welcome back Orion thanks Mark it's
always good to be here so we've done
several talks now and uh I just thought
maybe we would just wing it you know you
uh I don't really have anything prepared
but I I watch your
channel every Monday and Friday you post
a new video and You' posted so many
interesting Little
Talks you know everything
from from um like we you did a beautiful
talk on the difference between a
mother's love and a Father's Love which
was a great talk you did the holders and
sniffers that was a fun one it was that
was about how Partners
handle well actually farting in their
relationship which is kind of a trivial
problem but I talk about it more as a
metaphor for let's say the unpleasant
and distasteful aspects of our
personalities and I think there's
basically two ways to approach it you
can either kind of hold it in and
protect your partner from some of those
aspects of ourselves that just aren't
easy to get along with or you tend to
just sort of let them rip and say hey
people got to love and accept me for who
I am and I'm going to go for the
authentic approach even if it might be a
little distasteful from time to time and
I think those are two radically
different approaches to relationships
and I think that you can have successful
relationships both ways but that you
generally have to be with a compatible
like-minded person like it's hard for
holders and sniffers to get along the
most interesting part of that talk for
me was where were
you um kind of quoted I think it was a
professor that you knew who said you you
need to be with somebody who you like
the smell of their farts yeah it wasn't
a professor was a mentor of mine and
that was some advice that he gave me
long ago when I was a love Lorn young
man because if you're really in love
with somebody you're you're going to
just accept everything about him good
and bad at least tolerate I think that
that's something that we should stress
more in today's day and age is you don't
have to like everything about your
partner but you might have to tolerate
certain things and that's okay because
they might have to tolerate certain
things about you it's like everyone
thinks their farts smell better than
they do to other
people have we become to too like
spoiled Have We Become too spoiled like
like we're we're our goals I think our
expectations are too high expectations
are too high in so many different ways H
and one of the most damaging
expectations is that our partner should
be everything to us like our lover and
our business partner and our best friend
and our therapist and our mommy or daddy
and it's very difficult to get even one
of those things discharged well from one
person and so that really puts a lot of
pressure and expectation on
relationships and it's sort of like a
chain is only as strong as its weakest
link and sometimes somebody who could be
a great co-parent may not be a a very
emotionally
vulnerable supportive best friend and
that can create problems maybe a
wonderful mother isn't a great lover and
vice versa so it's important I think for
people to understand that you can't get
everything from everyone and everyone
has something about them that is going
to be less than
ideal I think the advice to find
somebody whose farts you can live with
is important though because things for
whatever reason are just easier to live
with than other things it's like and I
think everyone is has the right to have
his or her own like deal breakers the
things they just really can't stand or
the things that get under their skin and
they don't want to have in their
relationships it can be useful for
people to examine where that distaste
comes from but that doesn't necessarily
mean you have to force yourself to live
with it um some things are going to be
more charming and quirky other things
are going to be gross and distasteful
right and on some level the practice of
love is to accept the other person for
who he or she is and to hope that they
also give you the same Grace as well in
return you certainly don't show up to a
relationship hoping to be changed by the
other person to be more in lined with
who they would like you to be but people
go to relationships all the time
consciously or not to change their
partner sometimes we can say that it's
well-intentioned like I can see the
potential in you right you can be so
much better better than you currently
are but on some level that's a kind of a
disrespect to the individual as he or
she is and another person might not see
anything wrong with that behavior or
that
trait it really is a subjective
thing one of the other talks you did
recently which was kind of addressing
what you just spoke about there's no
need to understand the problem which I
thought was great because we're
constantly focusing on like let's f
figure out your problems let's figure
out your problems let's go to therapy
let's figure them
out but the truth is as you said even if
you figure it out doesn't mean the
problem has evaporated it's still there
no there's a couple things about this I
think one of them I said in the episode
I've said on the channel before which is
that Insight isn't enough and I learned
this when I worked for a couple years in
my training at a outpatient chemical
dependency clinic and you would see all
kinds of folks come through your doors
in that kind of setting and there were
folks who were kind of like frequent
flyers they've gone through the system
they've gone through programs multiple
times sometimes mandated sometimes not
these folks had been thoroughly
therapized like they spoke the lingo
better than I did at that point and they
could tell you all about their alcoholic
family Dynamics and their shame-based
self and the chain analysis of what led
them to relapse and how alcoholism from
their great-grandfather has been passed
down down to the generations and they
still drink so it's like these folks
were sufficiently aware both of their
vulnerability factors and the mental
processes that lead them to drink and
relapse and yet they continue to do
so by the same token that same day I
could see somebody with a very low
Insight who would come into the office
and say I want to stop
drinking why uh I don't know I don't
like anymore and he just decides not to
put the alcohol in his mouth anymore and
he's in recovery like he's he's getting
better that way what's really
interesting about working with addicts
in particular is there are few sectors
of mental health where you can see such
profound growth and change in a human
being in such a short amount of time
like if you can succeed in helping
somebody go without alcohol or meth or
opioids for 3 months
like they can become a totally different
person yeah I've seen it happen it's
amazing it's so hopeful and encouraging
of course the issue is to stay that way
right like what's the joke is quitting
is easy I've done it a 100 times so
that's one thing is that Insight is just
not enough the other thing that I
haven't said on the channel but I'll say
here kind of a controversial take but
that not everyone should be in a
relationship not everybody's ready to be
in a
relationship think about it this way
if if you had a broken leg and you were
trying out for like the varsity football
team no one would have a problem with
you sitting on the bench for a while it
doesn't mean you'll never get to play
but maybe you need to heal your leg and
go through some physical therapy and do
what you need to do to get to a place
where you could actually contribute to
the
team that's a tough sell when it comes
to let's say emotional or psychological
injuries sometimes people think that if
it's not visible people should just be
able to get over it or our hearts are
Teflon
or these folks deserve love and
relationships too and I think that's
kind of a tough sell it's like some
people if they've been traumatized by
previous relationships or their
childhood or life which is obviously
subject to happening it happens to lots
of folks it's like a broken leg is that
maybe you need to take some time off the
field and heal and do what you need to
do to get to a place where you can
contribute positively to the team effort
and insisting that you should play in
spite of that insult or that injury to
your heart or to your
mind I think that just is in spite of
reality on some level does that make
sense makes perfect sense yeah and so I
always you know sometime I think every
week I'm dealing with consultations from
guys who are in less than satisfying
relationships and they think yeah she
tells me she's still trying to get over
her trust issues from the ex that
cheated on her or she had a narcissistic
father and and she's working through
that and I was like okay that's good
that she's working through that but
she's still in physical therapy like
she's she doesn't get a spot on the team
yet she's on the RO she maybe she's on
the roster but she's on the what the
disabled list or the injury list
whatever they call it so um there's no
need to go forward with somebody who's
still in the process of healing
um and it's certainly not I tell these
men it's not your responsibility to make
all of these like changes to the game to
accommodate where she is emotionally or
psychologically it's like we're not
going to change the rules of football so
that people with broken legs can
play and we should be cautious about
going out of our way to allow that to
happen just give people some time take
six months 12 months heal up get better
and then get back on the field it's not
a big deal aren't we often though
finding a partner that might be slightly
broken in hopes that we can fix him up
and then make
him something that maybe we couldn't get
if they were 100% when we met them uh I
think a lot of people do I I certainly
was that way when I was younger and I'll
speak from my own experience I think I
did that because I didn't have a very
high
self-esteem I didn't know if I could
successfully compete as a Young Man
against some of the guys who were more
accomplished more
attractive stronger on some level I was
wondering what a healthy high
functioning woman would want to do with
me so on some level I'm as not the
fastest lion I might have targeted the
gazelle's with the limp you know that's
I was like okay maybe that's my food on
some level so and cons I think this was
unconscious but my thinking was that I
will earn my Rel relationship I will
earn my sex I will earn my love by
helping this person because what I where
I might have been able to compete even
back then was with my mind and with my
words and things that I was interested
in that respect so I thought okay I know
a little bit about psychology I know a
little bit about X Y and Z maybe I can
go in help this woman because I could
see the potential in her and as she gets
better she'll reward me in her gratitude
with sex love and relationship and it
turns out that's not usually what
happens that's not how it works no so
I've discovered that as I've become more
authentically confident and with a A
good measure of self-worth in a sense of
my own self-efficacy I don't I don't do
that
anymore um but I think a lot of people
unconsciously believe that they're not
enough and so they Target Partners
consciously or not that are also
deficient in some way and expect them to
be grateful for doing
so you see people in your private
practice you also are living in this
world
of relationships and everything else
that we're dealing with in life how many
people are happy in their romantic
Partnerships I don't know man that's
that's a tough one it's like we we know
outcomes about like marriage that 55% of
all marriages end in divorc it's only
40% for first marriages only but 55%
overall because if you get divorced once
you're more likely to get divorced
again but that doesn't necessarily mean
that the people who stay together are
happy nor does it mean the people who
separated we're unhappy like I think
that's obviously the case in in in some
instances but I think it's a bridge too
far to just make that
assumption I can speak for my own
personal experience having been
personally invited into hundreds of
people's relationships I can think of
maybe one or
two relationships families marriages
where I would think oh this is pretty
nice I could do
this the vast majority of the time I'm
there and I'm like I don't know how
these people do it like I could not
handle this and that's okay I don't have
to right you
know but
I don't know I don't know I think in
general people aren't very
happy and it doesn't seem like a
relationship makes you
happier we sure are convinced that it
will
though we try so
hard yeah people often think relation
like a like a romantic that kind of
relationship can make you happier can
you chase it until you are exhausted and
then you chase it some more a lot of
people do that yeah
I think we need relationships like a
life without relationships would be very
hard uh I think Aristotle said that only
a beast or a God could live outside of
society and Society is formulated of
relationships like you have to be
so
self-sufficient and
independent that you would need nobody
which would make
you I I don't even know what it would
make you or you you're just half
feral so most of us need relation
ships and they are a potentially a great
source of our meaning and satisfaction
they don't have to be romantic
relationships though I think friendships
are actually more important than
romantic
relationships in many respects but we
sure do value the romantic ones more
well we seem to sure they're fun too you
know so
many uh of these kind of relationship
gurus which I'll lump you
into that group uh they seem to focus
focus on how women are aiming for these
guys that
are the the most Alpha the most
successful the most attractive the most
all that but I and you and I have talked
about this off I think at dinner once
where I I think there are women
who probably because of some
subconscious thing that they believe
about themsel will aim low they will not
go for a guy who is the
most attractive C the best candidate for
a good life a lot of women learn to aim
lower I don't think they aim low but
many of them learn to aim
lower because you're right it's in in
the beginning like ever since high
school most women it's like there's
clickish and fattish about which guys
are hot and which guys are not and even
in high school there was like three guys
of the entire class that had seemed like
90% of the girls were smooting over
right and that that doesn't change all
that much especially Cor research it
seems like the vast majority of women
are all kind of looking at the top let's
say 15% of men that 90% of the women
were into is that what you said yeah
yeah certainly in with like for example
revealed preferences on dating apps
yeah and some guys hear that and they
despair but I don't believe that that's
Justified because the top 15% of men is
constantly being renovated like it's
very hard to be in that
top echelon indef Ely and the men were
there 30 years ago likely are not there
today do you see so you get a you get a
moment if you play your cards right you
get a little lucky and you work pretty
hard just like women you know it's like
they're most attractive in a season on
some level and men can kind of even the
odds through hard work and dedication
and a little luck over decades
potentially um so I don't think men need
to hear that stat and think it's never
going to happen to me I certainly when I
was younger didn't think that I would be
where I am today life is long and
mysterious okay
so what often women learn though is that
those attractive men are a wash and
optionality
and the research also is pretty clear
that men enjoy and pursue casual sex
more often than women do and so a lot of
men who are in that highest Echelon who
are getting a lot of female attention I
mean why stop the the buffet as it were
it's like why settle down with any one
woman especially now when an
everything's kind of coming in hard and
fast as it were
so that might not be an issue for a
younger woman but eventually most women
seem to want to have a family and they
might eventually despair of being able
to get that from the most attractive man
either because that man sees that woman
as exceedingly expensive because of the
opportunity cost it would require to
devote himself exclusively to her and
raising a family with her or that she's
not sufficiently attractive for him to
do that like that's the the truth of the
situation and so a lot of women
understand that okay if I really want
this maybe need to go after a different
type of man a man who is more caring
who's able to provide who has a stable
job maybe he's not the most interesting
guy maybe he's not the most attractive
guy but if I play my cards right I might
be able to get a ring I might be able to
get a house I might be able to get some
kids I think what I'm what I am uh
referring to is more like one of the
most interesting things I've heard I've
done like over 8,000 interviews and and
this to me was the most mind-blowing
thing I'd ever heard um Phil messing who
is a New York Post reporter he he did a
talk with uh Pete panuco who's a who is
a homicide detective in New York and
they did a talk about some of the big
homicide cases in New York and Phil was
talking about going
to uh to interview a death row inmate
and there's certain hours where they are
allowed visitors and he said it was the
most fascinating thing to go during
those visiting hours and here he the way
he described it was a lineup of tens of
women no kidding they're here for their
death row Daddy wow it's like what the
 you should make a documentary about
that no but but that's kind of what I'm
talking about these women could probably
get anybody they
want but they're looking for this guy
who's locked up never getting out
jobless
moneyless just crazy that kind of
behavor in serious Killers even that
have targeted women yeah multiple times
or women that like look for in inmates
you know they get become pen pals and
I've done a couple of those well yeah I
remember seeing a couple episodes from a
I think there was one woman she was
Eastern European MH yeah who um got
involved with someone on the death row
Iana yeah I think so and what was
interesting as I recall about her story
is I think she was raised in um
wartime I believe you're right I think
she was raised in Bosnia during in the
9s during some of the the conflicts in
the dissolution of Yugoslavia that's
right
and you can have all kinds
of ethics and and moral principles
however in in Wartime a lot of those
things go out the window like the
ability to attach yourself to a man with
a known willingness and track record in
killing
might be the safest  thing that
you could possibly do like it's wise to
do that I learned this in my own family
like my grandfather was a soldier who in
the aftermath of World War II walked
with my grandmother and a few other
civilians from Ukraine to Germany before
kind of like getting everybody on boats
to
America like I doubt that my grandmother
and those civilians would have gone with
him if he wasn't a
killer and he that he didn't have a gun
and knew how to use it like they were
safer with that man now according to
stories I've been
told it's he was not the easiest person
to live with let's put it that way and
it's like Ivana you can take the girl
out of War but sometimes you can't take
the war out of the girl and what might
be very adaptive and
even rational in some context might be
really maladaptive and irrational in
others this is a very obvious example
but I think to a lesser extent this kind
of programming affects all of us to one
degree or another where the things that
this is an interesting idea is like a
lot of
the the the Neurosis that's an outdated
term but a lot of like the the mental
issues that people deal with at one
point in their lives where their most
adapt solution to a problem they were
facing usually in their families of
origin it may not make sense outside of
the family though and it might be less
effective more expensive even come with
painful consequences but if people
haven't like updated their browser if
they haven't really like taken in the
fact that they're no longer children
living in that household under these
circumstances they can have those things
affect them for often the the rest of
their lives even but like I say most the
word dysfunction is the word function
dysfunction mostly works if it didn't no
one would  do it so that's
something to keep in mind when you're
potentially judging other people Andor
judging yourself is that there's
probably a reason why you do the things
that you do even if they cause you
pain yeah humans are interesting they're
fascinating man and we're all
psychologists to some degree or another
fig to be you do because people are both
a potential solution to a problem and
the biggest  problem you're ever
going to have when your partner is
giving you a hard time over
something and you just see it as it's
not really warranted you have to get
inside her head figure out what what's
going on there so that you can
understand where she's coming from it's
so you need to become a therapist that's
true but that goes back to the Trap of
understanding which we were talking
about earlier like you can do that or
you can say I regardless of where this
is coming from it's like your leg is
broken heal that and then play with me
you'll never have a partner ever well I
don't know about that we're all broken
to some extent to some extent but like
we said some farts smell better than
others and some people actually have
healed a little bit more than others you
keep coming back to the farts it all
comes back to the
farts two of my favorite talks you've
done they're like book
why beautiful women are nuts and why
successful men are jerks oh yeah
provocative titles it's a while since I
I wrote those you might have to jog my
memor oh yes I remember
now which one do you want me to talk to
talk about first take your pick which
one you in the mood for well you got to
compare the two let's go with why
successful men are jerks because I found
that when we give men a hard time first
sometimes it's more palatable when we
come to the women you're you're you're
learning how to be thank you diplomatic
so uh the word I would use which I used
in the episode but not in the title is
why successful men are  and
that's
generally what men are accused of as
being  and I think the issue the
reason why successful men turn out this
way I don't think they usually start
this way they turn into that is
because they have learned to do all
kinds of things that they don't really
want to do in order to get and keep
women I don't think women understand
that probably 90 95% of what an average
man does is designed to increase his
chances to either get or keep women I
would say higher than that you think
higher than 95% I mean like I remember
having this conversation when I was
younger and we're all dating and and one
of my friends
goes everything a man does whether he's
become successful powerful Rich what you
name it it's all just to get women well
I said that in the episode why
successful men cheat it's like a lot of
people shake their heads in disbelief
why would this guy who's at the top of
his craft his industry he's president
he's King like he has everything and he
threw it all away by sleeping with some
woman some intern some mistress and it's
like you're missing the point the reason
why he became the CEO and the president
was to be able to do that like that's
that's the brass ring that's
unconsciously held out for men that's
why they work sometimes to their graves
and they die in harness because that's
so frustrating for women though and in
what sense like a woman thinks like I'm
the perfect partner for this guy he
should be happy with me forever and and
she's done nothing wrong and then one
day he just finds a 24 year old and yeah
well we can I can talk about I can talk
to that like it's it's very difficult to
have St able fulfilling long-term
relationships not least of all
because no one continues to pay the
plumber what does that mean so it's like
when your toilet is when your toilet is
clogged the plum the plumber is in very
high demand but after the clog has been
resolved no one continues to pay the
plumber you get him out of the house you
give him what he's owed but that's it
we're done here so it's like people go
to other people because they need and
want things from others the issue is
that in giving those things to another
I'm complicit in my own
obsolesence like a plumber who doesn't
unclog clogs isn't a plumber like they
he would get no business
whatsoever but as soon as he's done
unclogging the clog he's got no more
business now the world is full of clogs
there's always going to be plumbers
right but the issue is
if I need to give you what you want to
get into a relationship with you but
giving you what you want means you no
longer need to be in a relationship with
me how the  do we do this right and
so in the long term this is not
something that we openly discuss at all
I've never heard anyone talk about this
we have to continue to find new problems
to solve in the our partners lives we
need new ways to be needed and if those
new ways to do not produce themselves
then either you generally you just drift
apart and maybe you separate but maybe
you just become like roommates and
platonic friends living in your own
house which maybe isn't the worst thing
but probably isn't the best thing either
right this is often why in particular
marriages suffer a crisis when the kids
are launched or about to be launched you
both parties might have chosen each
other to some extent because you think
that this person would be a good mother
very kind good with children or this
would be a loyal family man it's like
okay now if you have kids you'll never
not be a parent but like those qualities
and behaviors and attributes are much
less relevant now that the kids are 20
than they were when they were two so if
you don't have anything else to give
you're like the plumber who's unclogged
the
drain and that F seems really shitty
because it's like a because raising
children is no small thing and a
partnership of 20 years shouldn't be
just thrown out like yesterday's garbage
right but the issue is in there could be
another 40 years of life left like
that's a long time to not have a need to
be discharged to not have something that
we're working on together and so that's
what I counsil folks who are going
through this is you have to find other
projects that really speak to the both
of you that you can collaborate on and
there's there's tons that that could be
you could adopt a bunch of dogs and
Foster them you could travel the world
and start becoming influencers together
you can found a new business you can
build a house together like you have to
do some kind of overarching project you
need to keep dangling the carrot there
needs to be a new clog yeah there needs
to be a new clog that needs to be
unclogged and in the absence of that you
don't you get rid of the
plumber that's why people who need
nothing from their Partners their
relationships are the most
precarious I was once doing a
consultation with an older woman who was
having marital
difficulties and she was just like I I
don't know what the problem is like I
have my own money from my family like I
don't I'd be fine by myself I don't need
my husband for anything and I was like
if that's true which it probably isn't
but if that's true you should never tell
him that don't ever say that with your
mouth and certainly don't communicate
that with your attitude or your behavior
because I'm sure he doesn't think that
he does nothing for
you and if you act as if he does nothing
for you in spite of his efforts and his
loyalty and his continued investment
he's going to feel like the biggest
schmuck in the world because he's
clearly still giving and trying and it's
not even being acknowledged or
recognized and that's a dangerous game
to be to have one's
efforts not even recognized or
invalidated we need to need each other
and in the absence of that we just have
desire we just have want which is a very
capricious thing it comes and goes if
it's just desire why not break up when
the desire ends that sounds reasonable
the whole basis of the relationship was
desire there's no more
desire we came here to eat dinner we had
our food time to go home makes sense
so oh sorry I can pull it back around so
I was about to say you so a lot of guys
do  that they don't want to do in
order to be competitive with women get
access to them
and what they begin to learn as they
make decent choices and become more
successful is that women tend to respond
to them more and better as a function of
having things that they can offer women
that women really
want like
a 20-year-old man could give a woman his
heart but a 45y old man could give her a
yacht could give her a family could give
her travel around the world could give
her the ability to quit her job could
give her the ability to become a mother
in a way that the 21-year-old might not
be able to because he's just not
emotionally mature enough he doesn't
have the lifestyle he doesn't have the
wealth be extremely difficult for him to
do that and so what Su what happen
happens as men become more successful
and women start to respond to them
differently without them really changing
much about themselves they start to
realize what really moves the needle
with women and it's not
romance it's
not loving her more than the other men
in her
life it's being able and willing to give
her more than the other men in her
life and so men begin to dispense
because successful men are often very
rational and very effective they start
to dispense with the behaviors that
don't instrumentally move the needle
with
women and so they stop the romance they
stop the courtship and they maybe even
become a little corrupted in the sense
of they feel entitled that I have these
things this is what you respond to so we
can move forward in that way in the same
way that women can become corrupted
sometimes when they realize how much men
respond to their physical Beauty and
some women believe that because of the
way that they look that they're entitled
to certain things it's it's kind of the
same thing in just different gendered
expressions and of course it goes along
those lines because men are
fundamentally trying to exchange
resources for sexual opportunity and
women are attempting to exchange sexual
opportunity for resources it's not the
other way around so that's why we see
that successful men become 
which is a woman's term for a man not
really caring about the emotional
dimension of the
relationship and he learns that as a
successful man because when he was
attending to that but he was
unsuccessful it didn't work and as he
became more successful and he didn't
attend to it he had more success and
Effectiveness with women so women taught
him what to value with respect to his
dealings with them does that make sense
makes perfect sense do what do you say
to people who say you're your views are
so
unromantic well they are they are
unromantic like
I I understand what romance is it's not
necessarily a bad thing but romance
doesn't
make H people
happy and it certainly doesn't I mean
life is not a romantic comedy that's not
this the sweet lovable guy doesn't
always end up with the girl at the end
of the movie right I mean even think
about the way that that's those
narratives are played out it's
never the success
romantic CEO versus the poor
practical small town guy because that
guy would never  win he doesn't
have either things so the the reason why
romance kind of exists is it gives the
small town poor unsuccessful guy some
chance of potentially leveling the
playing field against this successful
accomplished man who actually can
provide value to women and make their
lives better than they might otherwise
be so romance is generally for
unsuccessful men it's a way for them to
potentially offer something that the
successful men either can't but most
likely won't because they feel like they
don't need to because they've been
taught that they don't by
women
fascinating yeah yeah I mean
the if you want to get to the truth of
why things are the way are we we can't
really be romantic imagine if like
Romanticism used to be a was initially
like a genre of it was a literary
movement and can you imagine if our if
our scientists of the 19th century were
Romantics and weren't willing to like
cut open corpses and run experiments and
separate the atom it's like it would be
very difficult to understand the truth
about the natural
world now is this the be all end allll
this kind of empirical scientific
understanding
no no it has its limitations as
well but Romanticism is sort of like a
fuzziness it's sort of like a
mood and moods
are uh moods are subjective they're
subject to change and they don't often
reveal actionable knowledge that we can
use to make better decisions moving
forward that's what I got to that what
about the women that are nuts attractive
women are nuts oh
yeah beautiful women are
nuts so many of them are um this one's
actually pretty simple the reason why
beautiful women are nuts is that no one
tells them the
truth no one tells them the truth
especially if they're precociously
beautiful like I don't know have you
have any of the women of the 8,000
interviews that you've done talked about
this have they talked about going
through puberty
puberty when they were still adolescence
and and like dealing with the new kind
of attention that they were getting from
men yeah it comes up once in a
while it's like we don't want to talk
about it because it's like anything that
happens before you're 18 it's like oh we
don't but you see that behavior well you
see that absolutely and and women young
women don't know how to handle it when
why would they or should they right but
it's like suddenly because their body
has changed the boys in their classroom
are treating them differently and
looking at them differently and not just
the boys in their classroom but the boys
fathers and the boys grandfathers it's
like men apparently never really stop
Desiring young attractive
women
so these women now have to deal with a
great deal of interest and
attention from which is a kind of power
and it's a power that they've done
nothing to earn they just sort of of
like lived a little bit longer and their
body did what the body did right so this
is can be very dangerous because I mean
think about it why did I why did I go
through the trouble of
like becoming a psychologist or why did
I before that get really good at test
prep and teach people about the GRE and
learn how to do that and before that how
did I why did I become an actor It's
like because people weren't just giving
me money people weren't just giving me
sex people weren't just giving me
entertainment and flights and dinners
like and those things sound nice don't
they right they're not necessary but
they sure make life a little bit more
pleasant so I had to earn them which is
what most guys have to do and we have to
earn them generally indirectly by
becoming very good at something which
takes a long time and compete
successfully with other men often in the
arena of life and then maybe with some
other things factored in we can
potentially get some of those good
things but we pay for
them now if I hit if I ever since I was
16 people were offering to buy me food
or to uh pay for my tuition or to take
me out every night of the week or to
give me relationships and
love
and would I have worked as hard as I
have in my life  no AB like I know
that enough about myself it's like
that's just too seductive it's like the
one ring of power man it's like very few
people could actually resist that
because the reason why we struggle is
generally to get those things not
because we are so virtuous that we
believe that struggle is inherently
valuable like some of us eventually get
there but we
are vanishingly few and we generally get
there through um pathway that I'm
describing now um so a lot of attractive
women they realize that the source of
their um I
mean and this has been happening as long
as you've been kind of like a conscious
adult why wouldn't you become entitled
why wouldn't you expect it if it's
happened 10,000 times in the past over
the last 10 years it's like I expect the
Sun is going to rise in the morning even
though there's no  guarantee that
it will it's like it's just happened
billions of times I think it's the safe
bet you see
so that can create problems first of all
like I don't even know if a totalitarian
Monarch doesn't get told no from time to
time maybe the ministers have to be kind
of gentle about how
they oppose him or reject him but like
there are few people that have lived in
the history of the world that get more
of what they want less than what they
don't than a beautiful
woman and it's hard to be told no it's
hard to be rejected it sucks to not get
what you want it does now most of us
though we we learn to deal with that
because we kind of accept that that's
just the way the world works like Mick
said you can't always get what you want
most of us can't often get what we want
right so if but it does take time to
learn how to tolerate rejection to deal
with the sting of disappointment
and
lack it toughens you up it might make
you a better person potentially can
anyway but it takes a while uh and it
takes a while whether that starts when
you're two or whether that starts when
you're
30 the issue is when it like anybody who
is told no for the first time they
generally have a meltdown in a tantrum
and Tantrums don't really look good on
anybody but they look much better than a
toddler than an adult okay so one thing
that can be very difficult is you're
dealing with with a beautiful woman
you're dealing with like a a toddler
emotionally
at least in the respect of this person
has never truly not been able to get
what she
wanted and the likelihood that some kind
of outburst is going to occur is quite
high and we often see that kind of
disregulation behaviorally as kind of
nuttiness right so that's one way but
let's talk about how no one tells these
women the truth because men very early
on it doesn't take long for them to
figure this out
but they realize the truth does not get
them
laid the truth does not get them laid
like almost every guy does this at some
point in his life especially because he
thinks it's going to differentiate
himself from all the other guys out
there I'm not like the other guys you
know I'm gonna I'm just going to tell
you how it
is if women can do this experiment it'd
be very easy they can do it for free
they can make like a fake profile on a
dating app with some pictures of a guy
even like attractive men and just change
what looking forward to Casual
relationships and see how many matches
they get and what kind of responses they
get versus if they say that they're
looking for a long-term
relationship I think that probably
90% more than 90% of men on dating apps
are looking for long-term relationships
which
is fascinating do I think that 90% of
the male population at any one time is
looking for a long-term relationship
 no but they learn that if they say
that they're just looking to have casual
consensual relationship with another
woman who's attracted to them they don't
get any
responses and women train them that way
like if the truth got men laid the world
would look so much better than it
currently does like can you imagine like
women actually do have the power to
remake the
world
indirectly by choosing
which men to reward with sex and
relationships and under what
circumstances and let me tell you if if
a woman one got better at sessing out
the truth from lies which they're not
very good at because most people aren't
very good at that um and just did not
have sex with men who lied to
them man we'd have a much more honest
population like very
quickly but one women have a hard time
differentiating the truth from
lies um and
two they often care about other things
more they
do it's
like where would women hang out if they
truly valued honesty above all things
like I don't know Charities where where
do honest men hang out there's not that
many where do they congregate where do
they congregate that's a good question m
maybe like philosophical clubs or
churches I I mean there's plenty of
dishonest people in both of those but
like probably better than dive bars or
nightclubs right I I blame the
dads well that's what I talk about in
the end of that episode is that the
there are exceptions not all beautiful
women are nuts but those women tend to
have very strong male figures in their
life fathers and brothers who were able
to tell the woman the truth and bear her
ha hatred bear her insults and her
criticism and her emotional outbursts
because it was the kind of like the
right thing to do not just from the
perspective of some vague virtue but for
her it's the best thing to do because
now she can become
like a a full emotional
adult those are rare it's rare for men
and women it's true it's like
chronological age has absolutely nothing
to do with emotional psychological age
and most of the people who are walking
around despite what their driver's
isense says are probably between 8 and
12 years
old but if you accept that that might be
true the rest of society starts to make
a lot of
sense you certainly can't begin with the
assumption that people are just virtuous
and mature why would the world look the
way that it
does if you go the other way around a
lot of things make sense
now I do think that there's reason to be
hopeful I do think that the state of
humanity is probably trending in a
positive direction you think so I do I
do uh it did seem like there was a lot
of barbarism back in the day man yeah I
guess you're right it's not like that
stuff doesn't happen at all in today's
day and age but I do think it's on the
decline I think that fewer people live
in poverty today than they have at any
point in human history there's more
literate people I think the quality of
life for the average person has
increased significantly I think there's
less violence
overall clearly we have things to work
on but I think there are also reasons to
be
hopeful but you have to understand that
these things they take a long time to
change the degree of understanding in
humanity is still very low still very
low and if you go too high you lose
people or they get scared and then they
they attack you so you kind of have to
like just be a little bit further along
and increase a person's understanding by
like another degree another step and
there could be a lot of steps to get to
where we ultimately want to go together
so there's no hurry it's not going to
happen while you and I are
alive one of your other talks that I
thought was great was how to pass
through
suffering oh yeah that was a useful one
I think
mhm because life is suffering a lot of
it is it doesn't have to
be I just wrote a script today so this
is kind of top of mind about suffering
suffering is different from
pain in my opinion suffering is pain
plus judgment and the judgment is
generally that this pain is unbearable
or unendurable or unjust or
unfair okay
I think pain is everywhere around us
except maybe for this one very thin very
narrow
fluctuating
path that kind of like is hedged on all
sides by pain we can call that the path
of light and I think those are the two
ways that all human beings can learn you
can either learn through pain or you can
learn through light and 99% of people
learn 99% of their lessons through pain
pain
is a one wonderful
teacher because pain never
lies it doesn't care about your feelings
it will tell you the
honest brutal
truth in a way that your loved ones
won't your therapist won't your priests
won't pain always gives you direct
honest feedback about how your behavior
aligns with
reality we experience pain when our
mental models
cause us to act inite of reality so to
give a very commonplace example if I
believe that
that uh that outlet over there should
have no power in it and so I would be
free to stick a metal piece in there and
suffer no
consequences I would experience pain as
a consequence of that decision because
my model was wrong I thought that there
was no power doing that or I didn't
understand that metal conducts
electricity or what have you but like my
ignorance
motivated me to feel pain because I
acted in a way that was like in spite of
the way things are that's a very I think
obvious and physical example but we can
see that even with emotional and
psychological pain as well is that at
the root of it is that there's some sort
of belief that reality should be other
than how it is and they're clinging to
this idea and in some cases continuing
to make decisions in line with this
incorrect model that bring them in
constant contact with
pain but pain there's kind of like a
guardianship to
pain because it's on either side of the
path of light it's like the rumble
strips on the edge of a road that let
you know that you're starting to drift
off course like the more sensitive and
responsive we become the less pain we
really need to feel to kind of wake up
and course correct back on the path of
Light which is not a
static um
unchanging route like it's very
difficult to constantly unwaveringly
follow that path it's very hard to see
which is why we get that feedback from
the path of pain pain is good it's the
it's the gift that nobody
wants and a life without pain would be
very difficult to endure because we
would be so far off that
path our lives and collectively Humanity
would devolve to such a degree that I
don't think any of us would want to be
on this planet like pain ideally helps
us get on that straight and narrow path
where we suffer less because what I
found is that the more pain there is the
less light there is but the more light
there is the more pain there
is and in some cases light is transmuted
pain the great benefit to light which we
can say collectively is knowledge wisdom
or Revelation is that it can be
communicated to other
people pain cannot be communicated to
the people not really like if you've
never broken your leg how can I
really tell you how that feels if you've
never lost a child how can you really
understand what it what that grief feels
like the only way you could possibly
approximate it is if you've broken your
leg or you've lost a child and it still
wouldn't be exactly the same thing but
at least we're kind of in the ballpark
right so pain is a very personal and
subjective experience and it can't
really be communicated or transmitted
which if that were the only option would
suck because that means that every
person has to like start over and learn
all the lessons from scratch and we
wouldn't get
anywhere light can be transmitted light
can be communicated which is fantastic
and that's like the best resource that
we have
collectively to fight back against the
darkness and to reduce the amount of
unnecessary suffering on this planet and
the light that I can transmit is my own
transmuted pain it's me potentially
saying with my words I've learned this
hard lesson from the teacher pain and
I'm going to try to teach it to you so
that you don't have to learn the same
lesson that I
did now that said I do think that
everyone's has the right to make their
own mistakes I do think that there might
be something let's
say cowardly and
meek about somebody who just takes good
advice and on face value and never runs
the risk himself or herself I do think
that we're allowed to make our own
mistakes which is why I never prevent
people from doing something that I
believe has a high likelihood of causing
them pain I'll I'll counsel them against
it but I won't stop I won't stop them
because just like myself they might have
to feel that pain they might have to
feel it
enough and they might have to feel it
enough times to finally learn their
 lesson and once they learn their
lesson they course correct they change
their behavior so they're a little off
the path of pain and a little bit more
on the path of light and they suffer
less and the more light there is the
more light there will be because people
who begin to suffer less have no
interest in going back not really and
they start to become it's like a
virtuous cycle and they're like chasing
after the light they follow the light
and that's the best way that I think we
have as individuals and collectively to
get out of the misery that might
otherwise be human
existence so thank God for
that uh yeah thank God for that for sure
yeah your talks just get more and more
fascinating as they go on oh thanks your
Channel's incredible I actually didn't
uh answer your question about the
suffering though so there's the episode
you're referring to okay is called a
horse in the rain yes so it's a it's a
attempt to teach people what to do when
they are in the midst of
suffering and this was a question that I
was asked in one of my courses back when
I was a
professor and the question was
functionally Dr terban you've talked so
much about unnecessary suffering and how
to undo it but what about the calling
some suffering unnecessary assumes that
some suffering is necessary which I kind
of believe is true certainly from like a
Buddhist perspective we can't escape old
age sickness and death let's put it that
way unless we die young I guess
um so there's some necessary suffering
that human beings are subject to passing
through how do you deal with that and
what came to me was this image of a
horse in the rain you ever seen a horse
in the rain Mark you just stand there
that's right it's just standing there
getting wet it's not trying to dance
around the raindrops in some sort of
manic futile desire to not get drenched
it's not like beating its Hooves and
lamenting the Injustice that it's
raining here and not over there on those
horses it's not enviously plotting
against the horses in the stable it's
not like laying down and just
surrendering oh my God this is so
miserable I'll never be dry again like
those are all human forms of
suffering animals don't experience that
which is part of why I think we Envy
animals in some in some
respect so a lot of the it might be
necessary to be wet it might be
necessary to be in the rain but all
these other judgments and stories that
we're subject to telling ourselves about
our circumstances are totally
unnecessary and make the suffering so
much more painful than it otherwise
needs to be it's really not that painful
to be wet and to be cold for a while
it's okay those those are conditions
that will
change and then you might end up being
so dry and hot that you'll miss being
cold and wet at some point you know
that's kind of The Human Condition so
the issue is to not make your situation
worse than it already
is a compliment to this is the advice
I've given about what if you find
yourself in the jaws of life that's what
I call it sometimes people just end up
sometimes through their own fault
sometimes not but they find themselves
in a really dangerous and precarious
situation the jaws of life it's
like you're the bunny and life is the
wolf and it's got you in its mouth right
I don't know if you've ever seen that in
a nature documentary but what the bunny
does under those
circumstances is not fight against
what's happening it doesn't resist what
is
happening why because the teeth are
right there if the bunny was to start to
struggle those teeth would just dig
deeper and deeper into its flesh and it
would be next to Impossible at that
point to escape so what the bunny does
he goes limp
it almost plays dead it doesn't expend
unnecessary energy struggling against
something that it can't escape from and
it potentially waits for its
moment which often happens where in
some momentary lapse of concentration or
attention or a feeling like the dinner
is a sure thing the wolf relaxes his
mouth a little bit and the bunny 
dashes out as fast as it can so that's
the goal is like when you're really
dealing with something difficult don't
make it worse than it already is and
wait for your moment if you're lucky you
might get one and then you take it as
best you
can on that note we'll uh we'll wind it
up already wow this was so fast that was
an hour already that was an hour good
lord well this has been great Mark
thanks for all your talks are fantastic
I think your your mind is just so f
fting oh thank you sir all right till
next time byebye thanks
