what is media
literacy um big tough question right out
of the gate that's a really big question
uh gosh oh god wow that's not an
intimidating question at all it's Big E
it's big I've wanted to make this video
for a long time because there seems to
be a general sense that people on the
internet have terrible media literacy
it's like no one knows how to critically
watch movies anymore and everyone is
falling for fake news or thinking AI
generated images are real especially in
the video essay space I think a lot of
frustration and drama and
misunderstandings come down to poor
media literacy and I've seen my fair
share of that as a content creator but
then I had an idea if I could make the
perfect media literacy video essay
teaching people how to engage more
critically and open-mindedly with the
stuff they consume maybe I could fix
YouTube so with this extremely achieved
able goal in mind I got to work given my
background as an ex- English teacher who
taught media literacy skills in my
classes I honestly thought that it would
be relatively easy to make a video about
this stuff but as I started digging into
things I quickly learned it's so much
more complicated than that I was
completely unprepared for how difficult
this video would be so today I want to
bring you along with me on this journey
I'll talk about why media literacy is so
complicated what people get wrong about
it and what we can do to fix fix it it's
going to be a big one there's going to
be some twists and turns so if you're
ready let's get into
it when I decided to make a video about
media literacy the first thing I needed
to do was to understand what media
literacy even means and this is harder
than it sounds because while we talk
about media literacy a lot people rarely
stop to actually Define it in tweets and
articles and even video essays people
use the term to
mean kind of anything it's sort of
become a catchall for literary analysis
critical thinking fact checking reading
comprehension or just having the right
opinion on a piece of media so my first
step was to establish what media
literacy actually is and to do that I
turned to academic articles and
textbooks because when in doubt find
experts and listen to them but the thing
is the EXP experts don't really seem to
know what media literacy is either I had
such high hopes I found all these great
articles I even got a couple of text
books that are aimed at teachers and
students I mean this book is for middle
schoolers how could it not be
straightforward but to be honest I hated
these articles and textbooks I mean
they're not that bad it's just it's hard
to explain how academic resources can
both say so much and nothing at all at
the same time like listen to this media
literacy is the ability to apply
critical thinking skills to the messages
signs and symbols transmitted through
mass media or we define media literacy
as the ability to decode media messages
including the systems in which they
exist assess the influence of those
messages on thoughts feelings and
behaviors and create media thoughtfully
and conscientiously or critical media
literacy is about asking questions
through CML we not only explore what we
know but also ask how we know it when
practicing CML we employ a collection of
skills that help us move from being
passive consumers of media to becoming
engaged critics and
creators what does that mean like I know
what all those words mean and I
understand what those definitions are
getting at but like what is critical
thinking here and what does it mean to
decode the system in which something
exists and where do you even start with
employing a collection of skills a lot
of organizations use some variation of
the definition from the National
Association of media literacy education
which says that media literacy is the
ability to access analyze evaluate
create and act using all forms of
communication now this is vague as hell
but in other places on the nle site they
give a little more detail saying that
media literacy is the ability to encode
and decode the symbols transmitted via
media and synthesize analyze and produce
mediated messages I understand that
media literacy is a complex topic but it
seemed like every single definition I
found was not only super vague and
Abstract but also different from every
other definition and that's only
accounting for people who actually gave
definitions some of the sources I read
didn't stop to define the term just
assumed that the reader would be on the
same page about what media literacy
meant which is a bold strategy when
you're writing about such a complicated
concept that doesn't seem to have any
agreed upon definition so why does all
this research suck so bad at defining
media literacy well the good news is
that other researchers are asking this
same question there's one article I read
analysis of definitions of media
literacy which what a great title and in
this article the author W James Potter
did a meta analysis of other media
literacy articles to figure out whether
there's any widely agreed upon
definition of the term and what Potter
found was that there are
434 different elements associated with
media literacy across the hundreds of
Articles he read over 400 different
skills or goals or outcomes that we
associate with media literacy to quote
Potter media literacy is regarded as
being a conglomeration of a great many
skills including the ability to read
evaluate analyze imagine possibilities
deconstruct messages recognize patterns
challenge meanings judge credibility
decipher cender intent counter argue dig
for truth avoid influence and produce
messages and Scholars claim that media
literacy has the power to help us
improve a wide range of other skills and
abilities it can also protect us from
false messages in the media create
positive habits from scratch and
transform risky behaviors into positive
actions it can alter faulty beliefs
about self identity Health Community
religion and media bias while protecting
our existing beliefs that are not faulty
in some way it can increase our degree
of Engagement with the media other
people institutions and Society at large
so yeah media literacy is complicated
and what's even worse about all this is
that when you can't even agree on what
something means it's impossible to agree
on the scope of the problems with that
thing or how to solve those problems so
Not only was I running into these
frustratingly vague definitions but all
the solutions that writers posed for how
to teach better media literacy were also
frustratingly vague so many of the
sources I looked at boiled down to teach
students how to recognize fake news or
talk to your kids about social media
algorithms for instance on the nle
website I that's such a difficult like
series of letters to say
I'm not going just going to call it
namel though that's pretty good n namely
namely namely is not
bad for instance on the NL website they
suggest integrating real world examples
of media into lessons providing
opportunities for Hands-On learning and
teaching students about responsible
online behavior and information literacy
and on the one hand yeah that's all
great but when I was training to be a
teacher we were constantly told about
the value of relating topics to students
lives using real life examples as much
as possible making lessons handson and
helping kids learn how to responsibly
use the internet and that was almost a
decade ago to me all of these solutions
from the nle felt both glaringly obvious
like yeah we should teach media literacy
skills in school but also unsatisfying I
refuse to believe that the way to fix
people's poor media literacy is just pay
more attention in English class so the
scholarly research had provided more
problems than Solutions and at this
point I felt like I had wasted three
weeks of my life getting nowhere on this
project so I did what we all do when
we've reached Rock Bottom I went to
Twitter part of this was because the
scholarly stuff hadn't gotten me
anywhere but it was also because I was
curious about another angle of this
media literacy discussion whenever I had
read about media literacy in an academic
context it was almost always focused on
teaching students how to analyze
non-fiction students were media literate
when they could identify fake news or
tell the difference between a news
article and an advertisement but
colloquially when most people use the
term on the internet it was more often
applied to fiction people are media
literate when they can analyze TV shows
or understand the themes of a movie the
difference between how academics and
people use the term media literacy
wasn't intended to be one of the main
focuses of this video it was just
something that I was mildly curious
about but especially after having
learned that even media literacy
researchers can use the term wildly
different from one another I was
interested in how this would be
reflected in how the general public used
the term but probably
unsurprisingly Twitter didn't make
anything clearer when you search media
literacy you mostly just get people
quote tweeting someone's opinion on a TV
show and saying media literacy is dead
believe it or not there aren't indepth
Socratic dialogues happening on this
godforsaken website but there was
something that surprised me during my
Twitter
Excursion apparently talking about media
literacy is
cringe now maybe I'm too English teacher
pilled to understand this but I find it
genuinely weird that's like saying you
think critical thinking is bad actually
right according to Twitter people who
care about media literacy are dweeby
little nerds who don't want anyone to
have any fun and they just police
people's interpretations of media media
literacy enjoyers are pretentious woke
scolds who want to overanalyze
everything when in reality it's not that
deep Bro so yet again I had run into yet
another hurdle that made this topic even
more complicated than it was at the
start and I felt like the more I read
about media literacy the more I realized
just how complicated it is the more
resentful I got about it the past couple
of weeks had been really difficult I'd
had this video idea that I thought would
be if not simple at least
straightforward but then I started to
look into it and I found that no one
could agree on what the term media
literacy even meant let alone agree on
how we could fix things and even when
people offered solutions they were
unsatisfying honestly it's no wonder
there's backlash against the very
concept of media literacy no wonder
everyone thinks it's cringe it's a
nebulous concept at best with a squishy
everchanging definition and because it
has so many other Concepts packed into
it it's nigh impossible to pin down and
thus also impossible to teach so
whenever people talk about it any
solution they offer is so basic it feels
obvious and audiences end up feeling
condescended to it's messy it's
complicated it's
frustrating and it's still something I
wanted to make a video about but clearly
my usual method of research wasn't
getting me anywhere so I did what all
great academics do when they're
frustrated out of their minds about what
they're studying I made it everyone
else's problem too I hit up 12 of my
friends and asked them to sit down and
chat with me about media literacy
and honestly they added a lot more
complication but their insights did help
me to work through the absolute mess
that is media literacy so let's see what
they had to say hi you may not know me
but my name is Villa I'm a uh video
essayist and friend of Zoe most
importantly my name is Ben I run the
YouTube channel dummy I'm Elliot I am a
YouTuber hi my name is Emily otherwise
known as lady Emily on the internet from
the YouTube channel lady Emily and is
also co-writer for the channel Sarah Zed
my name is Jose I run a channel that is
also named Jose well I'm legal kimchi I
am a video essayist here on YouTube I am
Lily Alexander I make video essays about
art and gender and the tech industry
hello I'm Lola Sebastian I have a
YouTube channel where I talk about
primarily literary adaptations my name
is Nick Covington I'm the current
creative director at human restoration
project I'm know Samson I make YouTube
videos I do commentary videos yeah my
name is Scott nice wander I have a
YouTube channel called nerd sync my name
is star I'm an anime girl on the
internet I am a comic artist and
YouTuber I've been making comics and
stories on the internet for basically as
long as the internet has allowed you to
do such a thing the first thing I wanted
to do with these interviews was to see
if I could crowdsource a definition of
media literacy and when I asked everyone
how they defined media literacy I got a
really interesting variety of answers
mostly having to do with looking under
the surface of a piece of media getting
something more than just the basic plot
whether or not that deeper meaning was
intended by the author media literacy it
comes in a lot of different shapes and
forms right so when I think of someone
who's media literate it's someone who's
engaging with a piece of media at a
level that goes beyond passively
consuming it they're actively thinking
about what they're seen what it means
and often placing it in a greater
context media literacy
is understanding what the what the
message what the point of something or
at least at the very least trying to
uncover that and not necessarily taking
everything as face value I suppose so I
think media literacy in general is your
ability to properly like read into those
things like to be able to see like what
somebody is trying to communicate um
whether it be intentional or not
intentional media literacy is the
ability to apply like a variety of
different ways of viewing media um the
ability to understand a thing on its own
terms and consider like the context that
it was made in all of these answers were
so great I was genuinely so impressed by
every single person I talked to but
there were some particularly interesting
tidbits that I want to look at so
remember some of the definitions from
media literacy folks I brought up
earlier one of the things almost all of
them included was the idea that media
literacy isn't just about how we consume
media but also the skills we employ when
creating it but even though all the
people I interviewed are content
creators only two of them considered
that creation element in their
definitions Nick who's a teacher and Ben
who studied media literacy and works in
media but I think media literacy today
looks like being a critical consumer of
media considering purposes intentions U
but then also in the creation space too
so um creating media and information for
authentic audiences I would say that
media literacy expanding on that is
something like the ability to find and
understand and maybe even create media
uh in order to participate in society I
found it fascinating that everyone else
focused on media literacy skills from
the viewer side of things rather than
the Creator side of things but honestly
I I think most of us think of it this
way too right media literacy is
something you do when you're consuming
media it's a skill for readers writing
skills are something totally different
right I'll get into that in more depth
later on but for now I also want to
touch on another really interesting bit
that Scott from nerdsync brought up he
said that being media literate means
knowing the difference between plot and
story it's really easy to confuse the
idea of uh plot versus is story whereas
like the plot is the stuff that happens
like it's the list of things that
happens uh but what's like the story
that the author is trying to tell
through those things that happen and so
I think for me it's trying to find that
story whether it's intended by the the
author or just something that I picked
up through my reading or watching a
couple weeks after I did those
interviews I actually sent Scott a DM to
tell him how integral this idea he'
brought up was to my video he was super
nice about it but admitted that he'd
actually gotten it from a book wired for
Story by Lisa cron I told him that I was
totally fine just pretending like he
came up with it on his own for the video
so everyone be sure to leave a comment
talking about how cool and smart Scott
is but I did actually look into the book
just to get some further context and you
know what's super interesting this isn't
a book about how to be a better reader
it's a book about how to be a better
writer So Not only was plot versus story
a really interesting framework on its
own but it also fit perfectly with the
idea that media literacy is about both
creating and consuming media plot versus
story also connected really well with
something both star and Lady Emily
mentioned when it comes to Art
specifically people viewing art movies
books games whatever as a form of like
plot delivery or just basic idea
delivery rather than what is it trying
to say what is it trying to do that's on
the surface level of they understand
what is going on in the plot even if not
every single thing is directly spoonfed
to them and also just kind of
understanding the intent why is this
being shown to us why is this important
and kind of gleaning additional
information from that and I feel like
most people have a good grasp of the
former but the latter I feel like is
where a lot of people sometimes struggle
and then that's where causes problems
occasionally the other thing I really
like about the plot versus story
framework is that it can be applied to
all kinds of media literacy not just
fiction like if you're reading a news
article you have the plot which is the
literal words on the page the factual
information that the journalist wrote
but you also have the story which is the
rhetorical purpose of the article what
the journalist is trying to get you to
feel or do along with all of the other
context like where and when it was
published this actually solved some of
the issues I had with the academic
research on media literacy earlier I
mentioned that it seemed like when when
academics talk about media literacy they
were usually referring to how people
engage with non-fiction like news but
when the general public talks about it
they're usually talking about how people
engage with fiction like movies and
books it always felt like there was some
fundamental difference between what each
of those groups meant when they used the
term but now I realize that no media
literacy is both of those things though
all that being said even after these
interviews I still had found a perfect
definition of media literacy I was
starting to get a better idea of what it
meant though and I realized that maybe
its elusiveness as a concept is actually
part of it media literacy is all the
things my interviewees said and all the
things the research articles said too it
is a whole bunch of skills like looking
under the surface asking questions about
how and why things are made thinking
about the contexts in which things are
made and using those skills on both
fiction and non-fiction both as a
consumer and a Creator media literacy is
complicated and maybe the fact that it's
so complicated is part of why people
struggle with it so much but now that I
knew that now that I knew just how messy
this topic was I could start to actually
confront the problem I could start to
solve the media literacy
crisis except when I asked my guest
about this crisis a lot of them didn't
think it existed the consensus actually
seemed to be that people have always
been bad at being critical consumers
it's just that now thanks to the
internet we're all a lot more aware of
the problem than we used to be yes there
is a crisis however I think it's
perpetual uh I think there's always been
a crisis there probably always will
because you cannot be an expert in
everything at all times I would say that
like lack of like deeper thinking and
understanding has probably existed for a
long time I guess maybe the reason why
people these days are like it's a crisis
is because we have access to so many
things now and so much knowledge now but
part of me feels like some level of this
has like existed for forever I don't
know if I would call it a crisis I feel
as though there's always been bad media
analysis out there and uh social media
has just made it more common honestly it
seemed like at every single turn this
video was just getting more and more
complicated I had just gotten a handle
on what media literacy meant and then as
soon as I tried to move on to solving
the problem now suddenly I had to
consider that maybe there wasn't even a
problem to solve in the first place was
it even worth making a video about media
literacy if there's not a
crisis well there's good news and
there's bad news the good news
is that there may not be a media
literacy
crisis the bad news is that there still
is a crisis happening that's the the
overview of my view on media literacy
right now I think it's symptomatic as
opposed to uh the source of the problem
I don't think the singular focus on it
uh addresses the problem that we observe
when we say media literacy crisis I do
not think that there is a media literacy
crisis I think the crisis is imperialism
and capitalism and it has been this way
forever I think it's a it's part of a
constantly morphing crisis which is uh
our state of affairs our systems there
wasn't some kind of perfectly ideal
media literate past that we've fallen
from over the past couple of decades but
clearly there is something wrong right
Reddit has countless threads about how
Walter White was a hero and Thanos was
morally correct
Facebook is full of people who can't
tell the difference between a real
photograph and whatever this is every
single content creator I know has gotten
comments from people who are mad about
something they didn't even say in their
video I've personally experienced
several instances of people asking
questions that they could find the
answer to if they just took a single
second to look at the description
something is wrong we all feel it we all
see it so so what is
happening if media literacy is about
asking questions about the media you're
consuming or creating then bad media
literacy is when you don't do that so
what is stopping people from doing that
well there's quite a few potential
answers it's possible that people are
just lazier or less intelligent than we
used to be but I think that's a deeply
uncurious answer to this problem because
people don't exist in a vacuum and we're
all products of our environments and the
systems we're living within insert
coconut tree joke here so instead of
blaming individuals let's take a look at
this environment and all these systems
and see if they have any answers for us
while I was thinking through all of this
the most obvious answer to me was that
people aren't asking questions about
their media because asking questions
takes time and like I talked about in my
video on aici
a lot of our systems prioritize speed
and immediacy at all costs this was
actually something a couple of people
brought up during our interviews I think
media literacy is having the ability to
interpret the information that you are
consuming in a rational Manner and now
with social media and technology that
all that really means is just not having
the instantaneous reaction that these
systems and platforms are designed to
make you have to like or to share or to
quote to and and talk  or whatever
they're going to be like oh I have to
get in the comments and and react to
this immediately because that is sort of
what the internet culture is is I have
to have an opinion I have to have a
reaction very quickly rather than
sitting with it and and thinking about
it so it almost is sort of like I wonder
if the YouTube comments in general is
part of potentially a problem of
everyone being like Oh I want to be the
first to comment this I have to have an
opinion a reaction so quickly rather
than just like that was interesting let
me sit with this a little bit so for me
with stuff like Velma it's it was
important to me to get in front of it
and be like let's not be too hasty here
is stuff stuff to get excited for um and
trying to be open-minded about it cuz if
I don't have an immediate reaction the
people who will are the people who are
going to say horrible bigoted things I
mean they're going to say it regardless
it is hard cuz I wish I could take the
time and like you know marinate in it
and sort of be like here are my full
thoughts but because the people I don't
like are going to say their thoughts
immediately it does sort of pressure me
to be like well I have to get my
thoughts out quick also really quick
because I don't want them to be the only
voices out there that people are
listening to in other words social media
and the internet more generally
incentivizes immediate reactions this is
clear in some obvious ways like how
you're rewarded when you post about a
trending topic because algorithms favor
relevance and recency but there are also
some features of social media that we
don't really stop to think about that
also play into this like how you're able
to comment on a YouTube video you
haven't watched or share a link on
Facebook to an article you haven't read
one of the reasons for this is that a
lot of our media is focused on making
things as easy as possible for consumers
restricting your ability to immediately
comment with whatever reaction something
made you feel would be frustrating and
people might feel like they were being
censored on top of this the algorithms
used by YouTube and Amazon provide hyper
individualized recommendations so you
don't have to waste time looking for
what you want everything is made to be
easy straightforward and uncomplicated
and this is true for our art too
generally speaking at a societal level
we like easy stuff we like the easy
melodrama of soap operas and CW shows we
like the self-indulgent fan service in
Marvel and Star Wars we like the simple
familiar three act Heroes Journey but
while we like all those things they
don't prompt us to ask questions they
don't surprise us they don't take risks
they're designed to be easy it's the
media equivalent of junk food we love to
Doom scroll and binge watch and not have
to think too hard about what we're
consuming
just like we love to eat fatty salty
foods that are convenient and easy if
not nutritionally dense sure it hits all
those short-term pleasure receptors in
our brains but at what cost and just to
be clear I'm not trying to Media shame
or food shame anyone all of these things
are enjoyable and that's okay I like
salt and vinegar potato chips and I like
watching compilations of baby
animals I spend a not insignificant
amount of time watching videos of
animals my friends know this about me
they will send me videos of small
animals multiple times a week shout out
to my friends anyway this difference
between easy media and more cognitively
engaging media is outlined really well
by Steven Johnson in his book everything
bad is good for you now just as a
disclaimer this book is about pop
culture but it came out in 2006 so some
of their references are a little dated
but I still think it has some really
interesting insights like for instance
Johnson suggests that one of the
differences between shows that are more
or less cognitively rigorous is about
how much information they give the
viewer the open question posed by these
sequences in more rigorous media is not
how will this turn out in the end the
question is what's happening right now
sorin's shows like the westwing are the
narrative equivalent of fog machines
you're supposed supposed to be in the
dark you're supposed to be confused he
goes on to argue that when media holds
back information and requires more
engagement from the viewer not only is
that good for us but it's also more
enjoyable part of the pleasure in these
modern television narratives comes from
the cognitive labor you're forced to do
filling in the details but if that's the
case then what does the industry have to
gain from making stuff that requires
such little media literacy well when
we've become so used to media that gives
us easy answers whenever a film doesn't
show every single detail of the world or
story or character relationships people
get mad at things that aren't explained
and so media that tries to give
audiences that pleasure of cognitive
labor is often punished at the box
office or torn apart on Twitter for
being confusing or having plot holes I'm
just going to say it we don't need
prequels and origin stories for every
single character in a major franchise we
don't need an extended universe that
fills in World building gaps for us we
should be able to do that work on our
own we should want to do that work on
our own because just like how movie
monsters are scarier the less we see of
them fictional worlds are more magical
the less the author stops to explain
every single detail about them but it
also comes down to risk
when media is easier to consume there's
a lower barrier to entry and less danger
of misinterpretation or misunderstanding
it might not be high art but it's
inoffensive so it can appeal to a wider
audience and wide appeal is really
attractive to people who are in the
business of art this is why it's such a
huge deal when more intellectually
challenging media does well commercially
when everything everywhere all at once
came out I don't think anyone was
expecting such a weird movie to do so
well with General audiences but even
still it did run into some issues with
misinterpretations and misunderstandings
for instance when my husband and I saw
it in theaters there was a group of
women behind us probably like college
age a couple years younger than us at
the time and when the movie ended he and
I were just sat there like emotionally
processing what we just watched and one
of the women behind us turned to her
friend and said so do you think they're
going to make a sequel to explain what
happened and I think about that at least
once a
week during my discussion with Lily she
brought up a really interesting point
related to how we could solve this issue
though Patrick H Williams he was talking
about I I think it was in his video
what's next after Marvel um basically
the need for movies that train people to
watch movies
again um for movies that get people like
eased back into ambiguity or like plot
lightness and I feel like Challengers
was one he cited there I am a huge fan I
loved it and I think that is one that uh
it's it's extremely accessible but it's
also it's also weird and like watching
that movie and also seeing that movie be
a big success made me feel hopeful you
know for like movies that can come along
and bridge the gap and get us making
like movies for grownups again I really
like this but I also think that we
shouldn't necessarily assume that even
the most straightforward training wheel
movies are immune from poor media
literacy because for example this is
such an embarrassing story so you know
in the dark KN the refrain you either
die a hero or live long enough to see
yourself become the
villain it took
me probably like eight years and like
half a dozen
viewings before I understood that that
is literally Harvey Den character Arc in
the
film and they just say it like they just
say it out loud several times like it's
not it's not subtext it's
text and I I have a graduate degree in
English I have pretty good media
literacy I think um and I think about
that a lot I remember when I realized
it I remember when I realized what they
had meant and it was this like I
literally was sitting on the couch and
like
gasped holy 
oh please like And subscribe I
you know you you live and you learn
and sometimes we need to be a little
patient with
ourselves anyway all of that is to say
that sometimes people won't be able to
pick up on even the most obvious of
themes but another part of the issue
with the entertainment industry is that
just like how social media tries to
quantify human interaction studios are
trying to quantify art this was actually
something that Jose brought up during
our discussion so I'll let him explain
it I get annoyed when people try to
build this idea of consensus around
movies we all have to like or dislike
something as an objective fact but we
sort of see these people who are so
insistent that their opinions about a
piece of media are the right ones that
they've tried to sort of fashion this
idea of objective criticism they're so
uh obsessed with Rotten Tomato scores
and stuff like that and they're trying
to sort of uh formulate some kind of
objective measure of quality for a piece
of media which is incredibly silly and
ridiculous they're not just coming at it
like as one opinion of many they are
getting closer to the objective truth
that's I think why they get into like
down votes on YouTube videos like that
means anything for a lot of people with
poor media literacy numbers are a really
easy metric for understanding media why
would you worry about actually analyzing
a film to understand its strengths and
weaknesses when you could just look at
its Rotten Tomato score instead and on
the industry side making art objective
and quantifiable makes it easier to
figure out the most efficient method of
dispensing that art as we've seen with
the rise of binge watching thanks to
streaming services and we're not just
seeing this with movies either there's
been a recent rise in book summary apps
and I find that absolutely fascinating
now obviously things like Cliff's Notes
have been around forever but now we have
short form blinkist and mag book which
aren't helpful guides to books they're
literally just summaries of books and
something that all of these Services
emphasize is how easy they're making
things they take confusing ideas and
explain them in plain and simple ways
never get confused by a complicated book
again I don't know if you've seen these
ads for magicook but they are wild
there's a couple of videos that I've
seen from from folks breaking down
exactly what they do and how terrible it
is so I won't get too much into it here
but suffice it to say making something
simpler doesn't necessarily make it
better but if you see books not as art
that's made with intention but instead
as a quantifiable and infinitely
reducible data point of which you need
to sell as many units as possible then
of course it makes sense to reduce it
down until it's as easy as possible to
consume but this Focus on ease of use is
also a big factor in another media
literacy issue the spread of
misinformation online part of this is
because as Mike Coffield puts it the
primary use of misinformation is not to
change the beliefs of other people at
all instead the vast majority of
misinformation is offered as a service
for people to maintain their beliefs in
face of overwhelming evidence to the
contrary in other words it's
confirmation bias social media actually
thrives on confirmation bias because
while changing your beliefs is hard
maintaining them having them catered to
being told what you want to hear is easy
and like I've said over and over again
brains like easy so social media
companies aren't incentivized to combat
these algorithms and instead just focus
on giving users what they want and
that's to say nothing of how much
YouTube and Facebook actually directly
profit off of grifters but just because
these systems aren't incentivized to
change doesn't mean that we're stuck
like this now unfortunately a lot of
solutions for these big picture problems
are unsatisfying like I mentioned
earlier most articles and organizations
focus on education as a panasia to media
literacy issues and I think that's just
a lazy answer one of the books I read
for this video is a non-fiction graphic
novel a fire hose of falsehood the story
of disinformation and I think that it
can be a really valuable resource like
it has some really interesting stuff on
the history of propaganda but this whole
book talks about the fire hose the big
institutional forces that overload us
with information and its solution to
that
issue wear a
raincoat so first of all that metaphor
really falls apart because the danger of
a fire hose isn't the water it's the
pressure sure wearing a raincoat will
probably keep your clothes from getting
wet but it's still going to hurt and
second of all like I said earlier I'm
skeptical of any solution that comes
down to just teach more media literacy
in school when you have such powerful
forces bombarding you with information
and misinformation and
disinformation it doesn't really seem
fair to put the responsibility entirely
on the individual rather than trying to
to protect yourself from the fire hose
doesn't it make more sense to just turn
the hose off now to be fair to this book
the authors do offer other suggestions
for how to protect societies from the
proverbial fire hose of falsehood they
bring up regulations on businesses
especially social media as well as
safeguarding free press and repairing
The public's fear and these are
solutions that have been echoed by other
media literacy Scholars like Dana Boyd
in her article did media literacy
backfire now I don't love every single
thing she says in this article but there
are some gems that I think are really
helpful for understanding the scope of
our society-wide media literacy struggle
she argues that media literacy programs
and solutions that focus on Expert
factchecking and labeling are likely to
fail not because they are bad ideas but
because they fail to take into
consideration the cultural context of
information consumption that we've
created over the last 30 years
addressing so-called fake news is going
to require a lot more than labeling it's
going to require a cultural change about
how we make sense of information whom we
trust and how we understand our own role
in grappling with information in other
words we've built this huge Tangled
attention economy web and there's so
much baggage associated with it like all
the algorithm stuff I brought up at the
beginning of this section that surface
level issues like labeling
misinformation aren't ever going to be
enough what we need to do is untangle
the web the question of how we untangle
the web is complicated some people like
Ben and Elliot argue that we need big
picture radical societal change for one
to just start radically changing systems
of Education systems of media um just
just so sort of radically undermine
Capital you know the more that you
undermine capital and big put Power into
the hands of workers and in the hands of
non proletarian workingclass people in
the hands of people who are
underprivileged in the hands of people
who are disabled the more that you do
that the less of a the less you'll feel
there's a problem with media literacy
but until the revolution happens Dana
Boyd suggests in her article that we
instead get creative and build the
social infrastructure necessary for
people to meaningfully and substantively
engage across existing structural lines
this won't be easy or quick but if we
want to address issues like propaganda
hate speech fake news and biased content
we need to focus on the underlying
issues at play no simple Band-Aid will
work part of the problem with this
though is that there's been an erosion
of trust in a lot of the institutions
that make up this social infrastructure
for instance people are becoming more
skeptical of higher education but
especially especially of the humanities
and the humanities are the home of media
literacy studies actual Humanities
education of like thinking and reading
and writing is on the decline on the
average in our society because we we we
don't like assign a value to it really I
would situate this in the context of a
growing resentment for like Humanities
and liberal arts in general you know I I
get the feeling that people don't
understand or can't quantify the benefit
that those sort of like disciplines give
and like universities all over the world
are are slashing Humanities funding to
to make room for more like stem funding
I'm not saying that these Solutions are
doomed to fail I actually have a lot of
Hope for these kinds of things I'm
fatally optimistic about this kind of
stuff but like Boyd said this won't be
easy or quick so until we actually can
turn off that fire hose of falsehood and
stop our systems from incentivizing poor
media literacy there has to be
something we can do in the meantime
right if we don't have the power to turn
off the fire hose we should at least put
on a raincoat now I know that I've just
spent the
past however many minutes arguing that
the problem is systems and that is true
I know that there is no individual
solution that is a perfect panasia for
any of the big picture issues I talked
about I know that but just because
certain behaviors are incentivized that
doesn't mean that we should just roll
over and give up there are ways that we
as individuals can practice better media
habits including by using the sponsor of
today's video milanote milanote is a
tool for organizing creative projects
and it essentially functions as a
virtual whiteboard I'm a really visual
person so whenever I'm working through
an especially difficult topic for a
video I need a place where I can map out
all my ideas I actually started
outlining on a physical poster board
with markers and Post-it notes but my
problem is that I'm quite verbose and
physical media have physical limitations
but milanote on the other hand can
handle all the chaos and wordiness that
I threw at it I created a subboard just
for mapping out all the different ideas
that came up during my interviews as a
way to see how the different
conversations overlapped and find common
connections and themes I know it looks
chaotic but that's the writing process I
taught writing for almost 5 years I have
a graduate degree in this this chaos is
normal and healthy and if you have a
chaotic writing process like me I
promise Mila note can handle it whether
you're writing essays or novels or even
just trying to organize your thoughts
creating a visual for it can be really
helpful in helping you slow down and
critically think about your ideas and
whatever you're working on milanote has
a template for it they've got mood
boards graphic design film making every
kind of writing project I actually
started this board using the novel
outline template and and then customized
it to fit my chaotic writing process and
for those of you who do collaborative
projects you can easily share the board
with others who can leave feedback using
the comments feature or even work on
your board together in real time they
also have a mobile app that I've been
using a lot to write myself notes as I
come up with ideas so I'm one of those
people who always used to just text
myself ideas or links but the myotee app
is so much more convenient because it
automatically syncs with your computer
myotee is available for free with no
time limits and you can sign up using my
link milin note.com
zooy which is also in the description
and in the pinned comment I genuinely
have really enjoyed my time using myen
note and it actually came in clutch for
this video with how much it helped me to
organize the mess that this topic became
I mean you saw how chaotic my rating
process is so I was really genuinely
impressed with how easy it was to use I
cannot recommend it enough again that
link is milen note.com
Zoey B and thank you again to milanote
for sponsoring but let's get back to the
video as for more actionable advice
number one is slow the  down like I
talked about in the last section none of
the systems that we're living within
want us to slow down social media
incentivizes quick gut reactions and
posting about trending topics even if
you haven't had time to evaluate the
evidence or sit and think about your
position everything in our culture is
telling us to speed up to be more
efficent ient to consume as much content
as possible but the good news is that
once you're aware of these forces you
can start to work against them for
instance you can take steps to make sure
you're not just consuming short for
media Stephen Johnson might not have had
any idea of what the internet would
become in 2006 when he was writing
everything bad is good for you but in it
he argued that the internet possesses a
different kind of intelligence from the
intelligence delivered by reading a
sustained argument for 200 pages you can
convey attitudes and Connections in the
online world with ease you can
brainstorm with 20 strangers in a way
that would have been Unthinkable just 10
now 30 years ago but it is harder to
transmit a fully fledged worldview the
cognitive immersion of a novel requires
a physical immersion for the effect to
work you have to commit to the book
spend long periods of time devoted to it
if you only read in short bites the
effect Fades like a moving image
dissolving into a sequence of Frozen
pictures
I know books are slow and tedious but
that's a feature not a bug short form
media is fine but long for media is also
important especially for nuance topics
the most important piece of advice when
slowing the  down though comes down
to one single concept media all media is
made with intention as a writer and a
poet I can assure you that every single
word a writer chooses is chosen for a
reason so whenever you feel a strong
emotional reaction towards something
pause before you comment on it or share
it use that pause to ask yourself
questions about what you just saw media
is made with intentions so what kind of
intentions might have been put into this
what do you think the author is trying
to do with this thing they made who do
you think they made it for and once
you've asked yourself those questions
then you can decide if what you're
feeling is fair or not and then you can
decide on how you want to proceed with
sharing it or leaving a comment this is
especially true if what you're reading
is challenging you either intellectually
or ethically like I talked about in the
last section our brains really don't
like to be challenged and a lot of
things in our environment have taken
advantage of that and now a big chunk of
our media diet is made up of easy
unchallenging stuff so when you're faced
with something that does challenge you
whether it's because the writing is
difficult or because it approaches its
themes in An ethically ambiguous way or
because it's just clearly coming at a
topic from an opinion that is radically
different from yours it can be
off-putting at first it's frustrating
when things don't give easy comfortable
answers and it's okay if your gut
reaction to something like that is
frustration it's okay if your instinct
is to be defensive that's normal all I'm
asking is that you don't let that
frustration and defensiveness be your
only reaction when you feel that way let
yourself feel it and then start asking
questions about what you just saw one of
the reasons this is so hard to practice
though is because it requires trusting
writers it requires understanding that
media is made through conscious choices
and that those choices have been made in
good faith but it can often feel hard to
trust writers because we have so much
non-c conscientious art out there we've
been burned one too many times by art
that promises to be deep or interesting
and then falls apart at the slightest
analysis or is just maddeningly
transparent and that's not even
considering the rise of AI generated
images and writing which are by
definition made without intention so if
you want to build up what Johnson calls
a kind of implicit trust a tolerance for
Planned ambiguity then you need to start
slowing down and asking yourself
questions like if a writer keeps using a
specific color in a certain way like I
don't know if an important scene is set
in a room with blue curtains it might be
worth considering why that decision was
made of all the things the writer could
have described they chose to describe
the curtains and of all the colors they
could have used they used blue isn't
that interesting isn't that worth at
least just thinking about and yes
sometimes times the reason behind a
certain decision isn't super deep
especially for films where budget can be
a huge constraint sometimes decisions
are made because they're cheap not
because of some deeper artistic meaning
and this also isn't to say that
authorial intent is the most important
thing in analysis either contrary to
what some people on Twitter believe you
can be Pro media literacy and pro death
of the author at the same time just fine
because while it's important to consider
authorial intent especially for
non-fiction media sometimes there's
enough evidence in the text to make an
argument that the author didn't even
think about sometimes it's not even
intentional sometimes people are getting
a message across like they're delivering
a message in their work that is more
representative of like what they think
and what their ideals are and they may
not think that that's like what they're
doing when they create that piece of
work but that is like what ends up
coming through it's like with tolking
tolking States that he hates allegory
there are clear allegorical elements in
The Lord of the Rings so regardless of
him saying he hates it you can find
those elements in there that's why folks
can bring their own meaning and
extricate that from the text even when
the author didn't intend for it to
happen but this is also somewhat related
to one of the most common
misunderstandings about media literacy
the idea that media analysis is just a
matter of opinion believe it or not
there is a difference between analysis
which is aided by good media literacy
and opinion which is just Vibes when
you're talking about what a piece of
media means that is analysis when you're
talking about whether a piece of media
is enjoyable or not that's an opinion
the textbook the media and me a guide to
critical media literacy for young people
explains it this way when we adopt a
critical stand toward media we ask
questions about meaning which is open to
multiple interpretations including
competing interpretations this situation
might be enough to make you throw up
your hands in Despair and say who cares
it's all just a matter of opinion in the
end this is when validity and a host of
principles that can help give us
confidence that a statement or story is
true come to the rescue some differences
of interpretation are a matter of
opinion but many differences of
interpretation can be resolved by
consider Shing the evidence for and
against each of the competing
interpretations the idea that the
validity of different interpretations of
a work comes down to evidence is
actually the underlying Foundation of
literary analysis that's what my High
School AP English teacher told us over
and over you can argue anything you want
about a text you can take any meaning
you want from it as long as you have the
evidence to back it up there are some
inter interpretations that have more
evidence than others and those are
usually the ones that English teachers
like to say are the correct
interpretations it's like how we have
scientific theories that we might not be
able to technically call facts but for
which there is so much evidence that for
all intents and purposes they can be
taken as facts the meaning of the green
light in The Great Gatsby is just like
gravity sure it's technically just a
theory but the evidence is over
overwhelming and trying to argue that
it's just an opinion is going to make
you look deeply unserious but when it
comes to your own personal experience
with art you're allowed to have whatever
opinions you want you're allowed I'm an
English teacher and I am telling you you
are allowed to have feelings about a
book or a movie or a video essay even if
those feelings aren't backed up by
evidence you are allowed to feel things
about art and those feelings are valid
the big question that you should have
when you think about art and media and
things like that is is it's there to
make you feel things explore that go for
it like films are not logic dispensing
machines of information they're meant to
be forms of art of of entertainment of
of you know Joy love and all these
emotions one of the best things we can
do is to allow oursel to develop like
personal relationship steps with art
even that like that go against the
consensus or that just have nothing to
do with the consensus I think one of the
best things for me was just like
realizing that I have a capacity to
understand things you know like it's
already there and it is not something
that needs to be drilled into me so much
is something that I just need to like
respect and give space that results in
me personally making a lot of
connections that other people would
consider like a stretch but uh it's fine
cuz cuz these are my my thoughts to have
my feelings to have and like a a
richness of perspectives on art is is
the whole thing of it you know like if
if there's only one correct takeaway
from a given thing then then what are we
doing here what's what's even the point
of paying attention if you can just like
get it all from a a Cliffs notes you
know sometimes this character is wearing
a purple shirt just because I wanted
them to be wearing a purple shirt it's
not that deep but like here's the thing
though if you can take something from
that I don't think that's a bad thing it
might not be what I intended but that
does not devalue what you're getting out
of it right like I just because it was
not intentional does not mean that it is
a bad interpretation to have I don't
think I know that I dedicated a whole
bit to talking about the importance of
intentionality and trusting that art is
made with
intention but if what matters most to
you is your experience with a piece of
art don't don't let anyone take that
away from you but honestly all the
advice I just gave is pretty milk toast
right to quote an actual academic media
literacy article if the issue were so
simple we could stop writing here and
move on to continue advocating for the
implementation of these criteria through
various educational programs yet the
situation is far from simple the
situation is far from simple and
something thing that's important to keep
in mind is that one of the main reasons
I wanted to make a video about media
literacy was because of how it
personally affected me as a Creator I
felt like a lot of the negative comments
I got on my videos were from people with
poor media literacy skills who just
didn't get what I was saying and to some
extent I still think that's true I do
believe that generally speaking people
on the internet could do a much better
job of being thoughtful and critical
consumers and I think that all of the
advice I just gave is valuable and we
should all try to be more conscientious
when we interact with media online all
the people I interviewed also wanted to
see better media literacy on the
internet especially in their creative
spaces and clearly we know what good
media literacy looks like so how do we
make it happen well my interviewees had
a lot of ideas Jose Emily and Scott
suggested essentially tricking people
into learning by making media literacy
fun on its own or hiding it in pop
culture analysis star and Alex had a
similar point but leaned into the idea
that people most readily change their
minds based on personal relationships
and empathy they suggested that the best
way forward was to talk about media
literacy in patient personable ways and
Noah Emily and babila suggested modeling
the types of behaviors we want to see
from our viewers all of these
suggestions are really helpful and I
think most essayists do some form of
them already two mixed results for
instance there's one Creator who I won't
name uh who made a video about media
literacy and didn't put any of their
sources in the
description and I noticed that there
were no comments that mentioned that so
like this Creator was talking about
media literacy telling people how to be
more literate including telling them to
check sources but they didn't put their
sources in the description and like
there were even people in the comments
who were talking a big game about how
media literate they are and how they
check sources for everything that they
watch except for that video I guess
anyway all of that is to say that
modeling good media literacy is hard for
me I personally believe that media
literacy has a lot to do with
intellectual humility and keeping an
open mind and so for me practicing my
own media literacy I often go into
discussions fully prepared to be wrong
about things and while that's sometimes
a good perspective to have it's one that
can easily go off the rails for example
it's probably not a good perspective to
have if you are a content creator who
gets hundreds and hundreds of comments
telling you that you're wrong all for
slightly different reasons because then
you might find yourself questioning
every single word you've ever written or
every single opinion you've had and even
just like the most basic things that you
might even have like a graduate degree
in hypothetically of course I try to be
intellectually humble to see my
worldview as open to improvement from
new evidence in the experience of others
as L Lynch puts it but historically that
has not gone well for me but luckily I'm
not alone in that almost every other
Creator I talked to also tended to
internalize comments and second guess
themselves when I receive comments that
are like you did a really bad job with
this that and the other I'm like oh my
God you're right I did even if it's not
true I tend to have to like run them by
um my best friend and be like what do
you think unfortunately your comments
hurt
me and I will be like oh my God I am I'm
they're right I am literally Satan or if
someone's arguing something in the
comments even if it's especially if it's
something that I actually did explain in
the video and I'll be like I definitely
talked about this in the video it'll be
a lot of like oh man I guess I should
have worded it better I should have
formatted my the structure of the video
better so yeah I will I will just think
like oh well I should have done better
and I'll try to do better next time and
then that just adds up over time but
what do you do about that if media
literacy is about considering evidence
and acknowledging that you could be
wrong how can you honestly do that as a
content creator without sacrificing your
mental health or Integrity well Lynch
argues that having intellectual humility
doesn't mean you lack an ego you just
don't put your ego before truth to be
open to learning from others you need to
be confident enough to realize what you
know and what you don't intellectual
humility is not an opponent of
conviction you don't need to
thoughtfully reconsider your views about
racism someone talking to the white
supremacists on your doorstep and one
reason you don't has to do with the core
meaning of intellectual humility it
means in part being open to the evidence
supplied by the experience and testimony
of others but evidence here is key just
because someone comes up to you and says
the Earth is flat doesn't mean you have
to take that statement seriously you can
be intellectually humble without to
paraphrase a well-known expression being
so open-minded that your brain just
falls out so how do I do that how do I
thread that needle how do I know which
comments I should listen to and which I
should ignore well there were several
good pieces of advice that the others
shared with me Jose and star both said
that they take the volume or frequency
of comments into account if you have
just one really angry comment then
whatever they're upset about is probably
a them thing but if there are several
comments All talking about a particular
point in your work then maybe that's
something you should think about but as
part of this job you also have to learn
how to put up with reading the most
terrible things that people think about
you that's just part of this and like
Lola said during our
conversation that can really take a toll
on you I actually feel like I have
really thick skin because you have to in
order to do this job and not lose your
mind um because every day on the
internet people are like threatening to
kill rape me they're you know commenting
on my appearance they're commenting on
the way I speak and it's especially hard
I'll say it like if you're a woman um
and if you're not like the most
conventionally attractive people in your
comment section tend to be split down
the middle of like yes Mommy oo Woo
which is disgusting you know lots of
sexualization if like it just dealt with
tons and tons of weird sexualization my
entire career like which is painful in
its own way um but it's also better than
people so much better than people being
like I think you're ugly and therefore
I'm going to kill you yep yeah I get a
lot of like why doesn't your husband
beat you
more which is great you love to see it
but why do people leave comments and not
just the terrible ones but in general
honestly what is the comment section
even for no one really knows star Emily
Nick and Alex suggested that people
leave comments because they just want to
be seen and heard it's not so much that
people want attention though for some
especially the more inflammatory
comments that is probably the case it's
more of a parasocial or Community
Building thing others like babil Elliot
and Noah argue that it's more about
strong emotional reactions people
comment because they get riled up for
one reason or another would it be like
too meta to
at this point in the video do like a
call to action to leave a comment maybe
not yeah um leave a comment telling me
why you leave comments like do you only
answer questions that creators give uh
is it one of these reasons that I've
just talked about um I don't know maybe
that is I I should have formally in the
script said like do a call to action
here but foresight is not my strong suit
but maybe as Alex pointed out to me
focusing on comments is actually just
missing the point I feel like people
don't engage with YouTube videos as
something that is made with intent and I
think that if people did engage better
in those ways um that they would be more
media literate and also leave better
YouTube comments I don't know if there
was a question in there I'm going to
disagree with you oh no okay no it's
fine it's good because you know I come
from a perspective of don't trust the
YouTuber yeah okay that's clearly my out
so what that individual is doing is
trying to think critically and um
potentially making a comment not for
you I see because we as YouTubers have a
tendency to be so focused on the channel
being us that comments we feel are
directed to us and even those that call
us out directly are not necessarily
directed to us so to assume their intent
I think is folly we've created a
location a location surrounding a
specific topic the Town Square where
people are electronically sharing ideas
some of those are not directed towards
us so when a person points those things
out it doesn't mean you Zoe made a
mistake in forgetting these things it is
an individual who may be trying to
provide the context to someone
else so what you're telling me is that I
need to work on my media literacy and
how I engage with comments and maybe I
should be thinking more about how
comments themselves are also as a piece
of media in this world made with intent
and rhetorical
choices yes I don't like that
answer it makes me mad cuz it means that
I don't have that I'm not that my
righteous indignation about YouTube
comments is perhaps
misplaced but it is a good answer
nonetheless one that I will have to
think
about
sorry also he has a great video all
about this specific question of trusting
content creators on his channel legal
kimchi which I will have Linked In the
description it is amazing and I
definitely recommend watching it when
this is over but this idea that I was
missing the point that I was getting
something wrong about my position as a
Creator and my relationship to the
comments it stuck with me I could not
stop thinking about it I chewed on that
conversation for a solid two weeks and
that's when it hit me remember media
literacy isn't just about how to be a
good consumer of media it's also about
how to be be a good creator of media so
maybe the problem isn't with viewers or
at least not just with viewers maybe I
and all the people I talk to for this
video am more responsible for this than
I first
thought this
Revelation was
frustrating I was so sure that people
misinterpreting my videos or
misunderstanding my arguments was just a
miscommunication and if I just taught
people how to be more critical viewers
and if I did a better job crafting my
arguments and modeling good media
literacy then everyone would end up in
agreement and it would be a wonderful
little space with only positive comments
and thoughtful
discussion but
that just isn't how it works
there's always going to be what you put
out there and what people come to the
table with we also must accept that
everyone is human and sometimes the the
complimentary item to what we put out
there what these folks bring to the
table isn't there to meet us you know
you're always no matter how well you
write something going to have someone
who looks at it sees the title and
thumbnail watches 20 seconds of it and
then hallucinates an argument into it
gets really mad at you and leaves a
scathing comment and I posited to you
the last time we talked about this that
this was perhaps a type of media
literacy in and of itself but I think
learning to accept that people will
always do that and that that's okay and
that maybe it feels a little Bleak and
like negative on human nature but that
it's kind of undeniable I think that's
like a skill to learn and um I think
it's okay to not be perfect at that all
the time and that it's kind of a a goal
to strive towards is like learning to
yeah make sure that you're making a
quality product and you know maybe
providing resources to people so that
they can try and come to the table and
understand it with you and you you know
really try and get at that shared
meaning really try and exist in the
world together but sometimes it won't be
possible and learning to accept that is
um I think important to not stressing
about those people ultimately some
amount of people are always going to
disagree with you um you can't make
everyone like you because if everyone
likes you then you've probably said
nothing that's like I think true of just
like being a human you know so
maybe the real media literacy issue was
on my
end maybe as a
Creator I need to have the media
literacy to understand that it's
literally impossible to create something
perfect that no one could ever
misinterpret even the best writers with
the greatest most thoughtful fans won't
reach everyone there will always be
people who just don't get it and that's
a fact of life and it's a fact that I
actually really struggle with even now
even after doing all of this reading and
having all of these conversations and
honestly maybe that means that this
video is useless I mean I've spent all
this time trying to craft the perfect
media literacy video that teaches
everyone all these skills and does a
full comprehensive breakdown of just how
complicated it all is
and
maybe it's a fruitless Endeavor Maybe
video essays as a genre are just a waste
of time because if you can't change
people's minds then what's even the
point but then I talked to my friend
star and star the starfish face creator
of the web comic cast off of which I am
the number one fan she told me something
that I think every single artist needs
to hear and so like everybody comes at a
piece of media from their own experience
equipped with their own knowledge past
experiences and how much they are
willing to connect with it and you
cannot account for every single one of
those people when you make something all
you can hope is that it hits the right
target audience and that the people who
are finding it and are enjoying it are
getting something out of it because like
I said earlier I was really struggling
back when my audience first got really
big that people were not reading the
story the way I had intended they were
not interpreting the characters the way
that I interpret them as their creator I
I had this almost legitimate crisis of
like this story is being taken away from
me and that's very hard it's like death
of the author but I'm like I'm still
working on it it was something that I
was really really struggling with and I
remember I went to a talk given by
another comic artist and something she
said really stuck with me it was
something along the lines of all you can
hope is that this piece of media is the
thing that someone needs at this exact
moment you think back to like all the
shows all the books that came to you at
just the right moment and said exactly
what you needed them to say the only
thing you can hope is that that is
something that your work is that for
someone you as the Creator cannot
control how people react to the things
that you make and if they interpret it
differently than you intended who cares
right like it's it's not a reflection on
you it's a reflection on them more than
anything and just try not to take it
personally and create something that's
meaningful to you and with any luck
it'll be meaningful to other people who
really need it in the moment and that's
all we can hope for
right
so where does that leave us well I think
that's up to interpretation but what I'm
choosing to focus on moving forward is
the idea that conflicting ideas can
coexist we should be able to acknowledge
that humanity is diverse and that
diversity is going to be reflected in a
diversity of opinion but we should also
be able to do so without compromising
our own values I'm going to continue to
try to model good media literacy and
teach people the skills to engage with
media in more literate more Curious ways
even if I know that cognitive biases and
systemic forces are working against me
and if I want people to to trust me as a
Creator maybe I need to prove over and
over again that I'm worthy of that trust
because when we all slow down take more
time to think about things practice more
curiosity and humility and
open-mindedness we all win Society wins
and Society wins not because we've
manipulated everyone into agreeing with
us or because we've destroyed all the
people who disagree with us Society wins
because media literacy is inherently
Democratic because when we're all more
media literate we're more open to
understanding others viewpoints even if
we don't agree with
them as Michael Lynch puts it in
know-it-all
Society we should not give up on truth
and humility and neither information
pollution nor polarization
should make us abandon them when we own
what we don't know and remain open to
what others do we exemplify a basic
respect for our fellow citizens that is
demanded by
democracy we may never completely
realize the ideal of respect the ideal
of living in a society that treats
people equally that achieves social
justice that values truth and reason and
that rejects arrogance and dogmatism but
these are goals wor Earth striving for
and it would be perverse to give up on
them just when they're under threat it
is precisely then that democratic
ideals matter
most thank you for sticking around until
the end of the video this video was a
lot I know that it took a while to come
out um but I hope that you liked it and
if you did then be sure to like and
comment and share the video with your
friends I also know that it was a little
different than my usual stuff and a lot
longer than my usual stuff uh but
honestly I really loved having all those
conversations with other creators so let
me know if you like that and want to see
more of it in future videos because I
will take any
opportunity uh to talk to Smart cool
creative people I loved it it was great
also I completely forgot to say
something while I was actually recording
but I want to give a huge thank you to
all of the creators who agreed to be
interviewed for this thank you so much
it was genuinely a joy to talk to all of
you I will have all of their information
in the description all of their channels
and everything so everyone please go
check them out send them some love
because this video would not have been
possible without all of them I also want
to thank all of my patrons and members
who made this video possible all of
their names are scrolling by over here
but I want to give an especially huge
thanks to Hugh Sophia Jared S Justin
Lowry Megan Lou
and Shep Alderson thank you all so very
much this video took a lot out of me it
took 2 months longer than I intended it
to it was supposed to be a like May June
video and then sometimes  happens um
it was also just really hard it was
really challenging to wrap my head
around all this stuff and like get a
handle on it but also the past few
months over overlapped with one of the
worst mental health ruts that I've had
in years maybe ever um so I hope that
this video was helpful and engaging and
good and useful and that you liked it
because I put a lot of myself into it um
but anyway thank you again for watching
and I would like to end with my Patron
poem of the video for autumn here is
cicada sometimes just sometimes I wish
to be a Sada who rests deep underground
and wakes simply to
scream and then leave the husk of who I
was
clinging and
empty and until next time stay safe stay
warm and I will see youall again soon I
hope bye
folks and on the one hand can you stop
sneezing hi uh
uh my bookmark is a Pokemon card make a
movie called everything everywhere that
happened last
time I love the Fast and the Furious
movies I don't know if there's much
Beyond those than like fast and people
with muscles it's you're right it is
family and I I feel ashamed for not even
saying that and that that should be
first in mind you could just watch my
 and then leave like it you don't
have to leave anything I want to just
clip that part to make you look like an
 please honestly bill says just
watch my  and
leave yeah let's start the campaign of
me having haters it's it's time it's
time for me to have some haters y are
too  nice to me um I couldn't
actually handle it I'm too mentally weak
but um everyone please be nice to pill
please I'm I'm I'm I'm
sensitive spoiler alert in case this
makes it into the video if you leave a
mean comment on someone's video we are
not upset by it if anything we're taking
a screenshot of it and showing it to our
friends and having a laugh like we make
fun of them in the group chat all the
time
you are not hurting us you are providing
us with Giggles for our friends I like
how sometimes depending on where you're
sitting it looks like it says King King
K yeah King yeah it says uh keep going
they found it off of canva or something
it's cute the public education system is
very challenging and always being
defunded and things like that so
um so fix that I guess so just fixing
just just the entire education if you
fix the entire education system I think
we'll be okay I think we just fixed it
right I think we fixed you do you do
better uh you do better education the
whole system and then also uh just cool
people keep making video essays I think
that helps oh yeah I mean video essays
are practice I think so and if everyone
thought the same way that like I did
about you know a Scooby-Doo cartoon if
everyone thought that way then I
wouldn't have a job cuz I'd put that
video out and they'd be like Scott we
already know this so maybe selfishly the
solution is to not do any of the things
that I just said and have me fix it
personally oh yeah cuz we profit off of
cuz we profit off of it and I do and
that would be good for me um so I think
that would be good video cancelled I
guess yeah actually if you post this uh
I'm going to copyright strike it I'm
gonna uh I'm going to to get it taken
down here's the thing Zo
if you are actually smart and creative
and insightful and inventive you're
you're not you're going to be the first
person to think of stuff sometimes find
more weird stuff find more stuff that
pushes the boundaries of your ways of
understanding find the stuff that like
they're doing something that you just
like don't understand and uh don't get
mad at that you know don't just have a
reflexive thing of like oh this is
pretentious or this isn't for me cuz
maybe it is give it a shot yeah if
someone comes to you and they're like I
think that the author just wanted the
curtains to be blue like I don't think
that media like has intention in this
way you're never going to get them to
understand the value of art or like what
art has done for you by being like Oh
the reason you think that is because
you're stupid and illiterate if we want
media literacy to be spread around the
world anger is not a useful response
maybe it's Justified maybe everyone
should be perfectly media literate and
maybe everyone should care that the the
curtains are blue but we're not going to
get people to understand that art can
change the world by yelling at them it's
just not going to
happen you're so
sweet thank you
