the conversation about AI or the impact
of AI is getting more and more polarized
every day there are views on both sides
some think it's going to be the biggest
Revolution some think is going to be the
biggest threat my speaker on the show
today is someone who's very clear I
think in his View and someone I'm very
excited to speak to you all Noah Harari
is a historian he's an author one of the
foremost thinkers of our time and is
talking about his new book Nexus youal
thank you so much for speaking with us
on NDTV absolute pleasure it's a
pleasure to be here thank you for the
invitation so I did a small introduction
of who you are but uh here's something I
like to do how would you describe
yourself for our
viewers um I'm a historian but my view
of history is that history is not the
study of the past history is the study
of change of how things change and
history is more relevant than ever
before because we are in the midst of
the biggest change ever in human history
the AI Revolution AI is really different
from everything we've seen before in
history because it's the first
technology which is not a tool it is an
agent now every previous human invention
when people invent Ed the stone knife or
the wheel or the printing press or the
atom bomb this was inventing another
tool that makes us more powerful now we
can do this now we can do this AI is not
a tool it is itself an agent which means
it can make decisions by itself it can
invent new ideas by itself an atom bomb
could not decide what to bomb an AI
weapon can by itself decide what to bomb
who to kill an atom bomb could not
invent the next generation of bombs like
the atom bomb could not invent the
hydrogen bomb AI can invent new things
including the next generation of AI so
we are now creating something which
might be potentially more intelligent
than us that might Escape our control
and start making decisions about us and
changing the world in a way that we
don't understand you know it's already
beginning in so many different ways like
you apply to a bank to get a loan
previously it was only human beings who
could decide whether to give you a loan
or not now increasingly in many banks it
is an AI deciding whether to give you a
loan or not and this will happen more
and more in universities in government
offices um you know people sometimes
have this s s fiction idea that the
danger of AI is the big robot Rebellion
like one day the AIS will try to take
over the world it's unlikely to happen
the real threat is that we will have
millions and billions of AIS these new
super intelligent agents everywhere
there AI bureaucrats in the banks in the
hospitals in the government offices in
the militaries making more and more
decisions about us changing the world
with new ideas that we cannot understand
and we will lose control over our lives
and over the future just to take that
point forward and and I'll pick up the
example on banks yeah and and then we
can see what the argument for is uh some
would argue that the bureaucracy as you
describe it and in the context of banks
is currently inefficient if you have the
right parameters then this AI decides
who to give a loan on for the right
reasons AB less bad debt you don't have
a possibly corrupt Banker giving loans
to a company for a kickback uh and or a
relative and you cut that out so I mean
what about that side of the argument I'm
not I'm not saying that AI is bad I'm
just saying it's a very big change there
are many arguments in favor of AI it
could revolutionize banking in a
positive way it can revolutionize
healthc care with millions of AI doctors
so many people can't get a doctor so if
you have millions of new AI doctors it
could create the best healthc care
system in history so even before we get
to the judgment is it good is it bad
just to understand the magnitude of the
change that for thousands of years we
lived inside a culture created by humans
all the ideas you know from music and
songs all the way to religions and and
economic systems everything came from
the human mind now increasingly we will
live in a world in which more and more
music but also more and more religious
ideas more and more economic models will
come from an alien intelligence why do
you call it alien because it thinks it
makes decisions in a completely
different way than human beings it it's
not organic it's more different from us
than chimpanzees or dogs are different
from us we are still all mammals we
share the same emotions we share the
same basic attitude to the world like we
we work in Cycles like dogs and
chimpanzees and cows and humans we are
organic we have day and night cycles of
sometimes we are active sometimes we
need to rest AIS are
inorganic they don't care if it's day or
night they never need to rest one of the
things that happen in every system that
AIS take over is that humans are forced
to move faster and faster and faster
because the AI never
rest you know even in finance we talk
about Banks so Wall Street is open the
the market in Wall Street only Mondays
to Fridays 9:30 in the morning to 4:00
in the afternoon in the evening at night
during the weekend during festivals like
Christmas it's shut because also the
bankers they want to sleep they want to
have time with their family now ai is
taking over finance and AI Works 365
days a year 24 hours so if you want to
stay in the game you have to move faster
and faster it happens to journalists it
happens to politicians and if you force
an organic being to be active all the
time you know what happens it collapses
and dies this is what is happening
around the world AI is accelerating
everything and this is pushing humans to
the brink of collapse now there is
immense positive potential there if we
know how to control the AIS but the
problem is that the AIS are agents and
they are learning how to manipulate us I
mean I give you one small
example when uh uh open AI the leading
company in the AI field developed GPT
gp4 two years ago they wanted to to test
what can this AI do so they gave gp4 the
task of solving capture puzzles capture
puzzles are these visual puzzles like
you want to access your bank so to make
sure that you're a human and not a bot
you have to identify a string of words
or to find a cat or something to to show
that you're human now the gp4 could not
solve the capture puzzle but the
researchers gave it access to a weapon
page task rabbit where you can hire
people to do things for you online so
gp4 uh triy to hire a human worker
online to solve the capture puzzle for
it now the human got suspicious the
human asked wrote on on the on the site
why do you need somebody to solve you
capture puzzles are you a robot it asks
the critical question are you a robot
and gp4 answered no I'm not a robot I
have a vision impairment which makes it
difficult for me to see the visual
puzzle the capture so this is why I need
your help so and and and the and the
human believed it so the question is who
taught gbd4 to lie nobody they gave it a
goal they told the GPT for your goal is
to solve this puzzle do anything needed
in order to solve it and gp4 on its own
initiative first of all decided to lie
to the human it understood if I tell the
human the truth it will not solve the
capture for me I need to solve the
capture I won't tell him the truth
secondly it invented a very effective
lie again this is the two abilities of
AI to make decisions I will lie and to
invent new ideas nobody told gp4 what
would be an effective lie of all the
things it could say saying that I have a
vision in perment I mean human being
with a vision in perment this was a
perfect lie so this is a very very small
example what happens if this happens on
a very big scale as the AIS control the
banks the armies you know uh um maybe
the next big financial crisis is caused
by AIS and we can't understand like you
go to the Prime Minister you go to the
president of the US and you say you have
this big financial crisis but nobody
understands what is happening because
it's the decisions of the AIS and it's
too complicated for human beings to
understand them so what this tells us is
that deceit is no longer just a human
trait no it is something that AI can
pick up and I suppose then the question
is who puts the leash because AI is not
going into Pandora's Box it's it's there
it's out completely so who puts the
leash on I I was I was seeing a um an
interview with Jeff Bezos who talks
about how right now he's spending all of
his time at Amazon looking at the
utility of AI your biggest Tech leaders
in the world are obsessing about how to
use AI so who puts the leash on ideally
it should be governments but with the
new US Administration this is unlikely
to happen the US is the leading power in
the AI race and with in the Trump
Administration it's very clear that it
is not going to put any leash to have
any
regulations um so this is a big danger
for the whole
world we could see a repeat of what
happened in the industrial revolution in
the 19th century um in the 19th century
a few countries like Britain and France
and later Japan and the US they led the
Industrial Revolution this gave them the
power to conquer and exploit and
dominate the entire world for more than
a century so this is how a small country
like Britain could Dominate and exploit
such a huge area like India for such a
long time how could they do it because
they led the Industrial Revolution they
had a technology of steamships and
machine guns and uh
trains AI is much more powerful than
steamships and machine guns the
difference between a country that leads
the AI Revolution and a country that
stays behind will be much much much
bigger than the difference between
Britain and say the Indian Kingdoms in
the 19th century so this this brings me
to my next question from an Indian
perspective uh there is no way this
country or we can be out of this race
there is no way we can afford to and
every nation in the world is going to
think like that yes so there is no
intent to put on a leash everyone wants
to be in the armed race this is the
latest weapon when everybody's just
running faster and faster we know for
certain who will win and who will lose
AI will win Humanity will lose because
all you know this is the most basic
principle in imperialism is divide and
Rule and now the competition is not
really between us and China or us and
India it's between humanity and the AIS
and if humanity is divided this ensures
that AI will win because every time you
approach a dangerous Junction you say oh
if we develop this AI if we don't put in
safety and guard rails this can be very
dangerous but if we slow down and the
Chinese don't slow down or the Americans
don't slow down or the Indians don't
slow down they will win so we know it's
dangerous but we have to do it and you
ask the Chinese they say the same thing
we know it's dangerous but we can't let
the Americans win so we have to do it
and everybody's running faster and
faster and as a result everybody
loses so what would your appeal be yal
as someone who is obviously thinking
about the big picture for Humanity as a
whole today you're talking about this in
the context of your book yeah we need to
solve the problem of human trust before
we solve the problem of AI like what we
have is a very it's a paradox like you
ask the the people who lead the AI
Revolution why are you moving so fast
and so
dangerously and they say we are aware of
the danger but we can't trust the other
humans so we must must move faster and
then you ask them but do you think
you'll be able to trust the super
intelligent AIS you developing these
aliens and they say yes we think we can
trust them this is this is is insane we
have thousands of years of experience
with humans we know that humans
sometimes lie we know that humans
sometimes deceive but we have we have
experience with humans and we also know
how to build trust with them AI is
completely new we have no idea how it
might develop this is such a huge gamble
now um if we can't build trust with the
humans I don't think there is any chance
will be able to build trust with the AIS
so I think we should you know people
this is a tendency of humanity to focus
all the attention on solving the wrong
problem and after you solve the problem
you over oh we solve the wrong problem
the real problem of the world right now
is not how to develop AI as fast as
possible it's how to rebuild trust
between humans um you know 10 years ago
the world was in much better shape in
terms of human trust it was the most
peaceful era in human history the world
war was in Conflict I come from the
Middle East from Israel I know this
perfectly well but you look for instance
at uh uh um military budgets for most of
History the military budget was more
than 50% of the budget of every
government on Earth in the early 21st
century it went down to just 7% of the
budget went to the military compared to
10% to health
why because governments felt very safe
the biggest taboo of the International
System was that you cannot invade and
Conquer another country just because
you're stronger there are lots of civil
wars and but the the basic taboo was
kept and this is why countries felt safe
now it's being broken in more and more
places the clearest example is the
Russian invasion of Ukraine this is
imperialism of the old old style that
people have forgot even what it means
you know people say oh it's like the
American invasion of Iraq it's not the
Americans never tried to to Annex Iraq
to the United States it was Unthinkable
that the US will Annex Iraq to the
United States now in Ukraine every piece
of territory conquered by the Russian
army is annexed by the Russian State
this is imperialism of a kind we have
not seen since 1945 and this example is
spreading countries around the world in
the Middle East in Venezuela in other
places they hey if Putin can do it we
can also do that and then defense
budgets Skyrocket of course so we need
to realize if you if we destroy the
international order what we get is chaos
and in a state of chaos if we have an AI
race
the winner will be AI
absolutely now obviously because you
talked about what's happening in the
world Ukraine Russia definitely what's
happening in the Middle East as well
you're also a historian how do you see
this conflict ending and the huge toll
it has already taken on human lives and
of course another very polarizing debate
on what's happening between Israel and
Gaza right now mhm well um in in Russia
and Ukraine this is very simple I mean
most conflicts in the world are complex
this is a very simple conflict the
ukrainians don't want anything from the
Russians they have no demands on any
piece of territory of of Russia um the
the the it's very very simple that
Russia has just no right to invade and
Conquer parts of another country it has
legitimate security concerns these
concerns should be addressed but it
should be very clear that a country
cannot invade and Conquer another
country just because it's stronger
should be as simple as that and all the
countries in the world should be very
clear on that point with the Russians
the Israeli Palestinian conflict is much
more complex it's an ethnic conflict
going on for
Generations uh but there too
the peace would come from the
realization that both peoples Israelis
Palestinians have a right to exist and
have a right to exist in dignity and
security and prosperity there are 7
million Palestinians more than 7 million
they are born there they have nowhere
else to go they have a right to exist in
in the land between the Mediterranean
and Jordan River in security and
prosperity and in the same land between
the Mediterranean and Jordan River there
are also more than 7 million Jews most
of them were born there they have
nowhere else to go they also have a
right to exist there in security and
prosperity the problem is that people
see only half of reality like they only
see the Jews and their rights or they
only see the Palestinians and their
rights and you know it's the human mind
is capable of holding two ideas at the
same time amazing fact about the human
mind we can hold two ideas at the same
time when when people both in the Middle
East but also in other parts of the
world have make this accomplishment of
understanding yes there is the Jewish
people it has a right to exist there is
the Palestinian people it has a right
then we can have peace we can of course
need to negotiates not easy where the
Border will pass and what you do about
water and what you do about this and
that but the real the the the deep root
of the conflict is that uh both sides
simply refuse to acknowledge the right
of existence of the other side you know
I I know I have a little time left in
this interview so I'm going to squeeze
some bits in we've talked about really
big issues let's bring it down to
individuals and you talk about
Communication in this book you talk
about how a lot of information we're now
receiving as individuals is Just Junk
yeah most information is junk and you
are obviously on a diet I believe you
don't have a smartphone I have a
smartphone but barely look at it but uh
it's not on me I I just you know there
are certain services like healthcare
like in the airport that now you must
have a smartphone but I try to use the
smartphone instead of being used by it
it's like with food we need some food
but too much and too much junk food is
not healthy for us so information is the
food of the mind we need some good
quality information but too much
information is not good for us like uh
we need time to digest physical food we
also need time to digest mental food if
you constantly just put more in you
never have time to digest to think to
meditate to detoxify your mind from all
the anger and hatred and greed and fear
which is you this is the junk
information that is constantly flooding
us so we need an information diet um
sometimes we even need an information
fast like take a period can be a couple
of hours or days some people maybe even
weeks when you don't consume any new
information you just give the time the
the Mind time to digest and
detoxify so do you ever find yourself
Doom scrolling before going to bed or
you never that I very much try try not
to do so again this is basically hacking
the human brain you know how do you hack
a computer
you find the weakest uh uh spots in its
code it's the same way how to hack the
human brain you find the weakest spots
in our brain in our mind and this is
what social media algorithms do like
they look for your weakness and they use
your weakness against you um and our
weaknesses usually are again it's hate
it's fear it's greed
if there is something that makes you
very greedy oh I want this I want this
then the algorithms will find this out
about you and then starts flooding you
with this if there is something you hate
like a group of people you hate or a
politician you hate or somebody you hate
the algorithms will experiment we'll
show you this we'll show you that and
then when they find oh you hate this
they give you more and more and more of
that so this is how they kind of hack
humans and flood us with junk
information yeah uh one of the things I
know you do to detox is vipasana it's
had a big um impact on you tell us a bit
about that and you know for for our
audiences here in India how Indian
culture and vasana has had a huge role
for you yeah so I've been meditating
vasana for 24 years now I do two hours
more or less every day and I come almost
every year to India to do a long
Meditation Retreat of one month or two
months of of vasana and for me the the
key question in meditation is what is
reality the mind is constantly
producing uh fictions fictional stories
imaginations and they come between us
and reality humans almost never
encounter reality we only encounter the
fictions produced by our minds or by the
minds of somebody else or increasingly
the fictions produced by AIS and we
don't react to the reality we react to
the fictions to the
images meditation is all about learning
to tell the difference what is a fiction
and what is reality like when you close
your eyes and sit down at least for me
the the question that keeps repeating is
what is really happening right now you
know it starts with the simplest
exercise of just feeling your breath
coming in and out of your nostrils oh
now the breath is coming coming in now
the breath is going out this is reality
the breath is really coming in the
breath is really going out you don't try
to create or control anything you just
observe reality and the amazing thing is
most people can do it for maybe 5
Seconds 10 seconds and some image comes
some fiction comes some memory comes and
hijacks our attention and then for 5
minutes you roll in some fantasy Until
you realize hey I'm supposed to be be
watching the reality you come come back
to Breath Again some fantasy comes and
this was like maybe the the the first
thing I understood when I started
meditating 24 years ago is that I have
no control of my mind and I spent almost
my entire life engage with
fantasies and not with
reality and meditation is just an
exercise for the mind how to let go of
the fantasies and get in touch with the
real it people sometimes think that
meditation is escape from reality you
have all these things in politics in
business in your personal life and you
say oh I I just sit in the corner and
close my eyes I disconnect from reality
I think it's the opposite that we spend
most of our Lives engaged with fantasies
we have no idea what the reality is and
at least for 2 hours a day I train my
mind to get in touch with reality if I
cannot
observe the reality of my breath going
in and out of my nostrils because of all
these fantasies what hope do I have of
understanding the reality of the
political situation in the Middle East
or of the economic crisis or whatever it
will only be fantasy
