most people around the world are still
not aware of what is happening on the AI
front it can invent medicines and
treatments we never thought about but it
can also invent weapons that go beyond
our imagination you're changing the
basis of everything it's no wonder there
is an earthquake in the structure that
is built on top of it I got news for you
people the rise of the Machines is
already upon us so what exactly do we
need to understand about the rapid
Ascent of artificial intelligence what
does this revolution augur for the
future of the human species to gain
Clarity amidst the confusion I'm joined
today by Yuval Noah Harari a
world-renowned historian and mega
best-selling author whose Landmark books
on the history and future of humanity
have sold an astonishing 45 million
copies and made him the public
intellectual of our time this is the
first time that we are basically about
to enter a nonhuman culture the big
question is whether we will force it to
slow down or it will force us to speed
up until the moment we collapse and die
his latest book and the terrain for
today's conversation is Nexus an
absolutely essential read that makes
quite a compelling case for why
artificial intelligence will be the
biggest disruption in the history of
civilization AI can make decisions they
they are not just Tools in our hands
they are agents creating new realities
it's very difficult to appreciate the
dangers because the dangers they're kind
of alien in the Hollywood scenario you
have the Killer Robots shooting people
in real life it's the humans pulling the
trigger but the AI is choosing the
targets thank you for coming I
appreciate you being here today I'm
excited to unpack what I think is a a
really uh revelatory book a very
important book that speaks to perhaps
the most vital issue of our time and in
reflecting upon it I was thinking back
on homod deas which came out in
2015 yeah and in that book you address
AI uh but at that time it was as if you
were sounding an alarm on a future story
uh that had yet to be had yet to be
written yeah and perhaps it came off a
bit Cassandra you know in that moment
and I'm curious as we find ourselves now
in 2024 eight nine years later it's as
if not only are we you know kind of on
the cusp of this new Revolution we're
mired in it in a way that perhaps even
is far more intense than even you
predicted at that time yeah I mean
things have been moving much much faster
than I think any of us
predicted and you know in 2016 AI was
like this tiny Cloud on the horizon that
might arrive in decades or even
centuries and here we are in 2024 and
the storm is kind of upon us and I think
maybe the most important thing is is
really to understand what what AI is
because now there is so much hype around
AI that it's becoming difficult for
people to understand what is AI now
everything is AI you know especially in
the in the markets in in the investment
World they attach the tag AI to just
about anything in order to sell it so
you know your coffee machine is now a
coffee machine is an AI coffee machine
and your shoes are AI shoes and what is
AI so you know the key thing to
understand is that AIS are able to learn
and change by themselves to make
decisions by themselves to invent new
ideas by themselves if a machine cannot
do that it's not really an AI so a
coffee machine that just makes you
coffee automatically but by a
pre-programmed way and it never learns
anything new it's just an automatic
machine it's not an AI it becomes an AI
if as you approach the coffee machine
the machine before you press any button
addresses you and says to you I've been
watching you for the last weeks or
months and based on everything I've
learned about you
and your facial expression and the time
of day and so forth I predict you would
like an espresso so I already took the
liberty to make a cup for you he made
the decision independently and it's
really an AI if it then tells you
actually I've invented a new machine a
new beverage a new drink that no human
ever thought about before I call it
bestpresso and I think it's better than
espresso you would like it more and I
took the Liber to prepare a cup for you
then it's really an AI something that
can make decisions and invent new ideas
by itself and therefore by definition
something that we cannot predict how it
will develop and evolve and for good or
or for bad it can invent medicines and
treatments we never thought about but it
can also invent weapons and dangerous
strategies that go beyond our
imagination you characterize AI not as
artificial intelligence but as alien
intelligence you give it a different
term can you explain the difference
there and why you why you've landed on
that word yeah traditionally the acronym
AI stood for artificial intelligence but
with every passing year AI becomes less
artificial and more alien alien not in
the sense that it's coming from out of
space it's not uh we create it but alien
in the sense it analyzes information
makes decisions invents new things in a
fundamentally different way than human
beings MH again artificial is from
artifact it give us the impression that
this is an artifact that we control and
this is misleading because yes we
designed the kind of baby AI we we gave
them the ability to learn and change by
themselves and then we released them to
the world and they do things that are
not under our control that are
unpredictable and in this sense they are
alien and again I mean humans are
organic entities like other animals we
function organically for instance we
function by Cycles day and night summer
and winter we sometimes active sometimes
we need to rest we need to sleep AIS are
alien in the sense that they are not
organic they function in a completely
different way not by cycles and they
don't need to rest and they don't need
to sleep and now as they take over more
and more parts of reality parts of
society there is a kind of tgof War of
who would be forced to adapt to whom
would the inorganic AIS be forced to
adapt to the organic cycles of the human
body of the human being or would humans
be pressured into adopting this kind of
inorganic lifestyle and starting with
the simplest thing that a I are always
on but people need time to be off so if
you think even about something like the
financial markets traditionally if you
look at Wall Street it's open only
Mondays to Fridays 9:30 in the morning
to 4:00 in the afternoon it's off for
the night it's off for the weekends it
takes vacations on Christmas on
Independence Day and now as algorithms
and AIS are taking over the markets
they're always on and this puts pressure
on human bankers and Investments and so
forth you can't take a minute off
because then you're left behind so in
this sense they are alien not in the
sense that they came for Mars to
understand artificial intelligence and
to understand what is actually happening
and where we're heading the thesis of of
this latest book requires us to
understand the nature of information
itself and the formative ways in which
the evolution of information networks
are inext
from the evolution and progress of
humankind so I'm curious about how you
discovered that lens into kind of
understanding the nature of artificial
intelligence and why it's important to
contextualize what is occurring right
now through that
perspective it's actually something I
began exploring in in previous books the
ideas is that uh information is the most
fundamental stratum most fundamental
basis of human society and of human
reality cuz the human superpower is the
ability to cooperate in very large
numbers if you compare us to chimpanzees
to elephants to hyenas individually
there are some things I can do in the
chimpanze con and vice versa uh our big
Advantage is not on the individual level
the really big Advantage is that
chimpanzees can cooperate in you know a
few dozen chimpanzees like 50
chimpanzees can cooporate maybe a 100
but with humans with Homo sapiens there
is no limit we can cooperate in
thousands in millions in billions if you
think about the World Trade Network like
the food we eat the shoes we wear
everything we consume it sometimes come
from the other side of the world so if
you have 8 billion people cooperating
and this is our big advantage over the
chimpanzees and all the other animals
what makes it possible for us to
cooperate with millions and billions of
other human beings it's information
information is what holds all these
large scale systems together and to
understand human history is to a large
extent to understand the flow of
information and I'll give an example if
you think for instance about the
difference between democracies and
dictatorships we tend to think about it
as a difference or as a conflict between
values between ethical
systems democracies believe in Freedom
dictatorships believe in hierarchies
things like that and which is true as
far as it goes but on a deeper level
information flows differently in
democracies and dictatorships it's a
different shape a different kind of an
Information Network in a
dictatorship all decisions are made
centrally dictatorships come from
dictate one person dictates everything
Putin dictates everything in Russia Kim
junun dictates everything in North Korea
so all the information flows to a single
Hub where all the decisions are being
made and sent back as orders so it's a
very centralized Information Network a
democracy on the other hand if you look
at it in terms of you're in alter space
looking at the flow of information in
the United States you will see several
centers in the country Washington the
political Center New York the Financial
Center Los Angeles the maybe autistic
Center
but there is no single Center that
dictates everything you have several
centers and you also have lots and lots
of smaller hubs and centers where
decisions are constantly being made
private corporations private businesses
voluntary associations individuals
making lots of decisions constantly
exchanging information without that
information ever having to pass through
the center through Washington or even
even through New York or even through
Los Angeles so just looking you don't
know anything about the values of the
people you just imagine you're in outer
space on in some spaceship or satellite
just observing the flow of information
down below the planet you will see that
North Korea is very different
information flow than the United States
and this is crucial to understand and
when you look at thousands of years of
history and how history changes and
different regimes rise and
fall understanding what kind of
information technology is available is a
key to understanding which political
systems or economic systems win for most
of History a large scale democracy like
the United States was simply
impossible if you think about the
ancient world the only examples we know
of democracy are small city states like
Republican Rome or like ancient Athens
or even smaller tribes we don't have any
example of a large scale democracy of
millions of people spread over a vast
territory that function democratically
now we know the stories for instance
about the fall of the Roman Republic and
the rise of the Caesars of the Emperors
of the autocrats but it's really not the
fault of Augustus Caesar or Nero or any
of the other Emperors that Rome became
an autocratic Empire simply there was no
way that the information technology
necessary to maintain a large scale
democracy which is bigger than just the
city of Rome like the all of Italy or
the all of the Mediterranean democracy
is a conversation and how can millions
of people spread over thousands of
kilometers Converse and decide whether
to go to war with the Persian Empire
what to do about the immigration crisis
on the danu with all these Germans
trying to get in you can't have a
conversation because you don't have the
information technology and you know if
it was just the fault of Caesar that
Rome became an autocratic Empire we
should have seen some other examples of
a large scale democracy in India in
China somewhere but nowhere we only
begin to see large scale democracies in
the late modern era after the rise of
new information Technologies which were
not available to the Romans like the
printed newspaper
and then the Telegraph and the radio and
television and so forth once you have
these Technologies you begin to see
large scale democracies like the United
States and one final Point why is it so
important to understand this once you
understand that democracy is actually
built on top of Information Technology
you also begin to understand the current
crisis of democracy because you know now
all over the world not just in the US we
have a crisis of democracy and to to a
large extent this is because there is a
new information technology social media
algorithms AIS and it's like you know
you're changing the basis of everything
so there it's no wonder there is an
earthquake in the structure that is
built on top of it so we have this idea
that the Advent or the Improvement of
information systems and information
technology is part and parcel of the
empowerment of democratic systems across
the world but built into that is this
sort of indelible misconstrual of
information this assumption or
presumption that more information is
better and leads to truth and knowledge
and wisdom uh and your book kind of puts
the lie to that and tells a very
different story around not only the
definition of information but its
purpose yeah I mean information isn't
truth information is connection it's
something that holds a lot of people
together and unfortunately what we see
in history that it's often much easier
to connect people to create social order
with the help of Fiction and Fantasy and
propaganda and lies than with the truth
so most information is not
true uh the truth is a very rare subset
of the information in the world
the problem of Truth is that the truth
first of all is costly whereas fiction
is very cheap if you want to write a
truthful history book about the Roman
Empire for instance you need to invest a
lot a lot of energy time money you need
to study Latin you probably need to
study Greek ancient Greek you need to do
archaeological excavations and find
these ancient whether inscriptions or
Pottery or weapons and analyze them very
cost ly and difficult to write a
fictional story about the Roman Empire
very easy you just write anything you
want and it's there on on the on the
page or on the Internet the truth is
often also very complicated because
reality is complicated you want to give
a truthful explanation for why the Roman
Republic fell or why the Roman Empire
eventually fell very complicated whereas
fiction can be made as easy as as simple
as possible and people tend to prefer
simple explanations over complicated
ones and finally the truth can be
painful
unattractive we often don't want to know
the truth about ourselves whether as
individuals which is why we go to
therapy for many years to know the
things we don't want to know about
ourselves and also on the level of
entire nations you know each nation has
its own Dark episodes its own skeletons
or cemeteries in the closet that people
don't want to know about a politician
that you know in an election campaign
would just tell tell people the truth
the whole truth and nothing but the
truth is unlikely to win many
votes uh so in this
competition between the truth which is
costly and complicated and sometimes
painful and fiction which is cheap and
simple and you can make it very
attractive fiction tends to win and if
you look at you know the the the large
scale systems networks in history
they're often built on fictions not on
the truth maybe I I give one example if
you think about visual information like
portraits paintings
photographs um so what is the most
common portrait in the world what is the
most famous face in the history of
humanity it is the face of Jesus I mean
there are more portraits of Jesus than
of any other person in the history of
the world billions and billions produced
over centuries in Cath
and churches and homes and fully 100% of
them are fictional there is not a single
authentic truthful portrait of Jesus
anywhere uh we have no portrait of him
from his own
lifetime uh the Bible doesn't say a
single word about how he looked like
there is not a single word in the Bible
whether Jesus was tall or short uh dark
hair or blonde or bold nothing all the
images and you know it's one of the most
famous faces in history it all comes
from the human
imagination and it's still very
successful in inspiring people and
uniting people could be for good
purposes you know charity and building
hospitals and helping the poor but could
also be for bad purposes Crusades
persecutions inquisitions but either way
the the immense power of of a fictional
image to unite people and going looking
what's happening today in the world so
you have these you know big tech
companies and social media companies
that they tell us that all information
is always good so let's remove all
restrictions on the flow of information
and flood the world with more and more
information and more information would
mean more truth more knowledge more more
wisdom and this is simply not true most
information is actually junk if you just
flood the world with information the
truth will sink to the bottom it will
not rise to the top again because it's
costly and
complicated and you look around we have
this flood of information we have the
most sophisticated information
technology in history and people are
losing the ability to hold a
conversation to talk and listen to one
another you know in the United States
Republicans and Democrats are barely
able to to talk to each other and it's
not an American phenomena you see the
same thing in in Brazil in France in in
the Philippines all over the world
because again the basic misconception is
that more information is always good for
us it's like thinking that more food is
always good for us and most information
is junk information yeah and what's
Curious to me about all of this is that
on some level what you're saying is
there's nothing new about this there is
this idea that suddenly we found
ourselves in a post-truth world and part
of what you're saying is it's kind of
always been that way but the qualitative
difference right now is not by
definition these platforms that allow us
to share information as much as it is
the algorithms that Empower them that
make the decisions about what we're
seeing and when we're seeing it yeah I
mean this is maybe the first place you
see the power of AIS to make independent
decisions in a way that reshapes the
world when I said earlier that you know
AI can make decisions and AI they are
not just Tools in our hands they are
agents creating new realities so you may
think okay this is a prophecy for the
future a prediction about the future but
it's already in the past because even
though social media algorithms they are
very very primitive AIS you know the
fair generation of AIS they still
reshaped the world with the decisions
they made in social media on Facebook
Twitter Tik Tok all that the ones that
make the decision what you will see at
the top of your news feed or the next
video that you'll be recommended It's
Not a Human Being sitting there making
these decisions it's an AI it's an
algorithm and these algorithms were
given a relatively simple and seemingly
benign goal by the
corporations the goal was increase user
engagement which means in simple English
make people spend more time on the
platform
uh because the more time people spend on
Tik Tok or Facebook or Twitter or
whatever the company makes more money it
sells more advertisements it harvests
more data that it can then sell to third
parties so more time on the platform
good for the company this is the goal of
the algorithm now engagement sounds like
a good thing who doesn't want to be
engaged but the algorithms then
experimented on billions of human guinea
pigs and discovered something which
which was of course discovered even
earlier by humans but now the algorithms
discovered it the algorithms discovered
that the easiest way to increase user
engagement the easiest way to grab
people's attention and keep them glued
to the screen is by pressing the greed
or hate or fear button in our minds you
show us some hate filled conspiracy
theory and we become very angry we want
to to see more we tell about it to all
our friends us their engagement goes up
and this is what they did over the last
10 or 15 years they flooded the world
with hate and greed and fear which is
why again the conversation is breaking
down very hard to hold a conversation
with all this hate and fear yeah it's a
function of unintended consequences that
on some level is no different than Nick
bostrom's you know alignment problem you
know thought experiment about paper
clips like this is the exact same thing
and I think it speaks to not only human
ignorance but human hubris around this
powerful technology I think you know you
talk so much about stories and how
indelible they are in terms of crafting
our reality but one of those stories is
we know what we're doing we can handle
it we understand the consequences we
know the downside here and we're making
sure that what we're putting out into
the world is is safe and consumer
friendly when you know on some level
they know it's not but Al they have no
idea you know what will become of it as
a result and so we're just in this
Frontier this unregulated Frontier where
anything goes at the moment yeah I mean
I think it's important what you said
that these are kind of unintended
consequences like the people who manage
the social media companies they are not
evil they didn't set out to destroy
democracy or to flood the world with
with hate and and and so forth um they
just really didn't foresee that when
they give the algorithm the goal of
increasing user engagement the algorithm
will start to promote hate and one of
the first places that let me just
interject quickly on that though now
that they know that that's the case it's
not as if they're backtracking that's
true they're EXA they're not exactly
regulation friendly at the moment no
absolutely not so all right sorry go
ahead you're right now they know and
they are not doing nearly enough but
initially when they started the whole
ball rolling they really didn't know and
one of the places you saw it for the
first time this was you know eight years
ago when I published homo this was
happening I I didn't pay attention to it
either in Myanmar bur Burma the country
formerly known as Burma Facebook was
basically the internet and and cly the
biggest social media uh platform and uh
in the 2010s the algorithms of Facebook
in Myanmar they deliberately spread
terrible conspiracy theories and fake
news about the rohinga minority in
Myanmar which led to an ethnic with of
course it was not the only reason there
was deep-seated hatred towards rohinga
much before but this kind of propaganda
campaign online on Facebook contributed
to an ethnic cleansing campaign between
2016 and 2017 2018 in which thousands of
rohinga were killed tens of thousands
were raped and hundreds of thousands
were expelled you now have close to a
million rohinga refugees in in
Bangladesh and elsewhere and this was
fueled to a large extent by this
conspiracy theories and fake news on
Facebook and at the time the executive
of Facebook had no I mean they didn't
know even the rohinga existed it's not
like it was a conspiracy of Facebook
against them for the Hall of
Myanmar a country where Facebook had
Millions and millions of
users they by 2018 this is after they
got reports of the of the ethnic
cleansing campaign they had just a
handful of humans trying to kind of
regulate uh the actions of millions of
users in the
algorithms and they didn't even speak
boures like when the algorithm chose
okay I I'll show people this hatefi
conspiracy theory video in buor
nobody in Facebook headquarters spoke
bmes they had no idea what the algorithm
was promoting the key thing is is not to
absolve the humans from responsibility
it's to understand that even very
primitive AIS and we were talking about
you know like eight years ago MH not
things like CHP to still the the
decisions made by these algorithms to
promote certain content had far reaching
and terrible consequen quences in
Myanmar they were not just producing
conspiracy theories they were producing
their millions of users producing you
know cooking lessons and biology lessons
and sermons on compassion from Buddhist
monks and conspiracy theories and the
algorithms made a decision to promote
the conspiracy theories and this is just
kind of a warning of look what happens
with even very primitive AIS and the AIS
of today which are far more
sophisticated than
2016 they too are still just the very
early stages of the AI evolutionary
process and we can think about it like
the evolution of of animals until you
get to humans you have 4 billion years
of evolution you start with
microorganisms like amibas and it took
billions of years of evolution to get to
dinosaurs and mammals and humans now AIS
are present at the beginning of a
parallel process
the CH GPT and so forth they are the
amibas of the AI world but AI evolution
is not organic it's inorganic it's
digital and it's millions of times
faster so where it took billions of
years to get from amibas to dinosaurs it
might take just 10 or 20 years to get
from the AI amibas of today to AI T-Rex
in 2040 or 2050 maybe even less maybe
even less we're talking about I don't
think our brains are are
organized properly to really comprehend
The Accelerated speed at which this is
self-learning and iterating and
improving upon itself like just it's a
compounding thing that is astronomical
meanwhile trillions of dollars are being
spent to build these server Farms with
these Nvidia chips and there's so much
power required to keep these things
going they're talking about nuclear I
mean this is like this is a whole new
world and yet in talking about it it
still feels somewhat like an academic
exercise because for myself or somebody
who might be watching or listening their
experience with AI comes in the form of
chat GPT or some of these helpful tools
like I like my algorithm it shows me the
kind of products that I want to buy
without having to search for it and a
simple example would be preparing for
this podcast like I listen to your book
on audiobook and I'm doing what I
usually do pulling up a bunch of tabs
and you know like just collating a bunch
of information on you and the book and
the message that you're putting out but
I did something I had never done before
which is I got a PDF of Nexus and I
uploaded it to a tool called notebook LM
M and that tool then synopsized the
entire book and created a chat bot where
I could ask it questions about your book
and ask it to elaborate on certain
Concepts and it will even create a
podcast conversation between two people
about the subject matter of the
book so even this conversation is at
risk right irrelevant and I'm like wow
that's kind of a a remarkably helpful
tool and it's easy to to you know just
not really appreciate or connect with
the downside risk and power of these
tools and where they're leading us so I
think what I'm saying is I guess the
point I'm trying to make is consumers
like all of us we're we're being lured
into a Trust of something so powerful we
can't comprehend and are ill equipped to
be able to kind of cast our gaze into
the future and imagine where this is
leading us absolutely I mean part of it
is that there is enormous positive
potential in AI it's not like it's all
doom and gloom there is really enormous
positive potential if you think about
the implications for healthc care that
you know AI doctors available 24 hours a
day that know our entire medical history
and have read every medical paper that
was ever published and can tailor their
advice their treatment to our specific
life history and our blood pressure our
genetics it it can be the biggest
revolution in healthcare ever if you
think about self-driving Vehicles so
every year more than a million people
die all over the world in car accidents
most of them are caused by human error
like people drinking and then driving or
falling asleep at the wheel or whatever
uh sell driving vehicles are likely to
sell save about a million lives every
year this is amazing you think about
climate change so yes developing the AIS
will consume a lot of energy but they
could also find new sources of energy
new ways to to harness energy that could
be our best shot at at preventing
ecological collapse uh so there is
enormous positive potential we shouldn't
deny that we should be aware of it and
on the other hand it's very difficult to
appreciate the dangers because the
dangers again they are kind of alien
like if you think about nuclear energy
yeah also had positive potential nuclear
cheap nuclear energy but people had a
very good grasp of the danger nuclear
war anybody can understand the danger of
that with AI it's much more complex
because the danger is not
straightforward the danger is really I
mean we we've seen the Hollywood science
fiction scenarios of the big robot
Rebellion that one day the big computer
or the AI decides to take over the world
and kill us or enslave us
and this is extremely unlikely to happen
anytime soon because the AIS are still a
kind of very narrow intelligence like
the AI that can summarize a book it it
doesn't know how to act in the physical
world outside you have AIS that can fold
proteins you have ai that can play chess
but we don't have this kind of General
AI that can just find its way around the
world and build the robot army and and
whatever so people it it's how to
understand so what's so dangerous about
something which is so kind of narrow in
its abilities and I would say that the
danger doesn't come from the big robot
Rebellion it comes from the AI
bureaucracies already today and more and
more we will have not one big AI trying
to take over the world we will have
millions and billions of AIS constantly
making decisions about us everywhere you
apply to a bank to get a loan it's an AI
deciding whether to give you a loan you
apply to get a job it's an AI deciding
whether to give you a job you're in
court you're found guilty of some crime
the AI will decide whether you go for 6
months or 3 years or whatever even in
armies we already see now in the war in
Gaza in with the war in Ukraine AI make
the decision about what to bomb um and
in the Hollywood scenario you have the
Killer Robots shooting people in real
life it's the humans pulling the trigger
but the AI is choosing the targets is
telling them what to this is much more
complex yeah then the standard
scenario every point of connection with
bureaucracy then becomes turned over to
an algorithm that makes decisions in a
black box without the opportunity for
rebuttal or conversation right so we
we're Outsourcing all of these decisions
and creating like an autocratic diaspora
of decision makers right and that in
turn like you can imagine over time like
what emerges from that is is like a
godhead or a Pantheon of gods where
there's an authoritarian regime that's
dispersed across this in which we are
relenting our agency over to these
machines and trusting that they're
making the right decisions but not
knowing how those decisions are being
made even the engineers who are creating
the algorithms don't know and there's
something you know kind of innately
terrifying about that again it's not
authoritarian in the sense that there is
a single human being that is kind
pulling all the levers no it's it's the
AI like the bank has this AI that
decides who is qualified to get a loan
and if they tell you we decided not to
give to give you a loan and you ask the
bank why not and the bank says we don't
know I mean computer says no I mean the
algorithm says no we don't understand
why the algorithm says no but we trust
the algorithm and this is likely to
spread to to more and more places the
key thing is it's not that the bank is
hiding something from you it's really
that the AIS make decisions in a very
different way than human beings on a
basis of a lot more data so if the bank
really wanted to explain to you why they
refused to give you a loan like let's
say there is a law the government passes
a law of a right to an explanation if
the bank refused to give you a loan you
can apply they must give you an
explanation so the explanation well
people fear that it will be kind of I
don't know racist bias or homophobic
bias like in the old days that the
algorithm so that you're black or you're
Jewish or you're gay and this is why I
refuse to give you a loan it won't be
like that I mean the bank will send you
an entire encyclopedia in millions of
pages saying this is why the computer
refused to give you a loan the computer
took into account thousands and
thousands of data points about you each
one based on statistics on millions of
of PR previous cases and now you can go
over these millions of pages if you like
and if you want to challenge okay but
but it's not the kind of old style
racism or whatever sure a new version of
the terms and conditions that we just
click on without reading right except uh
extrapolated hundredfold um in addition
to that with all of these data points I
can't help but think that that you know
these these
machines the veracity of the information
that these machines provide us with is
only as reliable as the data sets that
it has been provided with and and right
now we're tipto into a situation where
the internet is being uh rapidly
degraded because it's being populated
more and more by AI content now when you
go to Google and you search the first
thing you see is a is sort of an AI kind
of summary of your query as opposed to
links and this in turn is undermining
the business model of Legacy Media and
all forms of media right so as those
continue to die on the vine more and
more of the internet will be a result of
AI generated content and then it becomes
a recursive thing in which it's feeding
upon its own inputs to make decisions
and you know with that like you can
imagine a degradation of the data set
upon which it is making those decisions
exactly even if you think about
something like music so AI that now
creates music it basically ate the whole
of human music like for thousands of
years humans produced music or art or
theater whatever within a year the
current AI just ate the whole of it and
digested it and start now creating new
music or new texts or new images and the
first kind of generation of AI texts or
music um this is based on on previous
human culture but with each passing year
the AIS will be eating their own
products because as you know the human
share in music production or the human
share in text production or image
production will go lower and lower most
images most music will be produced at
least to in part by Ai and this will be
the new food that the AI eats and then
you have exactly what you describ this
recursive pattern and where it will lead
us we have no idea I mean another way to
think about it this is the first time
that we are basically about to enter a
non-human
culture like humans are our cultural
entities we live cun inside culture like
all this music and art and also finance
and also religion this is all part of
culture and for tens of thousands of
years the only entities that produced
culture were other humans so all the
songs you ever heard were produced by
humans all the religious mythologies you
ever heard came from the human
imagination now there is a an alien
intelligence a non-human intelligence
that will increasingly produce songs and
music mythology Financial strategies
political
ideas even before we rush to decide is
it good is it bad just stop and think
about the meaning of living in a
nonhuman culture or a culture which is I
don't know 40% or 70% non-human it's not
like going to China and seeing a
different human culture it's like really
alien culture here on Earth yeah my
human mind bristles at that I start
thinking about like this this bias I
have around the originality of human
thought and emotion and this kind of
assumption that AI will never be able to
fully mimic The Human Experience right
there's something indelible about what
it means to be human that the machines
uh will never be able to fully replicate
and when you talk about you know
information the purpose of information
being to create connection a big piece
there is intimacy like intimacy between
human beings so information is meant to
create connection but now we have so
much information and we're feeling very
disconnected so there's something broken
in this system and I think it's driving
this loneliness epidemic but on the
other side it's it's making us value
like intimacy maybe a little bit more
than we were previously uh and so I'm
curious about where intimacy kind of
fits into this you know posthuman World
in which culture is being dictated by
machines I mean human beings are wired
for that kind of intimacy and I think
our radar or our kind of ability to you
know identify it when we see it is part
of what makes us human to begin with
maybe the most important part um I think
the key distinction here that is often
lost is the distinction between
intelligence and
Consciousness that intelligence is the
ability to pursue goals and to overcome
problems and obstacles on the way to the
goal the goal could be a self-driving
vehicle trying to get from here to San
Francisco the goal could be increasing
user user engagement and an intelligent
agent knows how to overcome the problems
on the way to the goal this is
intelligent
and this is something that AI is
definitely acquiring in at least certain
Fields AI is now much more intelligent
than us like in playing chess much more
intelligent than human beings but
Consciousness is a different thing than
intelligence Consciousness is the
ability to feel things pain pleasure
love hate uh when the AI wins a game of
chess it's not joyful if there is a
tense moment in the in the game it's not
clear who is going to win the AI is not
tense it's only the human player which
is tense or frightened or anxious the AI
doesn't feel anything now there is a big
confusion because in humans and also in
other mammals in other animals in dogs
and pigs and horses and whatever
intelligence and Consciousness go
together we solve problems based on our
feelings our feelings are not something
that kind of evolution
decoration it's the core system through
which marals make decisions and solve
problems is based on our feelings so we
tend to think that Consciousness and
intelligence must go together and in all
these science fiction movies you see
that as the computer or robot becomes
more
intelligent then at some point it also
gains Consciousness it falls in love
with the human or
whatever and we have no reason to think
like that yeah Consciousness is not a
mere extrapolation of intelligence a
qualitatively different thing yeah and
again if you think in terms of evolution
so yes the evolution of mammals took a
certain path a certain Road in which you
develop intelligence based on
Consciousness but so far what we see is
computers they took a different
route their Road develops intelligence
without consciousness
I mean computers have been developing
you know for 60 70 years now they are
not very intelligent at least in some
fields and still zero Consciousness now
this could continue indefinitely maybe
they are just on a different path maybe
eventually they will be far more
intelligent than us in everything and
still will have zero Consciousness we'll
not feel pain or pleasure or love or
hate you know the same way that if you
think about birds and
airplanes so airlanes did not become
like birds airlanes don't fly using
feathers and so forth they fly in a
completely different way it's not like
that at a certain point when the
airplane flies fast enough suddenly the
the feathers will appear no and it could
be the same with intelligence and
Consciousness that it will be more and
more intelligent without feelings ever
appearing now what adds to the problem
is that there is nevertheless a very
strong commercial and political
incentive to develop AIS that mimic
feelings to develop AIS that can create
intimate relations with human beings
that can cause human beings to be
emotionally attached to the AIS even if
the AIS have no feelings of themselves
they could be trained they are already
trained to make us feel that they have
feelings mhm and to start developing
relationships with them why is there
such an incentive because intimacy is on
the one hand maybe the most cherished
thing that that the human can
have uh you know I was just on on the
way here we were listening to Barbara
ston singing are people who need people
are the luckiest people in the world
that intimacy is not a liability it's
not something bad that oh I I need this
no it's it's the greatest thing in the
world but it's also potentially the most
powerful weapons weapon in the world if
you want to convince somebody to buy a
product if you want to convince somebody
to vote for a certain politician or
party intimacy is like the Ultimate
Weapon I mean so far in history there
was a big battle for attention how to
grab human attention also we talked
about earlier in social media how how to
get human attention and there were ways
like I don't know in Nazi Germany Hitler
could Force everybody to listen to his
speech on radio so he had command of
attention but not of intimacy there was
no technology for Hitler or Stalin or
anybody else to mass produce intimacy
now is AIS it is possible technically to
mass produce intimacy you can create all
these AIS that will interact with us and
they will understand our feelings
because again feelings are also patterns
You can predict a person's feelings by
watching them for weeks and months and
learning their patterns and facial
expression and tone of voice and so
forth and then if it's in the wrong
hands it could be used to manipulate us
like like never before sure it's our
ultimate vulnerability this beautiful
thing that makes us human becomes this
uh great weakness that we have because
as these AIS continue to self iterate
their capacity to mimic conscious
and human intimacy uh will reach such a
degree of fidelity that it will be
indistinguishable to the human brain and
then humans become like these
unbelievably easy to hack machines who
can be directed wherever the AI you know
chooses to direct them yeah it's not a a
prophecy we we can take actions today to
prevent this uh we can have regulations
about it we can for instance have a
regulation that AIS are welcome to
interact with you humans but on
condition that they disclose that they
are AIS if you talk with an AI doctor
that's good but the AI should not
pretend to be a human being you know I'm
talking with an AI I mean it's not that
there is no possibility that AI will
develop
Consciousness we don't know I mean there
could be that AI will really develop
conscious to such a degree of fidelity
does it even in terms of like how human
beings interact with it does it matter
for the human beings no I mean again
this is the problem I mean because we
don't know if they really have
Consciousness or they're only very very
good at mimicking Consciousness so the
key question is ultimately political and
ethical if they have Consciousness if
they can feel pain and pleasure and love
and hate this means that they are
ethical and political subjects they have
rights that uh you should not inflict
pain on an AI the same way you should
not inflict pain on a human being that
what they like what they love might be
as important as what human beings desire
so they should also vote in elections
and they could be the majority because
you know you can have a country 100
million humans and 500 million AIS so do
they choose the government in this
situation now you know in the United
States interestingly enough there is
actually an open legal path for AIS to
gain rights it's one of the only
countries in the world where would this
is the
case because in the United States
corporations are recognized as legal
persons with rights until today this was
a kind of legal fiction like according
to US law Google is a person it's not
just a it's a person and as a person it
also have freedom of speech this is the
Supreme Court ruling for 2010 of Citizen
United now until today this was just
legal fiction because every decision
made by Google was actually made by some
human being an executive a lawyer an
accountant Google could not make a
decision independent of the humans but
now you have AIS so imagine the
situation when you incorporate an AI now
this AI is a
corporation and as a corporation US law
recognizes it at a as a person with
certain rights like freedom of speech
now it can earn money it can go online
for instance and offer its services to
people and earn money then it can open a
bank account and invest its money in the
stock exchange and if it's very smart
and very intelligent it could become the
more the richest person in the US now
imagine the richest person in the US is
not a human it's an AI and according to
us slw one of the rights of this person
is to make political contributions
donations this was the main reason
behind citizen United in in
2010 so this AI now makes billions of
dollars of contributions
to politicians in exchange for expanding
AI
rights so and the legal path is in the
US is completely open you don't need any
new law to make this happen uhhuh that's
like a that's a plot of a
movie yeah when you know we in La yeah I
mean wow that's so wild to contemplate
what are the differences in the ways in
which the Advent of this powerful
technology is impact ing Democratic
systems and authoritarian
systems so both systems have a lot to
gain and have a lot to lose again the AI
it's it's the most powerful technology
ever created it's not a tool it's an
agent so you have millions and billions
of new agents are very intelligent very
capable that can be used to create the
best healthcare system in the world but
also the most lethal army in the world
or the worst secret police in the world
if you think about authoritarian regimes
so throughout history they always wanted
to monitor their citizens around the
clock but this was technically
impossible even in the Soviet Union you
know you have 200 million Soviet
citizens you can't follow them uh all
the time because the the KGB didn't have
200 million agents and even if the KGB
somehow got 200 million agents that's
not enough because you know in in the
Soviet Union it's still basically paper
bureaucracy the secret police if a
secret agent followed you around 24
hours a day at the end of the day they
write a paper report about you and send
it to KGB headquarters in Moscow so
imagine every day KGB headquarters is
flooded with 200 million paper reports
now to be useful for anything somebody
needs to read and analyze them they
can't do it they don't have the analysts
therefore even in the Soviet Union some
level of privacy was still the default
for most people uh for technical reasons
now for the first time in history it is
technically possible to annihilate
privacy a totalitarian regime today
doesn't need millions of human agents if
he wants to follow everybody around you
have the smartphones and cameras and
drones and microphones everywhere and
you don't need millions of human
analysts to analyze this o of
information you have ai and this is
already beginning to happen this is not
a future prediction in many places
around the world you begin to see the
formation of this totalitarian
surveillance regime it's happening in my
country in Israel Israel is building
this kind of surveillance regime in the
occupied Palestinian territories to
follow everybody around all the time and
also in our region in Iran since the
Islamic revolution in 1979 they had the
hijab laws which says that every woman
when she goes out walking or even
driving in her private car she must wear
the hijab the head scarve and until
today the regime had difficulty
enforcing the hijab laws because they
didn't have you know millions of police
officers that you can place on every
street a police officer if a woman
drives without a headscarf immediately
she's arrested and fine or whatever in
the last few years they switched to
relying on an AI system Iran Is Now
crisscrossed by uh surveillance cameras
with facial recognition software which
recognizes
automatically if in the car that just
passed by the camera the facial
recognition software can identify that
this is a woman not a man and she's not
wearing the hijab and identify her
identity find her phone number and
within half a second they send her an
SMS message saying you broke the hijab
LW your car is impounded your car is
confiscated stop the car and by the side
of the world this is daily occurrence
today in Teran and isan and other parts
of Iran and uh this is based on AI and
it's not like the there is a report that
go to the court and some human judge
goes over the data and decides what to
do the AI like immediately decides okay
the car is
confiscated and this can happen in more
and more places around around the world
like even in the US you know for for if
you think about all the debate about
abortion without going into the debate
itself the people who think rightly or
wrongly but they think that abortion is
murder they have a very strong incentive
to build a similar surveillance system
for American women you know to stop
murder mhm like you can build this
surveillance system that can identify
yesterday you were pregnant today you
are not what happened in
between so it's not just a problem you
know for Iran or for the Palestinians or
the Chinese this this can come to the US
as
well and to prevent them from crossing
state lines things like that yeah yeah
like okay you went from I don't know
Texas to California you you were
pregnant you came back you're not
pregnant what happened in California so
it feels like AI is this incredible tool
to consolidate power uh around
authoritarian regimes but it also has
its its pitfalls too like it's not the
perfect tool it also frightens the
autocrats uh because the one thing that
human dictators always feared most was
not a democratic Revolution the one
thing they feared most is a powerful
subordinate that they can't control and
that might manipulate them or take power
from them if you can look at the Roman
Empire not a single Roman Emperor was
ever toppled by a democratic Revolution
never happened but many of them uh lost
their life or their power to a
subordinate you know a general that
rebelled against them a provisional
Governor their brother their wife that
took power from them this is the
greatest fear of every dictator also
today and so if you think about AI so if
you're a human dictator and you now give
this immense power to an AI system where
is the guarantee that this system will
not turn against you and either
eliminate you or just turn you into a
puppet I mean what we also know about
dictators it's relatively easy to
manipulate these people if you can
whisper in their ear because they are
very paranoid and the easiest people to
manipulate are the paranoid people and
we have our AI Corporation in the United
States that can deploy billions of
dollars towards Bots and whatever else
to you know create that paranoia or you
really just need to hack one person you
know to to for an AI to take power in
the US very complicated it's such a
distributed system like okay the AI can
learn to manipulate the president but it
also needs to manipulate the Senators
and the Congress members and the state
Governors and the Supreme Court like
what would the AI do with the Senate
phili Buster it's difficult but if you
want to take power in a dictatorship you
just need to learn to manipulate a
single person so uh the dictators are
not all happy about the AIS and we
already beginning to see it for instance
with
chatbots that they are very concerned
because you know you can design a
chatbot which will be completely loyal
to the regime but once you release it to
the internet to start interacting with
people in real life it changes I mean
remember what we talked earlier that AI
is defined by the ability to learn and
change by itself so even if you if Putin
creates like the the Putin's chatbot
that always says that Putin is great and
Putin is right and Russia is great and
so forth but then you release it to the
real world it starts observing things in
the real world for instance it notices
that you know in Russia the invasion of
Ukraine is officially not a war it's
called a special military operation and
if you say that it's a war you go to
prison for up to I think 3 years or
something like that because it's not a
war it's a special military operation
now what do you do if a very intelligent
chatbot That You released you know
connects the dot and says no it's not a
special military operation it's a war
would you send a chat Bo to prison what
what can you do and you know democracies
of course also have a problem with
chatbot saying things we don't like they
can be racist they can be homophobic
whatever but the thing about democracy
it has a relatively wide margin of
Tolerance even for anti-democratic
speech dictatorships have zero margin
for dissenting views so they have a much
bigger problem with how to control these
unpredictable chant
points over the last decade of Hosting
this podcast
my mission has been to engage in what I
consider to be critically important
conversations about the things that
matter most in life while I'm immensely
grateful for the growth of this show
I've also come to realize that my voice
alone is not enough this Mission cannot
be a solitary Endeavor so I wanted to
find a way to help amplify other
meaningful voices and the result is
voicing change media this beautiful
Consortium of thinkers of storytellers
artists and Visionaries all committed to
fostering meaningful exchanges
intentionally curated for those
committed to the path of
self-discovery together we're creating a
space of growth a space of understanding
where every exchange has the potential
to enrich our lives and catalyze
profound personal and planetary change
visit voicing change. media to learn
more And subscribe
how are you interpreting uh the current
moment given that we're on the cusp of
an election here in the United States
and you know there's a lot of discourse
around the existential threat to
democracy that we may be facing uh what
role is AI playing in this what should
we understand about the impact of this
technology on us as Citizens and
voters at present I don't think that AI
has again social media has of of course
a huge impact on the political discourse
and thereby on the results of the
elections but I don't see AI really kind
of changing or manipulating the
elections in November it's too close the
big question is whoever wins the
elections maybe the most important
decisions that person has to make will
be about AI because of the extremely
rapid Pace that this technology is is
developing you know you look at what CH
GPT was a year ago you look at what
things are now in in in 2024 what will
be the state of AI in 2027
2028 so you know I watched the
presidential debate most people their
main takeaway was about the cats and the
dogs it's the most memorable thing for
the debate I mean you know whoever wins
maybe we'll have to make some of the
most important decisions in history
about the relations uh I if if you're
worried about immigration it's not the
immigrants that will you know replace
the taxi drivers it's the immigrants
that will replace the bankers that you
should be worried about and it's the AIS
not somebody coming from south of of the
border and who do you trust to make
these momentous decisions now and if you
see think specifically about the threats
to democracy so one thing we learned
from history is that democracies always
since again ancient Athens
they always had this one single big
problem or
weakness that democracy is basically a
kind of a deal that you give power to
somebody for a limited time time period
for four years on condition they give it
back and then you can uh make an a
different Choice like we tried this it
didn't work let's try something else
this ability to say let's try something
else this is democracy and it's B on
that you give power and you expect to
get it back after years transfer at the
end of that term if you give power to
somebody who then doesn't give it back
they now have the power they have the
power to also stay in power that was
always the biggest danger in democracy
so for me the in the issue in the US
elections it's you can discuss the
economic policies the foreign policies
you like this you like that there is
discussion to be had but you have your
one person Donald Trump and that has you
know you have a record from the previous
time that this person doesn't want to
give power back and he is willing to go
a long way including potentially
inciting
violence to uh avoid giving power back
and you want to give him so much power
that doesn't sound like a very a very
good idea so for me this is the kind of
the number one issue in the elections
everything else is is
of marginal importance in comparison
yeah I mean I think it challenges our
our our predels around the stability of
democracy and is forcing us to really
embrace the fact that it is a delicate
Dynamic that is you know informed by
Collective action by the people and in
reflecting upon you know this technology
also uh you know the story of technology
is one in which our ability to legislate
around it and regulate it always falls
you know way behind the pace of
advancement and now we're in a situation
where the pace of advancement is like
nothing we've ever seen before which
calls into question our ability to not
only you know kind of put guardrails
around it but to even understand what is
actually happening the history of
Information Systems is one of collective
human cooperation and yet we're in a a
situation right now where it feels like
cooperation is being challenged not only
nationally here in the United States but
internationally and so as we kind of
begin to talk about how we're going to
triage this or or find Solutions like
where do you land in terms of our
capacity to collectively come together
as a global Community to figure out
Solutions and then put them into motion
so that we don't tiptoe into some kind
of
dystopia so there is a lot to unpack
here so first of all when we think about
cooporation as we said earlier this was
always our biggest Advantage as a
species that we cooperate better than
anybody else we can construct these even
Global networks of trade that no other
animal even understands like if you
think about I don't know
horses so horses never figured out money
they were bought and sold but they never
understood what are these things that
the humans are exchanging and this is
why horses could never unite against us
or could never manipulate us because
they never figured out how the system
works that one person is giving me to
another person in exchange for a few
shiny metal things or some pieces of
paper AI is is different it understands
money better than most people like most
people don't understand how the
financial system really works and
financial AIS inin in Tech they already
surpass most human beings not all human
beings but most human beings in their
understanding of money so we are now
confronting again millions of and
billions of new agents that potentially
can use our own systems against us that
they computers can now collaborate using
for instance the financial system more
efficiently than humans
can so the whole issue of cooporation is
is is changing
and computers also learn how to use the
communication systems to manipulate us
like like in social media so they
cooperating where we are losing the
ability to cooperate and that should
raise the alarm now and the thing that
it's very difficult to understand what
is happening if we want humans around
the world to cooperate on this to build
guard rails to regulate the development
of AI first of all you need humans to
understand what is happening secondly
you need the humans to trust each
other and most people around the world
are still not aware of what is happening
on the AI front you have a very small
number of people in just a few countries
mostly the US and China and a few others
who understand most people in Brazil in
Nigeria in India they don't understand
and this is very dangerous because it
means that a few people many of them are
not even elected by the US ciitizen they
are just you know private companies they
will make the most important
decisions and the even bigger problem is
that even if people start to understand
they don't trust each other like I had
the opportunity to talk to some of the
people who are leading the AI Revolution
which is still led by humans it is still
humans in charge I don't know for how
many more years but as of 2024 it's
still humans in charge and you meet with
these you know entrepreneurs and
business tycoons and politicians also in
the US in China in Europe and they all
tell you the same thing basically they
all say we know that this thing is very
very
dangerous but we can't trust the other
humans if we slow down how do we know
that our competitors will also slow down
whether our business competitors let's
say in here in the US or our Chinese
competitors across the ocean and you go
and talk with the competitors they s the
same thing we know it's dangerous we
would like to slow down to give us more
time to understand to assess the dangers
to debate regulations but we can't we
have to rush even faster because we
can't trust the other Corporation the
other country and if they get it before
we get it it will be a disaster and so
you have this kind of paradoxical
situation
where the humans can't trust each other
but they think they can trust the AIS
because when you talk with the same
people and you tell them okay I
understand you can't trust the Chinese
or you can't trust open AI so you need
to move faster developing the super AI
how do you know you could trust the AI
and then they tell you oh I think that
will be okay I think we've figured out
how to make sure that the AI will be
trustworthy and under our control so you
have this very paradoxical situation
when we can't trust our fellow humans
but we think we can trust and layer on
top of that is an incentive structure of
course that further engenders distrust
in this arms race right like the prize
goes to the Breakthrough developers and
those will be rewarded and remunerated
in ways that are you know perhaps
unprecedented right so absolutely so the
breakthroughs and what's on the other
side of that is is so enticing that any
discourse around regulation or anything
else that might slow it down becomes not
only a national security threat but also
an entrepreneurial threat right so
everything is motivating rapid
acceleration uh at the cost of
transparency and Regulation and all
these other things all these checks and
balances that that we really need right
now and I don't know like you know how
you're feeling about this but it it
leaves me a little cold and and
pessimistic like you're a historian like
the the story of humankind is is all gas
no breaks you know like let's just we're
plowing forward and we'll deal with the
consequences when they come like we're
not wired adequately to really
appreciate the long-term consequences of
our Behavior we're we're kind of you
know looking right in front of us and
making decisions based on how it's going
to impact Us in the immediate future and
and very little else yeah I mean
throughout history the problem is people
are very good at solving problems but
they tend to solve the wrong problems
like they spend very little time
deciding what problem we need to solve
like 5% of the effort goes on choosing
the problem then 95% of the effort goes
in solving the problem we we we focus on
and then we realize oh we actually
solved the wrong problem and it just
creates new problems down the road that
we now need to and then we do it the
same again and you know wisdom often
comes from Silence from taking time from
slowing down let's really understand the
situation before we rush to make a
decision and you know it starts on the
individual level that so many people for
instance think oh my main problem is in
life that is that I don't have enough
money and then they spend the next 50
years making lots of money and even if
they succeed they wake up at a certain
point and said oops I think I it shows
the wrong problem I think it wasn't yeah
I need some money but it wasn't the my
main problem in life and we are perhaps
doing it collectively as a species the
same thing you know you go back to
something like the Agricultural
Revolution so people thought okay we
don't have enough food let's produce
more food with agriculture we'll
domesticate wheat and rice and potatoes
we'll have lots more food life will be
great and then they domesticate these
plants and also some animals cows
chickens pigs whatever
and they have lots of food and they
start building these huge agricultural
societies with towns and cities and then
they discover a lot of new new problems
they did not anticipate for instance
epidemics hunter gatherers did not
suffer almost any infectious diseases
because most infectious diseases came to
humans from domesticated animals and
they spread in the dense towns and
cities now if you live in a hunter
gatherer band you don't hold any
chickens or pigs so it's very unlikely
some virus will jump from a wild chicken
to you and even if you got some new
virus you have just like 20 other people
in your band and you move around all the
time maybe you infect five others and
like three die and that's the end of it
but once you have these big agricultural
cities then you get the epidemics people
thought they were building Paradise for
humans turned out they were building
Paradise for
germs and human life expectancy and
human living conditions for most humans
actually goes down if you're a king or a
high priest it's okay but for the
average person it was actually a bad
move and the same thing happens again
and again throughout history and it can
happen now on a very very big scale uh
with AI in a way it goes back to this
issue of organic and
inorganic that organic systems are slow
they need time and this AI is an
inorganic system which accelerates
beyond anything we can we can deal with
and the big question is whether we will
force it to slow down or it will force
us to speed up until the the moment we
collapse and die I mean if you force an
organic entity to be on all the time and
to move faster and faster and faster
eventually it collapses and
dies one of the things I heard you say
that that really struck me was
this uh it's a quote if something
ultimately destroys us it will be our
own delusions H so can you elaborate on
that a little bit and how that applies
to what we've been talking
about yeah I mean the AI at least of the
present day they cannot Escape our
control and they cannot destroy us
unless we allow them or unless we kind
of order them to do that we are still in
control but because of our you know
political and mythological delusions we
cannot trust the other humans and we
think we need to develop these AIS and
uh faster and faster and give them more
and more power because we have to
compete with the other humans and this
is the thing that could really destroy
us and you know it's very unfortunate
because we do have a track record of
actually being quite successful of of
building trust between humans it just
takes time
I mean if you think about again the long
Arc of human history so these hunter
gatherer bands tens of thousands of
years ago they were tiny couple of dozen
individuals and even though the next
steps like agriculture they had their
downside again like
epidemics people did learn over time how
to build much larger societies which are
based on trust if you now live in United
States or in some other country you're
are part of a system of hundreds of
millions of people who trust each other
in many ways which were really
unimaginable in the Stone Age like you
don't know
99.99% of the other people in the
country and still you trust them with so
much I mean the food you eat mostly you
did not go to the forest to hunt and
gather it by yourself you you rely on
Strangers to provide the food for you
most of the tool you use are coming from
strangers your security you rely on
police officers on soldiers that you
never met in your life they are not your
cousins they are not your next door
neighbors and still they protect your
life so yes if you now go to the global
level okay we still don't know how to
trust the Chinese and the Israelis still
don't know how to trust the Iranians and
vice versa but it's not like we are
stuck while we were in the Stone Age
we've made immense progress in building
human trust and we are rushing to throw
it all
away because uh it just again it takes
time it will not happen tomorrow yeah I
mean I think it's urgent that we find a
way back to repairing some institutional
trust right like that has been degraded
in recent times and I think without that
uh we stand very little chance as a
democratic Republic of surviving and
solving these kinds of problems
absolutely if if you ask in brief what
is the key to building trust between
millions of strangers the key is
institutions because you can't build a
personal intimate relationship with
millions of people so it's only
institutions whether it's courts or uh
police forces or newspapers or
universities or healthc Care Systems
that build trust between people
and unfortunately we now see this uh
again another epidemic of distrust in
institutions on both the right and the
left it is fueled by a very cynical
worldview which basically says that the
only reality is power and humans only
want power and all human interactions
are power
struggles so whenever somebody tells you
something you need to ask whose
privileges are being served
whose interests are being Advanced and
any institution is just a elite
conspiracy to take power from us so
journalists are not really interested in
knowing the truth about anything they
just want power and the same for the
scientists and the same for the judges
and if this goes on then all trust in
institutions collapses and then Society
collapses and the only thing that can
still function in that situation is a
dictatorship because dictatorships don't
need trust they are based on terror so
people who attack institutions they
often think oh we are liberating the
people from these authoritarian
institutions they are actually Paving
the way for a
dictatorship and the thing is that this
view is not just very cynical it's also
wrong humans are not these power crazy
demons all of us want power to some
extent that's true but that's not the
all truth about us humans are really
interested in knowing the the truth
about ourselves about our lives about
the world on a very deep level because
you can never be happy if you don't know
the truth about your life are because
you will not know what are the sources
of misery again you will focus on your
life if you don't know the truth you
waste all your life trying to solve the
wrong problems and this is true of also
of journalists and judges and scientists
yes there there is corruption in every
Institution this is why we need a lot of
Institutions to keep each one another in
check but if you destroy all trust in
institutions what you get is either
Anarchy or a
dictatorship and again it's a good
exercise every now and then to stop and
think about how every day we are
protected by all kinds of Institutions
like when people talk with me about the
Deep State you know this conspiracy
about the Deep State I immediately think
about the sewage system
the sewage system is the Deep State it's
a deep H system of tunnels and pipes and
pumps which is the state built under our
houses and streets and neighborhoods and
saves our life every day because it
keeps our sewage separate from our
drinking water you know you go to the
toilet you do your thing it goes down
into the deep state which keeps it
separate from the drinking water
uh if I can tell one historical anecdote
where did it come from so you know after
Agricultural Revolution you have big
cities they are Paradise for germs hot
beds for epidemics this continues really
until the 19th century London in the
19th century was the biggest city in the
world and one of the most dirty and
polluted and a hot bed for epidemics and
in the middle of the 19 century there is
a cholera epidemic and people in London
are dying from cholera and then you have
this bureaucrat medical bureaucrat Jon
Snow not the guy from Game of Thrones a
real Jon Snow who did not fight dragons
and zombies but actually did save
millions of lives cuz he went around
London with lists and he interviewed all
the people who got sick or who died if
somebody died from Colorado he would
interview their family tell me where did
this person get their drinking water
from and he made these long lists of
hundreds and thousands of people and by
analyzing these lists he pinpointed a
certain well on Broad Street in SoHo in
London where everybody almost everybody
who got sick on colera they had a zip of
water from that well at a certain stage
and he convinces the municipality to
disable the pump of the of the well and
the epidemic stops and then they
investigate they discover that the well
was dug about a meter away from a
cesspit and one water sewage water from
the cesspit got into the drinking water
and today if you want to dig a well or a
cesspit in London or in Los Angeles you
have to fill so many forms and to get
all these bureaucratic permits and it
saves our lives and how does that relate
to this idea of the deep state I'm
trying to tether those two Notions
together again the people who believe
the conspiracy theories about the Deep
State they say that all all these State
bureaucracies they are Elite conspiracy
is against the common people trying to
take over power trying to destroy us and
in most cases no the people in this you
know to manage a seage system you need
plumbers you also need bureaucrats again
you need to apply for a license to dig a
well and it is managed by all these kind
of state bureaucrats and it's a very
good thing because again there is
corruption in these places sometimes
this is why we keep also courts you can
go to court this this is why we keep
newspapers so they can expose corruption
in the cities in the municipalities
sewage department but most of the time
most of these people are honest people
who are working very hard every day to
keep our sewage separate from our
drinking water and to Keep Us Alive and
by extrapolation there are all of these
bureaucracies that are working in our
interest in invisible ways that we take
for granted exactly basically right
you've often said Clarity is power power
and I think your superpower is your
ability to kind of stand at 10,000 ft
and look down on Humanity in the planet
and
identify what's most important in these
macro trends that help us make sense of
what's Happening Now and I'd like to
kind of end this with some thoughts on
how you cultivate that clarity through
meditation and your you know very kind
of like profound uh practice of
mindfulness and information deprivation
I should say right yeah information
fasts yeah starting maybe is with the
idea of an information fast so I think
this is important today for every person
to go in an information diet that this
idea that more information is always
good for us it's like thinking that more
food is always good for us it's it's not
true and the same way that the world is
full of junk food that we better avoid
the world is also full of junk
information that we have better avoid
information which is
artificially filled with greed and hate
and fear information is the food of the
mind and we should be as mindful as what
we put into our minds as of what we put
into our mouths but it's not just about
limiting
consumption it's also about digesting
it's also about
detoxifying like we go throughout our
life and we take in a lot of junk
whether we like it or not that fills our
mind and I I meditate two hours every
day so I can tell you there is a lot of
junk in there a lot of hate and fear and
greed that I picked up over the years
and it's important to take time to
Simply digest the information and to
also detoxify to kind of let go of all
this hatred and and anger and fear and
and uh and greed which is in our
minds so I began when I was doing my PhD
in Oxford a friend recommended that I go
on a Meditation Retreat or vasana a
meditation and for a year he kind of
nagged me to go on and I said no this is
kind of mystical mambo jumbo I don't
want to to to and eventually I went and
it was amazing because it was the most
remote thing for mysticism that I could
imagine uh because I it was a 10 days
Retreat and on the very first evening of
the retreat the teacher Essen goenka the
only instruction he gave he didn't tell
me to kind of visualize some godess so
do this man nothing he just said what is
really happening right now bring your
attention to your nostrils to your nose
and just feel whether the breath is
going in or whether the breath is going
out that's the only exercise like a pure
observation of reality what amazed me
was my inability to do it like I would
bring my attention to the nose and try
to feel is it going in is it going out
and after about 5 Seconds some thought
some memory some fantasy would arise in
the mind and would just hijack my
attention and for the next two or three
minutes I would be rolling in this
fantasy or memory until I realize hey I
actually need to observe my breath and I
would come back to the Breath Again 5
seconds maybe 10 seconds I will be able
oh now it's coming in it's coming in oh
now it's going out it's going out and
again some memory would come and hijack
me and I realized first that I've I know
almost nothing about my mind I have no
control of my mind and my mind is just
like this Factory that constantly
produces fantasies and Illusions and
delusions that come between me and
reality like if I can't observe the
breath going in and out of my nostrils
because some fantasy comes up what hope
do I have of understanding AI or
understanding the conflict in the Middle
East without some mindmade illusion or
fantasy coming between me and
reality and for the last 24 years I have
this daily exercise of I devote two
hours every day to just what is really
happening right now I sit with closed
eyes and just try and focus let go of
all all the mindmade stories and feel
what is happening to the breath what is
happening to my body the reality of the
present moment I also go for a long
Meditation Retreat usually every year of
between 30 days and 60 days of
meditation uh because again one of the
things you realize there is so much
noise in the mind that just to calm it
down to the level that you can really
start meditating seriously it takes
three or four days of continuous
meditation
just so much noise so long Retreats they
enable to have this really deep
observation of reality which is
impossible most of life we spend like
detached from reality two hours a day
that's a commitment even in the midst of
all the book promotion craziness you're
able to find came here I I usually do
one in the morning one in the afternoon
or evening what a beautiful thing and
obviously your ability to think clearly
and write so articulately about these
ideas is very much a product of this
practice absolutely I mean without the
practice I would not be able to write
such books and I would not be able to
deal with the kind of all the publicity
and all the interviews and you know this
roller coaster of positive and negative
feedback from the world all the time I
would say one one important thing this
is not necessarily for everybody
because I meditate and I have meditator
friends and so forth I mean different
things work for different people there
are many people that I wouldn't
recommend to meditate two hours a day or
to go for a 10 days Meditation Retreat
because they are different their body
their minds are different for them
perhaps going on a 10 days hike in the
mountains would be better for them
perhaps devoting two hours a day to
music to to say playing or to creating
or going to to psychotherapy y would
have better results humans are really
different in many ways from one another
there is no one size fits all so if you
never try meditation absolutely try it
out and and and give it a real chance
it's not like you go for like a few
hours and it doesn't work okay give it
up like give it a real chance but keep
in mind that again different minds are
different um so find out what really
works for you and whatever it is that's
the important part whatever it is invest
in it
I have to release you back to your life
uh but maybe we can end this with just a
a concise thought about what it is that
you want people to take away from from
this book like what is most vital and
crucial for people to understand about
what you're trying to
communicate but information isn't truth
truth is a it's it's a costly a rare and
precious thing it is the foundation of
of knowledge and wisdom and of nine
beneficial societies you can build
terrible societies without the truth but
if you want to build a good society and
you want to build a good personal life
you must have a a strong basis in the
truth and it's difficult again because
most information is is not the truth and
invest in it it's worthwhile uh to have
a practice whatever it is that gets you
connected with reality that gets you
connected with the truth thank you for
for coming here today uh I really
appreciate you taking the time to share
your wisdom and experience I think uh
Nexus your latest book is as I said at
the outset a crucial vital book that
everybody should read uh we're entering
into a very interesting time and we are
well advised to be as best prepared as
we possibly can and uh I appreciate the
work that you do um and thank you again
you've all thank you I only graced the
surface of the outline that I cre so
hopefully you can come back CU I got a
million more questions I could have
talked to you for hours next time I'm in
La I'll be happy to thanks man
appreciate it cheers
peace that's it for today thank you for
listening I truly hope you enjoyed the
conversation to learn more about today's
guest including links and resources
related to everything discussed today
visit the episode page at Rich roll.com
where you can find the entire podcast
archive my books Finding Ultra voicing
change in the plant power way as well as
the plant power meal planner at meals.
roll.com if you'd like to support the
podcast the easiest and most impactful
thing you can do is to subscribe to the
show on Apple podcast on Spotify and on
YouTube and leave a review and or
comment this show just wouldn't be
possible without the help of our amazing
sponsors who keep this podcast running
wild and free to check out all their
amazing offers head to Rich roll.com
slss sponsors and sharing the show or
your favorite episode with friends or on
social media is of course awesome and
very helpful and finally for podcast
updates special offers on books the meal
planner and other subjects please
subscribe to our newsletter which you
can find on the footer of any page at
Rich roll.com Today's show was produced
and engineered by Jason Cameo the video
edition of the podcast was created by
Blake Curtis with assistance by our
creative director Dan Drake portraits by
Davey Greenberg graphic and social media
assets courtesy of Daniel siss and thank
you Georgia Wy for copywriting and
website management and of course our
theme music was created by Tyler Patt
Trapper Patt and Harry Mattis appreciate
the love love the support see you back
here soon peace plance namaste
