thank you ladies and gentlemen welcome
sorry about that delay coming in um my
name is Jonathan fredland uh you all
know why you're here which is to
hear one of the foremost public
intellectuals of our age his first book
sapiens sold 25 million copies was on
the Sunday Times bestsellers list here
in this country for 96 consecutive
weeks overall he has sold 45 million
books in
65
languages he is now a fellow of the
University of Cambridge he remains a
lecturer in the department of history at
the Hebrew University of Jerusalem as I
say one of the great minds of our age a
warm welcome please for jual Noah
Harari it's very good to be uh together
we we've got a lot to talk about
including centrally your new book uh
Nexus uh the history of of how human
race has handled
information with a a very radical set of
thoughts about artificial intelligence
we're going to do all of that but first
of all I want to ask you about
this and the phenomenon of this kind of
thing you 20 years ago you were an
academic historian plowing away medieval
military
history writing monographs that might
have been read by perhaps 120 or so
people on a good day
now you are somebody who can pack out a
venue like this there were lines around
the block to he there are audiences like
this for you all over the
world what is that like what does that
do for how you write for how you think
for being
you um it's a bit
strange and unexpected but I think it it
testifies to the power of
history that it's I think more relevant
than ever for me history is not the
study of the past uh even when I studied
medieval military history I didn't think
that history is about remembering Kings
and battles from a thousand years ago
that most people don't care about
history is the study of change of how
things change and uh therefore also it's
about the present and the future and we
are now at a moment of great greater
change than at any previous uh uh time
in history which is why history is more
relevant than
ever so let's talk about the history
that you chart in this new book um and
the just as a starting
point of f the focus on
information very often I think people
are tempted to think that information is
something secondary so you think that
you know there's the war and then
there's the information War and people
treat it as if it's a kind of mediated
second order thing there's actual life
and then there's talking about life you
know but you write here that information
is actually the basic building block of
reality that it's an essential human
thing just explain to us as a starting
point why information is so important I
mean almost everything we do is based on
cooperating with a very large number of
other people most of them complete
strangers mean we can know a couple of
dozen people maybe 100 200 but most of
the people we cooperate with are
strangers and you talk about war so
armies are networks of thousands and
sometimes millions of people what holds
an army together if you think about an
economic system so the food we eat is
often grown by complete strangers who
live on the other side of the planet so
what connects them to us us and uh
wherever you look at churches at uh uh
cultural institutions the connections
that hold the network together is
information so it's it's things like
orders or taxes or mythologies or money
if you think for instance about
something like the United States what is
still holding the United States together
when Republicans and Democrats cannot
agree almost about anything
so maybe the last story that still holds
the country together is the story of the
dollar it's the last thing they still
agree about is the value of a dollar and
even this is under attack because you
have the cryptocurrency people who want
to dism and just imagine what happens if
suddenly each party has its own currency
and they go to the grocery store and if
it's a person from a different party no
I don't accept
that so um red dollars and blue
or Bitcoins and
whatever and the the the power of of of
this information networks is immense
they are now the most important thing on
the
planet and the key thing to understand
about it all is that the information
doesn't have to be
true you know if you think about the
dollar it's not describing anything in
reality you cannot ask is the dollar
true or false no it creates something
new in reality maybe the best example is
music that you think about how music
connects people whether it's people in
church singing a H A Hymn together
whether it's soldiers mching together to
the bit of a Trum maybe it's people
going to a club dancing together and the
music connects them and the thing about
music you know with all the talk about
fake news there is no such thing as fake
music there is a lot of bad music but
there is just no such thing as as fake
music music as information it always
creates
connections and when we get to talk
about AI later so again lots of people
hope fantasize that AI will tell us the
truth about the world it will not it
will just create a new world a new world
much more complicated much more
difficult to understand than the world
we know today just because you mentioned
mus music and I'm I'm going to just jump
ahead to Ai and then we'll go back again
but because you've planted music music
That's composed by AI like art that's
generated by AI you said there's no such
thing as fake music is a you know
Symphony written by AI real or fake is
it's completely real I mean you can say
I don't like it you can say it also
about many pieces of music composed by
human beings but um certainly in terms
of the vibration in the air it's real
and also in terms you know there is a
huge discussion maybe we have it later
about what is out and what is creativity
but a lot of people think that the
purpose of Art and and and of creativity
is to create some emotional impact on
people and here music created by AI can
have an immense emotional impact on
people it can play on our emotional
keyboard just like human made
music so the subtitle of the book A
Brief History of information networks
from the Stone Age to AI I think a lot
of people intuitively will look at that
and assume that's a story of progress of
things getting better that the we move
the human race moves from the discovery
of writing through to jumping a bit
printing to you know the newspaper and
each at each point our abilities get
better uh greater that it's a a story of
steady advance and we perhaps we'll come
on to AI whether that's the combination
but that notion of an
upward uh curve you say that's I think
you call it naive and you say it's not
quite right just explain to us why it
doesn't quite work out like that well
the basic question of the book of Nexus
is if humans are so smart why are we so
stupid I mean we obviously in many ways
the the the smartest the wisest animals
on this planet we've reached the moon
we've split the atom we know how to read
and also write the the code of Life DNA
and yet we are on the verge of
destroying ourselves and much of the
econ ecological system not just through
one method we have now an entire menu of
ways to destroy
ourselves and uh we are aware of it and
we are still in many ways rushing
headlong
towards the the the
clifftop and why is it and this is a
question that bothered humans throughout
history because humans had this tendency
for for for self-destructive activities
not just today but throughout history
and a lot of mythologies and theologies
they claim that there is something wrong
in human nature there is some deep flow
in us as as an as entities as beings
which causes us to be self-destructive
to be evil and only an outside
force can come and save us and I think
this is wrong the problem is not in our
nature the problem is in our
information most people are good but if
you give good people bad information
they make bad decisions they make
self-destructive decisions and then the
question becomes so why isn't
information getting
better and just give us an example of
people making bad decisions because of
bad information rather than than being
inherently bad give us an example if you
if you look for instance at at the
examples of of mass delusion mass mass
psychosis in the 20th century things
like Nazi German things like uh the
stalinist regime in the Soviet Union so
when you actually go and look at the
documents and reading the archives and
interview people who are still alive
most of the people who voted for Hitler
and who supported him were not evil
people this is one of the big
misconceptions about Nazism and about
many of or you look at
previous terrible things in history
whether it's the Inquisition or the
Crusades um
people very few people you can say they
are evil people in most cases people
think they're doing good things even the
inquisitors or the witch Hunters who
burn people at the stake they think that
they are actually saving their souls
from burning for eternity in Hell or The
Souls of other people who might be
influenced by these B bad ideas if I let
this heretic go on living and spreading
this heresy more people will lose the
opportunity to go to heaven and instead
will have to spend eternity in in the
Flames of hell so by burning this person
I this is actually of
love and people at least some people
seriously believe that and so your point
there is that their failing is not a
moral one it's that they've been fed bad
information to believe that the heretic
will be spared of torments for eternity
or whatever the if if you accept their
basic premises if you accept their view
of the world then yes what they are
doing suddenly not only makes sense it
looks like a good deed
and if if you think that the Jews are
going to destroy the world so destroying
them suddenly looks like a good a good
deed so the problem is the bad
information that led them to those wrong
beliefs wrong-headed beliefs the the the
essential problem is is ignorance and
not evil the and and and then the
question is so how can people after
thousands of years of progress and after
again we invented writing and the
printing press and radio and we flooded
the world with information with so much
information how can people still be so
ignorant and the the key misconception
here is that information just isn't
knowledge most information is
junk um you know we now have the most
sophisticated information technology in
history and people are losing the
ability to hold a rational conversation
I was just alluding earlier to the
United States but you see the same thing
all over the world so this very naive
idea will just invent more powerful
Information Technology we'll just have
more information this will necessarily
lead to arise in in knowledge and
rationality and wisdom and
communication again and again through
his history uh uh we were given very
good lessons that this it doesn't work
like that and the key reason is that the
truth is a very small subset of the
information in the world you have a lot
of information again like music which
you just the question of Truth never
arises with regard to music even
information that tries to tell you
something about the world most of it is
not true and the reason should be
obvious the truth is costly if you want
to write a truthful account of anything
of battles in the Middle Ages or of what
is happening right now in American
politics you you need to invest a lot of
time and effort and money to gather
evidence to analyze it to tell the
difference what is reliable what is
unreliable it's very costly to produce a
truthful account in contrast fiction
fantasy lie it's very cheap you just
write anything you want no need of
factchecking no need of research
similarly the truth is often very
complicated because reality is
complicated like you want to know the
truth about the physical structure of
the world it's very complicated or about
what causes epidemics very complicated a
fiction can be made as simple as you
would like it to be and people usually
prefer simple stories they are easier
and the final thing is that the truth is
often painful and unattractive from the
level of of an individual you that you
need to go to therapy for years to
realize the pain that maybe you have
caused loved ones in your life or the
pain you caused yourself not easy to
acknowledge this truth all the way to
the level of entire nations and cultures
and religions that sometimes have not
skeletons but entire cemeteries in the
closet that they don't want to
acknowledge and whereas the truth is is
is is not just costly but also
complicated and painful fiction can be
made as a feeling as attractive as
fluttering as simple as you would like
it to be so in a completely kind of free
market of information the truth is bound
to sink to the bottom not to rise to the
top we need to give it help and we've
seen this in the world of uh social
media and
other on the internet the way that and
there there've been there was a study in
Scientific American I think that charted
this that a lie goes v virals or and is
spread virally six times faster than the
truth that it is just more sharable more
viral uh and you've explained partly why
that would be and it matters because you
write that these stories are the glue
that binds societies whole societies
together and the false ones are better
at being that glue than the true ones
they're just
cheaper and also more attractive you
know if you think for instance about uh
um you know producing an atom bomb you
you want to produce an atom bomb so you
need to know some facts I mean it should
be very very clear no large network no
information Network economic military
cultural it cannot function uh with zero
truth it needs to know some truth about
the world if you want to produce an atom
bomb you need to know some facts of
physics otherwise the bomb will not
explode but the thing about
human networks is that they need two
things they need to know some truth
about the world but they also need to
preserve order among a very large number
of strangers again if you want to
produce an atom bomb it's not enough
that you have one physicist that knows
the effect of physics you also need
thousands hundreds of thousands of other
people you need Engineers you need
Builders to build the reactor you need
miners to mind the uranium somewhere you
need Farmers to grow rice and wheat so
all these engineers and physicists and
whatever will have something to eat so
how do you get hundreds of thousands of
people to work on a nuclear program if
you just tell them the fact of physics
listen E equals MC squ so what this is
not a motivation for anybody to to work
on this you need a better story and the
easiest stories are mythological stories
are fantasies and the thing that often
people who work in in science or work on
these technological developments don't
understand is that in almost all cases
the people who know the facts of physics
and biology and history they get their
orders from experts in mythology and
theology um
and this basic imbalance is what we see
again and again through history
