well I have a question I guess I'd like
to know a little bit more about why you
specifically chose the title the master
and the emissary yeah that that's to
meterics plain what I believe to be the
relationship is units and hemispheres
and they're like most other things in
life they're in equal and asymmetrical
and one of the brain hemispheres sees
more than the other that is the one that
I've designated the master
hmm and it was the right hemisphere mhm
that's a weird inversion because people
often think of the left hemisphere is
the one that's like dominant they do
they do traditionally that's been the
case but as is becoming ever clearer the
right hemisphere this has been a real
steep learning curve for some people but
the the right hemisphere is in many ways
more reliable sees more understands more
than the left hemisphere which is like a
sort of high high functioning bureaucrat
in a way mm-hmm and the idea of the
story was simply that certain matters
needed to be delegated not only because
as it were the master couldn't do
everything he needed an emissary to go
abroad and do some of it but also that
he must not get involved was a certain
point of view otherwise he'd lose what
it was that he did see so that's what
I'm really saying there is there was a
good reason why evolutionarily speaking
the two brain hemispheres are separate
when you say doesn't get involved what's
the advantage of that that detachment
from the involvement well it's that
rimoni cahal you who you know is a great
history pathologist yeah and one of his
findings was in primates are more
inhibitory neurons than in any other
animals and there are more in humans and
in any other primate and there are many
that's speaking proportionally
proportionately and there are more kinds
as well so we think that about 25% of
the entire
cortex is is inhibitory right so it's a
very strong effect and the corpus
callosum seems to be very largely in the
end inhibiting function in the other
hemisphere and that is I think because
over time the two hemispheres have had
to specialize there are reasons why I
actually can't be I'm not going to get
into now but I was talking about just a
few days ago that the evolutionary
psychiatry meeting but there are reasons
why the corpus callosum has had to
become more selective and to inhibit
quite a lot of what's going on in the
other hemisphere because it enables the
two to do distinct things mm-hm
and of course they have to work together
but usually good teamwork doesn't mean
everyone trying to do the same role
right so differentiation is very
important for two elements to work
together and inhibition is one way of
doing that so effectively the two takes
on the world if you like that the
hemispheres have are not easily
compatible right and and we're not aware
of that because at a level below
consciousness there's a meta control
center that is bringing them together so
in ordinary experience we don't feel
we're in two different worlds but
effectively we are and they have
different qualities and different goals
different values different different
takes on what is important in the in the
world and what meeting or whatever so
let me let me ask you about I got I've
developed a conceptual scheme for for
thinking about the relationship between
the two hemispheres and I'm kind of I've
been curious about what you think about
it and how it might map on to or not
your your ideas so I've been really
interested in orienting reflex and
discovered by Sokolov I think back in
about 1962 right he was a student of
Laureus and the orienting reflex is
manifested when something at least in
their terminology something
unpredictable happened i've thought much
more recently that it's actually when
something undesired happened happens and
the laboratory constraints obscured that
and that turned out to actually be
important but good um so and i kind of
put together the ideas
the Orang team reflex with some of the
things I learned from young Jung's
observations on the function of art and
dreams so imagine that you have a
conceptual scheme laid out right we
could say that it's it's it's
linguistically media its enforced on the
world and then there are exceptions to
that to that conceptual scheme those are
anomalies that are unexpected and the
orienting reflex oriented towards those
yes and so those are things that aren't
fading property in your conceptual
scheme that you have to figure out so
the first thing you do is react
defensively essentially because it might
be dangerous yeah and then your
exploratory systems are activated yes so
and the exploratory systems first of all
our enhanced attention from an
intentional perspective but then and
this is where the art issue sort of
creeps into it it's the idea would be
something like the right hemisphere
generates an imaginative landscape of
possibility that could map that anomaly
so you can kind of experience that it's
at night you know like say you're
sitting alone at night it's 2:00 or 3:00
in the morning you're kind of tired
maybe you're in an unfamiliar place and
there's a noise that happens that
shouldn't happen in another room yep you
can play with that so for example if you
open the door slightly and put your hand
in to turn on the light and you watch
what happens your mind will fill with
imaginative representations of what
might be a route yes right so it's like
the the the landscape of anomaly will be
populated with something like
imaginative demons yes and that's a
first pass approximation and it seems to
me that that's a right hemispheric
function and then that as you explore
further that imaginative domain which
which circumscribes what might be is
strained and constrained and constrained
and constrained until you get what it
actually is and that's specialized and
routinized it's something like that yeah
does that seem like a reasonable what do
you think about that I love that a whole
host of reasons one is you mentioned
defense and one of the ideas behind my
hypothesis is the right hemisphere is on
the lookout for predators right whereas
the left hemisphere is looking for prey
and
this has been confirmed in many species
of things I'd never heard that second
part amphibians and mammals yes so and
you're in left hemispheric mode you're
more in predator mode well I mean of
course we are not lizards or toads or
marmoset or whatever but in animals
generally speaking yeah this is the case
getting and grasping and after all our
left hemisphere is the one that controls
the grasping head is left hemisphere and
exploring which you mentioned yeah is
more right hemisphere and when the when
a frontal function is deficient people
often go into warm somatic mode of the
hand of that side and the left hand it's
usually exploratory motions meaningless
ones but trying to explore the
environment and with the right hand it's
grasping pointlessly at things so they
as where their automatic thing is with
the with the left hand the right
hemisphere to explore with the right
hand the left hemisphere to grasp so
when you said exploratory and you said
defensive and you said also opening up
to possibilities these are all aspects
or the way the right hemisphere I often
say the right hemisphere opens up to
possibilities right whereas the left
hemisphere wants to close down to a
certainty and you need chaos an order
and and you know I loved in your talk
you talked about chaos and order but if
I may say so you've seemed and maybe
you'd like to gloss that a little you
seem to suggest that it would be good we
can't get rid of chaos but you've seemed
to imply that it would be better if we
could whereas my view is that chaos and
order are necessary to one another and
there is a proper sort of harmony we
haven't okay I think that's that's as
deeper question as you could possibly
ask I would say I would say there's a
central theological issue there and yes
issue there's the you know in Genesis
the proper environment of humanity is
construed as a garden yes and so I see
that as the optimal balance of chaos and
order
nice nature is its flourish isn't it
picking is chaotic yeah then if you add
harmony to that you have a garden yes oh
you live in the garden you're supposed
to tend the garden okay so now the
garden is created it's a walled space
yes even as a walled space yeah Harrod
azide so it's a walled garden that's it
now the thing is as soon as you make a
wall you try to keep what's outside out
but you can't because the boundaries
between things are permeable so if
you're going to have reality and you're
gonna have a bounded space you're gonna
have a snake in the garden yes now then
the question is what the hell should you
do about that yeah make the walls so
high that no snake can possibly get in
or should or should you allow for the
possibility of snakes but make yourself
strong enough so that you can contend
with them and I think there's there's an
answer there that goes deep to the
question of even maybe why the
theological question of why God allowed
evil to exist in the world I agree with
you it's like well do you make people
safe or strong and strong is better and
safe might not be commensurate with
being like it might not be possible to
exist and to be safe well our existence
is predicated on the fact that we dies
well it's never safe well it's certainly
bounded right yeah yeah this inevitably
wrapped up with you sort of finitude
yeah there's this there's a lovely
lovely Jewish idea and ancient ideas one
of the most profound ideas I've ever
come across and so it's a kind of a Zen
koan and here it is is that so it's a
question about the classic attributes of
God
initiate omnipresent and omnipotent hmm
what is it being with those three
attributes Locke hmm what kind of
question is that
the answer is limitation yeah and the
second answer is that's the
justification for being is that the
unlimited lacks the limited exactly and
so because limited is us for anything to
come into existence there needs to be an
element of resistance and so things are
never predicated on one pole of what is
always a dipole right
everything is has that type oh yes it is
and it's imaged in the yin-yang idea but
it seems to me very important because
they're not help to be often seem to
suppose that certain things are just
good and other things are just about and
it'd be good if we could get rid of
bad ones but actually by pursuing
certain good things that are good within
measure too far they become bad not so
cool right but now let's go back to your
a normally thing because Ramachandran
calls the right hemisphere the unnormal
yes yes and so I think that that's a
very important point because there are
two ways you can react to an anomaly
one is to and both have to be explored
one is to try and prove that it's not
really an anomaly and therefore you can
carry on with things as normal
yes and the other is hopeful that you
hopefully that's it that's the that's
the typical left hemisphere approach
doesn't want anything to have to shift
yeah and quite reasonably you don't want
to be chaotically shifting if you're
onto a good thing too stressful exactly
it takes too much work it and you might
actually be mistaken in a way it's
perfectly correct to be weary but it's
not correct to be so weary that you blot
out anomalies and there's a lot of
evidence as I'm sure you know that the
left hemisphere simply blots out
everything that doesn't fit with its
take it doesn't see it at all right so
it's there's a hugely important element
in the right hemisphere going hang on
but there may be another way of thinking
that will accommodate this better and
actually good science needs yes to be
skeptical about anomalies otherwise the
be chaos but it also needs to be able to
shift when an anomaly is rightly large
enough right right or there it quite a
lot of them and they don't really fit
very well into this exactly yes yes so
there's there's another observation that
Jung made which I loved I love this
observation he was trying to account for
radical personality transformation right
and so his idea was this and I think
it's it's it's commensurate with the
ideas of inhibition between the two
hemispheres so let's imagine the left is
habitually inhibiting the function of
the right to keep fear under control it
does that all sorts of ways but so
imagine that the right is reacting to
anomalies and it's aggregating them okay
the left can't deal with them so the
right is aggregating anomalies and maybe
that's starting to manifest itself a
nightmarish dreams for examples like
that these normally super piling up it's
indication that you're on shifting sand
well so then imagine that the right
hemisphere aggregates normal ease and
then it start
to detect patterns in the anomalies and
so now it starts to generate what you
might consider a counter hypothesis at
the left side offices if that counter or
hypothesis gets to the point where the
total sum in some sense of the anomalies
plus the already mapped territory can be
mapped by that new pattern then at some
point it will shift yes and the person
will kick into a new yes now it's like a
piagetian stage transition except more
dramatic it is and what a piagetian
stage transition is also like and
subsumes both is big alien Alf fable the
idea that a thing is opposed by
something else but when it when there is
a synthesis it's not that one of them is
annihilated right there both transformed
and taken up into the new hole which
embraces what before looks like look
like an opposition ok so here's a
question for you you know when I read
Thomas Kuhn I was reading to a PSA at
the same time and I knew that Piaget was
aware of codes work by the way and the
problem I had with Cohn and the
interpretation interpreters of Kuhn is
they don't seem to get something who
interpret Kuhn has a moral relativist in
some sense yeah you don't seem to get
the idea of increased generalizability
of a plan so let's say I have a theory
and a bunch of anomalies accrue and I
have to wipe out the theory and so then
I wipe out the theory and I incorporate
the anomalies and now I have another
theories yeah it's a descent into chaos
that's my estimation ok old story so the
anomaly yeah disruption is the mythical
descent into chaos yes
and then you reconfigure the theory with
the chaos and you come up with a better
theory yes ok the reservoir is it better
and the answer is what accounts for
everything that the previous theory
accounted for plus the anomaly exactly
so there's progress always yes exactly
but Kuhn is often read as stating that
there is no progress that you know those
increments are at paradigms and you have
to just shift between them but yeah
there isn't there is a cumulative
knowledge in some sense well I think one
thing that when we probably would both
agree about is that we don't buy as a
story that you know because nothing can
be demonstrated do
finnaly utterly to be the case there is
no truth I mean I think we both believe
that there are truths things that are
truer than other things and indeed if
the actor well we couldn't even talk we
if we did and even to say that there are
no truths is itself a truth statement
which is that it's truer than the
statement there are truths so everybody
automatically has choose whether they
know it or not yes because while you you
said why they don't think it's not only
that you can't talk you can't even see
no because you don't know how to point
you wouldn't know how to discriminate
what's coming into your brain right so
it's inevitable and I think we would
agree about that but I think the may be
a slight point of difference between us
in that I'm very willing to embrace the
idea of uncertainty and Isis I may be
wrong perhaps you could expand on that
but sometimes you come across as as a
man who has certainties this well it's a
peculiar kind of certainty I'm certain
that standing on the border between
order and chaos is a good idea that's a
weird exactly because that you need to
be in this sort of slightly unstable
position yes you have to you have to be
what would you say encountering as much
uncertainty as you can voluntarily
tolerate yes I think that's equivalent
to vote God's Keys zone of proximal
development I'm sorry so when we talked
a little bit earlier about the idea of
an instinct for meaning yeah so I think
what meaning is it's it's it's the
elaborated form of the orienting reflex
but what meaning does its function its
biological function which i think is
more real in some sense than any other
biological function is to tell you when
you're in the place where you've
balanced the stability let's say of your
left hemisphere systems with the
exploratory capacity of your right so
that not only are you master of your
domain but you're expanding that domain
simultaneous it and when you I think
that when you're there yeah it's it's a
it's a kind of a metaphysical place in
some sense that you're imbued with a
sense of meaning and purpose and that's
an indication that you actually
optimized your neurological function yes
and the perhaps weak
Glaus the idea of purpose because I
think there's a difference between
people get very confused I think about
the idea of purpose particularly whether
there's a problem that suggesting there
is a purpose and I believe there is a
purpose or there are purposes to the
cosmos not just to my and suggest that
somehow it's all been predetermined by
God but this is to misunderstand the
nature of time that there are time
static slices and God is there and he's
sorted it all out and the whole thing's
just unfolding as Bergson says like a
ladies fan being unfurl is extremely
boring and and and and an entirely
static and non creative universe but
actually something is at stake things
are unfolding they have overall a
direction but actually exactly what that
direction is isn't no it looks like and
it's a fool who says anything positive
about the nature of God but but I'm not
convinced that God is omniscient and
omnipotent either I think God is in the
process of is becoming God is not only
just becoming but is becoming I mean
yeah so being and becoming more becoming
I think becoming is the important thing
why do you think that I mean it's also a
strange segue I mean I'm not criticizing
but I'm curious what drove you to that
conclusion an awful lot of thing is
really and I think that everything is is
a process in fact I'm writing a book
called there are no things oh there are
processes yes and there are patterns
patterns yes well I think music is so
powerful music is one of the most
mysterious and wonderful things in the
universe and I don't think it's at all
foolish of people to have thought that
the planetary motions were in a sense a
kind of music I think it is a very
important insight now the music you know
I've thought and I've said this in
public lectures that music is the most
representative of the arts music
describes how those patterns should be
arranged you're using representative in
a very different way no
you know it depends on what you mean by
represented so its representing the
ultimate reality of the cosmos what I
would like to say that presentative
inner that it's not representing
anything it is actually when we're in
the presence of music something is
coming into being which is which is at
the core of the whole cosmic process and
I think that's what love music they do
and I mean I'm hardly any originality in
the idea because lots of physicists say
this they're the sort of the movement of
atoms and the movements of planets and
so forth
are more like a dance or more write
music than they are like things bumping
into it right and so a bit of things
there's patterns that people have made
into tools I agree with you and tools of
what the left hemisphere is always
looking for it's always looking for
something to grasp right it rare phase
processes that if you it's all a matter
of time every single thing including the
mountain behind my house if you were
able to which is billions of years old
if you were able to take and as it were
a series of like a time-lapse camera
you'd see the thing morphing and
changing and flowing everything flows as
Heraclitus once said everything flows
it's just a question of over the time
period that you consider in Temple it's
a question of the tenure and so taking
time out of things and considering them
in the abstract deracinated from context
particularly from the flow and from the
context of time changes them into
something else and I think that what in
brief what Plato has done and what a lot
of the history of more recent
Christianity has done is to thing if I
God and heaven perfect states that are
unaltered and so on and I think that it
is an ever evermore wonderfully self
self exploring self actualizing process
that requires a degree of opposition you
know as a stream in order to have the
movement and the and the ideas and
patterns in it experienced
it's hard to describe these experiences
but when I've contemplated death deeply
it has struck me as a as a fundamental
repair mechanism like it's part of the
mechanism by which new things that are
better are brought into being absolute
and I mean you see that in your own
being yes of course without death you
couldn't live yes because you're dying
the things about you that aren't right
even at a physiological level are dying
all the time they unfortunately you also
completely die which is unfortunate side
but more more cosmically speaking it
does seem to me that death is the is its
I don't know man it's I've had
intuitions or intimations the death is
the friend of being and that's like it's
hard to get my head around that I
completely agree with you and indeed
that's being said by you know many many
ways of people than myself I mean I
think that's right the death is
predicated on life but also is it it
shouldn't be seen as a sort of some
things is- it's it's a necessary stage
in the process of being becoming what it
is and since everything is ramified
since nothing it's just isolated you and
i may look as though feel as though but
as you often eloquently say we all have
in time we come from a place but also as
a culture we have history we can't
detach ourselves from it we're
expressions of it but we're also
inevitably dependent as all organisms
are on the environment where I end and
where the great environment begins is a
I didn't like the will environment they
know that nature
we suggest something there's always
being born where as environments it's
only around me from which I'm separate
but but anyway all of that is tomato
supposed to yes yes so I would see us as
like an eddy in a stream or like a wave
in the sea that is never separate Road
in your life well I mean the comings
together of physics with with this with
the process philosophy is a very strong
when does that book come out when I
finished writing oh yeah and I I'm very
well
that it's getting bigger and is you know
all the time I'm writing it I'm seeing
more and more of things that I am really
must get to know more about it and it's
an ever receding well it's a danger of a
book that I know that aims at something
fundamental because you never run you
never hit the proper boundaries that's
it I need that wool mm-hmm yeah well I
also had experiences I would say that
when I was trying to understand their
imaginative experiences when I was
trying to understand let's say the
necessity of evil hmm no because that's
also a fundamental theological conundrum
and yeah a metaphysical conundrum you
know why is it that being is constituted
such that evil is allowed to exist right
it's Ivan chromosomes what critique of
Valle OSHA's Christianity essentially
what kind of God would allow for this
sort of thing it's the ancient question
yeah it's an ancient question and I mean
part of it what I thought what I mean I
thought about the adversarial element to
that which is that you need a challenge
because you don't you're not forced to
bring forth what you could bring forth
without a challenge and the greater the
thing that you're supposed to bring
forth the greater the challenge has to
be I need an adversary like that but
then I also thought that um it would
it's possible that that that being being
requires limitation you might say
optimal being requires free choice I
know I'm going through a lot of things
quickly free choice requires the real
distinction between good and evil is
without that you don't have choice well
so maybe it's possible to set up a world
where evil is a possibility but where it
isn't something that has to be manifest
you know where where it's an option open
to you and a real option and it has to
be and the challenge that was presented
to you but it's something that you
cannot you cannot move towards if you so
if you so desire and that seems to me to
be something like the ethical ethical
requirement that that's the fundamental
ethical requirement sure doesn't mean it
shouldn't exist that's not the same
issue no it isn't it isn't and I wonder
one could recast it as the need for
other nurse God needs something other
and that other if it's not going to be
just part of God has got to be free
we'll be no creation I mean the nature
that there is something other than than
God it may in the end come from and come
back to right that God well with that
divine essence or that whatever but
there's a wonderful thing I can't figure
out either like in the Christian idea
there's the end of time where the the
evil is separated from God from yeah and
I think about that as a metaphysical
well you might think if it's a form of
like imagines it's a form of perfection
a form of striving for perfection you
fragment yourself yes you challenge
yourself yeah throw what's not worthy
into the fire elastics like that and so
what it what you end up with retained is
much better than what you started with
through the trials something like that
well that sounds a bit like the
dialectical process that we were talking
it right and you have alluded to a
couple of very good Jewish myths and
there's one in the lurin Kabbalah about
the creation which I don't if you know
it but it's it's absolutely riveting to
me the idea is that the primary being
aim is off the ground of all being needs
something other to come into being the
creation and that creation what does
that aims off do was his first act is it
to stretch out a hand and make something
not a big the first act is to withdraw
to create a place in which there can be
something other than paint off and so
the first stage is called Simpson manis
sounds negative as so many creative
things do withdrawal and then in that
space there are vessels and a spark
comes out of aims off and falls into the
vessels and they all shatter and that's
called sefirot okay yes you might yes
and then there is the third stage repair
in which what has just been fragmented
is restored into something greater and
so this process carries
and it's in my terms very like what
happens with the hemispheres the right
hemisphere is the one that is first
accepting it is sort of actively
receptive if you can put it that way to
whatever is new you were talking about
Hanuman gobo cancer and and then
whatever that is is then sort of
processed by the left hemisphere at the
next stage in two categories so it's
visit that yeah try to understand it but
of course whatever it is is much bigger
than any of the categories so they all
break down and it gets restored in the
right hemisphere into a new hole that
the tikkun the repair mm-hmm right tik
kuf tik right right right right and I
think that the the kind of easy way of
thinking about disease is learning a
piece of music your festival attracted
to it as a whole you then realize that
you need to practice that piece of bar
28 and you realize that you know it 64
there's a return to the dominant or
something and then actually when you go
on stage you've got to just forget all
about that but it's not that that work
was lost it's just that it's no longer
present right right
