hello everybody and welcome back to
another uh episode of the Macy Street
podcast uh today we're very happy to
have with us a guest that really doesn't
need much of an introduction Professor
Jeffrey saaks who's a world-renowned
economics professor bestselling author
and a global leader in sustainable
development and and really geopolitics
as well uh Professor saaks is the
director of the center the sustainable
development at Columbia University where
he holds the rank of University
Professor the University's highest
academic R he had been at Harvard before
that for many years uh he's served as
advisor to to numerous un secretary
generals we we're very happy to have him
with join us
today thank you very much Jeff for
joining us on the Mike Street podcast
we're honored to have you um I just want
to come straight my pleasure thanks I
would just want to go straight uh start
with the kind of the global developments
and then talk more about what's going on
in the region here uh in in a recent
article you actually talk you say and I
want to quote you you say the recent
brick Summit in Kazan Russia marks the
end of the newon delusions um and that
since the 1990s the goal of American
foreign policy has been Primacy AKA
Global hegemony so I'm wondering uh what
this means exactly so this this this
idea of a liberal order liberal
International order that the US had been
dominating which seems to be evaporating
uh before our eyes at least sitting in
Beirut it seems to be disappearing the
questions about the UN about
international law all of this seems to
be very very seriously questioned in a
way that it wasn't before and in the
meantime we have this rise of the bricks
um in in a kind of different world can
you explain a little bit these
developments as they pertain to the US
and perhaps even now that Trump has been
elected what what this might have an
impact for a very long time uh maybe you
could date it almost to America's
beginning uh in the 17th century maybe
you could date it to uh the uh sweep
across North America in the 19th century
Manifest Destiny or maybe you could date
it to the postor War II uh order when
the United States assumed that it was
the world leader uh the so-called Grand
strategy or the uh the uh taken for
granted strategy of America's Elite is
that America should run the world and to
do that the United States has uh created
a
worldwide network of military
installations and CIA operations to try
to run the world of course it never
achieved its goal because uh the US is
4% of the world population and much of
the rest of the 96% doesn't want to be
run by the us but this aspiration is
very deep in the American psyche it
comes with the power and the wealth of
the United States with a very
militaristic vision of the world if you
don't like us either get out of the way
or we'll topple you or we'll invade you
and that has been American foreign
policy for many decades I think we
should put aside the baby word of
liberal uh in Liberal order there's
nothing liberal about the United States
uh the United States is a uh
is a is a militaristic regime that
learned its militarism from the British
Empire which was the most militarized
state of the 19th century uh and the US
learned at the knee of the British
Empire um and the US has been a
militarized state uh pretty much
non-stop since
1945 when the Soviet Union ended in
1991 the uh Assumption of the
US security Elites or state Elites is
well we won now now we are the most
powerful country in the world in history
uh we are uh not the new Rome we have
surpassed Rome uh no one can stop us we
can take down anyone uh and that was the
mindset of uh crazy people like Richard
Cheney Paul wolfowitz uh and many others
and every president that came in was
basically instructed by them but you are
the leader of the most powerful machine
uh of military force and coercion in
world history you are the center of the
world financial system you can turn on
and off the financial spigots to any
part of the world you are at the node of
the world information system you can
survey uh and intercept and disrupt
information flows to any place in the
world you're at the center of the world
Energy System you can turn on and off
the Taps and if they don't like it you
can blow up the pipelines to do it so
this H is the mindset it is definitely
the mindset of the incoming us
Administration even if the means might
be different there's no change in US
mindset it's not exactly a joke that
Donald Trump tweets every day that
Canada is the 51st state it's partly
taunting it's partly a game but I'm sure
he has in his mind why don't we own all
that territory why isn't the United
States the owner of uh Greenland in fact
as he says every day because the Chinese
and the Russians are going to have more
control over the Northern sea route so
we better literally expand the map to my
mind these people are you know playing
the game I used to play in my childhood
the game of Risk which was a fun game
where the idea was to have your peace on
every part of the board that's how you
won you took over the world you'd roll
the dice uh and uh eventually you'd wear
down through a war of attrition your
neighbor if you had more pieces on the
board but they play this with real lives
and um they play it with the
brutality
cynicism uh coercion
subterfuge
uh and they play it till today I'm sorry
to say it it's just this is this is
really the way the world is but Jeff
some people are including you I think
are have been talking about a phenomenon
called
dollarization um which we hear a lot
about so could you could you explain
what dollar I mean I think we're
familiar with it but just for our
audience could you explain what
dollarization is and also yeah more
importantly for this conversation could
you then say well what does that mean
for us power us hegemony us Authority
even us prosperity itself in so far as
there is still prosperity in the US
great and as I was running on and on I
forgot to mention the main point which
is that uh this vision of the US is
delusional that's the bottom line I
forgot to mention that I did say
the US is 4.1% of the world population
we're about
335 million out of some 8 billion people
it's not enough to run the world uh the
US is uh very proud of its military
prowess and its technology but frankly
there are a lot of countries in the
world that can blow up the US and can
blow up the world so it isn't hegemony
it isn't unipolarity is it isn't being
sole superpower but it is a lot of power
I mean no other country in the world
even remotely comes close to this
military archipelago of bases around the
world 80
countries estimated they don't make
formal lists so we have to guess uh
around 750 military bases Britain uh
still has a big Network their Nostalgia
for Empire is impressive let me say uh
a little pathetic but impressive um but
the United States really stands on its
own now the the State of Affairs is that
the US has had several roote
Awakenings uh you know it couldn't win
uh actually back in Korea there was an
Armistice that uh ended that conflict it
certainly didn't win in Vietnam it
didn't win in Afghanistan it didn't
quote win anywhere even though it beat
the out of these other places it
couldn't actually achieve its political
goals or often its military goals even
um so the idea of
unipolarity is a kind of textbook idea
of some uh second rate thinkers in my
mind but it is a prevailing idea now
what are the bases of this the the core
basis is supposed to be uh size of the
economy uh unfortunately for the US it
probably uh in
in best comparative terms uh is now a
smaller economy to China uh so this is a
a matter of tremendous frustration to
the the American leaders and their uh
self-proclaimed unipolarity
uh another feature of this is the role
of the dollar uh which means that when
uh Lebanon and uh uh and uh Saudi Arabia
make a transaction together uh make a
trade it's likely to be in US Dollars
actually rather than in the local
currency uh even when China trades uh in
the Middle East or uh other places up
until recently
it has been in dollars what does it mean
in dollars it means
through US based Banks or Banks uh that
deal in US Dollars which mean that the
banks hold dollar Assets in the United
States either in counterpart Banks or at
the Federal Reserve it also means that
transactions pass through uh a US
controlled uh electronic system
the the best known part of which is
so-called Swift system which is an
interbank notification system for
transactions this means that the US has
had a major ability to turn off
Financial transactions or to impose
sanctions or to threaten countries that
if they don't follow the US line their
banks will be cut off from International
Commerce in other words countries doing
business in other parts of the world
that have nothing to do with the US per
se but happen to settle the transactions
through a us-based banking system this
is what the role of the dollar has
meant now as a monetary Economist I can
tell you there's no intrinsic reason why
uh Thailand and uh Brazil should settle
a trade in dollars uh there are every
other way to do that but you need to
create the institutional mechanisms for
a non-dollar settlement system it could
be in taibat it could be in Brazilian
rales it could be in Chinese renman be
but you need institutions and Technical
mechanisms to make such a settlement and
a policy framework to do it the dollar
has been convenient for everybody uh up
until recently it became less convenient
when the US government started
confiscating your dollars if you got out
of line and so if you're the government
of Venezuela or Iran or North Korea or
Afghanistan and most recently Russia uh
if the US Treasury didn't like you uh
well your money is now our money and the
US froze $300 billion dollar of
Financial balances that Russia held in
dollar Assets in a European institution
called Euro clear based in uh based in
Belgium uh the idea of the bricks
countries which of course started with
the the acronym Brazil Russia India
China South Africa and then expanded to
in include uh Ethiopia
Egypt Iran and the United Arab Emirates
and now is expanding to another nine
countries in
2025 is that these are countries that
don't want the US to be able to turn on
and off the spigot so they
are re-engineering their financial
transactions so that their settlements
are impervious to us Bluster of course
Donald
Trump even before he enters the
presidency has already waved his finger
and threaten these countries if the
bricks dare to challenge uh the US
dollar dominance we will show you well
let's see I I I I doubt it but but also
Jeff like in terms for in terms I mean
the US has been able to finance its debt
which is obviously in dollars because of
the the The Cloud of the dollar in in in
World Markets right so so so this is
another issue which is uh I mean in so
far as the US is US power is tied to US
debt which is 36 trillion or whatever
how there are two aspects in which this
dollar
role plays in to the US Advantage One is
the capacity to metal the capacity to
make one's own sanctions the so-called
unilateral coercive measures meaning the
US says to another country you don't
trade with China or you don't trade with
Russia to make that effective has been
the dominance of US based settlement so
that's the part that I was emphasizing
earlier there's another part which is
that if other countries are uh settling
in your currency they will want to hold
your assets for their liquidity in other
words they will want to hold dollar
balances dollar bank accounts they may
earn some interest on that but rather
low interest rates because they need to
hold those balances to be able to do
their their daily business so in this
sense the US has had very good financing
terms for a long time but uh kind of as
a uh
a a drunker addict of running out your
credit card the United States has built
up a tremendous debt because the terms
of borrowing have been so easy uh and uh
now we're seeing that as other countries
don't want to hold their
balances their liquid assets in dollars
they can hold them in Redmond B they can
hold them in Gold they can hold them in
crypto they can hold them in other means
the terms of Finance for the US will
worsen interest rates are rising and
that's not in my view only because of
short-term cyclical factors the
inflation that arose uh in the context
of the covid disruptions and War I think
it is a a deeper fact which is that what
Charles de 60 years ago called America's
exorbitant privilege is become less
privileged as other countries are moving
away from Dollar reserves and dollar
settlements now Economist
debate is this really happening will the
bricks get away with it is it empty
Bluster will Donald Trump's finger
wagging uh be determinative and keep
countries back I can tell you even
within the bricks there are hesitations
oh maybe we shouldn't go this way you
know maybe the US will punish us so
there still is fear of the United States
you know it in the Middle
East I see the us as you know an an
arrogant
hubristic uh country that is a bit
diluted in its power but if you look
around the Middle East a lot of
countries are terrified of the US or
think we can't step out of line they'll
kill us or won't sell us the
f-35s or we won't get our spare parts
for our planes or uh they'll bring down
our regime so there is still a lot of uh
question and debate about the trajectory
of relative power it's not so easy to
quantify as measuring GDP but my view is
it's going to fade faster than people
think one other fact we should keep in
mind one other part of the debate does
the US have a Chokehold on the critical
Technologies and uh there are several
that are claimed to be choke holds um
the most important of which is Advanced
chips uh very uh small
uh two or three nanometer chips uh that
are crucial for AI for example uh and uh
it's claimed that the us is going to
keep the lead for years or decades the
second area is space technology the
capacity to put heavy payloads in space
and to do other things in space my own
view uh though I'm I'm not you know
the the final Authority on any of these
Technologies to be sure is that claims
of such technology choke hols in the
past have proved to be uh pretty
ephemeral in practice uh so I don't
believe that the US lead is so big so
decisive that in the end it's going to
be able to bat away the competition I
think the dollar will lose its
preeminence I think the bricks will be a
real counterweight I think China will
remain a very powerful pure competitor
and even larger economy and certainly a
larger industrial uh economy than the
United States and so my view is
geopolitics is is really changing uh
though uh of course the uncertainties
about that are are real every week I'm
I'm looking for it right now on my desk
but I don't see it every month I get a
copy of uh foreign affairs mag azine
which is the magazine of the Council on
Foreign
Relations I view it as a kind of
evidence of deep Neurosis in the US
because every issue is a proclamation of
America's continued and enduring Primacy
uh every article is a self-confirmation
we're still number one we're always
going to be number one we're far ahead
China's collapsing but I view this more
like a roar shock test uh or a
psychological profile than I do a deep
analysis of international
relations Jeff just before we get more
into the region here uh You' you've laid
out this uh very compelling argument
about the sort of the dollar the
development and the economy and the rise
of bricks in China but it in this larger
competition for Global hegemony the
question of the military side so just
the sheer number of military bases the
the amount of money that the United
States in particular puts into its
military uh we see it in the region
there kind of you know every time we
think the we hear the US is withdrawing
from the region we see it coming back in
big force in part because of you know I
don't know we can talk about it later
but the special relationship with Israel
whatever that is but also in the Gulf
region and others and trying to make
sure that China doesn't come in make
sure maybe Russia itself is also doesn't
doesn't come in as much what is that
what is the relationship between just
the the military the sheer milit side
versus the more Economic Development
kind of side are they how interconnected
are they which is more
important the military side is
fundamental uh it is itself based on
economic and
technological
prowess I would say most of the
Breakthrough Technologies I'd say most
of the Breakthrough Technologies of the
last 75 years in the United States were
military based uh I was uh thinking why
do we have such shitty trains in the US
where you can't even reliably take a
train from uh New York to Washington
without it breaking down someplace and
it's because the military doesn't care
uh and so we don't put in the technology
that China has put in for example for
its nearly 50,000 kilometers of fast
rail uh the military just doesn't care
about this in the United states where it
does care well we've had the internet
we've had the digital revolutions we've
had
microcircuitry uh we've had uh uh
remarkable technological advances almost
every one of which has been uh
originated by the defense department in
the United States this is quite
interesting God forbid we should spend
some money uh on human civilian purposes
but we're told by our libert
Arian minded politicians that's a waste
of money but if we spend it on the
military it's salute the flag and get
the money spent and there are civilian
spillovers as well from it but it is the
mindset which is nothing is too good for
the military so
ultimately it is the military because
you look at the Middle East uh who is on
the US sides where the US has military
bases it's regimes that feel that the US
is protecting them protecting them from
what from other countries from their own
citizens who knows but in any event it's
where the military bases are uh what
enables the us to have those military
bases well1 and a half trillion dollars
of security spending per year if you add
up the Pentagon the CIA Homeland
Security uh the other intelligence
agencies uh veterans uh and so on you're
at about one and a half trillion a year
that's a lot by the way uh it's within
reach of China and uh it's it's not a
unique
number of course Russia can't match
it though Russia is no slouch at this
game uh Europe doesn't try because this
is a part of Europe's uh system to be
vassals of the United States in trade
for protection a kind of feudal uh
structure of U
of security relations
um
but this power is
real but in my view it's not dominant uh
and uh Russian technology is is really
powerful and even the hooes can can send
missiles into Israel the hooes it's
Yemen that's not China That's Not The
Cutting
Edge the Iranians have Hypersonic
missiles uh Pakistan has nuclear weapons
North Korea is an extremely
sophisticated militarized State uh the
most recent
terrifying uh novelistic scenario of
nuclear war which I recommend to
everybody everybody by the author Annie
Jacobson called nuclear war scenario
which is a very science-based account of
how the world can end begins with a uh
missile attack on the United States from
North Korea it's absolutely one of the
plausible scenarios um and so the idea
that the United States stands alone or
unique in this I think
is not hugely naive and and again though
I'm no military expert I am a I I think
a pretty good Observer of Technology
over the centuries having studied this
for
decades one of the ways that the US and
before the US Britain projected its
power globally was not only the network
of bases but the Navy uh and the Navy
was deemed to be key uh to be able to
move assets well the Navy in my view
again I'm sifting through the expert
opinions of others is hugely more
vulnerable than it was 10 years ago
because of missile technology uh and
space technology uh and these big
aircraft carriers uh can be blasted out
of the sea most likely uh and they were
supposed to be uh the the whole base of
us power projection uh
so I I hate the foolishness of American
officials blly talking about war with
China in the coming years but my own
view is if we survive it somehow because
maybe it would be the end of the world
but if we survive it we probably lose
the war as most war games have shown
Jeff on this on this question about the
US and the Middle East to switch to the
Middle East a little bit so you've said
that the US is delusional or US policy
makers are delusional in their view of
you know Grand strategy in their view of
of a unipo world that will last in their
view forever that seems to be the
thinking but what if we shift it to the
Middle East and the perspective of the
Middle East where when people looking
from the Middle East you know will'll
often say well but the US is the
dominant power it has this military
capacity that you've talked about to
bludgeon people into or at least to try
to bludgeon people into submission so
how does your thinking about us delusion
square with the reality that we see in
the Middle East which is essentially
quiescent regimes the changes in Syria
the the crushing of the Palestinians yes
and of course there's resistance as well
so I'm wondering how that works in on
the one hand and on the other hand the
question of Israel I mean is Israel an
outpost of the US or is there something
different about the the Israeli us
relationship I think both the US and
Israel are delusional about the long
term it's true uh in the short term they
can kill a lot of people kick the
out of a lot of people and uh the US
Israeli Alliance has been non-stop War
uh the best way to understand
Netanyahu is very simple in my view
which is that his uh political movement
the lud uh is based on one idea never a
Palestinian State uh and uh therefore
Israeli control permanently uh over the
the land from The River To The Sea uh
and that actually is the charter of the
lud from the very start the idea that
this is a Palestinian chant not an
Israeli chant is a little bit of the
twist of our narratives but it's the lud
that talks about from The River To The
Sea of course and that's the goal then
nety came into power in
1996 and what was the strategy the
strategy was well we're going to keep
everything they're not going to like it
there will be resistance there will be
Hamas there will be Hezbollah there will
be other military resistance don't fight
them per se just overthrow the
governments that support them because as
Netanyahu I think rightly said in the
199s it's not the militants or what they
call the terrorists that are the ones
that are the danger it's they're State
backers war is a big business war is not
an Insurrection sorry no matter what
people think a war is an organized State
activity that costs tens or hundreds of
billions of and depends on Advanced
Technologies war is a big game of big
players so netanyahu's idea was well
yeah we don't like Hamas and so forth
but that's not the real story the real
story is the regimes that that back it
and I have always been struck by what
Wesley Clark told us many many years ago
about his visit to the Pentagon in
September uh 2001 seven wars in five
countries uh in five years excuse me uh
that list came from Israel that wasn't a
US of course Paul wolfoods and Doug FEI
and others are part of
this strong us Israel right-wing uh
Alliance and uh the seven wars Lebanon
uh Iraq Iran uh Syria
Sudan Somalia Libya we've done the list
Net's had six out of seven so far and
he's gunning for the seventh and he may
get it the war with Iran so that's the
basic idea it I think pretty
clear most Big Ideas don't get hidden
from
view people like like Netanyahu like to
write books about them bragging about
what they're going to do and netanyahu's
bragged about uh taking down the Middle
East he shows US maps uh at the UN of
the good guys which are the ones with US
military bases and the bad guys which
are the ones that support the
Palestinians and we're just going to uh
uh completely uproot the bad guys now
what has happened what has happened is
yes they've made a killing field across
the Middle
East no no results in terms of really
remaking the Middle East I I quoted
tacitus recently they made it a desert
and called it peace uh what have they
done is uh Lebanon at peace is Syria at
peace is Somalia at peace is Sudan at
peace is Libya at peace is Iraq at peace
no these are Killing Fields these are
blood baths these are not normal states
this is the handiwork of the United
States and Israel by Design but it it
doesn't produce the political outcomes
now here we are in the midst of a
genocide going on in
Gaza on the one
side it
is I can't call it impressive exactly
but it is a fact that almost the entire
world understands this is a genocide and
says so uh and bemes it and and uh you
have statements by every group
imaginable by the Arab League by the
organization of Islam cooperation by the
G20 by the Bricks by the UN General
Assembly and by the UN Security Council
but for the US veto uh against what's
happening so public opinion such as it
is uh is nearly
universally a gast uh at at this is as
it should be but it goes on every day uh
and this is part of the drama and the
Mystery this is the first uh Prime Time
full video genocide in history uh where
we watch it every day we watch the
gloating of the Israeli Defense Forces
uh we watch the genocidal statements of
the Israeli leaders we watched the
Shameless pathetic performance of
American politicians and one thing I'll
say on January 20 at least I'm going to
celebrate uh the departure of Tony
blinkin and Jake Sullivan uh Biden
hasn't been there for a long time
mentally but these lieutenants of his
are have really done a job they are
really nasty or stupid or some
combination of the two um so
so so all to say what does this add up
to well you can kill a lot of
people but in the end this is not making
even even forcing a long piece and I
don't believe
personally that uh Israel survives this
I I think it could survive and should
survive a two-state solution that's what
I've advocated for decades what I
continue to Advocate even for today
knowing all of the Practical
challenges but I don't think it survives
as the great Regional Empire in the
Middle East uh zealots have a real way
of
self-destruction uh and this is zealotry
at work in Israel when you say Israel
can't survive Jeff I mean do you mean it
as are you talking sort of ideologically
are you talking ethically morally or are
you talking since you're talking about
power uh do you mean in terms of what
it's doing now will ultimately be
unsustainable in the sort of medium to
long future but I should Define my terms
I'm saying if if we're looking
ahead a quarter Century from now will
greater Israel be the reality uh meaning
will there be a state of Israel that
controls all the land from the Jordan
River to the Mediterranean
parts of Lebanon parts of
Syria you know if these people have
their wish all the way to the Euphrates
because that's what it just says in
Genesis do I believe that that's what
the Middle East will look like in 25
years no but why do you assume that the
Israelis want peace as opposed to
domination they don't want peace exactly
so now that's the relevance of tacus
they they made a desert and called it
peace right they they don't want peace
uh or they want peace on their terms
but
uh in the end
Israel will not determine the State of
Affairs of the Middle East nor will the
United States alone though it thinks
that it will uh in the end
uh it just won't be uh a
uh a a Jewish State acting as a regional
Empire
uh it's not in the cards uh it's it
violates too many uh too many
International laws uh too much uh uh
Global
opinion too
much even primitive ethics not to kill
tens or hundreds of thousands of
innocent civilians most people believe
that actually um we we we agree with you
100% I think the world I mean the world
agrees with with with with what you're
saying but the question is like when you
say two-state solution could we push you
a little bit on that and ask you why
after all that has passed uh should
anyone advocate for I mean the two-state
solution in a sense is gone because
Israeli colonization of the West Bank
and Jerusalem is so extensive why not
advocate for for a single state given
the fact that we're talking about
hypotheticals here a single state where
everyone has equal rights why should
anyone be advocating hting for two
states one of which would still be in
theory a supremacist
State because uh we
are one vote away from a two-state
solution that could end killing it
wouldn't end this question of whether
the two states should become one state
whether there should be a federation
whether in the end it will become one
state and and I I think that it may well
become that way I have no problem with
it myself becoming that way but I
believe as
a in political terms uh there was a vote
basically
170 in favor of two-state solution in
the general assembly uh and a few
opposed essentially the US Israel uh
Micronesia naaru
Paraguay Argentina and depending exactly
on the vote sometimes Czech Republic and
Hungary sometimes not in other words
about 95% of the world has said
two-state solution the G20 this year
said it the bricks said it the OIC said
it uh the Arab League said it in Bahrain
last year in Riad um the United States
is from a judical point of view the only
blockade to that not Israel Israel
cannot veto two states I am not calling
for a peace process by the way we've had
a peace process for 57 years I'm not
calling for a peace process I'm not
calling for negotiations between the
Palestinians and Israelis that is the
least relevant conceivable approach I'm
calling for the United States to change
its veto uh to uh be aligned with
International law Global diplomacy and
the overwhelming opinion of the American
people uh so this is what I'm calling
for now what does that mean in
practice with a sovereign Palestinian
State on the borders of the 4th of June
1967 with control over the Islamic holy
sites with the capital in East
Jerusalem it means that there will be
a state of Palestine and the people of
Palestine and a place for Palestinians
to live will it mean eventually one
state it could very well by the way it
could mean a confederal arrangement in
the future it could mean two states that
hate each other for the next 30 Years
but don't kill each other but to my mind
it would mean the end of this uh Israeli
I don't know so many words come to mind
but this zealotry uh and this
militarism uh with the world saying no
no more Lon no there's going to be a
Palestinian State whether you like it or
not this is not your choice this is
about international law and this is
about peace for all the rest of us thank
you uh and uh you just have to live with
it sorry Jeff can I just to push you a
little bit more on this there see I mean
I from from where I stand there seems to
be a bit of a contradiction because
we're saying that there's delusion and
that we have this us now under Trump but
under Biden and Trump and you've argued
for a long time that there's this kind
of continuity especially when it
certainly when it comes to the Israelis
and it comes to the Middle East H so on
the one hand the US is getting you know
even more pro-israeli officially in
official not in public terms but in
official terms more we even now Biden is
sending another $8 billion even now is
sort of as his goodbye gift to Netanyahu
even even now to this day um we have
this uh you know we have the the the the
kind of trump um appointments that are
coming in are you know these Evangelical
types uh these people that believe in
Greater Israel people that all of this
and the other hand you're still coming
back to saying well we need to go we
need to get the US to remove its veto
what what is it that's changed I mean
how how how are we defining it and
analyzing it so incredibly well and so
realistically in a sense and at the same
time coming back to a policy that says
okay but still we're going to ignore all
this and we're still want the ideal
solution which I agree most people in
the world might want that but if the US
continues like this what what is change
where do you see the change that's going
to get the US to remove its fure if you
ask me is what I'm advocating likely to
happen no uh so
uh you know I'm I'm perfectly prepared
as I have been throughout my whole life
to say what I believe even if I don't
think it's likely to happen because I
think it's it's the right thing to do so
I just want to clarify I'm not making a
prediction that this is about to happen
it might the argument I'm making inside
the US is that um Donald Trump wants to
make America great again well maybe the
first step would be American sovereignty
because I don't believe any of this has
been in America's interest uh in other
words this isn't uh some great
accomplishment of the US to uh have uh
LED to7 trillion dollar of debt and mass
Bloodshed and diplomatic uh isolation uh
of the United States stes through six
Wars that Netanyahu has called
for I'm trying to say this is not in
America's interest uh it also happens to
have the
uh Le let's say the added feature which
doesn't matter very much I admit but the
American people don't want us to
continue uh being accomplices to
Israel's genocide
I say that it doesn't much matter
because America is not a democracy in
any operational sense when it comes to
foreign policy or much else by the way
it's a highly corrupted plutocracy but
when it comes to foreign policy it's not
even remotely a a democratic uh
institution we're lied to every day
there's no deliberation uh there's no uh
uh attempt to discern the public views
of issues none at all it's completely in
the hands of uh the National Security
Council and the CIA uh we don't know
again whether the president's been in
the loop on much of anything for a long
time because he's
mentally at least partly in
incapacitated but
uh my point is this is not an American
interest so it's a glimmer of hope uh if
you ask me uh is it more
likely to say yes we'll have two states
then to say this coming year we'll go
for the one state solution I would say
yes uh but maybe I'm you know playing
with numbers that one has a a a 10% or
5% or 3% chance and one has a
0.01% chance so one may be much more
likely but still highly unlikely but I'm
trying to go with something that at
least has a chance this coming year to
Stop The Killing stop the Bloodshed put
a floor uh under uh what is now
Palestinian freefall uh also by the way
you know look around the Arab world uh
of of course some states are still uh in
uh
in in diplomatic recognition of Israel
which I can't really understand I find
it uh this was the time to break
diplomatic relations in my view genocide
is a is a good reason for that uh but
they didn't do it uh and they didn't do
it because the US military bases are
there and for other reasons that we've
talked about but even those States say
two-state solution some of them say it
actually pretty firmly right now
uh if the Arab world maybe this I don't
know if you'll laugh or cry or uh
whatever but if the Arab world actually
got its act together and said we have
leverage uh you know it's we've waited a
hundred years for that it hasn't
happened yet but if it did happen that
really could change things by the way if
Donald Trump heard
clearly uh from the entire Arab world
and it's not impossible look don't play
games anymore with us don't bribe us
with your
f35s don't brive us don't talk about the
Abraham Accords and what it's going to
mean and try to pull us apart one more
time our position is the following and
that's our position and accept it or
don't accept it but that's our position
we've taken it to Beijing we've taken it
to Moscow we've taken it to Brazilia
we've Tak it to to South Africa that's
our
position you know what that would
actually make a difference it would make
a difference sorry part of I mean so
much what you're saying here is so
admirable in terms of you know pursuing
you know a noble ambition of peace and
so on you know and obviously we share
that we share that ambition towards
peace and justice but part of what's
happening and you you put your finger on
it too is there's also increasingly a
gap between us popular opinion and the
policymaking establishment run by the
lobby in Washington our last guest
before you was John mimer incidentally
so we're talking all about this but our
the crisis we see on our campuses you're
at Columbia I'm at UCLA I mean like our
campus is our I mean I know your campus
is is is like a you know fenced off from
the world now our campus is essentially
patrolled by Riot police this level of
suppression that's going on now it seems
to me that more and more people are
aware of what's going on at at the
popular level certainly on college
campuses so isn't this the best moment
to say what we want to pursue is what we
really believe in at least what I really
believe in I think my brothers share
this too is a one Democratic and secular
state where all citizens can be equal
and like why don't we like if if we're
pushing for an ideal in the face of
viciousness and violence and genocide
why don't we push for a true Democratic
just you know equality for all kind of
situation rather than a a two-state
solution that we all know is is gone
it's the and even if it even even if it
were realized it would still leave the
refugees out of the picture it would
leave the Palestinian citizens inside
pr48 or pr67 as second class citizens so
yeah I don't know what you think about
that I have no problem with that I I'm
I'm taking a different approach but it's
a perfectly reasonable approach you're
saying uh my Approach is
uh again all of it is against the odds
your approach my Approach believe me
it's against the odds you know it too
but my Approach is change one vote
because it's in the US national interest
to change that vote uh and uh go with
the fact that we are with
uh the overwhelming overwhelming
sentiment of humanity uh to act now so
that's that's why I'm taking the
approach that I am but I understand what
you're saying completely I I don't
disagree with it
either okay Jeff I know I know we need
to wrap um it's interesting now as we
record we have Amos Hawkin who's in
Lebanon uh Biden's mediator supposedly
for the and what's interesting is that
he's of course an Israeli citizen too so
he's an Israeli American and that you
can't make this up you can't make it up
I mean it's it's literally very it's
it's almost impossible to understand
where American policy starts and where
Israeli policy ends and it just seems to
be literally embodied in Amos Hawkin and
uh and when he comes in is sort of and
Douglas fight and Paul wolfs and many
many others along the way that's right
so um so you know let's let's hope that
that you know what we're ending with in
a sense but I think that the point I
would make is uh I'd make a a a a
general point about American politics
that I think is worth
making this uh strange fact that Israel
captured American foreign policy is not
um unique in the American political mil
America American power is for the buying
basically and not only on the question
of the Middle East but on the question
of the health sector on the question of
the military industrial complex more
generally on the question of big a on
the question of finance and the American
system is a very interesting system it's
a an extraordinarily plutocratic and and
corrupted system where money buys you uh
ownership our government basically is
now owned and operated it'll be
interesting to see it's owned and
operated by Silicon Valley this time
uh this is the big uh purchaser they
basically have the big prize okay it's a
it's a dynamic sector of the US it's
it's quite interesting on the other hand
it's increasingly in in line with the
military also so I have a lot of worries
about it that maybe we're seeing Orwell
completely come uh to life this way and
the version of paler and others but uh
you buy ameran American policy um and by
the way at a pretty low cost it's not
like APAC for example spends all that
much money uh you know a hundred million
is pathetic these people are so cheap so
unbelievably cheap for now it's probably
a half a billion that you need uh you
buy tens of billions of dollars of
armaments you buy whole Wars out of this
for nothing I mean you can't get
leverage like this almost in any other
business venture in the whole world so
at least I'm TR and and the American
people are really sick of it by the way
uh they know you know do you trust your
government hell no uh do you trust the
Congress well 10% say yes but that's
because 10% will say yes to anything you
ask uh but nobody basically trusts the
Congress at all uh do you think
politicians act in the American interest
no then you go to specifics do you
support American foreign policy in the
Middle East no and so
on what's the lesson well one lesson
could be you know if you're an investor
buy into it uh if you're a
forecaster understand it uh if you're a
you know kind of a an academic who wants
to dream that something could get better
uh at least point out this is really
screwed up this is not making America
great this is not even allowing America
to be Sovereign uh this is not in our
interest it's not in our security it's
making the world a lot more dangerous
attack Iran yeah brilliant idea next
step to World War uh
especially Iran and Russia will sign a
security agreement on uh January 17th
all right great stuff BB tell us your
next genius move you've already created
so much destruction uh all through your
region so all I'm saying is uh we should
understand
um arguments about what's right and
wrong legal not legal uh in American
interest not in American interests may
or may not be relevant at all but at
least for me it's just about the only
thing I have uh is to try to say this
makes no sense we need to do something
different Professor saak thank you so
much for for joining us on this podcast
we really really appreciate all your
Insight and look forward to to listening
to all your other podcasts uh we know
that you do this regularly so we look
forward to to to following up on you on
this great to be with you thank thanks
so much thanks for such an
interesting okay guys I thought this was
a really interesting discussion with
with Jeff saxs um I know we we we were
pushing him towards the end especially
about the question of Palestine and the
question of two-state solution versus I
don't know one state or or whatever one
wants to call that I know you were you
had something what what is it what do
you
think well I agree with you I thought it
was a fascinating discussion I thought
it was a you know there there's a kind
of uh at the macro level in terms of
dollarization in terms of us Global
hegemony in terms of the the the unip
polarity and the myths of us poity
lasting forever I think that is you know
he's very strong on that and then when
it comes to to Palestine OB as he said
he said there's a genocide going on it's
awful every we all agree of course about
that but then the solution is a
two-state solution and I kept thinking
you know um so so incisive at one level
of analysis and then it it struck me as
as more sort of idealistic in a certain
kind of way of a two-state solution yeah
but he admits that that's that's the in
other words his he's very clear like for
him the two-state solution is not
something that's a practical or
achievable thing because of all the
obvious so when I was talking about the
one state solution to he said yes that's
you but for him it's like this but he
said that's your point of view it's no
but the point is it's it's like a yeah
that's what I'm saying he recognizes
that so for him the two-state solution
isn't so much an actual solution it's
rather something to say it's one step
along the way because the one step it's
one step exactly to something better
yeah because the UN k right this is your
your baileywick in the sense that the UN
the international so the International
Community has overwhelmingly endorsed
the so-called two-state solution Kim so
my understanding is that he's saying
well that's that's that's the that's the
least that's what Norman finklestein
also says by the way AMA that's always
line is that there are laws backing the
two State solution there's nothing in
favor of the one St but this is true
this is true the simplest thing yeah but
that do so but so what now let me let me
just say in other words from from
somebody who's who operates within the
policy World which is where you know
Jess is right he's he's always on that
level he's dealing with leaders all over
the world uh all across the world from
China to the global South to the west to
wherever so when you when you're saying
okay what is the simplest possible
solution at a at a practical policy
level it's all you need is the US to to
kind of remove its veto to accept
palestin as a state how do we get to
that get I'm just saying like that
that's it that's literally there's
nothing else to be done except for this
one country to change on that that's it
I see that point Kim I see that point
because it's also you know you can see
how and the thinking you can see very
clearly this is the least uh this is the
least what is it there are the fewest
obstacles in the way right is that
that's the idea one obstacle there's one
obstacle that's it that begs the
question or that leads there Vu too
don't forget no but there veto it's a
question of the
V but it begs the question about like
what happens how do you get that shift
to occur and you US policy given his
analysis that the US you know policy
making is is completely he said he said
it's captured by the by the pro-israel
lobby by the by APAC and Company as he
says all of us politics is you know so
we go back to the shammer Walt you know
story about you know us us policy makers
are are bought and sold by endless
numbers of lobbies in in many different
fields but in in the Middle East it's
it's APAC
obviously although by the way it's
interesting his his emphasis wasn't so
much an ape it was more individuals
within the US govern when Karim brought
up Amos Hawkin at the end you know he
said there was what's his name wolf of
the AR said a in terms of the the return
on investment yeah they they work
together obviously all of the but it's
more I mean you're talking now Elon Musk
is on a rampage you're talking about
Zuckerberg you're talking about all
these people that control large parts of
social media uh you talking about the
attacks now on Tik Tok in the United
States because a lot of young people
were were we're using Tik Tok to get
live streaming of the genocide the lobby
said it must go exactly so and and all
this becomes clear so it's it's not just
APAC per se it's that whole that whole
kind of constellation and I think I
think what he was what he was suggesting
at the end and what what I think we
always talk about here is that there is
a shift in the public discourse there's
a shift in the public opinion not
discourse in the public opinion in the
United States and that that at some
point hopefully will have some kind of
bearing on on on the US obstacle in
terms of removing its veto or not beyond
that that's where we got to yeah that's
where we got to with our discussion with
John mimer last week I mean he's not
Palestinian he's not Palestinian so he
you know he's not going to say well you
have to you have to pick up guns and
fight and and you know there are other
ways to do it that's I understand so but
can we can we just just wrap on this
point about look you're in beut right
now and you're surrounded by people I
sure given the media that we're reading
you're surrounded by people who are
like
Hawkin you know gloating and crowing
with the sense that victory has you know
been achieved you know right am I wrong
about this and so I'm wondering how do
you reconcile that view in the
region um especially among the more
conservative forces that are Allied or
tied or subordinate to the US how do you
reconcile that view with his view that
that the US is delusional and that's
what I that's that to me I'm just keep
trying to I struggle with that all the
time well it's it's a short term I think
the idea I think the idea is a shortterm
versus a longer term thing I think you
it's very easy it's it's not difficult
to say the Israelis won and the
Americans won in this sense and healah
was defeated and Iran is weakened and
you know of course this is I mean at a
certain level it's pretty easy to say
that and they're making use of that to
try to uh shift from this kinds of what
what appears to be certain kinds of
military victories into strategic ones
or political ones and that hasn't
happened yet so what I will point out is
of all the gloating yeah there is
gloating in in in a lot of circles in
Lebanon that heal was it's not so much
of the pro Israel it's that they they
want to see the kind of ending of hisbah
as a as the main Force inside Lebanon
that's true on the other hand Hawkin did
come in and he did give a speech today
or press conference and he did say the
israelit are going to withdraw and the
Israelis have said the same so you're in
this thing where within that 60 days
within the truce if the Israelis do
withdraw what what is the implication to
you
the implication is when you look at
Syria you look at Lebanon you look at
these countries you see and look at the
West Bank you look at Gaza you see that
the country that resists and this is
Lebanon in particular let's
say the Israelis
withdrew in Syria there was no
resistance they've taken it and they've
expanded and there's no way that the
Israelis are going to withdraw forget
the Golan Heights I even talking about
Mount Herman and the other places that
they've taken when are these guys ever
going to withdraw
in Lebanon they're going to
withdraw at least I think they are and
so what does that tell you so yes you
can go on the gloating all you want but
on the ground you can also see that
there was a certain there was there was
a a if you don't want to say military
victory for hisbah and the resistance on
the ground in the South you can
certainly say the Israelis absolutely
failed to achieve their main military
objective which was to to destroy
hasbalah militarily speaking not in the
kind of grand not in leadership and
decapitating and killing the all of
which were massive blows don't get me
wrong for the larger political and
strategic ones but on the ground in
terms of the military they did not win
in the South uh and they were unable to
advance Beyond a few kilometers from the
borders no matter what their propaganda
was going on about they simply even in
FM they were unable to really push
through it so you're talking about a a a
a country like Lebanon which was able to
resist the Israeli military through the
80s increasingly through the 90s in 2000
is Liberation 2006 the Israelis did this
Massive Attack ultimately like it or not
they were unable to achieve any of their
objectives in the 2006 War hisbah gets
stronger and that's that's part of their
demise ultimately is the fact that they
became too big too strong they went to
Syria they grew they became a massive
bureaucracy and so they were infiltrated
more they were they were there was more
corruption inside there was all sorts of
things and this is things that they're
going to be dealing with right now but
in Lebanon in the core military
resistance part in South Lebanon they
held in a sense The Barbarians to baate
they did that and they and and so with
all the gloating takes place we cannot
forget that that is a fundamental aspect
and if anybody and I've had this
discussion with people here if anybody
thinks that the Israelis would not have
occupied South Lebanon or at least large
trunks of South Lebanon one needs to
only look at Syria today to see that
that's just it's it that is delusion
utterly delusional just not just I agree
completely claim such as they've also
been talking about southern Lebanon
since the 1950s for 100 years no more
100 years no no but like that's that's
you know in textbook I'm talking about
in terms of policy they've long wanted
to occupy South Lebanon south of Lani
take the water install the puppet
government in Beirut like this is like
going back to they
wanted they wanted they wanted the
borders of Palestine to be at the river
the the no I
understanders I'm agreeing with you I'm
I'm completely agreeing with you I would
also add by the way same thing in Gaza
for all the devastation that they've
inflicted on the people of Gaza they're
unable to accomplish their Prime task
which is which is destroying or
eliminating Hamas they've been so in
other words they have a this we've said
this many times on this on this podcast
they have a capacity to inflict massive
harm but that does not translate
necessarily translate into the
attainment of political objective that's
what Jeff was talking about when it
comes to the us they can kill millions
of people that doesn't mean they win
right so we have to disaggregate the
infliction of harm from the
accomplishment of military or even
political objectives I think that's
important to bear in mind yeah I think
that's is a good
I think it depends I think I think it
depends also on the the time scale we're
using because at a certain sort of time
scale you could say that that what he
was talking about Jeff was wrong when he
said that the Arab states have never
used their leverage it's not true I mean
they did try K I mean they tried in once
they tried no not just in 73 they tried
but also they no they they they were
part of a un block they they did vote in
the 50s and 60s come on true that they
didn't they didn't I mean by the way
also the Arab peace plan I mean like it
or not that was the Arab attempt to to
to to reconcile what they saw as a
reality and say okay let's just deal
with it 67 and they were ignored
completely and they were and they were
ignored completely but the point is that
there was this leverage in the past and
the question is how do we get back I
don't know I I feel that there's um
there's so many different levels of
analysis that that we're operating under
but from a US perspective you could say
that the Arab position has been defeated
or was you know in terms of a shorter
like if you take it from where the Arab
states were in terms of their discourse
in 48 versus where they are today you
could certainly say the US has quote
officially one but it hasn't of course
eliminated resistance and the whole
point is that resistance keeps
generating because the conditions are so
fundamentally unjust does that make
sense guys in terms of what are you
talking about yeah but but if we go but
if we connect this to the first part of
the conversation with Jeff if you say
also some of the threats to American
economic power which which is the basis
of its military and political power
which are coming yeah correct you know
at some point that also raises questions
for how long can can the US literally
how long can it afford to do what it's
doing and and hence how long can yeah I
know what I'm saying it's it's it's
sorry it's it's the global economy and
and the threats that are coming from
bricks Etc all the stuff Jeff was
talking about and it's also inside the
US the the change in public opinion uh
across the board even among evangelicals
Young they saying yeah exactly nothing
nothing is a done deal nothing nothing
is steady state here this like one last
Point S I think one last point and this
to respond to AMA as well is that one
lesson I've drawn is not that that is
that Israelis are actually very very
weak without the United States the
Israelis would not have been able to do
anything neither in Gaza not in Lebanon
nowhere it's Absolut this is more than
ever the Israel not even protecting
themselves October 7th they were unable
to protect themselves no from Iran too
like that whole missile the missile but
I'm talking even October 7 we're talking
about what they ended up doing in Gaza
would not have been done without without
the United States without Biden in
particular and blinkin and Sullivan who
just gave them another 8 billion by the
way that's right just right now that's
right this is the definition guys this
is the definition of a pic victory for
the Israelis Noory so far as no no like
they're they're gloating about their
Victory it's so how peric is it and when
you say the hoxin was gloating this is
all P Victory stuff yeah Hawkin by the
way but with the human cost
unfortunately oh obviously obviously
yeah yeah H hene was last scene at
Starbucks getting a getting a coffee in
Starbucks and and some Lebanese going
and telling them oh no please we don't
pay here we're Lebanese we're you know
Hospitality we don't we don't let
anybody pay any guests pay so you know
the country is split in that sense
before we wrap I just wanted to ask our
listeners our our audience um please if
you could give us a review on both on
YouTube and on Apple podcast or wherever
wherever you're listening to the show
basically not a review
good review obviously a good review if
you because it helps not for our vanity
but because it does help improve the
visibility of the show so if you're
getting something from this show from
all these guests we've had from our own
discussion and Analysis please if you
can rate the show and give it a review
and support it including if you can
support it on patreon which basically we
use to cover the expenses of producing
the show um that would be very helpful
because if you like what we what you're
hearing you know then having more people
have access to it will you know
hopefully benefit others as well where
do you get patreon S where do you get
the patreon because I think a lot of
people can't find it it's in the link
it'll be in the show description below
it's in the show description it's in all
show all of yeah or go to patreon just
look for us there too but yeah thank you
very much everyone thank you
