now as we were just talking right Tik
Tok and other social media platforms we
should have have faced scrutiny from
Health experts for increasing loneliness
particularly among teenagers now as US
Surgeon General Vic morthy nears the end
of his second term as the nation's
doctor his parting prescription is to
foster a stronger sense of community now
data from his Department Show Americans
are hanging out in person less and less
and with each passing year that is the
focus in fact of Derek Thompson's latest
piece for the
Atlantic it is the
antisocial Century he joins Michelle
Martin to discuss what can be done Derek
Thompson thanks so much for talking with
us it's great to be here thank you so
your new piece cover story for the
Atlantic is called the antisocial
Century you say that this self-imposed
Solitude might just be the most
important social fact of 21st Century
America why do you say that so for 60
years the Bureau of Labor Statistics has
asked Americans how they spend their day
how they spend their week you know how
much time do you spend sleeping how much
time do you spend eating food and what
they found is that in the last 20 years
in particular the number of Americans
who or the amount of time that Americans
spend in face Toof face socializing has
declined for every single demographic so
it's not just young people or young
adults or middle-aged people or old
people it's all ages it's not just black
or white it's all ethnicity ities it's
not just college graduates or people who
didn't go to college it's every single
category of Education attainment every
single category you could possibly think
of demographically speaking is spending
less time in face to- face socializing
than they did 20 years ago or really
than they did 60 years ago and that's
why the headline finding here is that we
are spending Americans are spending more
time alone than in any period for which
we have trustworthy data you also
noticed something and you actually open
your piece with with something that you
noticed in own town why don't you just
tell that story sure so as I was writing
this article um my wife and I and uh my
my baby daughter we went out to a
Mexican restaurant um here in Chapel
Hill and we get in you know around 5
o'clock our daughter eats dinner early
and there's no one in the restaurant but
there's a bar and there are like nine
paper bags large paper bags on that bar
along with a sign that says bar seating
closed and I thought that's interesting
they've closed the bar to become this
sort of like Depot for takeaway food and
over the next half hour like 5 10 10 12
people walk into the restaurant say
nothing to anybody in the restaurant
grab a bag and leave and I thought this
is crazy business is booming for this
restaurant but no one's sitting down in
chairs and no one's talking to each
other because takeaway has exceeded
tables as the main business of this
restaurant so I did some research and I
found out that in fact according to the
National Restaurant Association 74% of
all traffic to restaurants in 2023 was
for off premises sales that is takeaway
and deliver dely and that was like a oh
my God what an incredible metaphor for
this antisocial centy that I'm trying to
write about the bar the place where you
should be having conversations with the
strangers or friends in your community
has been closed and turned into a silent
Depot where people come and without
saying a word to each other just grab
food so they can eat back at their house
where by the way they're spending more
time than in any other period for which
we have good data so once I saw that
scene I thought well it's it's over
obviously this is going to be the first
10,000 words of the essay now obviously
Co you know Co played a role here a lot
of us were forced to spend time alone or
at least not going to places we were
used to going but you say this goes
beyond covid that this this is a trend
that started long before the covid
pandemic yeah I think it's a 60y old
Trend that was briefly accelerated by
the pandemic but there's some
information that suggests that we spent
more time alone in 2023 than we did in
2021 when all the vaccines rolled out so
this is something that is bigger than
covid even if of course people are going
to hear Solitude and think well I spent
that year basically in lockdown or in
relative isolation so when I roll back
the clock to the middle of the 20th
century and think how did this happen
especially starting in the 1950s 1960s
you know Robert putam wrote a famous
book called bowling alone where he
researched this question in depth a book
of hundreds of pages of graphs and
research and the most most compelling
information to me the most compelling
point that he made to me about the
causes of the antisocial century is that
in the 1950s 1960s you saw the emergence
of several really important technologies
that changed all of our Lives first you
had the car which privatized Our Lives
allowed us to drive away from cities
towards suburbs we spent more time alone
in homes in our backyards then the 1950s
1960s you have the popularization of the
television and the car private ized Our
Lives I think the television privatized
our Leisure there's some evidence
suggesting that between the 1960s and
1990s the typical American got about six
extra hours of leisure time per week so
what do we do with that extra 300 hours
per year you know you can ask yourself
or ask a friend if you had an extra 300
hours per year what would you do at that
time would you learn a a new language
would you learn a new instrument would
you uh play sports it turned out that
people spend almost all that time
watching television um nothing wrong
with a little bit of TV but 300 extra
hours of TV a year is a lot of TV okay
so this obviously invites the question
is this bad and you suggest that it's
not great so what's what's wrong with
people spending more time alone because
a lot of people say well this is me time
I'm just kind of refreshing myself yes
it's bad but let me be clear about
exactly why it's bad I'm the father of a
17-month-old so I know as well as anyone
how precious and frankly how close close
to Heaven one night alone away from the
screaming baby can be I mean it is the
next thing to God that said as with any
you know therapeutic the dose matters
there's a difference between spending
one night alone between saying I feel
great about not being around people
today I need to recharge and spending
more time alone year after year after
year and decade after decade after
decade that's what we're talking about
we're talking about a kind of overdose
on Solitude and there's research
suggesting that if you ask people how
much time do you spend with folks and
how much time do you spend alone the
people who spend more time alone tend to
be much less happy there's one study
that found that a 5% reduction in
socializing time reduced happiness as
much as a 10% reduction in income if you
think how happy would you be if your
boss suddenly said I'm gonna you know
slash your salary by 10% that's the
effect of just a few years of increased
loone time in America so I think quiet
is blessedness and I think that alone
time can be a true salv for the soul but
the amount of social social isolation
that people are experiencing in America
today I think is bad for us as
individuals and I think it's bad for us
as a community I want to quote something
you wrote in the piece you said that
Solitude and loneliness are not the same
you quote the sociologist Eric clintberg
he said it's actually a very healthy
emotional response to feel some
loneliness but how should we think about
this this this difference because you
know some of the great gosh some of the
great uh moral thinkers religious
leaders all spent time in quiet
contemplation you know alone Jesus John
the Baptist Moses Buddha the Buddha you
know they all the these figures all
spent sort of time sort of thinking
alone but you said that there's
something that goes beyond that you you
call it sort of antisocial it's not kind
of pro-social it's antisocial I want to
make two points because what you were
saying about Jesus and John the Baptist
you know was really galvanizing to me
the first point is on loneliness I think
loneliness can be healthy loneliness is
the experience difference between the
amount of social connection that you
have and the amount of social connection
that you want to have so many times we
feel like at the end of a week or a few
weeks like oh I'm feeling kind of lonely
I want to reach out to a friend I want
to see someone I want to get a drink
that's a wonderful healthy feeling what
we're experiencing instead I'm afraid
with decade after decade of rising
aloneness is the opposite of loneliness
loneliness is the instinct to be around
people but for many in particular young
people today I see there's the instinct
to be with yourself to have me time
followed by me time followed by me time
that's not responding to loneliness that
is something else the second thing I
want to say is that as I was finishing
this piece um I was watching a video
that the author David Foster Wallace uh
uh made where he's talking about the
death of quiet in America and how people
just can't be by themselves and be quiet
anymore and I think that to a certain
extent the phone contaminates our quiet
you know if Jesus went away for you know
his days in the desert and had the phone
on him was constantly checking back on
Roman Twitter I don't think he would
have all the revelations that he had
because he'd be sucked in to the crowd
thing I mean I'm being a little bit
factious here but there's it's important
for Solitude to be truly quiet but one
thing I think that these phones do is
that they make our Time In Crowd feel a
little bit more alone because we can
always just pull out our palms and look
down into our palms and be away from the
crowd but also they make our Solitude
more crowded we can be home alone
wanting to just recharge wanting to have
great thoughts or look inside of
ourselves and we can't help but pull out
of our pull out our phones and dip into
social media and become contaminated by
crowd think so I think there's a huge
difference between the kind of quiet
Solitude that can be truly replenishing
and the kind of Sol itude that most
people experience when they're on their
couches flick flick flicking on social
media but why is it that you know you
know we say this all the time we're
social beings right so I'm just
wondering how it happened that we just
were these conscious choices that people
have been making for themselves or have
their sort of social circumstances
dictated this and they've we've adapted
to it you know Eric kleinenberg the
sociologist who you quoted told me at
one point during my reporting that um we
do choose but we don't choose the set of
options that we have and I think that
our built environments in this case
shape our choices I think that it's
meaningful that while you know we've
been talking I think rightly about the
ways that our inner lives have changed
with the rise of televisions and
smartphones there's been physical world
changes too as we drive out to the
suburbs we live further away from people
the amount of social infrastructure
that's been built in this country in the
last 50 years has clearly declined from
its peak maybe the 1950s and 1960s
there's built environment changes that
are really important but I also think
that maybe you know people are don't
don't don't fully recognize what they're
choosing when they make decisions about
their life you know when we stay at home
and we watch Netflix or we order
Chipotle and God knows who hasn't done
that I watch Netflix all the time I
order you know food to eat here at home
all the time when we make those choices
we aren't calculating in that moment
here's the hours of not spending with
other people here's some other hours not
spending with other people so what I
wanted to do with this essay is to hold
up a mirror to America and to say here
are the choices that you're making every
day to surround yourself with
entertainment to be in your home longer
and our homes are more convenient more
comfortable than they used to be here's
the set of choices that we're making and
here's the bill that's come due and the
bill that's come due is historic amounts
of alone time in ways I think are
changing our personality and changing
our politics so I don't know that people
are are fully cognizant of the costs of
the choices that they're making my hope
is that this helps them to see the
receipt the bill so to speak of those
choices but what about other costs that
you see as being the price of all this
aloneness what what are some of the
other consequences that you see right so
you're talking about individual cost
there I mean we have lots of really good
data that suggests that young people
have fewer friends than they used to
have go out with those friends less than
they used to and I I think that's a
major problem I also think that
politically this is creating major
problem s you know I talked to a Brown
University researcher and author Mark
dunman I made this really compelling
point that if you think about it in kind
of an ironic way in the age of the phone
our families are tighter than they used
to be you know I text my wife all the
time people are in touch with their kids
maybe more than they used to be so that
inner ring of family is very very tight
and then you can think of an outer ring
of tribe where I'm very in touch with
people who share my ideas about you know
aloneness or economics or politics
whether it's on Twitter or on email or
via group text so in a way you have this
weird situation where the inner ring of
family is strengthened and the outer
ring of tribe is strengthened but
there's a middle ring which is the
village there's the people we live next
to there are neighbors the people in our
towns and we don't know them as well as
we used to and the reason I think that
matters is that while family teaches us
love and while the tribe teaches us
loyalty or ideology I think the village
teaches us tolerance I think it is it is
instructive of tolerance to be around
people that you're not related to that
you disagree with about things because
you learn that when you that you can
disagree with people while still seeing
them as fully human and in the absence
of a strong village-based culture in
this country I think you get politicians
like Donald Trump who are sort of like
an all tribe no Village Avatar of
politics and I also think that you have
parties that don't understand each other
and want nothing to do with each other
there's some polls suggesting that like
Republican teenagers say that will never
date a Democrat and Democratic teenagers
are even more likely to say they'll
never date a republican that's a world
where we have tight families and tight
tribes and we don't know each other at
the level of the village what what one
of the things you said earlier is that
we were talking about the difference
between Solitude and loneliness is it
loneliness is a wish for company and it
makes me wonder why don't why don't
these people go out and do so something
it's a great big question I don't have a
perfect answer but I have a theory I
think that we're dis evolved to live in
this attention environment we're
constantly stimulated by novelty and
entertainment and if we're on the
internet and we're in some you know
political messaging area outrage and
outgroup animosity you open up your
phone and you're immediately bombarded
with this stimulus that gets your
dopamine going and I don't think that
we' spent enough time in this new
attentional ecosystem to learn what to
do with it and many times I think people
find themselves so overwhelmed by the
amount of dopamine and cortisol that
they get going biochemically when
they're on their phones on their
computers that it somewhat exhausts them
and so when they put their phone down or
they close their computer maybe a friend
reaches out or says like do you want to
get a drink they're like no I'm
exhausted I don't want to get a drink
I'm totally pooped I mean I spent all
this time feeling angry and feeling at
the cortisol rushing through my veins no
I I I I kind of want to just stay home
and so I think it's possible that we are
tragically sapping our relationship with
other people because we're dumping all
of our dopamine at our screens we're
wasting our dopamine having these low
rent versions of social interactions
through our screens when we could have a
much higher quality experience if we
sometimes found a way to put these
things down but to the question why
don't we put these things down it's
because we're dis evolved to know what
to do with these things they're so good
at capturing one part of what makes us
human which is our sensitivity to
novelty in our environment that we
forget this other part of Being Human
which is being there for each other
what's the answer to this besides put
your phone down and answer is hang it
out I mean this the strange thing about
the prescription to this disease is that
it is simultan ously the easiest answer
in the world and the hardest answer in
the world it's easy because the antidote
to loneliness is free and obvious it's
being with other people the problem is
that being with other people can be a
collective action problem it's harder to
be with other people if the folks around
you aren't hanging out with each other
it's hard to start a new ritual like you
know dinner parties for your friends if
your friends never go out to dinner
parties so it's it is a collective
action problem and it's difficult to
solve but I'm optimistic that we can
solve it you know the difference between
culture and say science is like science
is a story that tends to move in One
Direction drugs get a little better and
then a little better and then a little
better culture is this culture is
progress and backlash and progress and
backlash and what's the coolest type of
genes are they skinny or roomy or skinny
or roomy that's culture we've had
decades now of an antisocial Century but
they were preceded by Decades of a very
social Century in the early 1900s we had
Rising rates of marriage and fertility
and union membership and all different
kinds of Club associations we had a
moral revolution in this country and we
can have another moral revolution in
this country but I think it begins with
the observation with the self diagnosis
that we're doing this to ourselves this
is a disease we're giving ourselves
that's the bad news but the good news is
that we all have the Cure we know how to
be with other people and we can just do
it more drk Thompson thanks so much for
talking with us thank you and let's get
together I'd love it
