hi everyone while they're getting the uh
the screen sharing set up uh just to say
thank you so much for um making the uh
opportunity for me to speak to you
remotely I wish I was there in person
but uh have some things I'd love to talk
you to you about so um what I'd love to
do today is to uh talk about a little
bit of our work and uh you know and 20
minutes I can only sort of give you the
highlights of some things that I think
are relevant what I'm interested in is
Ed minds and in particular embodied
Minds beyond the ones that are really
easy for us to recognize as a model
system we use the collective
intelligence of cells as they navigate
the space of anatomical possibilities
and this gives us the ability to ask
questions in a very serious empirical
way to ask questions about what does the
mind of the body think about how do we
communicate with it how can we reset
this some of its priors and its beliefs
and so on and this gives rise to a very
practical research program in
regenerative medicine of birth defects
injury cancer and so on um the uh here
there's there's there's a few main
points which are related to Ian's work
um and I'm so I'm I'm delighted to be
able to talk about these things in this
in this context so you'll see these crop
up um during the talk but fundamentally
what I do is diverse intelligence
research and one of the things I'd like
to introduce to start off is this old um
old painting this is Adam naming the
animals in the in the Garden of Eden and
one one of the interesting things about
this uh this old story is that it was
Adam that had to name the animals it
wasn't God or the Angels it was it was
Adam that had to do it and so uh we
wonder why was it on him to to name the
animals and I think what's interesting
here is that uh in many Traditions
discovering the name of something or
naming something means that you've
understood its true nature you've
discovered its its inner nature and I
think this is um exactly what we're
doing because it's going to become very
important to understand the true nature
of all kinds of beings beyond what is
what is shown here and what's
conventionally thought
about and so my framework uh is uh the
goal of it is to recognize and learn to
ethically relate to all kinds of diverse
intelligences and that includes of
course us and various animals that are
easy for us to recognize but also s all
sorts of weird creatures you know
Colonial organisms and swarms uh
synthetic biology so engineered new life
forms uh chimeric life forms things like
cyborgs and hyds and uh various other
beings that are going to be with us in
the next few decades starting off with
uh with with humans with various
augmented technology and and you know
sort of radiating out from there and
eventually maybe even uh truly um truly
alien life and I think that you know it
might be a little shocking to see some
of these things uh in the same list as
uh as some of some of these things but I
think we really have to uh take
seriously the humility of um not not
assuming that we understand uh what
kinds of embodiments various aspects of
the ineffable can take and so my my
point here is not to uh kind of uh
neglect the things that make us special
but actually to to really understand um
what other embodiments that can take and
and of course I'm not the first person
to think about these things so Rosen
Rosen Bluer and Bigalow uh tried for
this kind of scale so that you can put
on the same um on the same kind of uh
Continuum all kinds of different degrees
of agency and so on and what I'm
interested in is a framework that moves
experimental work forward so to new
capabilities um and ALS also uh enables
better ethical Frameworks that are going
to avoid some of the lapses that I'm
sure will result from uh naive and
simplistic ways of trying to make a
distinction between all of these
different things so so so so this idea
of uh you know uh making distinctions
between agents and terms of where they
come from so were they evolved in a
random search process of evolution were
they engineered by uh by human Engineers
or somewhere in between or a combination
let's let's look at where we actually
come from so this is the journey that
each of us takes we were all quote
unquote just physics at some point and I
hate that phrase but people people use
it a lot so we all begin life as a as an
unfertilized oite a little blob of
chemistry uh and slowly gradually with
no particular uh bright line of uh you
know there's no developmental biology
gives you no specific point at which uh
something something unique happens to
turn this process into something like
this or one of these other amazing
creatures so we all we all have made
this this journey and if you look inside
any one of these things you know for
example deart was really interested in
the pineal gland because it's it's
unitary in the brain and he felt that
that was appropriate for the uh for the
common unitary feeling of the integrated
feeling of the human experience but of
course if you look in the pineal gland
you see a bunch of cells and if you look
inside each of those you see all this
stuff so there's an amazing depth of
mechanism going all the way down to
molecular networks and this is this
happens to be a free living organism but
this is uh the kind of thing we are made
of we are made of an agential material
we are all a kind of collective
intelligence because the substrate that
we are made of is not a passive material
it actually has uh agendas it has
ability to form memories it can learn it
preferences and so on so so this is this
is our architecture now when we start
life um this is an embryonic blasty or
blastoderm at least a small uh view of
it let's say we have 50,000 cells and we
look at that at those 50,000 cells and
we say okay there's an embryo one embryo
what are we counting what are we really
counting when we look at 50,000 cells
and we say that that's an embryo well
what we're really counting is first of
all alignment functional alignment
towards a goal what we're saying is that
all of these cells are going to work
together to make a very particular
journey in anatomical space starting
with one cell and ending with a normal
let's say human in this case um Target
morphology and fundamentally what we're
counting what we're counting here is the
commitment to the same story all of
these cells are committed to the same
set of uh preferences and goals in
anatomical space uh and and that's
that's why they're all going to work
towards making this and this is not
simply a mechanical process of
complexity emerging from simple rules
because we know and I don't have time to
show you but there are many examples
that that show that if you try to
deviate them from this path they are
very good at finding new ways to get
there so so one of the key things is
that there are lots of uh similarities
here between the construction of the
body and the construction of the mind uh
you if if if you didn't know what a
human was and somebody showed you um the
material of of a brain and as so so how
many selves actually can fit in here you
know what's the density of of selves per
medium we actually don't know we don't
have a way of of of knowing that and it
isn't genetically determined in this in
the in the um case of development either
because if you take this blastoderm
let's say a chicken or a duck egg and
you use a little needle to make some
scratches here in this blader uh for the
few hours before these things heal up
each of these islands is going to not
being able to feel the presence of the
others is going to self-organize into an
embryo each one of them is going to be
its own self and so what you're going to
find is something like this you can make
twins triplets probably up to half a
dozen or so and there's a couple of
interesting things that you see first of
all uh the number of individuals that
come from this blastoderm okay and this
of course happens in in humans too
whether conjoin or or or or not conjoin
the number of individuals that come out
of this excitable medium is not known it
is not fixed in advance by genetics most
of the time it's one but it could be
anywhere from zero to half a dozen or
more and the next thing that happens is
that each of these uh embryos
uh uh it commits to a particular
particular path in the anatomical space
and the cells here in between they have
to decide am I uh am I part of this
embryo or am I part of that embryo okay
so there's a there's a there's a scale
up going on here in which individual
cells will bind into a collective which
will go off and and do specific things
and actually the cells at the border
have a difficult time some of them have
uh have problems deciding am I the left
side of of embryo 2 or am I the right
side of embo one and for this reason
it's been long known that conjoint human
twins will exhibit laterality defects so
left right inversions of the heart the
gut and so on in one of the twins
because because some of these cells have
a hard time figuring out where they are
so this is this is this this is the
process of coming into the into the
world um as a as a self the first thing
you have to do is figure out where your
borders are where do you end and the
outside world begins and this of course
has many uh uh implications uh in in
Neuroscience as well issues in
individuation for dissociative disorders
and and so on so one of the first
problems uh that has to be solved is the
problem of uh understanding left versus
right now even individual cells so
here's a chyal parami here's a a slim
mold this whole thing is one cell and
they have a preferential right where
bias when they hit a te-as they they
they have a um a built-in asymmetry so
even individual cells already have
broken uh the Symmetry between left and
right very interesting because
macroscopic
the universe does not distinguish left
from right at the at the quantum level
it does but macroscopically it does not
and so all of the cells in the embryo
have to do a very interesting thing they
all know which direction is let's say
rightward okay so all the cells have
that same information that that way is
rightward but they have to convert this
into knowing where relative to the
midline they are so this is a chick
embryo here's the midline and the cells
here on the left side have turned on a
particular Gene called noal because they
already know that they are on the left
side of the midline so relative to the
other cells and the midline of this body
um the way that actually happens is that
from at the very earliest moments of
fertilization uh at the in fact at the
first cleavage um there are a particular
uh bi electrical Machinery so proteins
that create an electrical gradient
migrate to one side so they all go
rightward here this sets up a voltage
gradient which we can measure and that
voltage gradient Yanks along something
called serotonin which is a
neurotransmitter so one reason this
might be interesting in this context is
and and related to some of Ian's work is
because you see right from the earliest
moments of development questions of
laterality questions of asymmetry use of
a neurotransmitter to solve these
problems long before neurons or or the
brain shows up and uh in this case
bioelectricity uh by virtue of uh its um
control of of neurotransmitter signaling
is involved in a collective decision-
making that's required to set up an
embryo as distin from Individual cells
now these uh these these these
collectives have all kinds of
interesting problem solving properties
first of all uh upon injury so this is a
salamander if they lose their arm they
will regenerate okay and will they will
make exactly what's needed and then they
sto no matter where they were amputated
so now that's the most amazing part of
regeneration is that they know when to
stop and the same thing happens uh in
these tadpoles that have to rearrange
their face to be a frog if you create a
so-called Picasso Tad where everything
is in the wrong place the ey is on the
back of the head the mouth is off to the
side they will actually rearrange in
novel ways give you a very normal
looking frog so what the genetics does
not give you in any of these cases is a
hardwired machine that always does the
same thing under all circumstances there
may be a few species that do that but by
and large um that's not what you get
what you get is a highly flexible error
minimization scheme you get something
that's able to correct despite novel
circumstances this being William James's
definition of intelligence right the
ability to uh hit the same same goals by
different means and and I want to just
highlight the the incredible problem
that these um that these organisms solve
so this is a cross-section through the
kidney Lumen of a n and you can see that
there's about eight to 10 cells that
normally go um are used to make up this
this structure so there's a trick you
can use in the early egg where you allow
uh the chromosomes to multiply but the
the cell itself does not divide and so
they end up with lots more DNA and in
that case the cell itself will get
bigger so if that happens what you see
is that the N is exactly the same size
it just uses fewer cells to do the exact
same job now what's really remarkable is
that if you make the cells truly
gigantic then something new happens
instead of using cellto cell
communication here that it uses a
different molecular mechanism CTO
skeletal bending and each cell will bend
around itself leaving an empty spot
inside so so so think of what this what
this animal has to do coming into the
world you don't know how many cells
you're going to have you don't know what
the size your cells are going to be you
don't know how many copies of your
genome you're going to have you can't
rely on any of this stuff all of these
things that supposedly were were honed
by Evolution uh you can't assume any of
that and so you have to be able to in
this kind of creative problem solving
you have to deploy uh a new molecular um
mechanisms that that are at your
disposal to get the job done to to
complete that journey in morphospace
despite the fact that not only it's not
just external injury it's not just that
the environment's changed your own Parts
have changed you can't even rely on the
consistency of your own parts and this
ends up being being actually a very
interesting property that I think is the
latter for intelligence is kind of a
ratchet for for intelligence in in
biology so how does all this work well
years ago we started to uh take uh
inspiration from Neuroscience which of
course is used to these multiscale
problems where you understand the
scaling of information from from very
small components all the way up through
cognitive high level cognitive functions
and we know that uh there is this
electrical Machinery that sets um
voltage states that propagate through
networks and you can try to decode those
electrical States here this is a this is
a living zebra fish brain and you can
see all the phys physiology that's going
on here as this fish is thinking about
whatever it is that fish think about and
um what we realized is that this is
actually not unique to neurons or brains
every cell in your body does this
evolution discovered this many many eons
ago this is extremely early about the
time of bacterial biofilms it discovered
that electricity was a great way to
scale mines from tiny little microbial
uh uh components all the way up through
larger kinds of things and so every cell
in your body has these these this
electrical signaling most of them become
uh coupled into networks with electrical
synapses and we can ask the same
question what uh we we know what these
networks think about you know they think
about moving you through three
dimensional space for example what do
these networks think about well they
think about moving you through
anatomical space and you can see what
this looks like this is a voltage
sensitive fluorescent die technique that
we developed this is a um a frog embryo
that's about to put its face together
and long before the genes come on to
regionalize the face you can see here
this is you're now reading the mind of
this collective intelligence you can see
this is what it's going to build right
here here's this is the electric face
and and I'm showing it this one to you
because many of the patterns are very
hard to decode this one's easy it looks
like a face so here's where the animal's
right eye is going to be here are the
placodes here's the mouth this is what's
going to guide the gene expression and
the uh subsequent um anatomy and of
course there are pathological patterns
you know if a human oncogene is injected
that will eventually make a tumor you
can already detect at an early stage
these are the cells that are going to
disconnect from the environment go off
like amias treat the rest of the body as
just external environment we'll talk
about that um in a minute so so these
these bi electrical patterns are are
literally the memory in the excitable
medium of this collective intelligence
that control where they go in anatom
space so we've learned partially to
communicate with them and convince them
to do other things so uh here by
injecting mRNA encoding a potassium
channel so this is something that's
going to change the voltage of the cell
there are no Fields there are no waves
no magnets no electromagnetic radiation
that's not how we do it we use the
native interface that the cells are
using to hack each other during
embryogenesis we're just taking
advantage of it and what we can do is we
can we can apply we can um uh instill in
these cells a particular uh voltage
state that is basically says to them
make an eye and if you do that in cells
that are going to give R normally will
give rise to the gut here so this is a
tat B here's the native eye here's the
gut uh those cells will happily build an
eye and that eye will have all the lens
right the optic Nerf all the same stuff
so we learned a few things here we
learned that the bi electric memories
are actually instructive they actually
tell the organs where to go they're very
modular they're they're top down control
we didn't tell these cells how to build
an eye they already know how to build an
eye all we said we just gave them enough
information to say go ahead and do that
we didn't give all the information on
all the strategies we're not talking to
the individual stem cells we're not
talking to the we're not micromanaging
the the gene expression nothing like
that um and uh we discovered counter the
developmental biology textbook which
will tell you that only these cells have
the competency to become eye that
actually if you prompt them in the
correct way pretty much all cells in the
body have the competency to do that so
that reminds us you know when you're
judging the competency of some system
you're really taking an IQ test yourself
because you may just not have found the
right way to interface with the
capabilities of that system um and
there's some very interesting dynamics
that happen when you do this the cells
that we've injected are saying to their
neighbors let's build an eye and in
particular if there's only a few of them
they will sometimes convince all these
other cells around to participate in the
process the blue ones are the ones we
injected but there's not enough of them
and they know that and so they they uh
activate all these others to work with
them but of course the cells around them
that are trying to suppress cancer are
saying you're crazy don't be be an eye
you should be skin we're all we're all
going to be skin or we're we're gut or
whatever and they have this back and
forth conversation that we can now track
uh that determines what happens um we
can rewrite this memory in creatures
like plaria so these are flat worms you
can uh cut these flat worms into pieces
every piece reliably knows what to make
and so there's this bioelectrical
pattern memory that says one head one
tail if we edit that memory and uh
convince them to do this so so this kind
of pattern if you cut this animal now
you will get a two-headed flator this is
not Photoshop these or or AI these are
real real animals now very importantly
this is not a bi electrical pattern of
this two-headed animal this is a bi
electrical pattern of this perfectly
normal looking one-headed animal whose
Anatomy is normal whose molecular
biology is normal this is a
counterfactual memory this is the early
evolutionary version of our mental time
travel because what this animal is doing
is the body is storing a memory of what
you will do if you get injured in the
future this is not what you're doing now
this is what you think a correct
planarian looks like and so the body can
store at least one of two different
representations of what a correct animal
looks like which is what you will use if
you injure it uh I call I call this uh
memory also because once you've reset it
it stays so if you take these two-headed
animals and continue to recut them um by
the way don't feel too bad about the
recutting this is how they normally
reproduce as they tear themselves in
half and regenerate and and go on so so
if you uh if you um recut them remove
the prime primary head remove this
ectopic secondary head the middle
fragment is now forever convinced that
normal planaria should have two heads
and we can actually reset it back to one
so we have the ability to actually uh uh
incept new memories into that
anatomical collective intelligence and
and tell it where it should go if if it
gets in trouble and here you can see the
video these These are what these
two-headed two-headed animals are like
now um the last bit of this I want to
tell you is a story about cancer so what
evolution has remarkably is use
bioelectricity as a kind of cognitive
glue to scale up the goals of these
biological system so individual cells
have little tiny goals all they care
about is the local uh physiological
States here but together uh what what
what evolution has allowed is for them
to join into electrical networks that
maintain very large scale very grandiose
large scale goals like building a limb
if you deviate them from that go by
injury they will continue uh and they
will rebuild and then they stop but that
process has a failure and that failure
mode is cancer because what can happen
this is a human gly blastoma cells
moving around what can happen is that uh
if there's an enogen or actually many
other things that can cause cancer uh
what it will do is cause the cells to
disconnect electrically from their
neighbors at that point the rest of the
body just becomes more environment and
they do what all single cell organisms
do they reproduce as much as they can
they go where life is good that's
metastasis and so what's happening here
is that these cancer cells are not more
selfish than normal cells their s are
smaller so the boundary between self and
World whereas before it was huge
probably the size of an organ or maybe
the whole animal it's now literally
shrunk to the size of a single cell and
it's still every man for himself but now
that border is Tiny so their self their
model of where the self ends and the
outside world begins has shrunk and so
we can use that kind of thinking to
design a therapeutic what if we
artificially Force these cells to
continue being part of that electrical
Network we won't kill them we won't turn
off the enene we will simply force them
into electrical communication with their
neighbors and if you do that this is the
same animal here's the ENA protein
blazingly expressed there's no tumor
okay and that's because we've we've
injected an ion channel that that
controls the bi electric potential
doesn't fix the the genomics but that's
okay you don't need to so uh I think
that in the future what what's going to
happen is that um future uh biom
medicine is going to look a lot more
like a kind of sematic Psychiatry um
than it is like chemistry this is what
we do now all of these bottomup
interventions because we treat um cells
and tissues as simple mechanical
machines they're machines but they're
not simple mechanical machines they're
agential beings with problemsolving
capacities and we can uh interface with
them using all kinds of interesting uh
novel technologies that are now
forthcoming so the very last bit I want
to talk about is this uh what I've shown
you in terms of regeneration and so on
is the ability to restore and rebuild to
the correct Target morphology um what
about the plasticity how how far away
can we go from that and I just want to
point out that normal development uh
really um puts us into a false sense of
SEC false sense of understanding because
acorns always make oak trees and we
think that we know what the acorn genome
can do it makes this every single time
but if prompted by a non-human
bioengineer that would be this this wasp
here these exact same cells with no
genomic change could build something
completely different they can build
these amazing GS and if not for this
little guy we would have had no idea
that these cells are actually capable of
doing
so one of the things that we do in our
lab is we'll we'll borrow some skin
cells from an early frog embryo we put
them in a little little depression here
and what they do is they uh uh they
don't do any of the things you might
assume they would do they actually come
together to be something we call a
zenbot these uh these are autonomous uh
novel kinds of constructs they are a
Proto organism they swim along they can
go in circles they can Patrol back and
forth they have this group Behavior
here's one navigating a maze watch what
it'll do it it swims along here here
it's going to take this corner without
having to bump into the other side first
so it takes the corner then at this
point it spontaneously turns around uh
and and goes back where it came from so
we're we're in the process of studying
their ability to learn their various
behaviors but one thing they do is if
you provide them with loose skin cells
they will uh run around and uh collect
those skin cells into a little ball and
because they're dealing with an agential
material these are not passive Pebbles
these are cells those balls uh mature
into the next generation of xenobots and
guess what they do they do exactly the
same thing and so you get multiple
generation so this is kinematic
self-replication so you can ask what did
the frog genome actually learn during
its many years of evolution well it
certainly learned by default to do this
so these this is the normal
developmental sequence uh and and these
are the behaviors but it also can do
this this is a this is a zenbot
developmental sequence I have no idea
what it's trying to become there's never
been any zenbot before there's never
been any evolutionary selection to be a
good xenobot uh so this is uh this is
this is something completely novel that
that these cells can can um can do in a
to to repurpose their Hardware in a new
way and um what I just want to end with
is to point out that this is not some
weird fluke of embryonic cells or
amphibian cells look at look at this
little little Proto organism so if I
showed you this you might think that
this came from a uh the bottom of a pond
somewhere uh well if you sequence this
what you will see is 100% homo sapiens
these are human cells these are adult
patient tracheal epithelial cells
donated by by human patients during a
trachea biopsies and in a particular
novel environment they will self
assemble into this little thing that
we've called an anthropod now they have
all kinds of cool properties one of the
coolest is that if you have some neurons
here growing in a dish and you make a
scratch wound they will navigate uh down
that little scratch wound and when they
settle into a group this is kind of like
a superbot cluster there's probably 10
of them here what they will do is they
will sit there and knit the sides of the
neural wound together four days later
you pick them up and you see that what
they were doing here is is healing this
neuronal scratch wound culture and
that's just the first thing we found who
knows what else they're capable of so
just imagine who knew that your tracheal
cells that sit there for decades quietly
in your in your Airway actually have the
ability to make an autonomous self multi
little organism it's never existed
before it's not how humans develop it's
not uh anything in our lineage uh that
actually has the ability to to run
around your body and uh and and make
make these kind of repairs so what I
think is that by making these kinds of
things and I didn't even tell you the
story where we can make uh plaria um
take on the head shapes of other species
so the same Hardware with no genetic
modification visits attractors in that
uh anatomical State space that belong to
other species I think all of these
synthetic beings and everything else
that are made here are are vehicles for
exploring a platonic space of
affordances that uh go Way Beyond what
the one little pin sort of pinhole that
we normally see in normal development
and normal regeneration and that by
using various techniques we can actually
start to map out the space and ask you
okay if if evolutionary selection is not
what uh created these things um where
are these patterns coming from and I
think we now uh have a have a way of of
starting to to understand this and the
very last thing I will just say is that
I'm I'm very conscious of the fact that
the talk that I gave was was exclusively
kind of a left brain talk and so um in
the week leading up to to this I did uh
take an attempt at a at a kind of a
right brain contribution and so um you
can see here at this uh at this URL or
or here I wrote a little bit of uh what
this whole topic of diverse intelligence
might look like if uh if if addressed
from a a more right brain perspective so
I'll stop here um just thank the uh the
the posto and the grad students who do
all the work uh thank our funders who
support us um some disclosures because
there's a few biotech companies that are
uh supporting our work and uh of course
the animal because they do they do all
the all the hard work so thank you so
much
