i was hanging out with some friends last
night and i discovered that our
conversations about popper got someone
to read the book the myth of the
framework really um and he actually
listened to the audiobook version
because i guess it's on audible said he
didn't like it that much oh sorry what
the hell
[Music]
how are things man good yeah helena and
georgia are in calgary for the next week
in a bit so oh nice living the bachelor
bachelor life again for a little while
yeah i went out for the first time
actually last night and first time in a
while and got into some good good
conversations with some old friends who
are now all marxists i like hadn't seen
them in a while and come back and
they're all talking about the virtues of
mr karl marx which is kind of
appropriate for what we're going to be
talking about oh fascinating yeah like
full full-on marxists or like yeah like
so i asked my one friend sam and he said
that he strongly believes in that all
history can be viewed through the lens
of class conflict um which is a rather
marxist take yeah um well of course it
can be the question yeah it's like ought
to audit
that's what i said i was like there's
many different lenses one can take on
history and that's a lens but it's not
the only lens but um but it was fun
these kind of conversations always just
explode into 10 like 100 different
branches and you can never get anywhere
but it's just fun to enter the frame a
little bit yeah it's always just nice
seeing or interesting thing where people
are like going with their life
trajectories too yeah what sort of ideas
people are
taken by and how different that is from
like you know your takes and others
totally it's just like always yeah
reminds me how non-obvious things are
right just like how different like
personalities are taken by different
ideas and there's like
that's always so fascinating to me like
really you actually find this idea
compelling right
yeah it was fun i don't think any of us
changed our minds but it was it was a
good a good conversation so i guess we
should set up a little bit what we're
talking about today if you want to dive
into it yeah yeah i mean so
we just finished talking about enigma of
reason last episode
and you know the gist was that reason
yeah reason is best understood in this
like social milia as like a tool used by
people to put forward their own ideas
and to argue about it and stuff i
thought it'd be kind of fun to turn to
popper's essay
about
a similar sort of topic and just talking
about like when fruitful discussion is
actually possible and so in particular
he's got this essay called the myth of
the framework which is part of a book of
the same title which makes things kind
of confusing uh by the way our
conversations i was hanging out with
some friends last night and i discovered
that our conversations about popper got
someone to read the book the myth of the
framework really um and he actually
listened to the audiobook version
because i guess it's on audible said he
didn't like it that much so what the
hell i guess you won't be listening to
the podcast anymore uh but shout out to
colter if he's if you still listening
but i honestly i can't imagine it would
be that good as an audiobook yeah i feel
like popper is quite dense and like
trying to absorb everything yeah
audio-wise like that you do have to read
it yeah because he goes into the details
with like the pre-socratic philosophers
and it's kind of hard to keep track of
the nuances of his arguments here um so
anyway like we're so it seems like
generally right now we're sort of
talking about like
how to have good conversations and when
conversations are fruitful and valuable
and um how to engage in good
conversations and come to them in good
faith and stuff and so i thought we'd
turn to this sort of classic essay by
popper that that uh touches on a lot of
these topics and so his setting
basically is he's trying to push back
against what he calls the myth of the
framework and the myth that he's pushing
basket against is basically the thesis
the fruitful discussions are impossible
unless participants come to the
conversation with some sort of
agreed-upon framework that shares like
you know certain underlying assumptions
and and certain facts
so there's exam examples of frameworks
uh which could be like you know
political frameworks scientific
frameworks
you know general perspectives on on life
and in different philosophies and stuff
so frameworks can be can be anything and
then what he's gonna be pushing back
against is
is this idea that we can't actually
engage in a in a dialogue productively
unless we share this sort of framework
joseph agassi uh summarized this i found
a little quote he said you can summarize
the myth of the framework and
contemporary american slang as you can't
argue with a commie
and i i like that but uh
but just this idea that unless you have
a shared background you can't have
fruitful discussions is the myth that
he's he's um gonna be challenging like a
lot of popular stuff it seems to be sort
of
motivated by his personal experience so
like when he was young i think he's
talked about this in other essays he got
like pretty involved with like
the marxist school of thought and was
like hanging around a lot of marxists
was pretty taken by those ideas um and
eventually ended up like disavowing
those ideas and and moving on but he
feels like he learned a lot from those
debates and
in particular he's learned a lot by
engaging with marxism as someone who's
like critical of it and so he's trying
to say like no no just because i'm now
no longer a marxist or
at the time started questioning some of
those assumptions doesn't mean it was
not valuable for me to like engage in
discussion with them and for us to start
like criticizing each other's views
right in fact like i learned a lot from
those kind of exchanges
and so i think that's kind of how he's
he's like coming to the essay i
just happened as we were preparing for
this just in reading other stuff i
happen to come across
two examples which i think sort of
exemplify the myth and like stuff he'd
push back against in like just
contemporary thoughts so one actually
just came from the discord like an hour
ago and people were discussing some of
paul graham's essays um he's got this
one essay written in 2009 which in
general i really like it's called keep
your identity small
but one paragraph in there right so the
idea is like he's he's trying to analyze
why like political and religious
conversations often go awry and
he says i think what religion and
politics have in common is that they
become part of people's identity and
people can never have a fruitful
argument about something that's part of
their identity by definition they're
partisan um so even he even uses the
word fruitful right so this is the exact
same wording that paul is trying to push
back against and so you know what paul
graham's saying here is like if you've
adopted a religious or
political like identity if you if you
call yourself a marxist or uh um you
know an austrian economist or a
libertarian whatever or a christian or a
muslim whatever um now
you can you cannot have a fruitful
dialogue with people who like call
themselves something else and underlying
this is because now you just think about
the world in such completely different
ways there's no way to have a realistic
conversation about it that's going to be
productive and so his advice is just
like
never make these part of your identity
um and so there's an interesting
separate conversation to have about to
what extent that's actual feasible
advice like how much you can go around
telling people to just like not
bring things on to their identity
because that just seems like a pretty
natural human state of affairs but
anyway that's sort of a separate combo
to have um the other example comes from
john heights recent atlantic article um
and he's talking about uh basically why
everything's gone to like sort of
it's talking about social media and
it seems to be his hobby horse these
days um
he's he's trying to analogize like our
current social situation to the tower of
babel right where like humans we all
shared one language and one one
framework of understanding and then god
said god damn these hubristic humans who
are trying to build this giant tower um
i'm gonna scatter them to the winds and
create all these different languages so
that they can no longer understand each
other and he he says the story of bao
was the best metaphor i have for what
happened to america's in the 2010s um
and for the fractured country we now
inhabit something went terribly wrong
very suddenly we are disoriented unable
to speak the same language or recognize
the same truth we are cut off from one
another from the past so underlying this
sentiment again i think is this fact
that like now in in the tower of babel
it's like literal languages those would
be the frameworks but he's saying these
are like you know political languages
were divided into like red and blue
america and because of that now we can
like no longer understand one another
and there's like there's no common
ground we can find we can't have any
discussions because we're just busy
yelling at each other on social media um
and again there's like a broader
conversation i have about the effects of
social media and stuff but i think this
idea um even if it's not stated
explicitly that like
we can't have fruitful conversation if
we're not sort of on the same page if we
don't share certain axioms at the
beginning uh that that a conversation is
just basically going to be impossible
and so anyway as as always popper
is still timely
i don't know when he wrote this essay
but probably sometime in the in the 70s
or 80s um and so you know 40 years 50
years later i think it's still worth
diving in and exploring a bit yeah nice
so maybe i'll just add a bit of
structural information about the essay
so the essay comes in 16 parts and he
discusses the myth of the framework but
in general the essay is like a full
frontal assault against relativism
relativism of all kinds so
just for the audience relativism is the
idea that you can't really have
objectively true or false statements um
statements can only ever be judged
relative to some cultural or arbitrary
standards so everything is relative to
standards and i first encountered
relativism and the conversation around
relativism uh through sam harris's work
in the moral landscape
um when after 2001 he was engaging in
some conversations with anthropologists
about
the taliban's treatment of women
um where certain cultural
anthropologists would say that there's
no way to um judge
cultural practices that say put women
into cloth bags and
plus 40 degree temperatures or
mutilate their genitals
because that's just their culture and
they have their own notions of right and
wrong and we in the west have our
notions of right and wrong and we can't
bring our western standards to bear we
can't use our western standards to judge
the cultural practices of another
group of people and so what popper says
is underlying relativism is this myth of
the framework so in the essay he's going
to
discuss both linguistic relativism
cultural relativism moral relativism
moral relativism being the notion that
right and wrong are um only ever
culturally specific um and he's going to
do so by attacking something deeper
which is like you said the the myth of
the framework and i think that this
essay is just filled like chalk filled
with really great quotes so i'm going to
be quoting quite quite a lot
um but it might be good to just start
going through it i don't know if we're
gonna hit all 16 parts but um we'll
definitely try to cover cover the
territory and maybe we should start just
by his um
response so
like you said maybe i'll just repeat
what the myth of the framework is i'll
just quote him verbatim
so he says the myth of the framework is
the following a rational or fruitful
discussion is impossible
unless participants share a common
framework of basic assumptions
or at least until they agreed upon such
a framework for the purpose of
discussion
and then he says uh the following as i
formulated it here the myth sounds like
a sober statement or like a sensible
warning to which we ought to pay
attention in order to further rational
discussion
some people even think that what i
describe as a myth is a logical
principle or based upon logical
principles
i think on the contrary that it's not
only a false statement but it's a
vicious statement which if widely
believed must undermine the unity of
mankind
must undermine the unity of mankind
and so must greatly increase the
likelihood of violence and war
because
this
idea
is intrinsically
divisive it says that certain groups of
people are beyond discussion beyond
rational discussion and hence rational
discussion isn't worth having and that
only leads you with violence right so
exactly he's like
incommensurable is the word he uses
frameworks and and that's your view of
the world um that there's no way to
decide between them rationally right we
can't sit down and have discussion about
it then what other way is there to
decide to try and convince other people
that your framework is correct right
your last resort is violence and he's uh
he abhors violence as he says i believe
in almost every essay he writes
you know he believes like fighting war
of words is just so much better than the
war fighting the war of swords yeah
exactly which i forget the exact quote
along those lines but it's fantastic
yeah but that's it's quite an important
point right like if you actually think
there's a limit to what we can discuss
rationally and like how to a limit to
how much people might be willing to
change their minds you really have no
alternative once you start significantly
disagreeing and you know one of you is
going to pick up a stick and then you
just iterate from there yeah exactly so
his main uh response is that proponents
of the myth of the framework
exaggerate a difficulty into an
impossibility he says right off the bat
that uh it's absolutely the case that if
say you and i don't share a framework of
assumptions a conversation is going to
be difficult but just because it's
difficult doesn't mean it's not fruitful
and in fact
a conversation where you and i are
in
agreement amongst most of our
presuppositions that kind of
conversation he claims is going to be
less fruitful because it's just
a contemporary parliament circle jerking
it's just you and i in agreement he says
uh at the beginning of the essay
although i am an admirer of tradition
and conscious of its importance i am
almost at the same time an almost
orthodox adherent of unorthodoxy i hold
that orthodoxy is the death of knowledge
since growth of knowledge depends
entirely on the existence of
disagreement
um and disagreement may lead to strife
and even to violence and this is uh very
bad indeed for ayapur violences where he
says i poor violence yet disagreement
may also lead to discussion to argument
and to mutual criticism um because
disagreement is two people thinking hard
about the same thing and having
different
uh opinions and this is where you get
the best the best criticism when people
have genuine disagreement and then he
says
and these i think are paramount
importance i suggested the first step
towards a better and more peaceful world
was taken when the war of swords was
first supported and then even replaced
by a war of words now this is why the
topic is of practical
significance so disagreement is a good
thing provided it leads to mutually
enriching criticism and provided of
course that it doesn't lead to
to violence and this is why the the
clashing of frameworks can be very
fruitful in indeed and so continuing on
the fruitful thing um he says i think
that we may say of a discussion that it
was more fruitful the more the
participants were able to learn from it
this means the more interesting
questions and difficult questions were
asked the more new answers they were
induced to think of and the more they
were shaken in their opinions and the
more they could see things differently
after discussion in short the more their
intellectual horizons were extended
and so
to just to reiterate his attack on the
myth of the framework the the central
thesis is that
through difficult conversations much
fruit can be gleaned um
and
proponents of relativism he says put
before us standards of mutual
understanding which are unrealistically
high and when they fail to meet these
standards they claim that understanding
is impossible
so if you
assume
that a discussion is only fruitful if
the
participants fully converge and agree at
the end of it and everyone has their
mind changed and everyone agrees if
that's
what your standards of success look like
then anything that falls short of that
is going to be deemed a failure the
popper's point is no no no what matters
is if our horizons were broadened if
we're
if we see our own perspective perhaps a
little differently if we understand the
perspective of our opponents perhaps um
more clearly after discussion even if no
minds were changed like the conversation
had with my friends at the bar yesterday
neither of us changed our minds but i
learned a little bit more about where my
position was weak when i couldn't
respond to some of the things that they
were saying and it gave me a list of
things i need to look into afterwards
and and i learned a lot from it
even though we didn't converge at the
end so part of this essay
is just like a passionate
defense of power of difficult
conversations
and defense of their their importance
and that's why i think in the era of
twitter and social media debates and
stuff um this is so relevant because
i think people see twitter as just a
giant battleground and decry the state
of the conversation when i see it as is
uh bringing these kind of difficult
conversations um into the public sphere
and we can learn a lot a lot from them
oh man there's so much good stuff here
uh okay so it strikes me yeah as you
were talking i was thinking like like if
you had an environment where
most conversations that started with
people in slight disagreement ended in
agreement that would be quite a bizarre
situation right because assuming that
like truth is sort of hard to come by if
you were in an environment where
every conversation was just leading with
both participants going oh yeah yeah um
i think you're right i think you're
right that would i think that would
actually just imply
coercion
and a very bad social environment where
people don't you have to agree otherwise
something bad's going to happen to you
right so like this is what
made
ussr in turn the soviet era like so
terrible right and that's that's an
example of like a framework gone awry
where you have some framework people
don't feel they can actually disagree
with it and so you get almost like
comical levels of bad reasoning
happening
at like a countrywide level yeah you you
expect
most conversations to actually have like
a significant amount of error
on both sides and what you want from a
conversation is
like perhaps some more agreement but
really you just want better arguments on
both sides right so that when arguments
do finally like collide and you have to
decide between them you actually have
the best version of each argument a
fruitful conversation doesn't necess
necessarily mean reaching consensus it
just means making each side a little bit
yeah more aware like you were saying of
the weaknesses of the deficiencies of
their position so the next time there
are they argue it they can be a little
more nuanced a little more subtle a
little more powerful and then maybe at
that point they'll start convincing
people or maybe they'll receive even
stronger pushback um and that'll like
shed light on even more weaknesses right
and so either one of those things is
good and then the other the other just
amazing paparian move is examining the
delta basically between how much
progress can a
conversation
make if
one the participants like already in
agreement and two if they're not and so
realizing that actually if people are
not in agreement um that means there's
much more room for the conversation to
grow right there's much there's much
more progress to be made during that
conversation because there's like
clarity to be found there's better
arguments to be had there's more
debating more criticism to be had
whereas like
if you start all almost already like
sharing basic principles and axioms then
there's actually not that far for you to
go right like that it's like the you've
already placed a limit on there's not
much the conversation to grow right like
just looking at a conversation that way
is like the delta between like how you
know like where you are now and like
where you could possibly be at the end
of the conversation is like such a
classic
prepariant move like and he says that
people have to unlearn
something which is taught in like debate
society that the goal of a difficult
conversation is to win
um to win to win the debate which is you
have two positions one represents
absolute truth and the other position
represents falsity and winning debate is
the conquering of truth over falsity um
and that has to go totally out the
window
because what's really valuable is even
the slightest clarification of one's own
problem even the smallest
contribution made towards a clear
understanding of one's own position or
the position of one's opponent so
clarity and progress are what we seek in
difficult conversations not
victory and he also just there's one
little sentence which went past me the
first time but i really like it he says
it's for this reason that uh
no change in one's position should be
made surreptitiously so
um it should always be stressed and the
consequence is explored so if your mind
is something i try to do whenever my
mind is changed i try to emphasize it
loudly and proudly in real time
exactly what was said to change my mind
and how my mind has been changed um so
that that becomes more fodder for
discussion and it's just so
it's it's freeing slightly when you
enter into these kinds of conversations
with the goal of clarifying your own
position and when you don't consider a
conversation to be a failure if you
haven't
successfully convinced the other person
of your your view but if you've been
pressure tested and if your views have
been challenged by your interlocutor
then that's what success looks like um
and and i just really like that because
then you don't enter into these
conversations with the goal of
having to win which is such a stupid
thing to to do it's interesting how well
this aligns with the thesis of an
english reason
right like it's kind of unbelievable
like reading i mean i guess you could
have read them in any order but just
having read that book like last week and
then discussing this this week like it's
unbelievable that they're not
contemporaries almost yeah yeah
and popper right they're just it's such
similar writing and like such similar
emphasis on argument and the style of
conversation and just assuming people
like will be biased and are coming at
things from a whole variety of angles
and like yeah you know it's very rare
for someone to have like the absolute
truth right and like just the focus on
trying to make progress over using
conversation instead of yeah i don't
know whatever sitting in your room and
de-biasing yourself or whatever
devising your beliefs yeah or pain
implicit bias tests maybe
oh middle of the podcast but
uh my name is vaden masrani from the
university of british columbia and this
is my good friend ben chug from uh
stanford law we're supposed to work that
in in the beginning but we'll work it at
random points throughout the
conversation
stick with us long enough you'll figure
out who we are yeah okay
so yeah at some point i want to talk
about i think his language
examples are like very cool and i think
he weaves language in a very cool way so
i want to talk about that
yeah so he takes this almost odd
diversion i felt like the first time i
wrote the essay
um he sort of goes on this tangent where
he's talking about language and it
wasn't quite clear to me like what
was happening until i got to the end of
the essay and then
re-read it um and realize that he's
using lang i think he's using language
like as a very real way to demonstrate
that frameworks actually can't possibly
be incommensurable you know you have
ideas and then
if you are able to
linguistically formulate those ideas
right so you're able to express those
ideas and language somehow um
then they have the ability to be
criticized by other people who share
that same language
okay then the question is
are languages universal
because if they were and by universal i
just mean like can they express all
ideas
because if so
uh then criticism is like always
possible regardless of the idea right so
no matter like the language or
background or someone they can always
engage with the id and criticize it but
then he so he actually dives a bit into
uh like scholar linguistic scholars um
to try and kind of answer this question
i think um and he he he uh he actually
realizes
that at least so i'm we should actually
start getting into linguistics a bit i
think it's kind of like a fascinating
area that i'm not that familiar with but
he seems to be persuaded that languages
aren't actually universal right and this
i guess is kind of obvious from like the
idea of like creole and pigeon languages
right there are languages that can't
express all ideas but he argues they
can change always to adopt new ideas and
to incorporate new concepts um and so
they aren't necessarily universal as
they exist right now but they do have
this sort of universal capacity to
expand um and adopt concepts um and so
and so because of that he he kind of
uses this as like a way to argue purely
linguistically that like the idea of
ideas being
or frameworks being incommensurable with
one another like unable to be analyzed
is like
just impossible because if they can be
formulated in languages and
all languages have the ability um to
either express those ideas or change in
order to express those ideas um then
they can be argued and debated um
and then he's got this sort of secondary
level i think where he's actually
analyzing languages as frameworks
themselves um
and saying kind of using it as like
languages can be people might say that
languages are prisons right you your
view of the world is always shaped by
means of the language you speak and so
it's never going to be possible to see
the world the same way as someone like
an english speaker and a french speaker
or an english speaker and just a comment
there so that's a kind of relativism
it's linguistic relativity is i think
the the search term and this came from
um yeah benjamin moore if it's called
the wharf sapir hypothesis that uh your
view of the world is filtered through uh
the language you speak um and that's i
think true to some extent
like uh
the notion that um certain say uh bands
of people in the north have many
different words for snow and then can
differentiate different kinds of snow
more clearly similarly to how in english
we have a lot of different words for
computers
and we can differentiate between
smartphones laptops
etc
this is a kind of relativism and so one
way you could interpret that is that a
conversation between two people that
were brought up in different languages
is going to be impossible because
they're seeing the world differently and
he's responding to that that notion um
and so just to contextualize a little
bit about what you were what you're nice
yeah yeah that was super helpful um and
then i mean that's when his his
conclusion from from the last use of
language starts to come into play he
says like this this may be true but
languages like evolve all the time um
and this seems to be borne out like even
just right now by like john mccorder's
work and stuff yeah like his whole thing
is like how languages evolve and
contextualize based on certain social
situations i think mcwhorter cut his
teeth actually um by attacking strongly
this idea of uh linguistic relativity so
i think he yeah so i think one of his
earlier books um i haven't read it is
him just dismantling this idea that
different speakers
intrinsically have different kinds of
concepts they can represent um and he
attacks that pretty strongly yeah oh
that's so cool anyway so yeah then
popper basically says you know it may be
true that languages if you just view
them statically right now are able to
express different concepts when you look
at them like as a time series right
they're always evolving and
contextualizing and changing depending
on like
clash of cultures and everything and so
that you know in principle there's
actually nothing we can't uh can't
understand or can't eventually express
in our language because it'll change to
to uh yeah for whatever need we have i
think part of at the end of this
discussion he
talks about
this important notion of like is it
possible to step outside your framework
um so so there's this nice quote he has
uh actually from a different essay um
the essay is called normal science and
it's dangerous where he's responding to
thomas kuhn and this is in relation to
the question can we escape our framework
can we break out of it and what he says
is that although we're always imprisoned
by a framework a linguistic framework or
a ideological one at any stage we can
break out of this framework into a much
more roomy framework uh a bigger more
expansive one and while we are always
imprisoned by our current use of
language or the current set of ideas we
have to make sense of the world at any
point we can criticize our framework and
move to to a new one and i like that
because it's realistic in the sense that
he's not pretending
that it's possible to escape this he's
simply saying that it's not it's not
final no framework is is a final
framework and that i think is is a
powerful insight because it says that no
assumption no axiom no principle should
be beyond um criticism beyond the
ability to be challenged
and it's through this clash of
frameworks where you actually have to
start doing this you have to start
challenging your own assumptions and
your own principles and in that way we
can progress from one framework to a
better framework to a better framework
this is in contrary distinction to
thomas kuhn's view of science and of
rationality uh yeah kunso is so
interesting for me like have you read uh
logic of scientific um structure
scientific structures yeah um no i
haven't read it no yeah it would be
interesting to read because i uh i don't
know i always feel like
i must have misread it because whenever
people talk about i'm always like i
don't think he
he was much
more descriptive and much less normative
than at least that was my take on him
and i remember him saying after popper
and others criticized him when his book
came out like i feel like people read a
different book than what i wrote and
that's exactly how i feel when people
talk about okay that's good i tell
you i'm criticized i mean papa
criticizes them all the time and others
do as well um
and so
so so my understanding of is he
talks about paradigm shifts right um but
perhaps i'm i'm not appreciating a lot
of the nuance of his argument yeah so
it's been a while since i've read it so
it might be fun to dive into to some
point but
i took his thesis to be mostly
descriptive right saying like you know
there are sort of these periods so he
definitely breaks science into periods
where he which he calls normal science
and then like a paradigm shift where
there's a revolution or something right
so and he calls work in normal science
like people uh mostly just like
incrementally filling in gaps of like
whatever the current main theory is
right yeah and then someone comes along
and sort of revolutionizes the theory
and the classic examples right or like
galileo or copernicus or einstein right
where you completely kind of change the
framework and then you revert and then
there's a
some turmoil for a while while people
are like you know debating and
discussing the framework is this right
is this not um and then
a consensus sort of takes over right um
yeah uh as you say the revolution sort
of succeeded right so now there's a
bunch of einsteinians wandering around
and then for a while some indeterminate
amount of time after that people are
sort of filling in the gaps of general
relativity and we're trying to figure
out now how it fits in with quantum
mechanics and that's kind of what he
called normal science where the paradigm
itself is is less up for debate and then
something like maybe string theory comes
along and then you're in a another sort
of term turmoil period turbulent period
and maybe we're still in that turbulent
period right now so anyway so people
criticize him typically
as
being
basically being a relativist saying what
what is happening is not that science is
actually progressing right so when these
evolutions happen it's not that we're
actually getting nearer to the truth or
that we're discovering better theories
what's happening is simply like it's
power games right so someone has come
along and proposed a theory and then
there's some politics and uh people yell
at each other and some people die you
know and basically there's power moves
made and then they force everyone to
adopt a certain this new paradigm right
has nothing to do with the truth it just
yeah you know and i
i didn't read him as saying that at all
i read the book much more as like just a
descriptive account of how a lot of
science has progressed that fits in
pretty well with my understanding of the
philosophy of science and even of how
things work in like machine learning
right
you know a lot of it is just like
you know someone proposes cnns and
everyone goes wild and then a lot of the
work is like okay how far can we push
this et cetera and you know and then
someone proposes transformers right and
it's like oh okay now this is kind of
another new framework we can work in
anyway so i know he gets criticized a
lot for sort of sociological takes but i
i don't it's just funny yeah i just have
this weird like out of mind experience
whenever people are criticizing
because i'm like is that is that really
that's good because what i know about
him kind of just comes from the culture
i haven't read the book so it's very
likely that uh the
imprint that he's made on
culture is not exactly what he he wrote
about in in the book so that's a good
point it's been made enough that i'm
starting to think that i should reread
it and maybe i was too too light on him
yeah it'd be interesting to reread it
like after we've dove into popper's
stuff so much so we may we may notice
things that we wouldn't have noticed um
having not kind of immersed ourselves in
the the land of popper maybe get us back
on track if yeah get us back on track
yeah one thing
there's another similarity actually with
the enigma of reason i think one
question that they both sort of leave us
with both the essay that is and the book
the ending of reason is how to actually
create the good will needed for
conversations to go somewhere so popper
what he's arguing against is the
impossibility of having fruitful
discussions if people are coming from
different frameworks but he doesn't say
fruitful discussion will always happen
or that it's easy
or it's easy right so he is so his he
quote my thesis
is that logic neither underpins the myth
of the framework nor its denial but that
we can try to learn from each other
whether we succeed or fail will depend
largely on our goodwill and to some
extent also aren't on our historical
situation and on our problem situation
right so we do need to make progress
we need to bring
an open attitude to these conversations
right we need to recognize that we're
fallible that we could be wrong um there
were openness
opening to our position
possibly being falsified or being
strengthened by criticism right but we
need to come willing to actually like
engage in the conversation um
and
so the question is like what sort of
what kinds of discussions um and sort of
relationships kind of create this
goodwill or enable this goodwill to
happen um and for that i feel like there
is a bit of a tension in his work
because it might be the case that like
like the delta we were saying earlier is
largest
um between people between participants
in a conversation who come from like
very different backgrounds
but it's also harder for those kind of
participants typically especially if the
backgrounds are talking about are like
political or something in nature
to actually become like bring good will
to the conversation so like personally i
find the people
i'm sort of like less biased against or
like more have a higher ability to learn
from are people where i agree with them
a lot on certain issues and then we
disagree and i know they're friendly i
know they have good intentions right
like you or i like we agree on a lot and
then where we disagree i know
that it's in good faith right and it's
in service of the truth and we may
disagree on other things but we both
agree on that yeah and i'm not you know
i'm not trying to yeah i'm not like
trying to prove things to you like you
know all this stuff so
so
anyway so that's like i i don't want to
say that's a weakness of the essay but
it leaves
that question needs to still be answered
and he makes an interesting observation
that that frameworks aren't only
intellectual they can also be a
sociological and a psychological
phenomenon so frameworks can bind people
together in a similar way to say how a
church or political or artistic creed or
an ideology can and this is where you
get the the messiness coming in where a
conversation between say an atheist and
a muslim may be challenging because the
identity aspect of both of these two
beliefs is in is in play um and to
have your framework challenged is to
kind of have your
social structure challenged um and this
is
simply an important point to acknowledge
because it is one of the things which
makes these kinds of conversations
difficult and there's no getting around
like because you and i both have a
shared interest in say pursuing truth
because we share that it's easier to
make progress but if we didn't have that
in common we would still i think be able
to fruitfully learn from a conversation
but it would be it would be more
challenging um and so it's just another
aspect of the mental frameworks which
needs to be recognized that they they
are social adhesive in some sense
between between people yeah and like to
and so you know i know i opened up the
conversation with the examples of like
john height and paul graham but i think
that you know the charitable reading of
what they're saying is like
especially for jonathan height like what
he's saying is social media sort of
eroding the trust and making it harder
to come to the conversation the arena of
conversation with like the good will
necessary to like
get further in the first place and so
he might not be saying that it's
impossible to have conversations if you
come with different frameworks just that
you know social media is making it hard
to come to the conversation in the
necessary sort of state of mind yeah do
you find that persuasive because i
i think his attack on social media is a
little bit misguided in the sense that
never before have we had the ability to
have an ongoing dialogue with a billion
different people at once and
a billion different
kinds of opinions um are all clashing on
on the internet at once and this is
going to be demo challenging but i think
height has this assumption that
conversation is much easier in the past
when i simply don't think that's the the
case and i'm curious do you find his
attack on social media uh persuasive uh
to some extent so i agree so i think
this is one of the things that changed
my mind in our first conversation about
social media when you pointed out that
all these criticisms or a lot of them
rest on the assumption that there was i
think i used the phrase like
epistemological shattering or something
you were like that implies something was
together like it was unshattered in the
past yeah
there was some
like true information was being shared
like mana from heaven right yeah yeah
yeah this is not this is not what the
past was we just couldn't see
disagreements as readily um and so i
think that is a mistake that's being
made in in a lot of this discourse with
regards to like
social media mental health and stuff um
i'm pretty agnostic there because it
seems like pretty early days in a lot of
those studies and a lot of them have to
be by their very nature of the questions
they're asking they have to be like
long-term studies right about like
outcomes of teens when when they're in
their 20s and and stuff like that and so
we just have to unfortunately like wait
a bit i think to see how a lot of that
resolves itself and where the p values
start falling but uh i
you know just like anecdotally
i find social media is
more effective for me
when i'm not like engaging in political
debates but more just using it as like
information desegregation so i'm i'm
quite careful
with who i follow on say twitter right
and i really
and so i
even if i like tend to like someone but
they're posting like mostly political
stuff i like you know either mute or
like don't don't follow them and i i
find mostly
it's best in terms of like people i sort
of already like you know i or i like
their takes or i like respect them and i
just like see what they're sharing and
then i take that offline and sort of
read it and think about it myself but i
think and then the sort of conversations
i engage in on there just like mostly
for fun but are less you know not
usually very serious um and you know i
do think it's not a great place to have
productive political conversations um
yeah i think used in conjunction i think
podcasts are probably the healthiest
place where these kind of productive
conversations are happening because you
have face-to-face or zoom-to-zoom
interactions and and you can have more
long-form discussion where twitter is
incentivizes trying to come up with
pithy one-liners where that's not maybe
the best for for a long-form discussion
but um but it does bring people together
and many instances of people meeting on
twitter and then having podcast
discussions uh from there so as one one
kind of social media amongst many i
think it's it's perhaps necessary just
trying to see if there's anything else i
want to hit but he has a nice um
discussion in the middle about culture
clash
and how our western civilization and
what he calls the greek miracle so the
rise of philosophy art and science and
uh
when was that around thousand bc that
that kind of
is a result of civilizations coming into
contact with one another and culture
clash civilization clash is is a
framework clash and he gives the example
from uh
xenophonies um whereas an often he says
that the the ethiopians if they were to
draw their gods they'd have the gods
would be black if horses were to draw
their gods the gods would be uh in the
shape of a horse and this is an example
of being forced to think critically
about certain assumptions that had been
made when being exposed to a different
kind of framework so
the assumption that all gods must be
polytheistic greek gods from um homer's
time
was challenged when's it often he's met
other cultures and i just thought that
was a nice a nice reinterpretation of of
that uh famous quote from from
xenophonies um yeah but yeah maybe if
we're kind of winding down just some
concluding thoughts i think this is
definitely one of popper's best essays
and well worth reading the whole book is
worth reading but definitely uh this
this essay in particular and um
and i don't think we've fully done it
justice in a lot of the quotes that we
may have read
will have gone by quickly and so it's
worth the listener i think spending some
time with this essay because there's a
lot to to glean from it yeah yeah my uh
my favorite takeaway just personally is
to just try and remember when you're
having conversations that the goal of
the conversation is not necessarily
consensus or agreement by the end but
you should feel like if it was success
if you like felt challenged and had to
strengthen your own conversa like your
own side of the conversation um you know
even if the other person got frustrated
or even if you got frustrated you know
if there was like a little bit of nuance
that now you have to grapple with or
like a little bit of confusion that you
now have to sort out even if that's
uncomfortable that's like a win right
yeah exactly if um
you know if you're trying to like you
know gamify life to to any extent you
can start looking on those kind of
moments where you're like almost more
frustrated or like a little bit confused
or discomforted after a conversation
that's kind of a win actually because
now you have to like sort out your own
position um and uh you know not
everything's about you're not just going
to converge on truth after every
disagreement um which sometimes you know
sometimes it's easy to forget that and
you're like why can't people just
agree with me
yeah so that was that was helpful for me
actually as i was
prepping for this i was also listening
to clint lowery's most recent podcast
conversation with brianna yeah i heard
that one yeah
yeah that was great um she starts so
they i mean talk about different
frameworks right yeah that's like a
perfect example of of the clash of
frameworks but there was like one issue
that she brought up uh there was
cancelling student debt in the u.s which
is kind of
a hot topic
i'm i'm generally quite against that
move um for probably reasons aren't
worth going into but just like the
median taxpayer is less well-off than
the people who went to college so asking
them to subsidize people's choices of
going to expensive elite schools and
getting liberal arts degrees seems like
a bad idea but she made me think by
um she's in favor of it and she's like a
far left progressive bernie sanders
type just for the audience yeah yeah
exactly and i mean she she brought up
the point that for many years there was
this incentivization largely coming out
of the government that people like
should go to school because it's the
right thing to do they'll have a lot of
job prospects after you know it's like
the american
uh it's kind of the american way and
things will be much easier after you go
to school and you know it turned out
that that's not necessarily true like
people especially depending on the kind
of degree right people go and they take
on huge amounts of debt and then not you
know for some of them they went to
school spent many hundreds of thousands
of dollars and then got trapped in like
the 2008 financial crisis crisis or
whatever but
my point is that i'm it's i'm not now
convinced of her point but she's added
like a dimension of thought there for me
that now i have to grapple with like i
hadn't actually
thought about the incentives coming
especially like from the government that
was telling people to go to school right
and so that's like a whole other
dimension of the problem now that i have
to i have to think about yeah yeah my
when i was listening to that
conversation i kept thinking i don't
agree with her but i would also get
crushed if i was to try to talk to her
because she was a very powerful uh um
debater and it was it's a good example
of having my own framework shaken a
little bit because
there are many things that she said i
couldn't give any specific examples but
i think she said where my reaction was
something like i don't think that's
right but i don't know what's wrong with
it either
and and just doing the work of having to
engage with a lot of her claims like
that's why glenn larry is so great
because he has people on that are quite
opposite of his uh view and i know just
a nice example of my own framework
getting shaken a little bit uh listen to
her speak nice well it seems like a good
place to to end it i had a lot of notes
but we went by
them that's good um yeah i don't know
what we're going to talk about next time
i think the plan is to get back to
conjectures and reputation series at
some point and kind of keep ambling our
way through this land of rationality and
scientific
explorations and stuff
[Music]
you
