stanford university
okay so we will pick up on the one topic
that was not covered from two days ago
because you guys needed to go play
around with the cellular automata first
so i will work with the assumption that
everybody here has now spent 48 hours
playing with those but
presumably because of the sleep
preparation you've forgotten much of it
by now so we will cover some of it okay
back to that issue of
fractals and butterfly effects and that
whole business that by the time you look
at chaotic systems that are determinist
but aperiodic all of that when they seem
to be lines crossing getting back into
the same spot look closely enough and
they're not going to actually be
touching
and the center piece of why that matters
was that whole business of
you know these both appear to be the
same and take them out a decimal place
and they're actually different and a
gazillion decimal places out and the
entire sort of rationale for thinking in
that way is the notion that a very small
difference here
can make a difference one step to the
left
and a million decimal places out there
a small difference
will make a difference one before that
in a scale-free way ah a fractal this
here a difference here a million decimal
places out is just as likely to have
consequences for one over as this one
for one over fractal scale free all of
that but the critical thing that is
encompassed in this is the notion that
tiny little differences
can have consequences that magnify and
magnify and amplify into a butterfly
effect
so cellular automata are a great way of
seeing this principle along with another
others that are relevant to all of this
okay so we start off with the very first
one and this is the one that you no
doubt first discovered as a powder which
made you deeply happy
and if you follow the rules it was
starting there was this which one is
this facing starting at the bottom
okay so starting at the bottom and what
you see is these very simple rules and
out of it emerges a whole complex
pattern and we'll be seeing shortly the
features of this that perfectly match
what the requirements are for emergent
complexity but we'll see as the elements
are
lots of constituents lots of building
blocks the building blocks being very
simple they're binary either they are
filled
or not filled extremely simple rules as
to how the next generation gets formed
and in terms of the extremely simple
rules none of the rules have anything to
do with other than the next generation
it is all local rules built around what
the neighborhood is like for each one of
these so you put it together and out
come these very structured patterns like
these and this is great this is very
exciting except this isn't what you
usually get
in most of these cellular automata
systems where you start off with an
initial condition
and a simple set of local neighbor rules
for how you get reproduction into the
next generations in most cases the
patterns stop after a while in the vast
majority they stop they hit a wall they
go extinct aha
two terms that i've already stuck in
here that are biological metaphors start
to seem less metaphorical after a while
first off the notion that going from
here to here to here to here represents
its next generation
and the notion that this were just now
that the vast majority of these cellular
automata systems go extinct they fail
after a while
so it's a very small subset what you
then also see is in some ways the
critical point in this whole business is
the relatively small number of starting
states that succeed
produce a remarkably small number of
mature states that all look very similar
to each other
in other words you can start with a
whole bunch of different conditions
and you will wind up with a bunch a
smaller number of stereotypical patterns
half of the cellular automata that wind
up taking off looks something like this
with this pattern what are we seeing
convergence
convergence the notion that you can
start with different forms and they will
converge over time what's this you just
proved you look at the mature form and
you can't know the starting state
the other thing is starting at the
beginning just looking at this line
there is no way you can tell what it's
going to look like 20 generations from
now you've got to march through it in
other words the starting state gives you
no predictive power about the mature
state this is a non-linear system the
cellular automata encapsulates this this
business that most of these go extinct
only a relatively few number of mature
forms exist it shows convergence very
different starting states can converge
into the same sort of patterns and minor
differences in the starting state can
extend into very different consequences
it shows in other words butterfly
effects okay so appreciating this a bit
so what we did was then go to example
number two where we changed the starting
state just a little bit here we shifted
around some of the boxes and what you
see is something that looks roughly the
same but it's not exactly the same but
it's the same general feel to it so
that's great but then we started an
exercise of starting off with
the initial boxes
this goes that way the initial boxes
evenly spaced with one space between
them and apply the rules from there and
this is what you get totally boring
static inorganic inanimate this is what
it does for the rest of time what this
exercise then did going to number four
is what if we now space two boxes
between each one of these and here we
have
an extinction
this is one of those where it hits a
wall and all the next lines are empty
okay how about three boxes in between
the starting states okay another form of
extinction
okay how about four boxes between the
starting states and suddenly something
very dynamic takes off applying the same
rules and all you've done is change the
spacing between the starting states and
look at for one thing how close this was
to going extinct up there on top how
asymmetrical the pattern is that comes
out and this particular one will stay
asymmetrical forever
the ways in which that generated
something very unexpected there is no
way you could sit there a priori and say
hmm
one box in between generate something
that looks inanimate two boxes not gonna
work three boxes yeah somewhere around
four boxes in between that's when
dynamic systems suddenly take off there
is no way to have known that before
without marching through this and
actually seeing starting state tells you
nothing about the mature state
then we space it even further
and what we get is something similar
again this one is symmetrical it is
somewhat different from the previous one
but it's the same sorts of patterns that
come up over and over so what we've seen
here is by starting state minor
differences big divergence between going
extinct versus being a viable pattern
minor differences in starting state big
divergence between symmetrical and
asymmetrical patterns tiny differences
butterfly effects
okay next
looking at
the consequences here of introducing
some asymmetry from the very beginning
the one on the left up on top has four
boxes and four boxes
it has eight boxes the one on top has
eight boxes on the left and the one on
top on the right just adding in one
extra box on the side so it's four and
five adding a little asymmetry and what
you see is a very different pattern and
one of the things you tend to see in
these pseudo animate living pattern
systems is starting states of asymmetry
produce more dynamic systems more
dynamic patterns than even symmetrical
ones that's one of the only rules that
comes out of there
so we're seeing now minor little
differences producing major different
consequences
divergences butterfly effects
now showing this in a different way
and
what we've got here
are
four different starting state conditions
the one on the far left is in fact the
one from the previous one the four and
four four different starting state
conditions where they're not enormously
related to each other the first one
against the other three but the other
three have minor differences and the
whole thing is two of these are
identical after the first 20 generations
or so this one and this one
the two of them are identical and for
the rest of the universe they will
produce the same identical pattern and
looking at the mature state you show up
on the scene somewhere halfway down and
you could never ever know what the
starting state was did it start like
this or did it start like this a
convergency here
and in this case it's another one of
those rules knowing the starting state
doesn't allow you to predict the mature
form knowing the
mature form you don't know which
particular starting state brought it
about and the only way to figure it out
is to stepwise go through the whole
process because you can't just iterate
by a blueprint there's no blueprint
finally
the last one was giving you instead of
different starting boxes in each case
with the same reproduction rule the last
one was the same starting pattern of
boxes with different slightly different
reproductive rules and what you see here
are totally different outcomes depending
on which variant we have the beloved one
on the top left and you see here by
slightly changing the nearest neighbor
rules if and only if there's one
neighbor with this property if and only
if there's two neighbors if and working
through that way and you see remarkably
divergent outcomes
for one thing
you see that the majority of them
produce something very boring either
boring extinct or boring repetitive in a
very undynamic way
only a small subset produce lively
animated
living systems so we're seeing a whole
bunch of biological metaphors here over
and over and over which is the starting
states you know the mature mature you
know the starting state the generations
very simple rules for generations going
one to the next what we see also is the
vast majority go extinct and produce
either go extinct or some repetitive
very boring
crystallized type structure a small
subset a tiny subset produced instead
dynamic patterns and knowing what the
starting state is is not going to give
you any predictability whatsoever of is
this going to produce a dynamic pattern
or not nor does it allow you to look at
a bunch of the starting states and say
those two are going to produce the same
mature pattern
and these are all properties of the
evolution of different living systems
so you begin to see okay cellular
automata do you see some of these
principles the simplest level out there
in the natural world is looking at all
sorts of shells sea shells and
tortoise shells by the seashore and
whatever's and they all have
patterning on them that is derived from
that first
a cellular automaton rule producing
patterns that look a whole lot like
these and
go online and look for them because i
didn't get around to it in time but
producing all sorts of patterns in
nature very common ones what does that
tell you very simple rules for
generating the same complex patterns and
different starting states cellular
automaton properties here
another thing in a living biological
system that begins to suggest this
okay
so
i
do this research in east africa and
every now and then over the years i've
gone to this mountain called mount kenya
which is on the equator it's about 17
000 feet it's got glaciers up on top so
this is an equatorial glacial mountain
and you go up to about the 15 000 foot
zone and there's like
it's it's more land almost everything is
dead up there from the cold and there's
basically only like four or five
different types of plants up there
oh already only a very small number that
survive in that environment and each one
of them is very bizarre and distinctive
looking there's one of them that looks
like a little like rose bud thing except
it's about five feet across
and then there's another one that has
sort of a sprouty thing like this and
then a big central cactus looking thing
that isn't really so there's a few of
these really distinctive bizarre looking
class and in some way or other that's
what it takes to survive up there
so i have this friend who does research
up in the andes and he does botany stuff
up there and he goes into this one range
there that is on the equator and high
enough that there's glaciers up there ah
a glacial equatorial mountain on the
other side of globe so one day i'm
sitting around and looking at some of
his pictures there and suddenly i look
and say that's the exact same plant
that's the big rosebud plant as in mount
kenya and oh my god that's the tall
sprouty one and say it's the exact same
plant how can that plant be over there
and we go rummage around and his botany
taxonomy stuff and they're completely
unrelated plants they are taxonomically
of no connection whatsoever
but what they've done is converged onto
the same shape
and in some mysterious way if you're
going to be a plant growing on the
equator at about 15 000 feet there's
only about four or five different ways
of appearing there's massive convergence
and there's only four or five ways that
you can survive an environment like that
you get organisms in
very dry environments and there's like
only four or five ways that you can go
about being an organism that's super
efficient at retaining water
and
those are the only ones you see amongst
them desert animals and completely
unrelated ones have converged on to some
of the same solutions there's only a
very finite number of ways to do legs
and locomotion
two is good for
weirdo things that fly of six creepy
things i've ate you don't find seven you
don't find three you find some of the
solutions here are immensely different
starting states and have converged what
we see is in these living systems over
and over stuff that look like cellular
automata where slight differences
magnify enormously butterfly effects
where you are modeling living systems in
a very real way most of them go extinct
divergence convergence and where each
one of these you get the smaller number
reflecting the fact that there's only a
limited number of ways of doing
rain forest tempered zone rain forest
and the pacific northwest there's only a
limited number of ways of doing tundra
in miami beach there's only a limited
number of ways and all of these this
convergence and always reflecting that
these are cellular automata okay so
hopefully you are now feeling
desperately regretful that you didn't
spend the last few days doing this
because these are so heartwarming if you
want to read a book that nobody in their
right mind should read it's a book by
this guy named steve wolfram who's one
of the gods of
computers and math and was one of the
sort of people who first developed
cellular automata and by all reports
probably one of the
largest egos on the planet and he
published the book self-published it a
few years ago which he can because he is
grotesquely wealthy from some of his
computer programs and just showing what
a low-key sort of humble guide he is he
called the book a new kind of science
just showing that he wasn't uh
just going from some little piddly new
way of viewing the world but here was
his new type of science and the book is
about 1200 pages and i suspect not even
his mother has read the thing it is so
impenetrable and it sold a gazillion
copies and almost all of them were
sitting in people's garages now wading
down drain pipes because no one can
actually read this thing but an awful
lot of what the book is about are
patterns in nature coded for by very
simple local rules and the simple fact
of that you've got a lot of very smart
people doing the cellular automata stuff
and they can't come up with rules where
you could look at something beforehand a
priory and no this one's going to
survive this one's going to go extinct
those two are going to turn the same
these two that differ by a slight
smidgen they're going to turn out to be
enormously different there's no rules
for it and the book has all sorts of
cool pictures of the cellular automata
looking things out in nature and
go
buy it for
somebody's birthday and see if they're
not grateful for the rest of their lives
but his whole argument there is these
show ways in which you can code for a
lot of the complexity in the natural
world with small numbers of simple rules
this whole business of emergence
this sets us up now for beginning to
look at some of the ways in which we hit
a wall the other day ways in which the
reductive model of understanding the
universe stops working after a while one
version being the problem of not having
enough numbers of things not having
enough neurons to do grandmother neurons
beyond jennifer aniston that whole
business that you simply don't have
enough neurons to do that beyond just
the rare ones now and then and what do
you get instead what has the solution
turned out to be this field that people
focus on now called neural networks
and
the point of neural networks is that
information again is not coded in a
single molecule single synapse single
neuron one neuron this neuron knows one
thing and one thing only which is when
there's a dot there instead information
is coded in networks and patterns of
neuronal activation
and just to give an example and this is
one that's in the zebra book and anyone
who was in biocore i do this one and i
do it because i at one point learned the
name of three impressionist painters
except they're not coming to mind right
now okay so you've got two layers here's
what a neural network would look like a
two two-layer one these neurons on the
bottom are boring simple hubal and
visual type neurons from the other day
where each neuron knows one thing and
one thing only this one knows how to
recognize gauguin paintings this one
recognizes van gogh and this one
monet
okay each one of them is obviously
there's no human diesel neuron on earth
that's like that but just for our
purposes they now project up to this
next layer note this neuron projects to
one two and three
this the two three and four this the
three four and five so what does this
neuron know about
this one knows how to recognize goga
it's only getting information from this
neuron it's another one of those human
vessel type i know one fact and one fact
only this one
here is another one of those what does
this neuron know about in the middle
that's the neuron that knows how to
recognize impressionist paintings that's
the one that says i can't tell you who
the artist is but it's one of those
impressionists it's not one of those
dutch masters it's an impressionist
painting and this one does it because it
is getting information that is not
available to these guys it is getting
information at the intersection of all
these specific examples
these ones
number two and four those are ones that
recognize impressionist paintings also
but they're not as accurate added as
number three because they've got less
examples to work off of
this is how a network would work and
what that suddenly begins to explain is
something about the human brain versus a
computer computers are amazing at doing
sequential analytical stuff like you get
calculator things inside cheerio boxes
that can do more things than the human
brain can do computationally but what we
can do is parallel processing what we
can do is patterns resemblances
similarities metaphorical similarities
physical similarities and that's why you
need networks like these you don't need
neurons that know one fact and one fact
only you need neurons where each one of
them is at the intersection of a whole
bunch of other inputs okay example so
now suppose you've got a network there's
one neuron which fires and there's a
whole bunch of neurons sort of sending
projections into it and this is a neuron
for remembering the name of that guy
what was the name of that guy that guy
he was that impressionist painter so
suddenly your impressionist painter
network is activating and firing at this
neuron so it's sitting there
so this is
now you've got your whole impressionist
network this activated what was the name
of that guy he was an impressionist
painter he painted women
dancers a lot of the time so people who
painted dancers but it wasn't degas okay
so you're it's not degas circuit going
in there and what was that guy's name
god i had that seventh grade art teacher
who loved this guy's work if i could
remember her name i would remember his
name oh remember the time i was at the
museum and there was that really cute
person who seemed to like it and i had
to pretend i liked this guy also and it
didn't work out nonetheless and going
through and oh what's the name there's
that stupid pun about the guy he's
really short and something about the
tracks being too loose to loose latrek
and suddenly it pops out there and
you've got enough of these inputs coming
in there and this is tip of the tongue
wiring this is how you may not be able
to just remember the guy's name wait he
was the short guy with a beard who hung
out in bars and parisian bars and
there was that time in seventh grade and
enough of these inputs and suddenly out
pops the information
what this begins to tell you is
this is ways of getting similarities
these are ways of getting things that
vaguely remind you this is a world where
humans can now do stuff like have a
piece of music that reminds them of a
certain artist because they both have
similar coloration and that's something
that makes sense to us that's something
that can work because what you then
begin to see is
every one of these neurons this one for
example impressionist neurons this one
may also be at the intersection of
another network that's going this way a
network of
french guys from the last century and it
may be part of another network of people
whose names are hard to pronounce so
you're anxious about saying them in a
lecture or the intersection and each one
of these is going to be an intersection
of a whole bunch of these all of these
networks what does that do
that's what you can do that a computer
can't you see
similarities similes metaphors and
somewhere in there you get something
really important which is
the ones the networks that have wider
expanses that connect a broader number
of neurons in a very simple artificial
idiotic way that's kind of what
creativity would have to be
networks that are spreading far wider
than
in some other individual it is literally
making connections that neurons in
another individual does not and suddenly
you have a world where
you know everyone knows this one as a
face
and it was only a limited number of
people who ever decided that this one's
a face and in some level picasso had
like a different network a broader one
as to what could constitute a face
a broader network in some way is going
to have to be wiring that is more
divergent and in at the intersection of
a bunch of networks that are acting in a
convergent way so what's some of the
evidence that it actually does work this
way you go and you stick electrodes into
neurons in the cortex and what you see
if the world was entirely made up of
like human visa one one piece of
knowledge only what you would see is you
would find neurons then each one
responds to one single thing all these
grandmother neurons and instead what you
see by the time you get to the
interesting part of the cortex past the
first three layers of the visual cortex
and the first three layers of the
auditory once you get into the 90
percent that's called the associational
cortex and it's called that because
nobody really knows what it does
then what you see are neurons that are
multimodal in their responses all sorts
of things stimulate them and here we
have a neuron that's being stimulated by
a type of painting by the knowledge of
french guys by something phonetic by
ulcer and they're multi-responsive so
that's what you wind up seeing the
majority of cortical neurons when you
record from there with an electrode
they're not grandmother neurons they're
at the intersection of a bunch of nets
more evidence for this this was one of
the grand poobahs in neuroscience around
the 1940s or so a guy named carl ashley
and obviously a very different time in
terms of thinking about specification of
brain function and what he did was a
very systematic attempt to be able to
show where in the brain individual facts
were stored and the term for it at the
time this jargony term was n grams he
was
searching for the engram for different
facts and what he would show was he
would destroy
parts of the cortex in an experimental
animal and he couldn't make the
information disappear he would have to
destroy broader areas and some of the
knowledge some of the memory was still
in there and he concluded in this famous
paper in the search for the engram that
according to all the signs he knew there
could be no such thing as memory and the
reason why was he was working with a
model of being able to there's a single
neuron where if i could ablate it i
should be able to now show in that rat
that it's just lost the name of its
kindergarten teacher and instead you see
networks going on
you see the same thing clinically in
something like people with alzheimer's
disease
early on in alzheimer's you will lose
you know in these networks you'll lose a
neuron here or you'll lose a neuron
there when you're just beginning to lose
neurons and what you see is clinically
in people with alzheimer's early on it's
not that they forget things it's not
that memory is gone it's just harder to
get to and you do this with all sorts of
testing neuropsychological testing where
you try to give the person cues to pull
it out
example you're giving somebody
potentially with alzheimer's a classic
orientation test you ask them okay do
you know the name of the president
okay they managed to get that do you
know the name of the last president no
idea so now you give them a little bit
of killing okay let me help you a little
bit it's a one syllable word
still not there even though you've now
activated the one syllable word network
obviously artificial still can say okay
let's make it a little bit easier it's
things you could find in a park in a
city park so you're activating that but
no still not coming out and then you
give even more explicit priming there
you give them a forced choice paradigm
is what it's called okay so is it
president tree or president trump or
president bench or president bush
bush bush the kid with the father also
it's still in there it was still in
there it just takes more work to pull it
out what you're seeing there is not the
death of individual memories you're
seeing a weakening of a network a
network that is now taking stronger
priming to pull it out of there
and just to show how subtle network
stuff can be here's something that would
work with a lot of individuals with
early stage dementias what you do is
another type of priming so you're
eventually going to ask them the name of
the previous president and they first
come in and you say oh great to see you
come on in what a beautiful day i walked
here by way of the park the bushes were
so beautiful this morning in the park
there some of them had flowers some of
them didn't but bushes are so nice to
look at when you're walking through a
park because bushes are one of my
favorite forms of bombing and then five
minutes later they are more likely to
name remember the name bush out of a
whole different realm of more subtle
networks you're tapping into so all of
this is the beginning of a way of
solving the problem we had the other day
of not enough neurons for them to be
grandmother neurons
more solutions we then went to our next
realm of trouble which was the problem
of there's not enough genes there's not
enough genes in that specific realm of
explaining bifurcations and
you can't there can't be a gene that
specifies okay this is where you
bifurcate if you're this particular
blood vessel and a different gene for
this particular bronchiole and a
different gene for this branch of a
dendrite in a single it can't work that
way there's not enough genes what this
introduces is the idea of there being
fractal genes
genes whose instructions
are ones that are scale free
what do i mean by this okay here's what
a fractal gene might do so we've got a
tube and remember this is a tube that's
going to be part of a blood vessel or a
dendrite or a
lung or we've got a tube and the fractal
rule here is
grow this tube in distance grow it until
it is five times longer than it is wide
the width the opening and that's the
simple rule and the rule is when it's
grown five times longer i forgate
so what's going to happen at that point
it's just gone five times longer and it
bifurcates at that point and what you've
got is now because this is split in two
the cross section is going to be shorter
but you apply the same rule now with the
shorter cross section you have the same
rule grow five times the length of that
cross section until you split and what
you wind up getting is this is one
simple fractal rule that will generate
the tree patterns that the branchings
get shorter and shorter the distances
between the branch points get shorter
shorted because the cross sections are
getting one simple rule and you could
generate a circulatory system a
pulmonary system and a dendritic tree by
giving a fractal instruction in this
case one that is scale free that is
independent of what the unit is here and
this could work within the single neuron
or within an entire circulatory system
so all of that's great that's totally
hypothetical ooh fractal genes we know
by now that's got to translate into a
protein in some way or other how might
this actually look in a real system
so suppose
okay so a gene coding for a protein this
is one copy of the protein this is
another it's another they bind to each
other in a way so that they form a tube
and they bind to each other in a way
that's just pure mechanical reality of
these are not in bits of information
these are actual proteins so it's going
up in the tube there and suppose that
the forces are as the tube goes up it
gets more and more unstable and when the
tube is high enough it gets unstable
enough that
these bonds between the proteins begin
to weaken
and it begins to split the splitting
there is a function of the length of
these so it's split and now the next one
has half the number of cell of proteins
in this one and thus it's that much
weaker so you only have to go a shorter
distance now before it begins to
this doesn't exist there's no way it's
like this but what you could begin to
see is here's how you could turn a scale
free set of instructions potentially
into what it would actually look like
with mortar and bricks in terms of
proteins how it might actually work
now the notion of fractal genetics of
fractal genes and fractal instructions
begins to solve another problem and this
is that space problem of how much stuff
can you jam into a space
here's the challenge here
in terms of how dense things are
in the body amazing factoid there is no
cell in your body that is more than five
cells away from a blood vessel
okay you could see why you would want to
do that but that is not an easy thing to
pull off how do you do that with the
circulatory system an amazing other
factoid to factor in with that is the
circulatory system comprises less than
five percent of your body mass
how can this be
you've got this uh yet the system that's
everywhere
but it's taking up almost no space it's
within five cells of every cell out
there yet it's less than five percent of
the body and
okay forget it i'm not going to put that
up but what this begins to
okay you convinced me so let's do this
so what you begin to do is transition to
a world of fractal geometry
you've got all your euclidean world of
nice smiley
strange things there you've got this
whole world
of shapes that are constrained by
classic cartesian geometry and all of
that and what fractal geometry generates
are objects that simply cannot exist
here up on top eventually you will see
the first example of this and this is
out of the chaos book and this is this
cantor set what you do is you start with
a line
you start with a line and you cut out
the middle third
now for those remaining two ones you cut
out the middle third for those remaining
four you cut out the middle third and
there it is and you just keep doing this
over and over and over again and what do
you do when you take it out to infinity
what have you generated a set of an
infinitely large number of objects lines
that take up an infinitely small amount
of space
it's not possible for that to work yet
as you go more and more that direction
you get this impossible
phenomenon of something approaching
having an infinite number of places that
something appears while taking up almost
an infinitely small amount of space
and what this winds up being is
it's not quite a line anymore at the
bottom but it's kind of more than a dot
it's somewhere between one and two
dimensions it's a fractal its
dimensional state is somewhere one point
something or other it is somewhere
between dots and a line and it does this
impossible thing which is it's
everywhere without taking up any space
or you could then push it to the same
thing the next dimension and this is
this coke snowflake and it's the same
sort of rule you start with
the triangle there and the rule is you
take the middle third
and you put a little triangle out of it
and then to take the middle third of
that and put a little triangle out and a
middle third and you just keep doing it
forever and ever and ever and you wind
up with something that is impossible
which is an object that has an infinite
amount of perimeter
an infinite amount of surface area
within a finite space
that's impossible
but it begins to approach this and what
do you see here this is a way of just
iterating over and over and over to jam
a huge amount of surface area into a
tiny space and thus it's somewhere but
different
sort of like a line but it's sort of
like a plane by then and it's got a
fractal form somewhere between two and
three it's got a fractal quality of two
points something or other it's an
impossible object that is solving this
problem of being in another version
having surface area everywhere without
taking up any space and being within a
finite area
next finally this menger sponge which is
the same exact concept again you start
with the box up there the ring and you
take out the middle third of each of
those segments and then you take out the
middle third of each of those segments
and if you're doing this with what
starts off as a three-dimensional cube
eventually you get something that cannot
exist which is an object that has an
infinitely large amount of surface area
while having no volume that's what it
produces at the extreme and we got
something here that's somewhere between
two different dimensions a fractal again
and what you see is this is how the body
solves the packing problem because all
you need to do is make the circulatory
system
not circulatory system some version of
this some version of splitting the ends
of the capillaries over and over and
over or making the lungs with their
surface area for exchanging oxygen
looking something like this and this is
how you generate a system that is
everywhere and taking up virtually no
space obviously it's not taken out to
infinity but this is how you can have a
circulatory system that's five cells
away from every cell in the body yet
takes up less than five percent of the
body
this is a fractal solution all you do
here to generate these is taking some of
these qualities over and over and over
and over and you can begin to produce
absolutely bizarre impossible things in
terms of surface area and perimeter and
volume and all of that this is how you
can use a fractal system to solve the
packing problem
of course as soon as you're coming up
with the notion of something like
fractal genes you of course have to
consider
the possibility of there being fractal
mutations
what would a fractal mutation look like
and again most people most geneticists
and molecular people do not think about
this in these terms but there are people
who do who actually talk about things
like fractal gene mutations what would
it look like suppose you've got a
mutation
and it produces a protein that's
slightly different and as a result it's
got bonds here that are slightly weaker
between different proteins so on a
mechanical level what have we just
defined this is a tube that's going to
grow these proteins where it's a shorter
distance before it begins to split
because these bonds between them are not
as strong there's a mutation now where
instead of growing five times the cross
section maybe you're growing 4.9 times
the cross section and thanks to that
mutation the entire branching system is
going to be compacted a bit it's not
going to reach the target cells and
these would be catastrophic mutations
where the pulmonary system doesn't
develop the circulatory system doesn't
develop and what you would see in those
cases is the mutation is something that
has consequences that are scale free
another hint when you see some fractal
gene mutations are a small number of
diseases that they're about spatial
relationships in the body
for example there's a disease called
coleman syndrome where you get stuff
that's wrong with midline structures in
the body something is wrong with the
septum between the noses the nostrils
something is wrong in the hypothalamus
something is wrong in the septum of the
heart this is not three different
mutations this is some sort of fractal
mutation messing up how that embryo did
symmetry how the embryo does midline
structures so you begin to see ways here
in which you can solve this and within
biological metaphor where you could
begin to get
solutions for these problems and also
mutations that can put you up the creek
okay so that is another realm for
beginning to solve this another domain
and here we begin to move into the realm
of emergence emergent complexity
which we will first look at a couple of
crude passes at it first emergence
driven by biophysical properties and do
not freak out if you don't know what i
mean because i have no idea what i mean
by that so i will explain in a more
accessible way and this was something
that was explained endlessly by a guy
who used to be in the bio department a
developmental botanist named paul green
who died about 10 years ago way too
young from cancer he was a really good
guy
he would give this famous lecture
where he would start off and he would
describe some sort of disc
and the point is the disc the material
inside was of a softer material than the
material on the perimeter and he'd be
putting up math at this point that i
didn't understand but it was sort of a
disc like that and then he would show
that what happens if you heat the system
what happens if you put heat on a disc
like this and what he would wind up
showing going through agonizing amounts
of math is that when you heat a system
the only solution for this system that's
trying to respond to the heat but in
different ways on the perimeter versus
the inside is to come up with a double
saddle a double saddle shape and the
math proved this and i had no idea what
he was talking about you come up with a
double saddle shape
and then what he says is so that's how
you get a potato chip
you take a slice of potato where there's
more resistance on the perimeter and
less on the inside and you heat it and
the only solution to that problem is to
come up with a double sour potato chip
shape and if you change the outside the
force of it if you take one of those
like great organic give you the runs
tight potato chips where it's going to
have the skin left on the outside it's
going to be a somewhat different shaped
double saddle because there's only one
solution
mathematically to that and then you sit
there and you deal with a very simple
important fact which is that slice of
potato knows no biophysics that slice of
potato didn't fit there's no gene that
instructs potatoes to respond to heat in
this way this was the inevitable outcome
of the biophysical properties of a slice
of potato
and what he then shows is in plant
systems after plant systems they develop
where two shoots come out this way and a
little higher up two shoots this way and
two this way and two this way they're
all double saddles and this winds up
being a mathematical solution to a
packing problem there when plants are
growing their stems there's no genes
specifying it you don't need genetic
instructions it is an emergent property
of the physical constraints of the
system
another example here that sort of proto
emergence somewhat simpler versions this
phenomenon of wisdom of the crowd
and this is one was first identified by
francis galton who was some relative of
darwin and started eugenics and was bad
news in that regard with famous
statistician and being an englishman
somewhere in the 19th century he spent
huge amounts of time going to state
fairs and county fairs or whatever and
he was at this fair one day where they
had some
oxen up there and they were having a
contest that if you could guess the
exact weight of the oxen you would get
to milk it or something i don't know
what the prize would be and there were
hundreds of farmers around filling out
little pieces of paper where they were
guessing and what he discovered at the
end was that nobody got the answer right
good so the owners of this get off easy
without having to give up any of their
oxen milk but he then did something
interesting he collected all the little
slips of paper and he averaged all of
them and it came out to the correct
weight within an ounce
in other words no individual in that
group had enough knowledge to be able to
truly accurately tell what this thing
was but put them together in a crowd and
out comes the right answer
another version of this and one of this
one is deeply important in terms of
western intellectual tradition back to
is that program who wants to marry a
millionaire does that still exist
in reruns and
okay so is this one there's this they
they give you questions and if you
answer them they give you money and it's
great and at various points if you're
stumped you've got three things you
could do one is they could eliminate
you've got four choices they can
eliminate two of them to make it a
little bit easier for you another is you
have this expert who you can call up and
the third option is to ask the audience
which they think is the right answer and
all the audience there has these little
buttons so they can choose a b c or d of
the multiple choice there and what the
logic is supposed to be is cut it down
to two your chances are better if you
have to guess talk to your wise expert
who's sitting by on the phone there and
they're going to be wise and be able to
hopefully answer this question or ask a
whole bunch of people and they would all
vote and any smart contestant would
choose whatever the audience chose
because when the audience was asked 91
of the time they got the right answer
they got the majority of people voting
for the right answer and this is more
wisdom of the crowd and this was a much
better hit rate than whoever the expert
was on the other side of the phone one
person could be extremely expert but
they're not going to be as expert as a
whole bunch of somewhat decent experts
thrown together
this is the notion behind a field called
prediction markets where what you do is
you are trying to
predict some event for example the
pentagon is very interested in using
prediction markets to try to predict
where the next terrorist attack might be
and what you do is you get a whole bunch
of experts and you ask each of them to
think about whatever the parameters are
and take a guess as to how long it will
be before the next one occurs and what
you do is you average them up and assume
there's a wisdom of the crowd thing
going on and that will give you lots of
information great case of this a few
years ago there was some
submarine or something that sunk
somewhere out in the pacific and the
ocean and nobody knew where it was but
they kind of knew where the last
sighting the last recording was from but
everything i had a whole bunch of naval
experts and they had all of them sort of
bone up on the knowledge of what was the
water temperature and wind speeds and
where they were in the last sighting and
what was on tv that day or whatever they
got all the information and each one
made a guess as to where it would be on
the map and you put them all together
and they had guesses covering hundreds
of square miles of ocean floor and they
put it all together and they came up
within 300 yards of the right location
so what we have over and over here is
this business of put a lot of somewhat
decent experts together on a problem and
they will be more accurate than almost
any one single amazing expert at it
under a few conditions the collection of
these partial experts can't be biased or
if they are they all have to be biased
in a random scattering of directions and
they need to really do be somewhat
expert if you get a whole bunch of
people off the subway in new york and
ask them to guess the weight of the oxen
they are not going to wisdom of the
crowd their way into being able to milk
the thing afterwards you got to have
people who have some experience with it
and you wind up seeing wisdom of the
crowd stuff going on in all sorts of
living systems for example here is
an ant colony and here's a dead ant and
they're trying to get the dead ant back
to the ant colony and when you look at
these things they know how to get it or
they get some dead beetle or something
to eat and a whole bunch of ants push it
over back to their colony oh does each
one of them know exactly where they
should be pushing no what you have
instead is each ant has somewhat of the
right idea as to where they should be
going and there's more ants that have a
reasonably accurate notion a smaller
number that are somewhat off a really
small number that are way out of whack
because in general ants are kind of
experts at finding ant colonies they're
pretty informed and what you do is you
put them all together and you do this
vector geometry stuff and it moves
perfectly in that direction and no
single ant knows exactly where the
colony is you've got a wisdom of the
crowd thing here going on
okay
five minute break
if you have a chance can you email me
that website so we could post it and the
course works it's great
okay picking up
so now we are ready to take some of
those building blocks wisdom of the
crowd stuff biophysical potato chips and
begin to see it more formally in this
field of emergent complexity
what is that about what we've already
alluded to it's systems where you have a
very small number of
rules
for how very large numbers of simple
participants interact
what's that about here's what emergence
is about you take an ant and you put it
on a table top and you watch what it's
doing and it makes no sense whatsoever
you take 10 ants and do it and none of
them make any sense you put 100 and
they're all scattering around and
somewhere around i don't know a thousand
ants or so they suddenly start making
sense and you put in 10 000 or 100 000
or whatever it is and suddenly instead
of some little thing wandering around
aimlessly you suddenly have a colony
that can
grow
fungi and regulate the temperature of
the colony and all these things and
suddenly out of these ants emerges an
incredibly complex adapted system an
adaptive one and the critical point
there is no single ant knows what the
temperature should be in the colony or
if this is time to go out foraging in
this direction instead of that direction
it all emerges out of the nature of ant
interactions you've got very simple
constituent parts an ant much like one
box that's filled in the cellular
automata
you've got very simple rules for how
they interact with each other amps have
i don't know maybe three and a half
rules don't tell deborah gordon in the
department who's an aunt obsessive but
that i may be inadvertently dissing the
ants but they have a small number of
rules as to how they interact if you
bump into an ant and you do this with
the pheromones you go this way and if
you go that way and i'm just making it
up they have a small number of rules and
as long as you got a lot of ants doing
this out of this can emerge hugely
complex adaptive patterns and this is
what an emergent system is about
simple players huge numbers of them
simple nearest neighbor rules and you
throw them all together and out comes
patterning and there is no single ant
that knows what the blueprint is and
there's no blueprint there is no plan
anywhere that says what the mature form
of the colony should look like there are
no instructions it is bottom up
organization rather than top down
and you see all sorts of versions then
of
emergent
complexity built around again lots of
elements of things with a small number
of very simple rules about how neighbors
interact with each other
who even need that board okay
here we have two four six eight
different cities
or eight different
places where an ant could find good food
or eight different something or others
eight different locales and you were
trying to do something efficient you
need to go to each one of them to sell
your product or to see if there's good
food there or not you need to go to all
eight of them and you want to do it as
efficiently as possible you want to find
the way to have the shortest possible
path to go to all of these places and
this is the classic traveling salesman
problem
and nobody at this point can solve it
there is no formal mathematical solution
and by the time you get to like eight
locales there's like i don't know
hundreds of billions of different ways
you can do it so how can you can't come
up with the perfect solution but you
could come up with maybe kind of a good
decent one there's two ways you could do
it first is to have an unbelievably good
computer that just by sheer force cranks
out a bazillion different outcomes and
in each case measures how much you're
doing it and
you can get something close to an
optimal answer the other way of doing it
is to have yourself some virtual ants in
something that is now called swarm
intelligence here's what you do
you need to have two generations of ants
the first generation you stick them all
down different numbers of them and they
all start off in these different cities
these different locales and their rule
is each one of them
goes to another city each one of them
goes to another destination but here's
the following rule the ants are leaving
a pheromone trail thermo trail they
stick their rear end down what is it
head thorax abdomen they stick their
abdomen down and they've got a gland at
the bottom there which releases a
pheromone and makes a track a cent track
of the pheromone there and a very simple
rule they have a finite amount of
pheromone in there to expend on the
entire path they're making
in other words the shorter the path
the thicker the pheromone trail is going
to be
now what you do is deal with the fact
that the pheromones dissipate after a
while they evaporate and thus the
thicker the path
the longer it's going to be there
you now take a second generation of
virtual ants and you throw them in there
and what their rule is they wander
around randomly and anytime they hit a
pheromone trail they join the trail
one way or the other and they lay down a
pheromone trail of their own with their
abdomen they reinforce the markings on
this trail
and let 10 000 virtual ants do that for
a couple of hundred thousand rounds of
generations and they solve the traveling
salesman problem for you because it
winds up being the short paths the more
efficient ways of connecting locales
will leave larger thicker trails
which are more likely to last longer and
thus increase the odds that an ant
wandering around randomly we'll bump
into it and reinforce it and what you
see is initially there will be every
possible path and as you run this over
and over it will begin to fade out and
out will emerge the more efficient ones
you can optimize the outcome doing it
this way just asking virtual ants to do
it for you and this is exactly how ants
do it out in the real world when they're
foraging in different places there is a
first wave of them that comes out and
they go to locales leaving scent trails
and then there's the wanderers that come
in and when they hit a trail they join
it there are now telecommunications
companies that use swarm intelligence to
figure out what's the shortest length of
cable they need to use to connect up you
know eight different states worth of
telecommunication towers whatever
they're called and they can sit there
and do math till the end of the universe
trying to figure out the cheapest way to
wire them up or they can use
swarm intelligence and that's what a lot
of them do at this point it works
what are the features of it this is not
wisdom of the crowd this is not that
every ant knows a solution to the
traveling salesman problem except none
of them have the perfect solution but
put them all together and they all get
to vote in outcomes the ants don't know
from traveling salesman problems the ant
does nothing about trying to optimize
this all the ant nose is one of two
different rules if i'm walking from one
of these to one of these the longer i
walk the thinner the pharah montreal or
rule number two if i stumble into one of
these i join it and put down my markings
there
two simple rules two very one very
simple type of sort of
unit of information and they're an ant
and all you need to do is make sure
there's enough of them and they solve
the problem for you
this winds up explaining another thing
how do bees pick a new nesting site
a bee's nest bees hornishness a bee's
nest every now and then the bees need to
leave and pick a new place to live and
how do they figure out the good place
and there's all sorts of criteria of
nutrients and so all sorts of bees go
out there and what they do is they look
for food sources and they look for place
that will have a lot of food maybe
that's a place to go and move the colony
so we know already the bee will go out
and find its food there it's food source
and we'll come back in and here's the
colony cut and cross section and what
you wind up having is this ring of bees
here's the entry and you have the bee
dancing going on that we've heard about
in the middle and the dance floor there
and we've already heard it's this
pattern of this figure eight while
shaking the rear end and we know what
the information is which is the
angle tells the direction to go out
there
and the extent to which it's wiggling
its rear end is how long you're supposed
to fly for but the final variable is the
better the resource the longer
you do the dance
so you've got bees coming in from all
over the place that have found good
resources that have found so-so ones all
of that and so there's bees doing all
this dancing stuff here of different
durations and the ones who have found
the good solution
to where do we want to live are dancing
longer
the ones who have found the most
efficient path are leaving a message
longer
so now you bring in your second
generation and the rule is among bees if
they happen to bump into a b that's
doing a dance
the b responds and goes where it tells
you to go
so a b may randomly sort of bump into
one of these guys and then off it goes
actually i'm sure it's more complicated
than this but it's along the lines of
there's now random interactions if one
of the peripheral bees encounters bumps
into
one of these bees that has information
it joins in in that bees group
and then goes and finds the food
resource and comes back with the
information
so thus by definition if you have found
a great food source
you're going to be dancing longer
which increases the odds of other bees
randomly bumping into you which causes
them to go and find the same great food
source and come back and dance longer
and the ones with lousy ones are coming
and dancing very briefly unless there's
hardly any odds of somebody bumping into
them and what you begin to do is you
suddenly optimize where the hive is
supposed to go again it's not wisdom of
the crowd it is an emergent feature of
one generation with information based on
some very simple rules and one
information that generates some random
element and out comes an ideal solution
more versions of this another domain
where some very simple rules out of it
emerges something very complex and
adaptive okay so the themes here are two
generations the more adaptive the signal
the stronger it is the longer it lasts
and then randomization element another
theme that comes through in a lot of the
emergence which is to have your elements
in there your aunts your bees your
traveling salesman whatever the
constituents are and now what the rules
are are simple rules of attraction and
repulsion
which is to say some of the elements are
attracted to each other and some of the
elements are repulsed by each other some
are pulled together some are pushed
apart like for example magnets
magnets are polarized in the sense that
magnets only have two ways of
interacting with each other
simple nearest neighbor rules they're
either attracting or repelling depending
on the orientation
so here's what you do now you take a
system and something very simple you've
got some
you know simulated
sim city sort of thing where you're
letting
out the system run to design a city you
want to do your urban planning in your
city that you're going to construct
there and what you do is you can sit
there and you can study
millions of laws about zoning and
economics and all of that to decide
something very simple where are you
going to put the commercial districts
and where are the residential districts
going to be
or you can have just a small number of
simple rules which is for example if a
market appears in some place
what it attracts is a starbucks
and what it also attracts is a clothing
store or some such thing so a bunch of
rules but then you have repulsion rules
which is if you have a starbucks it will
repulse any other starbucks so the
nearest other starbucks can be this far
away if you have a competitor's market
it can't get any closer than this that
sort of thing these simple attraction
repulsion rules and what you wind up
getting when you run these simulations
are
commercial districts in a city where you
get clusters of commercial sort of
places that are balanced by attraction
and repulsion where you have thorough
fares connecting them and the more
elements there are
in the two neighborhood commercial
centers the bigger the connection is
going to be the bigger the street is the
more lanes the more powerful the signal
coming through there and you throw it in
and out pops an urban plan that looks
exactly like the sort of ones that the
best urban planners come up with and all
you need to do instead is run these
simulations with some very simple
attraction and repulsion rules
so you do that and it winds up producing
stuff that looks like cities
you do that with a bunch of neurons you
take a petri dish and you throw in a
whole bunch of individual neurons and
they have very simple rules they secrete
factors which attract some types of
neurons and they secrete factors which
repel other types of neurons and all of
them are having some very simple rules
when i encounter this i grow projections
towards where it's coming from if i
encounter that i grow projections in the
opposite direction simple attraction and
repulsion and what you do is at this
point you throw in a whole bunch of
neurons each one where you throw them
into a petri addition at the beginning
they're all scattered evenly all over
the place and you come back and you come
back two days later and it looks just
like this you have clusters of neurons
sending projections and you have all
these empty residential areas in between
and if you just mark this in a schematic
way looking from above you're not going
to be able to tell is this the
commercial districts in the big city or
are these neurons growing in a dish and
you get areas of nuclei of cell bodies
and areas of projections and it winds up
looking exactly like that and amazingly
there was a paper in science earlier
this year and it was looking at one of
these versions again in this case
attraction and repulsion rules with ants
colonies setting up foraging paths and
they explicitly compared one colony to
the efficiency of the distribution of
the train stations in the tokyo subway
system and what they showed was very
similar solutions but the ants had
gotten a more optimal one and the subway
system had people sitting their salary
to figure out the best way to do it all
the ants had were very simple rules of
if it's someone from the other colony i
stay this way if it's someone for mine
simple attraction repulsion and out
comes something that looks like this as
well
so here you see that happening with a
remarkably small number of rules
now you put it into a really interesting
context which is something we bumped
into back when first introducing
proteins and dna sequence equals shape
equals function all of that molecules
have charges on them some of them were
positively charged some of them are
negatively
whoa attraction and repulsion
positively charged molecules are
attracted to negatively charged ones
same charge ones repulsed here we have a
system with very simple attraction and
repulsion rules
and that's the logic behind when one
thinks about it one of the all-time
important experiments something that was
done in the 1950s by apparent scientists
university chicago yuri and miller
here's what they did they took like big
vats of
organic soup stuff that just had all
sorts of simple molecules in there
little fragments of carbon to carbon a
little fragments there's all sorts of
inorganic molecules and there are little
ones in there floating around in this
organic soup and what they did was they
would pass electricity through it and
they did this vast numbers of times and
eventually what they saw was they would
come back and check and these random
distribution of these things of these
little fragments had begun to form amino
acids
whoa
metaphor
the organic soup just the evenly
distributed uh sort of world of
potentially organic molecules in a world
in which electricity passes through
lightning what had these guys just come
up with some in your like kitchen sink
experiment of the origins of life
and what people have done subsequently
is show you don't need the catalyst
there's a whole world of researchers who
study origin of life and the basic
notion is you put in enough simple
molecules in there that have attraction
and repulsion rules and you get
perturbations and spatial distributions
of certain ways and they will begin to
form rational structures after a while
here's another version of this and i
used to do this in class except i could
never pull this one off and it just
became chaotic
it's kid's toy you got these
magnets you either have you have magnets
like that and then you have little metal
balls that can go onto the magnet here
and you've got vast numbers of them and
you can
piece them together whoa this is
starting to look kind of familiar here
so we have these constituents with very
simple rules which is the magnets repel
each other they bind these things and
here's what you would do here's what i
would attempt to do first off i would
get somebody to show me how to get the
video thing on here to project it but
you would put up a whole bunch of these
magnets in rows not too close to each
other nice and symmetrical and what you
do then is you take a handful of the
metal balls and fling them in there and
if you do that four or five hundred
times eventually they will bounce around
and amid all the pieces flying you are
going to get
a pyramidal structure like this
one of those just like that
three-dimensional you know that you're
going to get one of those that will
simply pop out of this because that's
the nature of potato chips solving their
math problem with double saddles that's
the nature of throwing a whole bunch of
elements with simple attraction and
repulsion rules and give them enough
chances throw in enough perturbations
there and structures will begin to
emerge and it's the same exact principle
there these same ones over and over
so we've got some very simple versions
where you get a merchant complexity one
is this version of a first generation
has directed searches and the intensity
the signal that it leaves afterward is a
function of how good of a search they've
done random wanderers then you have the
attraction repulsion world of putting
these together lots of elements and you
begin to get structures out of it
next version of this or next domain of
where you begin to see the fact that
these rules are underlying an awful lot
of things
suppose here you were studying
earthquakes
and apparently there's just like little
earthquakes going on you know 20 times
an hour or so all down in the richter
scale of you know one quarter who knows
what but you get enough of these you get
a huge database and you can begin to
graph the frequency of
richter one earthquakes and how often do
you get the richter two and richtofen
all of that and you graph it
and
it's going to look something like this a
distribution like that which is
obviously there's a huge number of
number one categories and it drops off
until the extremely rare at this end
there's a distribution which is
mathematically can be described
something called a power law
distribution with a certain angle to it
and okay so here's the relationship
between how often you get little teensy
earthquakes and the big ones
now instead what you do is something
much more different from that which is
you look at 50 000 people
and you look at their phone calls over
the course of the year and you keep
track of how far the phone call was how
distant the person is that they called
and now you map the distance the very
shortest calls the very longest and the
frequency and
it's the exact same curve it's the same
power law distribution
next version of it this was a study that
was done which was i don't quite know
how these guys did it they i always get
lost in the math on these but in this
one what they did was they took a whole
bunch of marked dollar bills and they
started in the middle of i don't know
where i think it was the columbia
something and they were somehow able to
keep track of how far the bills had
traveled a week later and asking okay
how many of bills had traveled no more
than a mile how many five miles and it
was the exact same curve and people now
have been showing the same power law
distribution here's some of the things
that have been shown the number of links
that websites have to other websites the
number that have only one length
power law distribution
proteins the number of proteins showing
certain degrees of complexity and the
numbers dropping off with the same power
law here's one which is the number of
emails somebody sends over the course of
the year this is the one that was done
at columbia they got access to
everybody's email records i don't
understand how they could have done this
but it was a couple of million over the
course of the year and what they showed
was the frequency how many people were
making this small the number of emails
over there and the same power law then
there's this totally crazy one which is
okay
do you guys know the the kevin bacon six
degrees of separation thing there
okay someone went and did a study about
this that they got like every actor that
they could find who was in a film in the
last two years and they got all of their
filmographies and they generated their
kevin bacon degrees of freedom degrees
of uh
sing it out okay and they figured it out
the number for each individual and then
they graphed it how many people were six
degrees of separation away how many were
five so on and it's the same pattern and
this one keeps popping up this power law
business and what you see intrinsic in
that is it's a fractal because some of
the time you're talking about what's
happening with the tectonic plates on
earth and some of the time you're
talking about phone calls and some of
the time you're talking about how
molecules interact with each other
there's something emergent that goes on
there which is an outcome of some of
these simple attraction repulsion rules
an outcome of simple pioneer generation
and then random movement ones and
outcome structures like these
this winds up being applicable in a very
interesting domain biologically
okay so now we go back to the traveling
salesman problem and we're having now a
cellular version of it in terms of
networks you've got a whole bunch of
nodes here
and
the choice that each node has to make in
effect is how many connections it will
make in the network to other nodes and
how far should those connections be
should it only connect with one's way at
the
what does it want to do that's nonsense
in terms of optimizing a system what do
you want your distribution of
connections of nodes in the network to
be what is you want to optimize you want
to get a system that has very stable
solid interactions amongst clusters of
nodes but nonetheless occasionally has
the capacity to make long distance
connections there
and what you wind up seeing is if you
generate a power law distribution in
terms of okay i'm going to all of my
projections are going to be within this
distance and
this then the same power law
distribution so that the vast majority
of the nodes in the network are having
very local connections but still
there's a possibility now and then a
very long ones you get a system that is
the most optimal for solving problems
most cheaply cheaply in whatever the
term is there and this solves it for you
and then you look at brain development
so you've got neurons forming in the
cortex in a fetal cortex and you've got
neurons you've got all these nodes and
they have to figure out how to wire up
with each other and how to wire up in a
way that is most efficient what's most
efficient in order to be able to do the
sorts of things that cortex specializes
in and you now begin to look at the
distribution of projections and it's a
power law relationship most neurons in
the cortex are having the vast majority
of their projections very local but then
you have ones now and then that have
moderate ones even rarer ones that have
extremely long ones and you look and
this is how the cortex is wired up it
follows a power law distribution and
what this allows you to do is have
clusters of stable functional
interactions but every now and then you
can talk to somebody way over the other
end of the cortex to see what's
happening
interesting finding autism autism people
have been looking for what's up
biologically and the initial assumptions
would be there's not going to be enough
neurons in some part of the brain or
maybe too many another what appears to
be the case so far is this relatively
normal number of neurons in the cortex
but then some people started studying
the projection profiles of neurons in
the cortex of individuals with autism
post-mortem very rare to get these and
you see a power law distribution but
it's a different one
it's a steeper one
what does that mean in the cortex of
autistic individuals way more of the
connections are little local ones
there's far fewer of the long distance
ones they're way more local ones what
does that produce little pockets little
modules of function that are isolated
from other ones
and that in some ways is what's going on
functionally in someone with autism
there's a lack of integration of a whole
bunch of these different functions there
and that's what happens when you have
maybe a mutation or maybe some
epigenetic something or other prenatally
that changes the shape of the power law
distribution
interesting there's a gender difference
in the power law distribution of wiring
in the cortex which is in the typical
female brain if this is the power law
distribution
and in the male brain
it's a little steeper
male brains are more modular in their
wiring what's the biggest
part of the brain okay we're running out
of space here
there it is there's the brain and cross
section and you've got cortex here and
cortex there and famously here's all the
cell bodies and when projections are
going from one hemisphere to the other
it goes across this huge bundle of axons
called the corpus callosum
the corpus callosum is thicker in women
than in men on the average it is thicker
in females than in males because the
power law pattern is such that there are
more long distance connections and
female networks and thus it's a thicker
corpus closing the same thing is playing
out with connections like this and
connections but this is the big honker
one you get a thinner
corpus callosum in men
you get an even thinner course of corpus
callosum in people with autism again
that hyper male
notion there of baron cones what you
have here is perfectly normal number of
neurons
probably even perfectly normal number of
connections between the neurons but
they're more local they're more isolated
in the autistic cortex there's less
integration of function it's more
isolated islands of function there
okay more examples of where you can get
sort of patterns coming out another
version of it which is bottom up
quality control
you start a website you are
selling some product you are selling
books or whatever and you're asking
people to rate the books and you have a
board of experts that read all your
books and there are editors and they're
wise and they're learned and they write
your book reviews and recommend which
one should be what and which one's not
and you get this very successful
business going so that you're selling
more and more different kinds of books
and as a result you need to hire more
and more of these experts to read the
books and produce their ratings and
eventually that just becomes too top
heavy and what do you do the whole world
that we completely take for granted now
you have bottom up bottom up evaluations
everybody rates things and that's the
world where you punch in a book into
amazon or you look at something in
netflix and when you return it it will
give you people who liked this movie
tend to like these things as well there
are no critics professional critics
sitting there doing top-down evaluations
this is another realm of expressing
attraction and repulsion rules i like
this i didn't like this and all you need
to do then is throw in elements of
randomization and you've got bottom-up
quality control
and that's a completely different way of
doing these things what's the greatest
example out there of bottom-up systems
with quality control
wikipedia wikipedia does not have gray
bearded silverback elders there writing
up the wikipedia knowledge and sending
it on down to everyone else it is a
bottom-up self-correcting system
it is very easy to make fun of some of
the stuff that winds up in wikipedia
which is like wildly insanely wrong but
when you get into areas that are fairly
hard-nosed very interesting study about
five years ago that nature commissioned
which was getting a bunch of experts to
look at wikipedia and to look at the
encyclopedia britannica and look at the
hard-nosed facts in there about the
physical sciences the life sciences and
what you got was wikipedia was inhaling
distance of the encyclopedia
britannica's level of accuracy and that
was five years ago and it has five years
of self-organized correction since then
this is amazing the encyclopedia
britannica is like written there's like
30 like elderly stuffed british scholars
that they like have
locked in a room for years who produce
the encyclopedia and these are the law
givers and the knowledge and you just
let a whole bunch of people lose with
somewhat differing opinions about
whether madonna was born in 1994 or 1987
or whatever it is and you throw them all
together and you do wisdom of the crowd
stuff and out comes a self-correcting
accurate adaptive system with no
blueprint just with some very simple
local rules
very low simple ones which is looking
for similar patterns shared between
different individuals and
self-correcting where you get even more
efficient versions of that is with a lot
of websites where not only does
everybody get to put in their opinion
but people whose opinions are better
rated
have more of a voice in evaluating
somebody else you're putting in weighted
wisdom of the crowd type functions in
there and out comes incredible accuracy
these are great there's one drawback
with those systems though
which is with ones like netflix where it
tells you you're going to like this if
you like this that sort of thing it's a
system that's very biased towards
conformity it's not good at spotting
outliers of sort of taste and such what
you really want to do in those systems
is here are the movies of the movies
that are out right now here are the ones
that have
10 of the people think it's the greatest
movie they've ever seen and 10 percent
think it's the worst movie that's an
interesting movie to see that's when you
you want to be able to get a way of
bottom-up information about the extremes
movies that generate controversial
everybody's going to love whatever it is
and that doesn't take a whole lot this
is a way to break the potential for
conformity in these bottom-up systems
nonetheless overall it winds up solving
a problem without professional critics
without a blueprint without top down
control
so how do you wire some of these up
back to the cortex and the adult cortex
and has these power law distributions
and they're great because they optimize
they've got lots of stable local
communication but there's still the
ability to do creative long distance
connections so that's great
but how do you get that how does the
nervous system wire up this way and it
does swarm intelligence the developing
cortex does a swarm intelligence
solution
when the cortex is first
developing
what you will have are
is a first generation a pioneer
generation a pioneer generation of cells
the cortex
surface all of that that there's a
pioneer generation of cells that
basically grow processes up like these
and these are called radial glial cells
what they are they're the ants with the
first generation of setting down the
trail here they're the first bees coming
in and what you then have the neurons
are the second generation random
wanderers and what they do is they come
in as they begin to develop they have
rules that when they hit a radioglia
they grow up along it they migrate along
it they throw up connections and you do
that with enough of the cortex which is
hundreds of millions of billions of
neurons in there and you get optimal
power law distributions
all you need are some very simple local
rules and out of that emerges an
optimally wired cortex and it's the same
simple emergent stuff going on
okay so how do we begin to really apply
this stuff to humans because it winds up
being very pertinent and making sense of
some of the most interesting complex
things about us
so what's the difference between humans
and every other species
nothing all that exciting from the
neurobiological standpoint you've got
this real challenge which is you look at
a neuron from a fruit fly under a
microscope and you look at one from us
and it's going to look kind of the same
looking at a single neuron you can't
tell which species it came from
we have the same kind of
neurotransmitters that a worm uses in
its nervous system we've got the same
kind of ion channels the same sort of
excitability the same action potentials
you know minor details are different we
have not become humans by inventing new
types of brain cells and new types of
chemical messengers we have the same
basic off-the-rack neuron that a fly
does
oh we have very similar basic building
blocks
what's the difference of course is we've
got 100 million of them for every neuron
that you find in a fly brain
and out of that comes emergent
properties
great story gary kasparov casper if i
never remember which syllable to
emphasize uh grandmaster russian chess
grand master in the 90s and apparently
he's rated as one of the strongest of
all times and he was the person who
wound up participating in this really
major event which was this tournament
with this chess playing computer that
ibm had built called deep blue or big
blue or
old yeller or what was it called deep
blue deep blue
deep blue and they played against each
other and apparently what happened was
in the first game
kasparov won perhaps and the computer
was able to modify its strategy and then
proceeded to mop the floor with him and
this was a landmark event in computer
science this was the first time that a
computer had beaten a chess grand master
amazing event
not surprisingly afterward kasparov was
all bummed out and depressed and his
friends were trying to make him feel
better and they go to him and they say
look
all you got done in by is quantity all
you got done and by is the fact that
that computer could do a whole lot more
computations than you could in a set
amount of time i'm told apparently chess
grand master types can see five six
moves ahead and they can intuit where
the interesting ones was and deep blue
could calculate every single possible
outcome like seven eight moves in
advance and every time it would simply
pick the one that was the best outcome
it was like generating solutions to the
traveling salesman problem casper didn't
have a chance because the computer could
simply generate enough solutions to pick
the right one so all of them are saying
to him you should not be depressed
because all that computer had going for
it was quantity
and what he said in response was yeah
but with enough quantity you invent
quality
and that's the exact equivalent of one
amp makes no sense and 10 000 do that's
the exact equivalent with enough of
these elements here you optimize we do
not have fancy neurons that are
different than any other species we've
just got more of them and simple nearest
neighbor rules and you throw you know a
million of them together and you get a
fruit fly and you throw 100 billion of
them together and you get poetry and you
get symphonies and you get theology and
you get all of that and it's the same
building blocks with enough quantity you
invent quality
and this is the punch line that came out
of
really important work a few years ago
okay we're now what ten years i think
into having the human genome sequenced
and about five years ago they sequenced
the chimp genome sound bite everybody
learned from whenever back when is that
the human and chimps and shares 98 of
its dna so finally you had these two
gigantic rolls of print out and here's
the entire human genome and here's the
entire chimp one and somebody could
finally sit there and compare them and
compare them and see
indeed is it 98 shared and that winds up
being the answer even though what that
number actually means is debatable but
that brings up the question of course
what's the two percent what's the two
percent that differ and what has come
out of that have been some very
interesting findings some that were
mentioned earlier on which is they are
disproportionately coding for
transcription factors and splicing
enzymes and okay that amplification of
network stuff it is preferentially
coding for non-coding regions differing
but not all the stuff from back that
lecture for getting macro evolutionary
changes that's how you get a different
species coming out but how about other
types of genes what were some of the key
differences here was one big difference
we have about a thousand fewer genes for
olfactory receptors than chimps do
they've been inactivated in us they're
called pseudogenes and us they don't
express and that's about half of the
difference in the genome between humans
and chimps if you want to turn a chimp
into a human you're halfway there if you
just give it a lousy sense of smell
that's half the genetic differences what
other differences there there were ones
having to do with morphology bone
development probably bipedalism versus
being a partial quadruped there was once
having to do with hair development which
is why chimps have all the hair on them
and only those like disturbing people
with the hair on their shoulders have
that much hair so that's that there's
differences in some reproductive related
jeans you don't want to mate with them
all of that and then you say
where's the genes having to do with the
brain are there any differences there
and there turned out to be very very few
and they turned out to be very very
logical
the handful that differ
seem to have something to do with
cell division
have something to do with how many
rounds of cell division these cells go
through
and what you have is the human versions
go through more rounds
and calculations have been done looking
at the average number of neurons that
each progenitor cell generates say
during cortical development and if you
start with the number of neurons that
you find in a recess monkey brain and
happen to three or four more rounds of
cell division you get a human brain in
terms of the numbers
qualitatively it's the exact same
neurons all the difference is quantity
and you put enough of these together and
you go from tools which are meant to get
little termites out into human
technology the difference between us and
them is one of quantity throw enough
neurons in there and out begins emerging
all these distinctive human things
so
what does that do that begins to for one
thing underline what the main genetics
are about in terms of the genetic
differences in the brain between austin
say chimps are genes that free you from
genetic influences because those are not
specifying what sort of cells you
generate in larger numbers in the brain
they're not specifying connections
they're just specifying larger quantity
and all this stuff goes to work and out
comes a human brain instead of a chimp
one
okay so what does this whole subject get
us the chaos stuff the complexity
emergence stuff what are some of the
themes that come through with all of it
the first one is this emphasis on
quantity you want to get a very very
fancy system you don't necessarily have
to invent a new type of ant or a new
type of zero or one in a binary system
or a new type of neuron you could do it
with quantity you get quality you get
excellence you get complexity you get
adaptive optimization with huge numbers
of elements with the very simple rules
what's the next theme that comes out of
it one that is totally counter-intuitive
once again like this whole subject that
shoots reductionism down the drain
totally counter-intuitive the simpler
the constituent parts the better
fancy complicated ants that are
specialized and have all sorts of
different rules they are not going to
generate swarm intelligence as
effectively as do systems with the
simpler elements the more simple the
building blocks are the better
something else that is intrinsic to all
of this which runs counter to all sorts
of rational intuitions which is
more random interactions make for better
more adaptive networks you want lots of
random noise thrown in there because
that's how you stumble onto optimal
solutions randomness is a good thing
and remember right at the time that
we're making new neurons in the cortex
that's when you induce the transposable
events in the genome that's where you
juggle the dna producing randomness
there randomness is a good thing
randomness adds to the excellence of
networks
what else next thing is a theme that
comes out of it is the power of
gradients of information things that
guide you you a sell you an ad you uh
commercial district
things that can guide you towards things
things that can repel you gradients of
attraction and repulsion and that's
exactly what's going on there is a
gradient in magnets when they're this
close and the power that they have is
dropping off as they move gradients
provide a lot of the optimization in
these systems
very very important as well is nearest
neighbor interactions these are not just
a handful of simple rules about how
you're interacting with somebody in
chicago these are all how you interact
with another ant another be when you
bump into it a glial cell local
interactions with simple
rules something else another one that
runs totally counter to intuition which
is
generalists work better in these systems
than specialists do
generalists are more likely to come up
with disease adaptive outcomes
okay so what does all of this mean on a
larger level
and what i think is up is that this is
where the complexity of human brains and
human behaviors come from these emergent
properties and this is now a generation
or two into people thinking about this
stuff and it is incredibly hard to think
about and most of the work i do and my
peers do is reductive stuff that's very
limited and
like i don't understand how to think
about it in this other way and the odds
are you guys are not going to be good
enough at it either you're good enough
that you were a first generation growing
up that knows if you want to find out if
you're going to like a movie or not you
don't need to have somebody with
expertise and a label on their forehead
and a blueprint and top down you don't
need critics anymore you have bottom-up
systems you guys are first generation
growing up thinking in that way
what's the consequence of that you're
beginning to get better at this stuff
and my guess is it's not until like your
grandkids that you're going to have
people thinking so much in emergent
systems then we're finally going to be
able to figure out what the brain is
doing
and where you see there is all sorts of
things that can happen if there was more
bottom-up communication than the
trenches in world war one they would
have stopped the war all these emerging
things bottom up we've now had
revolutions when
marcos was overthrown in the philippines
back when that was basically bloodless
when the czech revolution occurred was
called the velvet revolution because
there was no violence
all they had to do was get enough people
in the town square in the capital and
paralyze the country and they took it
over
i will predict that within our lifetime
there is going to be a revolution in
some country at some point where nobody
leaves their living rooms all they do is
do something online with some emergent
bottom-up thing and they collapse the
government and do it in and no one will
have to leave their living room because
it will be all emerging things coming up
the final couple of points here first
one is all that chaotic strange
attractor stuff all of us spent a lot of
time thinking about how we're not quite
up to the ideal this or not we're not at
the ideal appearance we're not at the
ideal intelligence we're not at the
ideal choice of perfumes we're having
the ideal anything what strange
attractors and chaos shows you is the
notion that there is an ideal that
there's an essentialist optimal whatever
is a myth we are all deviating from the
optima because the optima is just an
emergent imaginary thing
the other final point is something that
you guys are going to be much better at
than any previous generation which if
you grow up thinking when i want to find
out if the movie is good or not i do
bottom up stuff you are growing up with
a mindset that you don't need blueprints
you don't need top-down blueprints and
implicit in that when you look at how
you can get complex adaptive optimized
systems without blueprints is the fact
that if you don't need blueprints you
don't need somebody who makes the
blueprints and will be a lot easier to
comprehend that as being the case you
don't have to have a source of top-down
instruction if you don't need a
blueprint
okay so i don't know i'm talking about
something
for more please visit us at stanford.edu
