I am so glad you convinced me that the
family car should be the defender 110 it
is so beautiful inside it's so
comfortable and it just feels
indestructible yes it really is I've
been waiting a long time for the new
model to come out the defender 110 I'm
telling you it's my favorite car of all
times it's my third one you know have
stories of going Offroad the guy managed
the group he was like what are you doing
in this beautiful car I'm like I'm going
Offroad he's like are you sure cuz you
can use one of bars and they look like
Mad Max cars I'm like no no no no we're
going to do this and he was shocked wow
well it's great because the defender has
been reimagined for 21st century
adventure and it's unparalleled off-road
ability as well as this robust interior
are invaluable whether you're headed
towards Uncharted Territory or just a
weekend of exploration the defender 110
tackles challenging surroundings with
absolute confidence the SUV conveys
strength outside and in featuring
Peerless technology like an intuitive
driver display and an awardwinning
infotainment system that's my favorite
part to keep you connected no matter
where the journey takes you Adventure is
unique to everyone and so is the
defender choose from The twoo Defender
90 the four-door Defender 110 or the
larger Defender 130 with the ability to
seat up to eight passengers you'll find
uncompromising performance in all three
so pack up and go even further with the
defender 110 learn more at Land Rover
usa.com
slender sometimes it takes a different
approach to help you unlock your true
potential capella University's
game-changing Flex path format helps you
learn at your own pace and fit earning a
degree into your life from before you
enroll to after you graduate you'll be
supported by people who are invested in
your success so you can pursue your
goals knowing that help is available if
you need it imagine your future
differently at
capella
[Music]
du this isn't your average business
podcast and he's not your average Host
this is the James aler show on the
Choose Yourself
Network today on the James aliter show
you're you know managing director of a
big DC fund SL hedge fund thought we're
were going to talk about our
hair what do you do during the day other
than brushing your hair
it depends sometimes um I'm working on
physics sometimes I'm thinking about
markets and contributing in our research
group uh sometimes um I'm listening to
somebody you know talking about a
company or we're trying to think about
where we might take the philanthropic
arm but I don't get a chance to talk too
much about Peter teal and I consider him
uh not only my employer but he's an
amazing friend an amazing human being
and a great teacher what's a couple of
your takeaways from interacting with oh
well part of the problem you see the
reason I don't talk about Peter almost
at all is is that the news media created
a fictional character called Peter teal
um and the two of them are totally
different the real Peter teal and the
fictional Peter teal aren't the same
person so every time I talk about the
real Peter teal people imagine that I'm
talking about a vampire who lives on a
seastead uh you know off of New Zealand
drinking the blood of virgins to stay
young and I've just never met that
person they figured out a very effective
Gambit for trying to silence his
insights but I'll give you one Insight
that I think is really particularly
[Music]
good so let's take this to the you know
you quinting the phrase the intellectual
dark web you felt free to express
opinions among the select group of
friends and colleagues you chose to be
around you on on a daily basis you you
you feel comfortable saying what you
think cuz they don't uh slander you for
it or ruin your career for it I don't
feel comfortable saying that I think I
just can't stop okay that's fair enough
but I'm assuming some of the people in
your W in your life including your wife
your boss some of your colleagues you
feel like they're not going to fire you
or divorce you or whatever if you say
what you think you maybe you think I'm
taking a risk but you're willing to go
up against that edge well I mean yeah
yeah if that's a safe environment then
you should definitely use those people
to practice right and then as it gets as
the audience gets bigger to include
strangers or Twitter or Media or way
ways in which you your model ah which
you you use you built a model with the
safe people now your model is breaking
down because you're in the the the crowd
and you know for instance let's take a
recent uh tweet or or not so recent but
fairly recent tweet of yours um I don't
want my daughter to think going to HR is
her path to financial success something
like that um that was very specific to
the James demore situation I want to be
very clear about that right so so in in
a world that where the context is absent
um that was in no way shape or form
about sexual harassment it was a
specific to having had my brother as a
biologist ejected from his university
where he was a Professor to watching
another biologist James deore ejected
from Google and it was hypers specific
to reading a tweet from a woman who
worked at Google saying if HR doesn't
get rid of this problem you know I'm
quitting I'm leaving this is ridiculous
and so I thought about okay this is a
woman complaining to
HR that the um situation in which Google
asked for James de Mo's feedback and he
gave feedback based on the literature
and then they fired him for the feedback
that they asked him to
give I mean that's that's that's some
form of entrapment to me it's bananas
and the idea that you're going to listen
to people complaining to human resources
for somebody doing what you've just told
them to do he's carrying out the orders
of Google right so so and I and I should
have been more specific because it was
specific to that obviously you didn't
mean you know everybody runs HR is
ridiculous wait wait this an important
point the problem with what you just
brought up is that is what I'm calling
the gotcha game right so lots of people
understood that this was about biology
and Google being very uncomfortable
about the fact that men and women scored
differently on Big Five personality
inventories and that success in the work
Place may be correlated much less to
gender but to the attributes of openness
conscientiousness extraversion
neuroticism what have you right and that
males and females May differ in that and
so it may be expected that in certain
lines of works you you'd expect a female
tilt or a male tilt and it it can be
different what was outraging
me was understood by many people who
tried to go after that tweet and this is
the interesting end dangerous part they
like the fact that it doesn't carry the
context so it can be made to sound
different than it is and the reason that
many of us get upset is is that we
understand that the game that the left
which I in which I live right is playing
a game of gotcha right and the idea is
that you say something oh can we take it
out of context can we mean it to suggest
something that it never meant can we lie
about you in a way that you will have to
work uh day and night to clear your own
reputation as we attempt
uh to make you null and void that's the
Tweet you're talking about and one of
the things that was fascinating about it
was that it had a tremendous amount of
support and the news media I mean I saw
it on MSNBC people were trying to
construe it as something it wasn't so
anyway what would you like to say about
that tweet so and and by the way I've
had not an well maybe an experience on
the same level like one time I wrote an
article
about an an evening out with my daughter
on her birthday and that basically
asking please everywhere allowed us to
open doors at various places where doors
were closed to us and someone wrote an
article against me saying um and she
said specifically in her article imagine
the last part of every sentence in
James's article was because I'm a white
male and she got millions of views on
her article yeah and people
were threatening me physically I got
death threats it was it was all over
everything it was and people who had
previously been strong readers of mine
were you know left and it's very
personally frustrating and and affected
my income you know perhaps it's hard
it's hard to judge right they they they
got me and it was completely ridiculous
too in the same way but so so so given
this experience given that I felt safe
initially with my readership writing
this and they and that obviously they
would know what I meant obviously you
thought people would know what you meant
now you're expanding out to a crowd
where they don't quite a they're playing
the game gotcha which you would never
that you had never experienced that with
your crowd of Close Associates
Associates and and you've widened this
audience um so now you're able to you
know again there's a missing nutrino all
of a sudden uh uh the missing force is
that uh people in a in a large enough
group are not going to quite understand
or there's going to be someone who's
going to attack and and I think that's
always going to happen I wouldn't think
of that as a missing nutrino situation
there is a scale feature that as you
become more visible the um Bounty for
taking you down I mean there there are
life forms that simply exist in a very
negative energetic environment where
they're just hunting for things that are
large and it's easy to bring large
things uh you know to their knees at the
moment right so so what what I'm saying
is that you you got into a large enough
experimental group that that the nutrino
disappear there was a missing energy the
missing energy was people understanding
you oh all of a sudden people are not
understanding me the way I thought let
do that a little bit differently if you
want to get to the nutrino thing um very
interesting uh where video presence in
tele presence in
teleconferencing uh is initially not
very
successful and it turned out that it was
hard to put the camera where people's
eyes were on the screen and so if you
were looking at into the eyes of the
person projected to you you were never
looking into the camera so you always
looked to them to be unable to meet
their gaze so you think like the naive
hope would be telepresence and
teleconferencing would be awesome the
realized um disappointment would be boy
do we have a lot of deals breaking when
we do them through
teleconferencing and then you would try
to discover when those deals broke then
you might dis discover that it had to do
with eye contact and so the failure to
transmit extra emotional data of trust
you know you see people using um emojis
for example because text like Unicode or
asy doesn't carry enough emotional
instruction as to whether you're joking
whether you're serious and so you'll
find people will fight uh over text
because in in speech they would have
been able to give each other enough cues
as to the fact that they were in a
caring Ing and loving place and over
text it just doesn't communicate any of
that so that would be more of a nutrino
example which is what would be the
difference in having this conversation
via text versus doing it in person so
you and I are now actually physically in
a room looking at each other but my
guess is is if we were doing this over
the phone we would be missing all sorts
of facial cues right and I'll tell you
when I went from podcasting over the
phone to podcasting in person downloads
went up about 5x so it's a huge
difference fantastic yeah and that was
the missing nutrino I didn't understand
why am I not get like have this great
guest let's do it like that so you think
I'm a this is perfect now so now we have
a model and the model is I'm a great
podcaster and I can count on X downloads
and then you notice that sometimes you
get the downloads and sometimes you
don't so now you try to correlate it
with something that's different hey I
notice that all the times I'm actually
in person I get a much higher download
account than than when I'm doing it over
a phone so then you start trying to say
okay well what's what's the Delta what's
the difference you come up with an
object that measures all of the
differences and you find out it's not
the line quality you pay for you know a
line with fantastic Fidelity you do it
through video conferencing still isn't
good because the eye contact is off
eventually you realize that it's the
warmth of of eye contacts facial uh eye
contact facial muscles and all of that
kind of you know human stuff that we've
always known about we've forgotten in
the modern age that's your nutrino right
and you know the first time I did Sam
Harris's program I think I was the
second guest ever to go to his house and
record why is because I didn't want to
touch a topic as dangerous as Sam's
relationship with Islam uh if we weren't
in the same room and able to kind of see
each other reassure each other and
communicate well and I think this is
that is a great example and it neatly
fits the nutrino but I still I still
think the missing nutrino model applies
to my article about saying please and
your Artic your Tweet about that was
very specific to Google and HR and
biology that somehow or other
we you me whoever
miscalculated the response of the mob
right you miscalculated that there would
be people once once you're once your
audience was big enough there's always
going to be people trying to EST I
really miscalculated I mean it probably
that tweet probably took me 45 seconds
to compose I definitely miscalculated
the the level of the reaction the last
time I checked that tweet had more
support it had like
37,000 likes and then it got taken down
so I'm kind of interested what Twitter
did to make them go down but the number
of people who have said to me I joined
Google because I thought it was an
exciting bold company that wanted to
take on the future and I can't stand my
life there because it's become this
politically correct um
camp in which you you can only uh you
know genuflect in front of social
justice or you have to keep your mouth
shut well that was fascinating to me so
you know people may remember it as a
controversial tweet but take a look at
the Tweet there's a tremendous amount of
love and a lot of that love is female
and a lot of that female love that that
tweet got was technical females because
a lot of technical females are fed up
with this right and so so maybe I'm
trying to fit the missing nutrino model
too too much but I think it's such a
strong idea about reinvention and skill
acquisition that I want to push it uh
patience than was your missing nutrino
at first it must have been very
frustrating that people were under
taking things out of context it's still
frustrating I mean exactly I don't think
it's simplifies I think that what's
really what's really present in this is
is that I you know I and I want to jump
out of just like the skill acquisition
which is this kind of formal
thing emotionally
how sad that we can't actually talk in a
trusting environment about well what are
you going through and how are the rest
of us perceiving it and how does your
solution now feel like you're you felt
bullied and now you're you're taking it
out by bullying somebody else like this
is a very
fraught situation and we can't get to a
more
human level of understanding I really
believe that the women who
are frustrated in a technical context
have a lot of reasons to be frustrated
even if it's nothing more than not
having enough role models of how to
combine you know the different pressures
on on women and men or or you or even
trans you want to do any of that so I
think that that there are real problems
that these groups have and what's
peculiar to our age is that they feel so
emboldened that rather than making sense
and being modest in your aim and scope
to try to correct the problem we're
seeing these kind of um you know what
was the Sarah Jong you know like cancel
men
or you know she got pleasure from like
uh the amount of pleasure I derive from
making old white men angry or something
like this it's just such
negative uh
aggressive uncivil behavior
that um it crowds out the healing and
the worrying about each other's problems
and the listening and the comedy and the
uh you know just the best aspects of
civil society that cancel culture seeks
to destroy well I you know you look at
uh a platform like Twitter which is all
about I make a tweet how many likes do I
get how much approval do I get it's all
you know related then to your
neurochemicals and how happy I get so so
it is a way of achieving status so these
people who so people who are let's say
below status on you in other ways it's a
way for them to suddenly kind of
overwhelm you and and try to get an
attemp to get status over you there's so
many other ways to get status like but
but they don't know that well but that's
the thing you could have a negative
energy you could have a positive energy
about it and I think
that
um when you hunt somebody using gotcha
stuff it's a very short ride okay you're
very quickly you get your little
dopamine hit maybe you you have a circle
of people who cheer you on but it
doesn't lead anywhere really deep that's
the thing that I want to tell a lot of
these people which is if you want to
actually correct these problems that's
super exciting that has a future if you
really enjoy hunting people boy that's
that's a bad business for you forget
forget your Quarry maybe maybe you'll be
very successful you'll take a bunch of
people down but it's just just it's not
a positive energy about it
and if I think about the people who've
done the best by me either taking me
down or trying or contributing
something I mean just try the reverse
try both if you have to but like try
contributing to somebody's well give
them some positive feedback constructive
feedback if you don't like something
they did um and yet and yet outrage porn
is almost like an addiction so so it's
getting larger and larger this is what I
talked about outrage templates recently
so for example I claim that there will
be
a an article in the not too distant
future uh which will show the difference
between women being highly dressed up
and men being dressed down and it will
then come with uh some commentary about
this picture beautifully shows us the
different standards to which women are
held well how do I know that because
it's a template because I've read that
story mult multiple times and that
outrage
template will be it's reusable and so
they've figured out what we find
outrageous and what we haven't
understood is if it's a template don't
bother reacting to the story react to
the series of stories right but people
are incapable of doing that so you
you're capable of doing that CU you're
you've got your robot you're seeing what
but this is why I push out language you
like you asked about you came up with
the term intellectual dark web well do
you remember before we had the word
selfie it was really interesting there
were all of these photos uh typically of
a a woman in a bathroom pointing the
phone uh the camera on her phone at the
mirror and regarding herself is like
yeah I look pretty good okay it was such
a strange thing I mean we we'd never
seen this particular photo and the fact
we were seeing thousands of them and
nobody had a term for it when the word
selfie was
discovered it was like oh this thing
that we've been is in our mind but we
can't talk about it because it has no
language around it suddenly you could
say oh you're taking a selfie boy that
person's too into their selfies you know
I'm drowning in selfies do you see how
Instagram is saturated by selfies
whatever that's that's a huge shift
because you gave something that
everybody knew tacitly the ability to
promote it to Consciousness and
communicate it so like when I tried to
come up with the Inquisition or the
intellectual dark web or what's the
Inquisition well it's the
um so in the Inquisition the Jews of
Spain were chased by the Spanish
Inquisition into say turkey in the
Ottoman
Empire my claim is is that a lot of
analytic leftist an analytic lefties
have been chased into the center right
by The Madness of these Progressive
lunatics and that um that thing I'm
calling the Inquisition is that people
who are worried about uh you know uh
homophobia or xenophobia and all these
things but don't for a second sign up
for the progressive uh revolutionary
sort of pseudo maist agenda um those
people are now hanging out as if they
were in Turkey uh even though their home
you know was originally uh in the analog
of Spain that the that the center right
has become the Ottoman Empire to receive
people chased out of The Madness of
Spain you know so so so what I'm
wondering is what are we missing in
terms of language yeah Concepts right so
so but how do you how do you
educate uh the the the mob of strangers
that I think there's another thing we're
missing which is that people feel their
their status has been somehow stripped
from them and that they've only get it
on Twitter or Instagram and are able to
join the team let's say of polarized
left in order to achieve status over
people they don't they simply don't like
like let's say straight white men or
whoever but who doesn't like straight
like white men I mean who who doesn't
like you
know I think this is nonsense I I just
I'm going to reject this um who even
taught us to talk like this CU we sound
like asses I mean you know you just
take this incredibly vibrant
Multicultural country that we should all
be so I mean in this case this is taking
place in the US I think this is an
incredibly exciting country we've we've
broken the ties to Bloodlines it's
pretty peaceful pretty prosperous we do
a fairly good job of assimilating and
integrating people and then to be
talking constantly in in in their terms
about race and gender and sex and
orientation it's the most boring
divisive invidious conversation
imaginable I don't want to take the bait
I don't think anybody hates straight
white men okay I agree so so let's so so
again what's missing that this this this
outrage porn is only growing and it's
hard like I can't it's not only growing
it's it's growing and shrinking I mean
there's so much fatigue around it
because first of all it just it's not
smart we like being smart we're
incredibly smart this used to be the
country of you know Rockefeller
University and the institute for
advanced study the University of Chicago
we we we're great at science and math
now we're pretending that we're bad at
science and math we're pretending that
we're so evil and that we're such bad
stock that we have to wear hair shirts
from morning till night this just
Preposterous we I think it's really
important to recognize that in general
people are sick of this at levels that
are powerful enough to elect a Donald
Trump right so you know it was clear
that Hillary was inevitable because the
polls showed that you know people were
going to vote for Hillary but secretly
they weren't supportive of Hillary I
don't even think they were supportive of
trump they just couldn't stand the
nonsense anymore so you think you think
then the backlash against this outrage
porn has has been growing and but maybe
the outrage porn is getting louder and a
little bit more violent yeah it is so
you know cuz a few months ago I posted
an article just economic data points and
of the past year of the past basically
since 2016 and I gave all the sources of
data they were all basically the Federal
Reserve or Bureau of Labor St
statistics the common the most common
comment I got was what's the source of
your data I had posted all the sources
of data in the article there was like
almost a blind spot that the outrage
porn was was reflexive yeah it was so so
so and I kept saying I posted the data
here's and I'll post it again here's
here's the source right so uh but nobody
then people come in James people are
clearly asking for the source of data
where's the source of data it was almost
like I was in a mental institution on my
own thread uh where people were not able
to see this is the source of data and
it's reliable sources that everyone
would agree with is reliable there comes
some cognitive dissonance where on the
outrage porn side they can't see what
they're doing and I just wonder how do
you how do you communicate with that uh
you you do express your opinion
and but you're still going to get that
outrage porn well here's what I would
recommend to the people who traffic in
the outrage porn as you're calling it um
that's a relatively small community but
it's very noisy so I call it this the
Chihuahua effect the Chihuahua effect is
a very small very small group of people
making a tremendous amount of noise
making you think that they're an
enormous Community all right so for the
tiny minority of people who have nothing
better to do but than to try to take
down um people who are trying to be
constructive and trying to think through
these sorts of things um you have to
talk to them in the exact
language that they speak which is your
point from a few seconds ago that you
don't want to do
that
sorry which part are you drawing if I'm
contradicting myself I want to know okay
so so the phrase you know using identity
politics you using the language of
identity politics to talk to people is
not what you want to do well so I think
this was at Ohio State there was a
protest and the president found his
office occupied and if it's not Ohio
State I apologize to the community in
advance but the colia
maybe I don't know I thought it was
colia but
so assuming it was Ohio state um I think
that the president said you'll notice
that none of the people who normally
work here are at their desks and that's
because you created and he uses the
magic phrase an unsafe work
environment and do you want to know why
it felt unsafe because those people felt
like they were being
harassed you know and so they needed a
safe space so they had to go home I see
so you're using their code words well
the point is that that they're not aware
that they've become bullies that they
are abusive in exactly the terms that
they claim other people are abusive they
don't see that all of the stuff that
they're trying to
enforce is their own behavior against
others I mean the truth and safety
committees at these platforms are
trafficking in hate the hate traffickers
are the truth and safety do you remember
what the group was behind the French
Revolution was called the Committee on
Public Safety I kid you not right and do
you know in uh in Islamic nations with
religious police what they call the
religious police they call them the
squad for the prevention the promotion
of virtue and prevention of vice
pvpv and so what I worry about is in
these situations you mentioned they just
got steadily worse so so another example
is in the The Book classic book the
gulag archipelago Alexander Solen niton
me mentions um he quotes the main
newspaper of you know what he calls the
red State at that point and it basically
says that this newspaper is saying
doesn't matter what
someone it doesn't matter what someone
is accused of they're guilty based on
whether they're bgeo or not based on
where they come from based on how they
were born you're missing a concept the
concept is called artic article
58 so article 58 of the Soviet Penal
Code I believe was uh the provision that
made anti-revolutionary anti-soviet
activities a uh a high crime and the
great thing is is that everyone is
always guilty of article 58 so the only
issue about article 58 is when do you
enforce
it so everybody's guilty at all times
and this is what's going on right now
with the current moral panic which is so
delicious is that every single breathing
person is guilty of article 58 of the
social justice uh code right which I
wonder then I mean that's why you could
take a guy like Kevin Hart dig through
his jokes from 20 years ago and throw
them off the Oscars what I wonder is
given again this example from the Soviet
Union or maoism or from where from
wherever all these examples never really
ended without
violence well well all the examples that
you brought up like French
Revolution
yeah I don't think it's quite that
simple I mean I think that that if we
were in
1968 we would have thought okay the
country's got to go to Civil War in
order to resolve this and it didn't
right right I mean the level of violence
was much reduced from what it could have
been yeah I wonder why the psychology
was different like you look at even
times like 2000 you know the election Al
Gore Bush uh obviously a lot of hate on
both sides but it didn't result in the
same kind of outrage that's happening
now because they lost control of what
I've called the Gated institutional
narrative the Gated institutional
narrative or Jin was the
central means by which control uh over
all of our senses of where the country
was where we were were controlled
right and the Gated institutional
narrative was subject to a Tipping Point
between the power of uh broadcast and
print media versus the power of social
multi-directional media and so by the
time we got around to
2016 The Tipping Point had been had been
uh pushed in the direction that
traditional media couldn't keep the
story uh under control so you know the
New York Times is guilty of of a
particular type of fake news that I
pointed out called narrative driven news
and you figure out what the narrative is
before the facts are in so the narrative
at the New York Times is usually a very
long story arc and all the facts are fit
to it and the story arc that they had
before the election was Hillary Clinton
is the inevitable next president of the
United States so all of the facts that
came in were fit to that narrative and
that's why they were so rudely shocked
because they had engaged in this attempt
to use the Gated institutional narrative
but they didn't understand that we can
now go around them I mean you know why
is a somebody employed by the New York
Times a more interesting journalist than
somebody writing uh in their underwear
in their parents' basement there's no
[Music]
reason these days we're all investors
trying to be smart with our money
despite our worst impulses but at ey
shares we believe that deep down inside
of every investor is a better
investor one that's just waiting to be
let
out explore ey shares ETFs and insights
and let your best investor
out visit is shares.com for more
information you know what I love about
fantasy sports is that even though I'm
not going to to be a great basketball
player or a baseball player or a
football player or whatever I feel like
I get to participate and make decisions
and use my knowledge of these different
leagues to or these different sports to
to compete so it's like I can pick my
team or I can pick my favorite players
and I could use my knowledge to make
predictions and maybe even make money so
with the basketball season here you can
now pick combo projections across
football and basketball from the
specials league on prize picks this is a
league created specifically for combo
projections that include two or more
players from different sports or leagues
want to play alongside some of priz
pick's favorite players like rapper Meek
Mill and comedian Andrew Schultz who's
also been a guest on this podcast and
I've been a guest on his you can now
find Community plays under the promos
tab of the app to view entries for some
of the biggest names in the prize pick
Community each week look prize pick even
offers a reboot policy so that your
entries stay in play even if one of your
players gets injured for football and
basketball games if you have a player
who exits the game in the first half and
does not return in the second that
player is rebooted prize pick is the
only daily fantasy sports platform with
an injury insurance policy what so I
love playing it I love anywhere where I
can use analytical ability with my
interest to demonstrate some skill and
maybe make some money and I like the
game like aspect I do wish they had
chess as a category on prize picks.com
but I'll set up for what they've got
maybe I should make my own fantasy chess
league but in any case I love prize pick
go to priz picks.com James use code
James for a first deposit match up to
$100 that's the easiest $100 you're ever
going to make so that's prize.com
James and use code James daily fantasy
sports made
easy
[Music]
the future of learning is definitely
online like it's such BS that you have
to spend $200,000 or take $200,000 in
loans and go to some fancy school when
it's useless it doesn't guarantee you a
job most employers including me do not
care about degrees or grades or anything
like that we want to care that you love
what you're doing that you know what
you're doing doing in some cases that
you have experience or that you're
willing to learn but people in general
love learning and are curious like the
key to success is curiosity and I think
masterclass.com is the perfect model for
online learning I'm really happy they're
they're sponsoring uh this episode if
you're going to give a gift give the
gift of learning Master Class makes a
meaningful gift this season for you and
anyone on your list because both of you
can learn from the best to become your
best from from leadership to effective
communication to cooking let me tell you
some of the classes I've taken I've
taken comedy from Steve Martin I mean
can you believe I can take a class from
Steve Martin on Comedy or Jud appow my
favorite comedy director I could take an
actual class from him on writing Wolf
Gang Puck on cooking Dan Brown on
writing or Judy Bloom who's been on this
podcast on writing by the way Wolf Gang
Puck also has been on this podcast it's
such a pleasure I I try to take classes
all the time from masterclass.com and
whether you're watching masterclass on
TV or listening in audio mode in the app
or on their site the quality speaks for
itself it's like these masterclass
instructors are your own personal
mentors that are going to help you reach
the next level how much would it cost to
take one-on-one classes on Comedy from
Steve Martin or on chess from Gary
kaspar you just wouldn't be able to do
it but it would I mean it would cost
hundreds of thousands of dollars with a
masterclass annual membership it's $1
a month membership start at $120 a year
for unlimited access to 101 classes with
all 180 plus Master Class instructors so
it's not just $120 for one instructor
you get all 180 plus masterclass
instructors boost your confidence and
find practical takeaways you can apply
to your life and at work and if you own
a business or are a team leader use
masterclass to empower and create Future
Ready employees and leaders that's the
real education in today's world so this
holiday season you can give one annual
membership and get one free at
masterclass.com
Jas J of course stands for the James
aliter show so right now you can get two
memberships for the price of one at
masterclass.com
Jas masterclass.com
jaas offer terms
[Music]
apply
you know given that social media and
these platforms have kind of created
this Tipping Point again there doesn't
seem like there's an end to it I mean I
agree the backlash probably I think
they're trying to reestablish the Gated
narrative in particular by making it
very
frightening uh if you're building your
business around social media that you
don't know what can get you thrown off
the platform like they don't have to
throw that many people off the platform
they just need a few of those cases to
be ambiguous enough so that people check
themselves like gosh I've spent eight
years building up my follower account
and I've got a business on top of it and
now they can turn me off in a heartbeat
without telling me that I've violated
anything because there's some strike
against me I I I
mean it doesn't take much and what they
what they figured out is is that you can
just threaten people's livelihoods you
don't have to threaten uh you know their
them with bodily harm just threaten
their reputation the reputation is
necessary to earn a livelihood
livelihood is necessary to have a life
QED you're done yeah and the and again I
don't how does that
end what's what's the final chapter in
that well I don't know but I'll tell you
where I think it's going I think that
where it's going is is that the claims
are getting so Preposterous and the
number of people who are fed up with
left kism and are willing to say that
it's an idiocy and in particular the
people like me on the left I think are
the biggest problem for this kind of
thought policing because at least when
it's people who use words like libtard
or own the Libs from the right you can
dismiss it as that kind of garbage on
the right I think that's garbage speak
on the right and then they've always
done that and it's always been
irritating and stupid I think that when
it comes from the left you're saying you
know I share your aspirations for a more
equal better healthier world but you're
the problem now I mean you're out of
control and you're make you're
embarrassing all of us by creating a
blood lust um coming out of the left
that will eventually consume you all you
you're going to end up like robes Speer
aren't you well and I do think again I
think there's
some some something some Force has to
happen from the outside to shake that up
and like historically it's been violence
and I'm not I'm not of course of course
I'm not advocating that I'm just afraid
of that yeah but that's what the IDW is
doing it's saying here's an alternative
to violence let's just point out that
this is ridiculous and stand up and
notice the pleasure that comes from
clearing your throat and speaking in
your own voice right and that's why when
people come to the shows that we do you
know part of what they're getting is the
ability to see to look one of the most
moving things is you're looking around a
filled Arena and thousands of people
think like you and they have no voice
this is why you
know Trump at his
rallies was holding the rally because
because he wanted to see that the public
in large numbers was with him now I'm
not a Donald Trump fan I want to see him
you know I want to see him defeated in
2020 but what he was doing was he was
using the public events as like neelon
ratings am I doing okay because if I
listen to you guys over in the news
media uh I'm the worst human being since
pole pot but if I actually look at my
crowds people are cheering me on well
that's a lot of what's going on with
like the intellectual dark web we're not
at all like Trump but I can see the
hunger people are dying you know for me
to start a podcast they're dying write a
book tell us more how can we contribute
why because they found themselves
voiceless and it's really interesting to
me how a tiny number of writers and and
anchormen and late night
comedians have pretended that an
entirely different structure
um doesn't exist in the United States
and I guess because they have such a big
microphone
collectively it's not the bigness of the
microphone it's the complete absence of
anything
else you know where is the conservative
late night host who is not a
racist you know it's like
oh here's a good missing Community the
number of people in the US who are both
xenophilic who like Thai food and they
want to uh travel to Argentina and
they're learning Indonesian who knows
what and who still don't want open
borders is a very large number of people
I would say it's probably the majority
position in general we don't want to be
inundated with people who are suddenly
being promoted to citizenship or
permanent residency we want some
immigration but we don't want a flood
and we're super interested in the
outside world and very happy with the
you know this way in which we're getting
to see a larger portion of our planet
and experience the benefits of
Multicultural interaction that community
of people who are both restrictionist
and
xenophilic there is no record that it
exists much less a record that it is
probably the majority position and why
is that and it's because of a concept
that was highlighted to me by the
founder of the data and Society
Institute uh Dana Boyd where she said we
need to use strategic silence I thought
what is strategic
silence strategic silence is that when
you punish perspectives that you don't
like by not reporting them I thought wow
how fascinating so something happens
it's a news story you the reporter say I
don't like what will happen if I report
on this and I don't want to be used so I
simply going to refuse to report the
news well that's what we're we're
suffering from an epidemic of badly
determined strategic silence that we are
strategically silent on all sorts of
things which the country cares about and
doesn't hold crazy positions there's
nothing crazy about wanting to be a
restrictionist there's nothing
xenophobic about it
and what you understand over time is
that the only reason that this state of
affairs exists is that
somehow a group of people want to say if
you even mention restricting uh
immigration to the US I want to be able
to infer that the only reason that
that's true is because you've got a
black heart right your your heart is
just coated with evil and it's just I I
I sort of I chuckle you have to be
insane to think anything like that could
be true and yet there's no counter
example so all of the late night
comedians in
essence it's like the same voice with
multiplicity 10 and and and you can't
have the counter example among late
night comedians because they'll get the
same treatment Kevin Hart just got on
the Oscars someone's going to there's
going to be the outrage and they're
going to get fired it's your point their
livelihood is going to Beed but but
that's an interesting case right we just
saw the Sarah Silverman tweet from
2010 where she said you know something
like not like there's anything wrong
with it but the new bachelorette's a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Whoa okay so you're being edgy
you're being a
comedian that's cool but you want to
know what you just WR lost the right to
police anyone ever for microaggressions
I don't think I've ever made a joke like
that in my life on Twitter right I've
never used those words why is Sarah
Silverman still with us and the answer
actually comes down to the system of
indulgences which is the problem isn't
whether you committed a crime the issue
is are you eligible for an Indulgence so
that you can continue to to live in the
world so Sarah Silverman
who's you know as a Bernie
supporter um probably has an Indulgence
from the
system but if somebody who's
conservative um makes a joke they won't
get an Indulgence so it's not really
even the crimes it's the selective
prosecution of the crimes and whether or
not forgiveness or clemency will be
offered and that's how the magic trick
is done it's not like I forget who was
the late night ComEd comedian who used
to do the man show uh Jimmy Kimmel okay
I guarantee you therefore that Jimmy
Kimmel is going to have a lot of stuff
that would be considered offensive but
my guess is is that he's got an
Indulgence probably said I apologize
probably he's a very staunch Democratic
supporter and that will mean that he
won't actually have to stand for these
as crimes where somebody else will be uh
you know in uh in the stocks uh in the
Public Square being humiliated so so it
seems like a solution you can't you
can't go out there and earn those
indulgences solution is basically kind
of to do what you're doing and just be
as you know being able to express your
opinions figuring out where the comfort
zone is so career is not ruined and a
mass you know giving people permission
to basically say what they think even if
it's different than yours even if it's
different than you know this you know
mass media
uh and kind of just accumulating in
numbers these people who can think and
speak freely and and you always talk
about first principles I'm going to Veer
it towards that which is where do you
sort of accumulate your first principles
so you can start to to think this way
and and B I guess you know how do you be
careful about where that line is because
the line's very
dangerous sure I mean I think that the
first thing is is that you should get a
good grounding in a few fields that have
incredible reach so just to begin with
there's no framework work that is more
important to the average person than the
framework of evolutionary theory so
learn as much as you can about systems
of selective pressures both natural and
sexual
selection uh I'd start off with I'm not
sure where to go first but might want to
try the selfish Gene it's got problems
but it's pretty good um I would highly I
would highly recommend the Cambridge
Encyclopedia of human evolution is a
really great book to try to place Us in
cont text as a species uh of Apes um I
think economics is really important
because economics markets are the
continuation of natural and sexual
selection by other means so it can be
systematized and we interact with each
other through markets markets organize
us where uh command and control
structures cannot so thank God we don't
have the President telling us what we
have to do every morning the market
tells us what to do and in some sense
that's super important as a framework I
definitely think um having an offbeat
history um read regular history and then
read the Howard Zin version of history
and then read some super Arch
conservative version of the same history
learn how to walk around history from
all the different
perspectives uh and then I think that
um try to find the most durable parts of
psychology I think one of the reasons
Jordan Peterson's been so successful is
is that he stayed very close to the to
the ground floor with psychometrics and
psychometrics weren't negatively
affected uh like the rest of Psychology
by the reproducibility crisis so figure
out what you can and can't say in his
case he focuses on IQ and Big Five
personality inventories which are pretty
solid so I think that that's super
interesting there there are lots of
Frameworks that you you just need to
know if you're going to try first
principles thinking and what you have to
not do is find the wrong heuristic
framework that claims that it's first
principles so for example highly uh be
highly suspicious of Sociology be highly
suspicious of certain aspects of
psychology which are not based on um
reproducible science be very concerned
about fields that were created in the
wake of Campus unrest in the 60s and 70s
because the standards for those fields
appears to be different um than for the
fields that preceded them that doesn't
mean that there weren't problems in the
fields that preceded them but uh various
forms of activist and grievance studies
are definitely um not good because they
come from a tradition of heuristic
rather than fundamentals and there's no
way of adjudicating things that go
counternarrative to those
fields once you sort of realize where
Bedrock is and by the way if you can do
math mathematics physics chemistry and
programming that won't hurt you either
um then you'll have an idea about what
reliable knowledge is all about
and you have to be very bigoted and
Prejudiced against fields that are
trying to Hawk non reliable knowledge as
if it was reliable knowledge that can
happen in a field like physics where
physics you know has been pushing a
string theory agenda which is certainly
not reliable knowledge as if it was
reliable knowledge but you know a lot of
physics is absolutely rock rock solid so
you have to know even within a field
this part is the good part this part is
the dangerous part that's part of why
people are tuning into us I think and so
um I guess it's just a a final thing
you're you know managing director of a
big VC fund hedge fund I thought we're
were going to talk about our
hair what do you do during the day other
than brushing your hair it depends um
you know if
uh sometimes um I'm working on physics
sometimes I'm thinking about markets and
contributing in our research group uh
sometimes um I'm listening to somebody
you know talking about a company or
we're trying to think about where we
might take the philanthropic arm but uh
I think it you know I don't get a chance
to talk too much about Peter teal and I
consider him uh not only my employer but
he's an amazing friend an amazing human
being and a great teacher what's what's
one of what's a couple of takeaways from
from him and from interacting with oh
well it's part of the problem you see
the reason I don't talk about Peter
almost at all is that the news media
created a fictional character called
Peter teal um and the two of them are
totally different the real Peter teal
and the fictional Peter teal aren't the
same person and so every time I talk
about the real Peter teal people imagine
that I'm talking about a vampire who
lives on a
sead uh you know off of New Zealand
drinking the blood of virgins to stay
young and I've just never met that
person so I in general don't love
talking
about just because that they figured out
a very effective Gambit for trying to
silence his insights but I'll give you
one Insight that I think is really
particularly good Peter has this thing
that he does which I call um radical
compression with minimal
Distortion
and academics usually will tolerate
almost no
Distortion so they of Miss principles
that Peter sees on the other hand um
Peter will say something like I think
one of his was a challenge where he said
we've become much less positive about
technology and science find me a uh a
movie after Back to the Future that
viewed technology
positively
well because he posed as a challenge I
worked I worked really hard in my head
and I came up with one there's a little
indie film called Safety Not Guaranteed
that technology makes a really beautiful
appearance and but the point was I was
behaving like an academic I was willing
to accept no Distortion Peter it's not
true there's one movie that well if if
that's true right that there's only one
movie that I can think of then his point
is obviously mostly correct the
Martian oh this was before the Martian
came out yeah yeah yeah I actually
discussed that on Tim Ferris it's the
ultimate High agency Movie and Andy we
has been on uh this podcast as well is
the author of the original novel yeah so
the um but this is a thing that I
learned from Peter which is be willing
to be a little bit wrong if the
principle uh can be packed up into like
a single sentence and right that that's
a that's a boast you know it's basically
saying did you notice how much our
artistic world and our cultural world
has turned against technology and
progress yeah it's so interesting
because you look at I I actually do a
bit about this in in standup if you look
at movies just about robots yeah the
either they're male robots who are
shooting everyone or they are female
robots who are luring you into sex but
then locking you up and leaving to to
infiltrate Society uhuh so it's like
kind of there's this sexism and robots
but they're all evil well or the Austin
Powers ones which are actually uh deadly
through their sexuality right the fots
right so yeah so robots kind robots are
bad a substudy of that um I don't know
why this keeps reading um but all right
what's another thing you've learned from
um Peter Peter's been on the podcast I'm
always fascinated by more insights
what's a what if you can what's another
uh well another one of his would be um
learn to live with almost contradictions
so for example in both it seems like
there's a fuzz which I like well but but
this is you you see people say he's a
contrarian but he's not you you can't
just put a minus sign in front of
everything and have that work out you'll
bankrupt yourself right so he's always
finding
um the interesting contrarian play so
one of them for example
is most radical individualists are bad
team players and most team players are
really group thinkers
but there's nothing inherently
contradictory about being a radical
individualist who's also an exceptional
team player so go search for that you
know because it's an almost
contradiction but if you can find a tiny
number of people that's super terrific
um a different version of this is that
most smart people are
uninteresting and you're looking for
people who are both surprising and smart
well most of the people who talk in
surprising ways aren't
smart and most of the people who talk in
smart ways aren't surprising now which
of these categories should you search
first the claim is in general you should
search the surprising people first why
because while not everybody's smart
there are a huge number of smart people
you'll it'll take way too long better to
look at the tiny number of people who
are saying truly surprising things and
see if any of them are smart as a better
search process so various ways of just
unspinning the world and seeing it
differently you know at some point I
tried to take Peter's book and turn it
into a collection of
aphorisms and
um you know or or or sort of little
vignettes so you know Peter talks about
last mover advantage and you think about
well what does that mean last mover
Advantage we'll take any look at a at um
bicycle Sprints and in bicycle Sprints
you have two two guys trying to go as
slow as possible around the track
they're each trying to draft the other
from behind to get the other guy to do
the work for them right so it looks like
it's going to be a Sprint but they
didn't realize that when they wrote down
the rules that it was actually going to
cause a strategic chess-like situation
bring it to a crawl well that's like
last mover Advantage you let the other
guys make the mistakes and then you're
the last one who's learned from
everybody else and everybody else is
fatigued and you still have have energy
or another one would be
um you know around people always want to
throw the outliers out um when they're
doing statistics on the other hand uh
the outliers may be all that determines
anything in in a given system because
curtosis and the far right tail is such
a powerful effect and so you know
understanding that you're not cleaning
your data what you're doing is is that
you're uh you're confusing baby in bath
water you know that's an important
principle it's interesting because the
same thing occurs in relationships
people when they meet let's say on a
date they're on their best behavior and
then 3 months in finally one has an
outburst that's like out of control and
the other side might think okay well
that was just he was just frustrated or
she was frustrated but that actually is
the real the real leakage coming out
about what this system is like what this
person is like maybe so maybe
yeah well you know people another one
would be Peter's always on about the
tech slowdown I have a different version
of this is a a core theory of mine and
whenever you hear the thing about the
tech slowdown um somebody will always
say oh look at my phone I have a phone
in my pocket it's got the Library of
Congress you know at that the touch of a
button it's the most amazing thing well
I tried to create an aphorism about this
which is of course your phone is amazing
it's all that was it's all that's left
from your once Limitless future um you
know it was the Collision of the two
things that worked best which was is the
the semiconductor and Communications
technology well well and I view that as
the reason you can't quite call that
Innovative is because it was already
predicted in the 60s like Mo's law
predicts your phone in your pocket
predicts super not question whether it
is or it isn't Innovative it it has been
Innovative the the problem is that all
of the other things that we were
predicting all of the Jetson stuff or
all of the positive versions of a
technological future
um have been much more stalled and so I
often give people this challenge you're
in a you're in a restaurant say uh how
do you prove how many ways can you prove
that it's not
1973 right and so you know the Styles
certainly aren't 1973 but it's not a
proof because maybe it's just a funny
restaurant and you know it's always the
things uh around like the phones you
know or the maybe there's a flat screen
TV TV but there's very little that lets
you know that it's not 1973 anymore and
I think we have to just recognize
that the fact that some things worked is
disguising how much hasn't been working
and that's good news because it's an
opportunity for us to restart all of
these things that are stalled out and so
it's not pessimism it's optimism and
saying hey great news we've been
neglecting all sorts of areas of growth
and now we have the chance to do it we
just have to recognize that it didn't
get done and if we're going to do it
it's going to require rolling up our
sleeves and figuring out who's good at
what rather than constantly complaining
that something somewhere is unfair okay
and so going full circle would you agree
that is the missing nutrino in our kind
of analysis of innovation we predicted
the Jetson it didn't happen even though
we have got all these brilliant
innovators right and then what measures
the difference right remember that was
the next part of it which is um you have
to figure out by you know by what does
it fail and I would say that the failure
has been that the atomic world has not
progress like the electron world or the
bit world the data world and so
undoubtedly the problem is we have to
get good at innovating in the atoms
again as well as you know complimentary
to our our Innovations and data
structures all right well Eric Weinstein
thanks so much for spending hey James
thanks two hours uh talking with me it's
the benefit of having a podcast as you
just talk to people like you and and
learn well come up to San Francisco
we'll do this again all right definitely
excellent thanks
[Music]
James AI might be the most important new
computer technology ever it's storming
every industry and literally billions of
dollars are being invested so buckle up
the problem is that AI needs a lot of
speed and processing power so how do you
compete without cost spiraling out of
control it's time to upgrade to the next
generation of the cloud Oracle Cloud
infrastructure or oci oci is a single
platform for your infrastructure
database application development and AI
needs oci has four to eight times the
bandwidth of other clouds offers one
consistent price instead of variable
Regional pricing and of course nobody
does data better than Oracle so now you
can train your AI models at twice the
speed and less than half the cost of
other clouds if you want to do more and
spend less like uber 8 by8 and datab
Bricks Mosaic take a pre- test drive of
oci oracle.com Advance that's oracle.com
advance oracle.com
advance
