I do believe that the metamodern
sentiment takes you beyond critique in
that you begin to see the enemy as more
human and you begin to see that while
there are some people who are just
callous liars and bastards frankly
mostly that's not the case mostly there
are people trying to get through the day
and when you see them at that level as
parents sometimes as artists in their
spare time sometimes there chess players
it's much easier to connect with them
and say they're often like I don't know
what to do I've got this job I've got
this family I'm caught in this you know
caught in this system I think you have
to get the conversation to that level
more as meeting as equals recognizing
we're all
somehow to to a greater or lesser extent
complicit today I'd like to welcome
Jonathan rouson to the program Jonathan
is the co-founder and director of
uk-based
perspectiva which is a research
organization examining the relationship
between complex Global challenges in the
inner lives of human beings Jonathan is
an applied philosopher with degrees
spanning a range of humanities and
social sciences he is also a chess
Grandmaster and British champion and
also the author of several books
including dispatches from a time between
worlds this was an engaging conversation
we touched on themes frequently brought
up uh in the show such as the metac
crisis meta modernism what it means to
live and reside in the post tragic uh we
discuss how the average human can learn
and think about navigating the human
predicament I hope you enjoy and learn
from this conversation with Jonathan
rouson Jonathan rouson welcome to the
program I feel like I've made it Nate to
finally be here thank
you this is our first time ever speaking
and I've known of you in your work since
I read the the essay tasting the pickle
10 flavors of the metac crisis how long
ago was that a couple three years four
roughly four years when I wrote it yeah
middle of Co it's my co survival
writing I follow a lot of people on
substack um you're one of the few people
that I actually take time to read when
something comes out because you have a
really wide boundary perspective on
things and and you're quite wise um so
why don't we start by you introducing
yourself what is your your current work
uh you're you're an editor or you work
at something called perspectiva U maybe
just unpack um what you're doing now how
you got here and and your your
worldview wow roomy question okay so yes
my my my current day job is that I'm the
the co-founder and chief executive of an
organization called
perspectiva and technically that's a
charity in England and Wales I'm I live
in London um and we describe ourselves
as a community of expert generalists
we're interested in what it means to be
good at being a generalist and we speak
about the desire
to understand in theory and in practice
the relationship between systems souls
and society and by that we mean we're
very interested in integration and
synthesis we're interested in the
connection between the exterior world of
complex systems the economy ecology
technology and so on but also the
interiority of the human being the
psyche the soul the spirit and how that
plays out in society the metaphors the
images the language the discourse and my
intuition some years ago was that one of
the major problems with the public
conversation is that these three
fundamental features of reality rarely
coar Rose they were rarely allowed to
find each other and sort of
mingle so perspectiva was created partly
to create that kind of conversation and
that was now seven or eight years ago
and I'll sort of rather than go back all
the way if I start from the beginning
the my sort of claim to fame probably or
my USP is that I I played chess
professionally for many years I was a a
chess Grandmaster and British champion
for a while and I I briefly worked with
the former world champion vishan Anand
and I got to know the top of the Chess
World quite well and I think that
informs my view of the world in lots of
ways which we can maybe come back to um
and then I studied a bunch of things as
people do but with no particular
intentionality I just sort of stumbled
from one thing to the other I did some
some social science work some Humanities
work I ended up doing a PhD on the
concept of wisdom what it means to
become wiser um and then I got a job in
public policy research and I realized
there this was at the Royal Society of
Arts in London that if uh if you could
raise funds for something if you could
intellectually sell an idea saying this
is important we need to look at this
then you could pretty much do what you
wanted so I ended up doing quite a lot
of work on climate change quite a lot of
work on spirituality particularly the
public awkwardness around discussing
fundamental matters of the nature
meaning and purpose of life alongside
our most our biggest Collective action
Challenge and I began to realize that
while these were quite different in one
way they were both about somehow making
contact with reality they were both a
kind of os they were both like what's
going on who are we how do we live and
in that context I was lucky to meet I
think one of your previous guests I'm
not sure Thomas bjorkman who um gave me
enough Runway to leave my organizational
job before I could start raising funds
myself to create perspectiva and make it
viable that was about
2016 and in that time we've taken form
we've um become a publisher so we've
published uh now seven books uh the most
recent was quite prestigious Ian
mcgilchrist the matter with things um we
have quite a few more books in the
pipeline you you published the matter
with things did although I should also
say with all du humility that we were
there to catch it when it fell I mean it
was more Ian had already done all I had
both I have both volumes uh in the other
room I'm I'm three and a half% my way
through it long way to go no it's a it's
a momentous read and really you know
World historical kind of work uh and I
love it not not to play favorites but of
of the 120 episodes I've recorded my one
with Ian is either my favorite or among
the top three right well yeah I can I
can imagine why and then so in addition
to the publishing we uh we created an
annual festival called the realization
festival and if anyone's not doing
anything at the end of June there's
still some tickets for that this year um
and that's a kind of inquiry in a
similar Spirit uh we call it a festival
for the soul but really we're dealing
with the soul in a you know in this time
of
Reckoning and um we also created a so
social uh practice called the anti-
debate it's a new way of having public
conversations
so the organization's moving along part
of me feels like I'm winging it and
making it up but part of me feels like
it's working and uh I'm I'm a father of
two kids for what it's worth I'm a type
one diabetic I'm Scottish that's about
it well based on that intro I am um I'm
shocked that it's taken two and a half
years to get you on the program because
the words you're saying are completely
aligned with the philosophy of of this
show uh but I'm also pleased that we're
we're finally uh speaking so in no
particular order based on what you just
said what does it mean to be an expert
generalist so I believe we have a we
have an well okay I can Define the term
in a second but let me give you the run
the sort of run up to
it part of the way that modernity deals
with knowledge is by fragmenting it and
um organizing it um and that's been the
case now for many years you get that
with University departments disciplines
subdisciplines so you get people who are
more and more specialized indeed to
someone joke that the problem with the
academic world is in effect it's got a
topof theclass syndrome and that top of
the class syndrome is that the people
who who are top at the class in primary
school love this feeling so much that
they want to keep it and so they choose
the subjects in secondary school where
they can stay top of the class and they
love that feeling so much that when they
go to university they choose a subject
where they Excel and they keep doing
this at infinitum until they Remain the
best at their field in the world but in
the process they lose sight of virtually
everything else now obviously that's a
caricature but it's it's a heuristic as
well it explains something of what's
gone wrong whereas the generalist is
lumbered with the cliche of being a jack
of all trades and master of none but in
a time of relative turmoil when when
things are relatively stable you
actually really value the expertise of
precise and detailed understanding in
one domain and I'm not knocking that for
a a second but in times of relative flux
where how we know what we know what we
need to know what we need to do uh how
we need one field to inform the other
how different kinds of discipline inform
different kinds of practice this is the
time of the generalist this is a time
where you really need to be good at
synthesis but for that how do you do it
with any degree of trust any degree of
competence and that's where the idea of
expert generalist comes in what does it
mean to be an expert generalist it means
to have a degree of epistemic agility
based on at least understanding at least
one thing as an expert I see as a
precondition of being an expert
generalist that you know expertise from
the inside it could be in guitar playing
it could be in looking after dogs it
could be in energy economics it could be
in climate change it could be in chess
it could be in parenting but there's
something you know from the inside where
you say yeah I would say that I've put
my quote unquote 10,000 hours into that
and I I really know this thing and
through that you have a nose for what
sounds like competence and expertise
elsewhere enough that you know what to
begin to trust what kind of questions to
ask um the kinds of knowledge you need
the kind of knowledge it's missing the
framing issues moving from one field to
the other understanding that World Views
and Frameworks will actually Del limit
what you can and can't see and and you
often don't know what you don't what you
need to know and so on so the expert
generalist um I have got a py paragraph
somewhere that I've forgotten but I can
ping that to you later on uh but it's
basically somebody who is um it's a way
of taking generalist understanding
seriously and trying to give it a bit of
institutional uh and societal respect um
because the problem with generalism is
has no status or status as you'd say um
and that's really a problem today
because we need generalists but they're
not giv any kudos
basically I I fully agree and to use
suran's language you said uh a
generalist is a jack of all trades and
master of none so um reductionist
expertise is the master and being a
generalist is the Emissary in our in our
culture um and could that change or is
the reward incentive structure in
universities particularly but more
broadly in the workforce does it
naturally reward um uh special ization
and experts and and there are very few
jobs that um yeah you know other than a
librarian or a hedge fund manager maybe
uh that that pay someone uh to be a
generalist what are your thoughts that's
right well it's a lovely flip on the Ian
uh understanding um because in a
sense in terms of Ian's hemispheric
hypothesis the perception of the whole
and a good reading for context and the
capacity to focus focus on the
particularity of something not just to
apply an algorithm or a method but to
really see the details of one particular
thing is the quality of the quot unquote
Master the the right hemispheric
um
disposition um and and then you need
once you've got that that's the moment
for now I need an expert on this that's
where you say to Emissary I need to find
somebody who understands this kind of
detail of theoretical physics please cuz
without that I don't know if my theory
of time is working and I don't know if
then I can't be sure if what I'm trying
to say sociologically about time is
going to make any sense you know that
kind of thing um so you need that
quality of grasping the whole to know
what kind of details you need in terms
of your
question it's it's connected to the
feeling
that well universities are still very
important culturally they're
particularly important in North America
I think um my sense is my wife's an
academic I have many academic friends I
spend a lot of time interacting with
universities in various ways there's
quite a morale is quite low I would say
in in general University morale is quite
low and I think that's partly because
they
feel um that they're not really allowed
to ask the questions that they're that
they're drawn to they're not really free
and you know it's the promise of this
Enclave cultural Enclave where great
minds can pursue their interests no
longer applies now
you have enormous administrative
pressure significant funding pressure
often quite a lot of departmental
politics um and yes you'll squeeze in a
publication or two but even there you
have to deal with the peer review
process and all that that means um so I
I
feel I don't know how to save the
university system at all but I have
noticed that the people I admire more
intellectually tend to be outside of it
um not always but Ian's an example you
know not easy to do Ian's work in
University because it it traverses too
many different fields that that is just
in addition to being at the heart of the
human predicament um the left brain
right brain and just our our psychology
in general of how we've moved to a
materialist understanding of of our
world and we're disconnected from nature
but beyond the the content the
scholarship in that thing is
unbelievable he hundreds and hundreds
and hundreds of references I mean that
guy is is special um yeah um so so um
like I said you have a a substack uh
what's it called it's called the joyous
struggle uh that's my personal one the
joyous struggle and this perspectiva my
organization also has
one yeah so um you write a lot about the
metac crisis or poly crisis U what why
do you prefer the term metac crisis and
and poly crisis and and you know what
what are your thoughts on all that okay
well I'm inclined to back up just a
little bit cuz you know I'm conscious of
your audience I've listened to some of
your shows and uh I know your guests um
I think what's going feel free to back
up as far as you like so so it's like
this um I think there's really quite a
big difference between medic crisis and
poly crisis I think it matters a lot and
I I think it's to understand
why you need to understand something of
conceptual practice the the very idea of
how terminology takes root
institutionally and culturally and
begins to shape mindsets Which shapes
policies and so on it really does matter
that as you're trying to get some sort
of macro diagnosis of the global
predicament that the terminology we
choose is as precise as
possible and in that sense the
difference between the prefix meta and
poly might seem Niche and kind of Arcane
but actually what one introduces um the
other ignores so I'll try and explain
what I mean by that poly basically means
many and it it can mean more than one
type of that kind of many but it
typically just means plural a number of
things and I think in the theory of poly
crisis and there is quite a lot of
theory it's not just a random
buzzword um they're talking in terms of
systems analysis and it's usually where
at least three systems uh are in some
sense out of whack not working and
there's a sort of emergent property of
that compounding effects that means you
can no longer know through cause and
effect relationships how to intervene in
a way that will solve any problems an
example of that would be during the
pandemic where the health system the
economic system and the education system
became particularly intertwined schools
were closed because of health reasons
businesses were closed because of health
reasons um and
then everyone felt the the effect of
that that would be a sort of classic
poly crisis these things are
inextricably linked it's not clear where
you intervene to make a difference but
and this is maybe where I hope I have
something to add to the show that might
be well maybe not new but at least
relatively unusual it's to do with
interiority you know I think when you
the risk of
doing something like a super organism
analysis looking at energy flows and
trying to understand the global
macroeconomic economy as an it as a
system uh and I know you know Nate know
there's more than that going on there
are human psyches and culture and so on
but at the same time there is a kind of
mentality there a technocratic mentality
that means that the term poly crisis is
picked off the shelf as oh I can use
this conceptually because it allows me
to carry on talking at that technocratic
level of the system as an IT poly crisis
doesn't really allow you to get inside
what's going on now what do I mean by
that I mean that uh we're not it doesn't
help you deal with Consciousness or
emotion or the overall meaning and
purpose of what's what we're trying to
do it's still at the level of there's a
problem that's try and fix it in that
sense it's very much part of the the
mind the leadership mindset that says
nothing to worry about here this is just
one of many problems we'll call it the
poly crisis but we'll still treat it
like any other problem right but as you
know what's going on is several orders
of magnitude more complex and difficult
and for that you need not only to stand
back the PO crisis does allow you to
stand back and look at it but it doesn't
allow you to do two other things one is
to look within and the other is to look
Beyond and this is what the word meta
gives us that poly doesn't meta has
multiple meanings it's meant to have in
Aristotle it was typically just after
but it also can mean within between
Beyond um and it's also got this quality
of of moving between as well so it's a
very rich term and that's also important
because the problem is multifaceted in
fact I call the metac crisis a
multifaceted delusion for that reason
because on the one hand it's one thing
it's ultimately our view of the world
that's the problem it's a a deep
delusion RIT large but it manifests in
terms of the economy in terms of War uh
in terms of human relations and so on so
what meta gives us is the capacity to
look Within in the problem and by that I
mean the
underlying story of the human being and
the meaning and purpose of life that
permeates society today which doesn't
give you the resources you need to
contend with this kind of existential
Global
predicament and there's more to say but
that's a good start to just get it going
that that makes sense to me I I actually
unless I'm interviewing someone that's
known for using those terms I use the
term the human predicament um more often
than not but it for for the reasons you
just said it's why I don't like the word
energy transition because it immediately
conjures up we just need to fix the
energy stuff but the transition ahead of
us is in our relationships and our
values in our interaction with nature
within ourselves I mean it's so much
more than just energy um so so I think
the reason I asked you that question is
because your essay that I first read
about the pickle um made me think about
that so how do you on another layer how
do you
experience you yourself experience the
metac crisis or how do you feel it with
quite a lot of dissonance would be the
answer and I choose dissonance um
because and joy yeah because um Joy
there is a joyful struggle um and I'm
grateful for my life and I'm blessed
with quite a full life um
and I live in a street now in Putney
here which is you know relatively
affluent part of London um my kids go to
school we're all more or less healthy
the E you know the the government's not
great but on the other hand the the
country is still more or less stable we
are I would somewhat argue a democracy
although of course it depends how you
define that um so in a sense I I live a
normal life and and I I don't I don't
want to wish it away you know I I I I'm
not one of these people who say
everything has gone to pot and you know
everything must change overnight I'm
like actually I have quite a lot to lose
um there's so so on the one hand at a
personal level um I'm not ready to say
modernity is necessarily ending or that
Democratic capitalism has utterly failed
so in terms of my lived experience I've
even got a conservative orientation in
that way you know this kind of the home
and the family and the community is kind
of alive for me but if you ask me more
intellectually and a bit more to my
Scottish Roots um I do feel like there
is this vast delusion that is playing
out now and is come getting worse and
worse and worse and as part of the
preparation for this talk one of your
guests I forget which one spoke about
the likelihood of a what he called a
socioeconomic heart attack I thought it
was a nice line forget which guest it
was but then the another one is just
socioeconomic heart attack quite likely
for the reasons that you your viewers
will be familiar with uh World War III
not unlikely because compounding
pressures uh of the system uh as a whole
giving rise to Resource Wars and and
Military adventures and um people not
trusting democracy authoritarian
leadership authoritarian leadership
justifying itself through conquest and
so
on and then you have all the more subtle
problems of AI and exactly where what
those problems are as a whole
conversation but certainly a big shift
in
our capacity to make sense on the
internet the problem of
misinformation uh likely to be something
we were contending with and so on so I
do feel dissonance in the sense that I
want life to carry on as it is in some
ways while also feeling simultaneously
everything has to
change uh and that's sort of how it
shows up for me mostly there's one more
way it shows up if that's if I can
say uh it shows up spiritually in the
sense that
you know I'm not I I don't have any
religious background I didn't my family
wasn't religious I didn't go to church
or anything like that but as part of the
metac crisis work and as part of the uh
research I alluded to earlier at the RSA
I have been interested in the the sort
of forms of spiritual practice and
spiritual perspective that we have in
what is mostly a liberal imaginary and
you in the North America you're somewhat
different culture of course but there's
still this broadly individualistic
public private
separation um some people believe in God
some
don't um and that's kind of more or less
how it is but I'm quite interested
in given how difficult it is to actually
see a way through and you've done better
than anyone at pointing out that
conundrum I'm interested in what a kind
of transform transformative
Transcendent metanoia shift in overall
worldview would look like and while I
can't say that shows up for me I'm very
far from enlightened I do have glimpses
of a kind of ah life could feel a bit
different there there there are some
Thin spaces in the world where I feel ah
I don't really see things very clearly
200 years from now my worldview will
look very silly so all of these things
play out I I agree with almost
everything you just said um I'm going to
come back to the metac crisis and and
some of you perspectives but I do also
follow you on Twitter and once in a
while or or more often than once in a
while you have a a chess related comment
so you mentioned youed to be a a
Grandmaster uh chess
player is that different than like
tennis where if there's someone who's
better at tennis they will beat the
other player all the time or is it is
there a lot of luck involved and how did
chess uh help shape your worldview or or
did it contribute to your understanding
of the choreography in your mind of the
metac crisis and the things that we're
discussing well I did write a book a few
years ago called the moves that matter a
chess Grandmaster on the game of life
and that was a long form answer to the
question what is chess taught you about
life
um and just say The Grandmaster title is
a lifelong title thankfully so if you
earn it you don't have to you know keep
playing or anything like that you you're
always that um how do you earn that
title you basically have to get very
good and then you have to prove that
you're good in three tournaments where
you have to play Above Grandmaster level
and then you have to have a rating which
is a kind of number given to you through
an algorithmic process by the World
Chess Federation that is a level at
which The Grandmaster title kicks in so
if you can bu keeper that's that's to
make sure you don't just have three
fluke results so if you have three big
results and one constant rating um
they're like okay you've met the bar and
that's your grandmas for life and after
that your R can drop and it often does
um so I I think there's something like
for I've lost track I'm a little bit out
of a loop but there's at least a
thousand Grandmasters in the world now
although when I when I became one it was
more like a few
hundred um but in terms of the big
question um well there's a lot of things
uh first of all there's the
opponent um then there is
your own mind and being aware of your
own mind and then there's the constant
mistakes that anyone makes who plays
chess then there's the fact that there's
multiple pieces doing different kinds of
things then there's the fact that uh
plans don't typically work out because
you can't see too far before a surprise
hits you um so when you play these
things out I I the the the opponent the
presence of the opponent has given me a
somewhat annoying
trait of thinking of what the other side
would say it it can make me sound
disloyal because you know sometimes a
friend or my wife Shiva or whatever will
come up to me and say this person said
this this and this and I have to work
really hard not to say they kind of have
a point you know um because I'm trying
to see it from their point of view and
and I and chess has given me that chess
has given me the the legitimacy of the
opponent and here you are have an
organization called perspectiva right
different perspectives right maybe
accident um which is you got to be
careful with mad relativism you got to
be careful that say that you know it's
not just anything goes but once you
realize that you know if you grew up
differently uh if you'd had different
experiences you would have thought
something different too you know if uh
you know people become conservative
because they were brought up in
conservative families people become
Progressive likewise because of certain
experiences and once you sort of once
that Penny drops
you just have to try and see people um
not primarily politically see them first
of all as human beings who like you fell
into the world at some level with a
certain set of
circumstances um and then through that
formation they develop their views that
they have it gives you a certain degree
of sympathy um even tenderness towards
people when you that's what I feel at
the chess put it's like I want to beat
this opponent you know certainly when I
was younger very
competitive but there's also a degree of
they're just trying to do what you're
trying to do you know and that has
stayed with me um so while I don't while
I don't love fossil fuel baronss I do
sometimes imagine you know if I was the
shell CEO trying to persuade my board of
something what what are my constraints
what can I do what can't I
do that kind of thing so so let me build
on that because that something that
you're known for and I wanted to talk to
you about um you are a champion of a
philosophy or way of thinking called
metamodernism um and may maybe you could
just briefly describe your
interpretation of the words uh modernism
postmodernism and
metamodernism and then get into why you
think metamodernism is a useful way to
think about the world and and the metac
crisis most people watching this will
just watch this but anyone who whatever
I'm about to say however much I fumble
it there's a long form version of this
and it's online called you know met
metamodernism and the perception of
context and there you can see detailed
paragraphs on each of these but here's
my verbal response modern you know the
word modern means you know basically new
um it's it's to do with what is what is
new what is uh coming our way habas
spoke of it in terms of an orientation
towards the future
um tracing the exact origins of
modernism is tricky there's several
different ways of looking at it h there
sort of early modernism middle modernism
late modernism but you're talking about
sort of 400 to 600 years of of time and
we're still modern and this is quite
important that this any sort of sequence
is not a simple like ladder with one
thing leading to another the former
structures stay in the new structure so
while we're modern we're still premodern
as well you know we're still out posts
of E I don't know um uh Orthodox
religion of various kinds and you know
there's the Taliban in Afghanistan and
there's you know all sorts of sites of
the
premodern um and often you'll find those
same people with mobile phones and you
know they're they they're in
a a more postmodern setup as well so
what we mean by postmodern is postmodern
is is sometimes called like modernity on
stilts there are some people who think
it's really just a a different part of
the modern
um but typically the postmodernist are
critique of modernity it's saying that
there's not one story there's not one
world view this science reason and
progress that people put their faith in
works better for some than others it has
a shadow that shadow includes
colonialism it includes slavery it
includes fossil fuels it includes being
energy blind and that's part of the
modern mindset it's like yes go science
reason program
but you're like hang on what are you not
seeing what is you know whose backs is
this being built right the postmodern
mindset is the one that does that kind
of critique
work the metamodern
disposition is many things but one way
of understanding it is that it's a a
sort of reconciliation of the modern and
postmodern mindsets it's a way of
recognizing modernity had a lot going
for it it still does um quite grateful
when you go to the dentist that you have
an anesthetic before you have treatment
you know that kind of thing it's it's
it's valuable the progress is is
invaluable however it does have a shadow
and and we need to move beyond the naive
acceptance that everything is progress
and everything is good um but you don't
want to get lost in perspective and
critique the challenge of moving beyond
postmodernism is to give something other
than the critique of
modernism you have to
somehow present a positive World Vision
uh a place to go to a set of ideas that
you can believe in and very often
they'll bring some of the sense of Drive
of of of pro and progress of modernity
but they'll
also Tech give that some texture and
definition through the perspectives of
modern of postmodern modernism so it
will say think about that from a
subaltern point of view think of that
from a feminist point of view think of
that from a racial point of view and
then we might be getting somewhere so
we're not throwing out the progress
we're just asking you to to give it
definition and flesh it out and and give
it some uh greater scope and because of
that um it's a bit more than that though
because as you bring those qualities to
bear it's quite roomy already you can
feel a kind of Psych at you know playing
with
itself and sometimes they call you know
serious play would be quite a matter
modern disposition so on the one hand
you look like you're being frivolous but
actually you're TR really inquiring into
something they sometimes speak about
ironic sincerity or sincere irony as one
of the metamodern qualities and that's
to do with the fact that you're so
saturated with perspective from the past
that you can no longer speak as if you
haven't spoken before um Umberto Ekko
gives a good example of this he
says and this is on the postmodern but
I'll tell you in a minute it's also
metamodern in some ways uh amber EO of
course uh great it Ian academic literary
theorist um novelist man with maybe the
best library in in in the world as well
he said there's a story of uh he thinks
of it as a man who loves a very
sophisticated woman and so he cannot say
to her I love you madly because she's
heard these same word words several
times before in Barbara Cartland
novels there is a solution however what
she needs to say is as Barbara Cartland
would have put it I love you madly
now that would be postmodern it's I love
you as modern It's s of like it's just
the way things are saturated with
perspective and and history postmodern
critique Barbara carton would say it
metamodern would be somehow you can say
I love you and the person you're talking
to knows that your mind has just gone
through that Barbara Cartland joke but
you come out the other side and you're
like no no I can be this that's a real
value so what what metamodernism gives
you is a it's a commitment to things
like truth beauty and goodness again and
love and so on these are real things but
you can no longer treat them completely
innocently you you know you you don't
stand in veneration of them there's a
little bit of irony and playfulness with
them yeah I want to talk more about that
but in the example you just gave it
presumes for metamodern thinking to
scale or uh to have an effect there
needs to be more metamodern thinkers to
so that you talk to otherwise the the
love example you just said wouldn't
wouldn't have uh
manifested um I I mean here here's why
I'm interested in it um there are a lot
of problems with our world and they're
accelerating um you've mentioned many of
them uh climate change and what's
accelerating there uh social
inequalities um lot lots of things and I
think it's natural for humans to
um isolate a problem that they care
about or feel threatened by and blame
someone
um I'm I've lived through that period in
my own life and now I am trying to
connect the dots of how things fit
together but not only deconstruct what
happened with our society and our
species and our cultural Evolution the
last uh few hundred years on the backs
of armies of fossil workers but to
reconstruct what's possible and and
Forge some even though they're blurry
paths ahead which I think requires us to
suppress our identities listen more be
playful ask questions instead of just
critiquing right right so help me
understand the pathway to to get Beyond
critique towards some sort of a
reconstruction even if it's fuzzy and
doesn't have all the details right
the quick answer is experimentation so
um I mean it's difficult for me to speak
on behalf of metamodern modernism as a
whole because there are multiple strains
of
metamodernism um and in I need to to
sort of lay that out before explaining
what might follow for Action so there's
a kind of
cultural um cultural metamodernism let's
say which is to do with recognizing a
mult a metamodern Sensibility within art
forms like films and books where they
notice that there's a return to real
value you actually care about the
characters so Seinfeld for example would
not be metamodern it's very postmodern
it's all
critique
um whereas something like and funny as
hell by the way funny as hell I I'd
happily chill out and watch it in fact
there something a relief just to be in
that zone of completely unserious uh
let's say um but it's there's no there's
no real depth to it not really there's
no kind of ultimate ultimate love or
truth or beauty or anything like that
it's all very
surface um but there are many more films
now where that's not the case so one
example would be uh you know don't look
up is quite a metamodern film um I don't
know if you're familiar with it but the
the approaching as I loved it right so
that would be a very good example of
metamodern film because on the one hand
it's absurd and ridiculous and it has
those kind of postmodern critiquing the
world tropes but there's also a
character that you care about in the
main scientist and then when they're
having the dinner at the end there's a
real sort of somber Reckoning of we
really we really did have it all didn't
we I think is the final line before the
asteroid hits um and so there's some
real dignity and sort of tenderness to
the film and that's a metamodern quality
but it's not naive you know it's it
still recognizes the political
corruption and the denialism and the
crazy media and those are part of the
world so it doesn't feel sacr or
sentimental it takes all of that stuff
and moves you beyond it and that's what
cultural metamodernism analyzes looks at
artifacts like that what's going on
there you have a kind of political
metamodernism which is a bit more in the
sort of hanzi Frac school which is to do
with developmental Theory and that where
you where you mentioned there about the
population and how they see the world
they would actually Advocate that we
need sort of education at scale to
develop the world population to sort of
understand things in a certain way so
that we can actually grapple with the
problems that we have um the the benefit
there is it's true we need to grow into
the complexity of our times the risk is
it can sound kind of crypto fascist and
that you have to you know make people a
certain way and force them to be free
and so on um and then you have a more
academic sort of social theory
metamodernism with um trying to actually
change social theory Beyond
postmodernism and that's m mostly um
Joseph Ananda storm I believe his name
is um and then you have something like
the kind of metamoris I have which is a
bit
more fluid it's it's more of a kind of
not not being any any of those camps but
sort of seeing them all and it's
something to
with
um recognizing that modernity might be
inexorably
ending but still
somehow not entirely wanting to let it
go so it it makes you you're not a
doomster there's also a Doomer optimism
Camp that's another story you're not
you're not like oh my God everything's
collapsing it's all terrible actually
there's a little bit of up beatness to
it it's like we live in utterly
fascinating times dark yes we really
might be stupid enough to destroy our
only home nonetheless how fascinating to
have to contend with problems of this
magnitude and when I say experiment what
I mean is we're a bit
beyond you know the kind of analysis the
kind of meta analysis which says here's
the global system totalizing abstraction
this number of people this number of
governments this amount of money this so
much energy what do we do because that's
not where the agency is there is no
world government there is no we in at
that level I believe the metamodern
sensibility is much more localized but
more precisely it's cosmol local it's
very much aware of the planetary
sensibility seeing ourselves as a kind
of Cosmos in the far reaches of space
but the action is often local and the
local doesn't just mean your street
level or your garden it can also mean
your digital Community what you have
proximate to you my favorite line of
yours Nate so far is where you said on
this Runway train we have to find the
dining car thought it was brilliant
poetic Brilliance and it's that's kind
of metamodern it's like yes things are
going to hell in handcraft and so on but
hand cart rather but um but we've got to
enjoy this one wild and precious life
and uh simultaneously this is the
metamodern mixed feelings they come AR
they come together yes it's dark and
difficult yes it's hopeful and joyous
and so it goes on
and that's the quick answer I haven't
told you what we do yet but I'll give
take a bre breath okay and let me ask a
followup to that and then you can tell
me what you do um so from a practical
standpoint for those watching this show
who are well-versed in the global global
problematique uh uh to use a different
term um and are either
themselves uh or constantly interacting
with others who are focused just on
critique it's the fault of Exxon and
shell it's the fault of the billionaires
and the cor corporations or or what have
you how would you experiment what sort
of advice would you give to listeners
to playfully or experimentally move
Beyond um that that framing of of the
metac
crisis move towards the body and
relationships um is the quick way of
looking I'll give you two examples of
that
um you mentioned Shon xon when I was
working at the RSA working on climate
change um I managed to raise funds to do
a climate constellations inquiry I don't
know if you know constellations therapy
but it's a a form of sometimes it's
called social presence in theater in
essence somebody discloses in natural
language what the problem is they'll say
I'm trying to raise money I can't raise
money nobody understands my my my
argument for social change what do I do
and then the room will kind of um take
form take the form of that in this case
there was a climate person who was
working in the climate field saying she
was having real difficulty with feelings
of pain
towards attacking the fossil fuel
industry she felt it was somehow
disingenuous her life depended on these
petrochemicals and so on and she uh
didn't feel right that almost every day
she was going to work as if they were
the enemy and she was the
savior
somehow so the constat basically says
okay let's play that out so intuitively
without thinking too much you choose
someone to represent fossil fuel uh you
choose someone to represent maybe uh the
organizations you're working inside
someone else might represent the media
the government and so on then you you
lay it out in the room and then you'll
ask them okay here are those people um
anything you want to add and she'll add
one or two things and then the
consolator will look at the room and ask
the people who are already there now
they're not doing role play it's very
important to understand that they're not
acting they're asked to deal with
sematic data what's going on in their
body about how they feel and they'll say
things like they know that this fossil
fuel company is standing there how do
you feel about I'm looking at you and
they'll say I feel pretty uncomfortable
I prefer he turned around and they turn
around and it goes on like that for a
while until it settles and the reason
I'm sharing this is that when it settled
what happened was the fossil fuel
company was there and and
funnily enough it was a tall white man
which is kind of like type cast fossil
fuel Baron um and I remember thinking he
looked like the part and then they got
the person who was playing um the issue
holder in the field so they don't play
it themselves they choose somebody else
to be them and they got them to
say say tell tell the the consolator
said tell them ask them to say I am evil
and the F ofil person said I am evil and
then he said how do that feel and he
said bollocks good British word like
nonsense I'm not evil right he says okay
okay ask him to say I am the past he
said I am the past he said how do that
feel he said better about right and this
was a really kind of cathartic moment
for the person who held the issue it was
like they're not evil they're the past
right we have to make them the past help
them become the past right they maybe
they are evil too that's another that's
a footnote but this is an example of
actually you know doing something with
theater and in bodies in the room second
example um we did a an anti- debate one
of perspectiva sort of
inventions it's an attempt to explore an
issue with uh multiple ways of knowing
and again using space more intelligently
trying to be still intellectually
rigorous as far as possible but not
relying merely on discussion also
working with metaphor feelings um
movement and so on and we did one on
climate change and we asked part of it
is asking people to choose the
question and then they sort of vote on
the question and they try and make the
case for why we should discuss this
thing and what we ended up discussing
this is quite recently was the
contention humanity is too weak to solve
the climate
crisis discuss right humanity is too
weak
and what was interesting about that was
um we chose to discuss it not because
people AG greed but because some people
vehemently disagreed and they hated the
question so much that they really wanted
to go for it and others were like no no
I think finally we're getting to it this
is really the problem we are too weak to
deal with this problem and as an aside
Thomas metzinger wrote a beautiful essay
where he spoke called um spirituality
and intellectual honesty that's freely
available online where he says that
we'll become aware of ourselves as fa
failing
beings really evocative haunting term
failing beings but anyway that was what
the discussion became and we allowed
people to get into this sense of what do
we mean by being too weak am I too weak
are you too weak who's too weak is this
really true but it's different from just
having a get the bastards conversation
right because it doesn't entirely ring
true while you get the stats about a
certain number of companies responsible
for a certain percentage of the
emissions and you'll know these facts
about than me but you know they always
ring partly true they're very important
because agency is not easily distribut
distributed nor is responsibility
there's not moral equivalence
nonetheless am I taking to the streets
every day to complain about um the
fossil fuels that I'm implicated in no
I'm living my life most people are so
it's not entirely right for me to say
the problem is entirely with the fossil
fuel companies I can do what I can I can
devest my pension I can campaign I can
write my things
but somehow you I do believe that the
metamodern sentiment takes you beyond
critique and that you begin to see the
enemy as more human and you begin to see
that while there are some people who are
just callous liars and bastards frankly
um mostly that's not the case mostly
there are people trying to get through
the day and when you see them at that
level as parents sometimes as artists in
their spare time sometimes as chess
players it's much easier to connect with
them and say they're often like I don't
know what to do I've got this job I've
got this family I'm caught in this you
know caught in this
system I think you have to get the
conversation to that level more as
meeting as equals recognizing we're all
somehow to to a greater or lesser extent
complicit albeit some greater admittedly
well your last sentence I fully agree
with u but let me ask you this
um so Society has progressed from
premodern to Modern and postmodern and
maybe some somewhat metamodern in in the
movie don't look up you mentioned is
that progression map on to an individual
human life as they mature and learn and
become more wise and have experiences or
not necessarily so not necessarily it's
a common understanding so the way you
framed it there first of all even the
initial qu premise I would question it's
not necessarily progress I mean the very
the very idea of progress is quite a
modern sentiment some would say in the
context of your a great
simplification um progress May well be
one of the ideas that we have to hospice
you know we have to sort of let
go um and
um there can be different kinds of
progress of course but the but the sort
of societal the idea that things are
getting better and better and better
that's precisely what we're realizing
isn't the case that that was always a
partial
truth um I I don't know that you've
you've read it but Daniel SCH en Berger
and the um uh civilization Research
Institute team have a new uh long paper
out on on uh naive progress versus
authentic progress unpacking the point
exactly that you just made okay great no
I haven't I haven't read that but it
rings Rings true and um I in the context
of an individual life it's also it's
also true that these things they they're
more like overlapping
qualities um so the world remains premod
modern postmodern and metamodern all at
the same time likewise in an individual
psyche you know the part of me that goes
to the bank is still quite modern um and
the part of me that goes to the debate
and critiques the opposition is
relatively postmodern and so on um but
there is nonetheless some developmental
aspect to this there is something about
the one of perspectiva premises is that
a new sensibility is arising I do
believe that's the case and that
sensibility can be called metamodern in
that people are kind of
Reckoning with we can't go on like this
at a global scale but they're also
recognizing there is no operative agency
at the global level that will allow us
to respond to a reckoning and so our
default way of functioning day by day is
no longer fit for purpose and so then
what how do we actually collaborate
together experiment together influence
powers that
be change the nature of power maybe
create a parallel polace these kind of
things so so what would be possible if
more people um developed that way of of
looking at the world and interacting
with others in contrast to if the facts
about our our Global pickle uh continue
to get worse and we just critique it
louder and louder critiques um how how
do we get out of that Loop and what
might be possible if if more people
start to think that way things are
possible um and and by that I mean I'm
not inclined to despair um I do
recognize objectively we are in a pickle
quite quite a significant one the way I
try to get around it is that critique
should Co arise with vision and
Method and I try not to allow critique
to come by itself for too long without
vision and Method it's buddies coming
along um vision of course is something
to do with where you want to get to and
um that's tricky today because that will
always be contested you know it's not
like One Vision is going to SW yeah
seduce the whole 8 billion plus
population uh it's going to play out
differently and this is one of the
challenges with our desire to see the
system the global system as a whole we
need the work you do is invaluable don't
get me wrong you absolutely do need to
see um how we're doing in terms of
energy and economy and debt and all of
the things that you allude to at a total
system however you need to remember that
the total system is only one frame and
that there's also a kind of pluriverse
of multiple cultures with different
kinds of
Institutions and there is scope for
change that's more localized I think the
danger is because we're used to living
our own life in terms of if there's a
problem I'm responsible for fixing it
when we switch the scale and go to the
global we think something similar
applies big problem what's the solution
but it's a kind of um category error
that really while the totalizing
abstraction is important
information it's not the arena for our
our agency the arena for our agency is
inherently more localized and the
challeng is to coordinate the local
action at
scale and that's a big difference I
think
so building on that you've coined a term
called Collective
individuation uh which my understanding
is you pulled from Carl Young's work on
individuation and elanar ostrom's work
on Collective action can can is this the
time to explain that and could you break
that down for us okay um so I'm not sure
I coined it I forget the original Source
but just in case I'm not nicking it I
certainly brought it into being a little
bit in our Network um individuations
relatively straight forward it's a it's
a union notion to do with becoming who
you're meant to be and it's it's a sort
of stage of life where you free yourself
from societal society's kind of
influences and find your own voice and
um uh somehow degree of integration in
the soul arises so it's becoming an
individual but it's more than just
individual as opposed to Collective it's
being a person it's really in in Carl
Roger sense it's becoming a
person um what's different about
Collective individuation is that it
insists on linking that process of
personal individuation which is a kind
of psychological and spiritual work to a
cultural and sociological
context so Ellen rrom is very important
when it comes to problems relating to
Moc or Collective action problems or
game theoretic
problems because Ellen ROM's work is
really a kind of can do attitude yes
there are collective action problems but
there are also Collective action
Solutions and if you become less
abstract about it and look at what
people actually do in practice often
these apparently insurmountable
challenges can are dealt with through a
kind of trust and trade-offs and rituals
and so on um now what I mean by linking
Carl Yung and Ellen rrom is that I feel
that what's called for today is not
everyone doing their own thing uh in
terms of you know that's my life that's
your life good for you you do you I'll
do me that sort of thing that's only
partly true there's there's there's
something about finding out who you are
and living the life you're meant to live
but I think it has to be responsive to
the historical ecological and cultural
context we find ourselves in and that's
quite a different contention then the
question is not who am I the question is
what am I called upon to be and and what
is my unique opportunity here giv my
background giving my talents given my
relationships given my affordances my
opportunities what can I do that helps
and that is a question leading towards
individuation but it's collective in the
sense that it's responding to the mil
that you're part of um so that's what I
mean by Collective individuation which
is a a different way of saying I'm
trying to get a lot of people on this
channel to understand the the global uh
predicament and and play a role uh once
they see the the road and the landscape
then play a role according to their
affordances like you said um I mean
that's that's why I really enjoy
speaking with people like you because
I'm trying to individuate given my view
of the circumstances the unbelievably
scary uh and complex circumstances that
we face but then I find someone else
that's doing the same thing and I feel
like the burden is lessened somewhat
just by interacting with that person and
then if there's 10 people um it's it
scales and so I think that is something
that feeling and you're labeling it
Collective
individuation relative to The Meta
crisis is exactly what we need to happen
globally to some degree I feel so I also
feel it's an antidote to despair you
know it's an antidote to the idea of the
problem is too big nobody's doing
anything about it I can't do anything
about it
really our job I think is to find our
not to ignore the context it's very
important we Orient to the the medic
crisis the planetary predicament but at
the same time recognize that that's not
actually our Arena as such that's our
context our arena is somewhere else and
the question is and how do we find our
own work informed by the work informed
by that predicament and I do feel more
people are beginning to do that um which
gives me some encouragement as well so
before we hit record on this Jonathan we
were talking about how difficult um the
circumstances are and that this can be a
lonely road um and uh we didn't evolve
to handle this amount of stress about
the world every single day how do you
manage to have a life and a wife and
kids and uh um chores and and things and
also work on this metac crisis space how
how do you how do you manage that uh and
the cognitive dissonance
involved well there's quite a lot of
multitasking I'm laughing because my
headphones are on and and when you
mention chores you know there's a fair
amount of dishwasher while listening to
the great simplification for example um
and there's you know I actually think of
you know tasks I can do where I can stay
at tuned while doing things but more
generally I think just quite important
to get a good feeling for your own
responsibility because you can't you
know you can't really carry the weight
of the world I'm not sure you're meant
to I think it's quite a recent
phenomenon through initially the
internet but particularly the internet
enabled smartphone and then social
media that we carry in our pocket the
world's problems and also because of
muscle memory and habit formation and
algorithms and addiction and so on um
they commun responses and everything
else we we end up checking a lot oh my
God there's the problem there's the
problem and not just that but we get a
lot of status anxiety look at those
people who are really doing something
important I'm not doing anything
important now I'm not immune to any of
that I feel all of that but I also see
the absurdity of it and um I think it's
quite important to be around people who
will challenge you to do your best but
we'll also thank you for doing your
thing and to be encouraged by you know
can say to you I think very clearly
you're doing your thing and it's um
there's something charismatic and
beautiful about that when when you find
your work and you're doing the thing
that you alone are well placed to do
it's a blessing and I wish that for
everyone um and when you find that it's
a bit easier to have a life because you
no longer feel your life is solving the
meta crisis which you can't possibly do
um which anyway doesn't have a solution
but that's another another
conversation thank you for that um both
the honesty and and calling out my own
situation um which you did correctly I
think
uh two years ago I never would have
anticipated that two years on I would be
doing this podcast alternated with my
little frankly riffs and Reflections and
doing presentations and connecting
people around the world and it does
actually feel like this is what is mine
to do um so I I I will carry on so
getting back to to the the
individual um observation of you carry
the the world's problems in your in your
pocket how help do you think I believe
it was Mark Gaffney came up with the
original framing of the pre- tragic the
tragic and the post- tragic uh maybe you
could briefly redefine that and and uh
tell me if you think that's uh useful
framing or do you incorporate that into
your your life and your work yeah so I I
first came across this through Zack
Stein and I think Zach and Mark together
developed the idea and they speak of it
as Stations of the self I believe so
it's not a conventional developmental
model in which you kind of go through
stages it's more
like
um it's an existential analysis of of of
the individual's disposition towards
life and in order to it's it's not a
judgment about the relative value of
these things so it's important to feel
it's not like you're trying to achieve
post tragic um uh pre- tragic is perfect
if you're a baby and you're giggling and
you're in your mother's arms and you
have the food you need be pre- tragic
all for it right tragic or or watching
Seinfeld or yeah later in life maybe but
yeah when you're
um if you lose a loved one uh if you
lose your favorite tree if you um if
your pet dies if uh you have heartbreak
then be tragic you know there's a case
for for not catatonic depression no one
would recommend that but there's a you
know there's a a time where tragedy hits
you and you're meant to feel it and
that's
normal but these are not places that are
the truest let's say they're true at
certain points of life but I think what
is more fully true the closer to the
whole truth is something like the post
tragic which is where the the energy of
the pre- tragic and the kind of
positivity of it and the the love of
Life contained in it is informed by the
darkness and the reality of the tragic
which after all is really about a
statement that life matters that there
are things worth caring about that there
is meaning here and it carries that
meaning into the post- tragic which is
where life is darker heavier more real
but it's still broadly something that
you're glad to live and engage in I find
it quite quite handy as a notion um for
what it's worth I I do too and actually
that was a a beautiful description of it
that I hadn't heard uh that framing I
think those of us working in the metac
crisis space and many of the listeners
and Watchers of this
program uh probably would agree that um
the the buffeting of world events with
Israel and Iran and Russia and climate
and new temperature records and all the
other things that we we yo-yo between
the post- tragic and the tragic on a
daily basis sometimes which isn't all
that healthy um so H how do you reside
mostly in the post- tragic what are some
techniques or practices that that you've
come up with or what do you have to say
about that a couple of things so the
first is in addition to the yo-yoing
there's also the problem of the the sort
of techno Optimus pre- tragic
vibe that you leave if you go online and
you or you you watch what's Salient on
YouTube there's a lot of people who do
feel that you know civilization is doing
wonderfully well and look at how AI will
solve all our problems and make everyone
fabulously wealthy and solve our energy
problems and so on and that's wearisome
because it doesn't ring true and it and
it it sort of distracts attention from
what needs to be done um also I think
it's important to say that there's
different kinds of tragedy I mean I have
had some degree of tragedy in my life
but I I would even hesitate to say I am
post- tragic because I'm not sure
touchwood that I've had that you know
had people die that are close to me and
I've I've had heartache and you know I
know a bit of tragedy but I also know
people who have had real real tragedy
and you know lives have utterly Fallen
apart um but in so far as you you want
to get to a state of being that allows
you to live well which I think is a
given and one that is real and not fake
you're looking for something that can
contain the darkness of Life contain the
Vivid and frankly
disturbing diagnosis of the world's
predicament but not allow it to floor
you and debilitate you um so you're
clear sided about it but simultaneously
able to
function um and that does require a
degree of
well let's say um sort of agility with
your attention you have to be careful
what you attend to and when and for how
long uh there's a time to look clear
sighted at the apparent impossibility of
changing the macroeconomic system in
time to avert ecological collapse but
there's a time to look into the eyes of
your loved one or go to the park with
your child or your dog and a lot of this
is about what you attend to you know you
are what you attend to at some level so
let me ask you a personal followup to
that you've mentioned several times uh
um already that uh local um as opposed
to Global is is probably the the correct
direction so do you have these
conversations um about the metac crisis
and and some of the existential angst
we've been discussing locally or
regionally where you live or or mostly
on your on online Network because I I
don't I have a huge Network
internationally like people like you and
Thomas borkman and Daniel
schmachtenberger but I've tried locally
and largely failed so far it's
interesting isn't it it's interesting
that that you inhabit that world and you
find just you can't communicate to
others what you're thinking and doing um
I do try uh depending on who who I'm
with I often speak in terms
of um interested being interested in how
things connect and that people can
respond to you at that level I'm
interested in most people study one
thing I'm quite interested in how one
thing connects with another and that's
my job and I try and think about that
and I write about that but when it gets
a bit more involved it's to do with I
asked them questions like well you've
heard of climate change for example how
do you think people manage to deal with
that and then it begins to come out or
you'll say you know what are your
feelings about AI you can ask your
hairdresser or your person who at your
local shop and they
um they won't always be ready for that
conversation don't get me wrong but but
sometimes after a few preliminary
remarks over the weeks of seeing you
they get curious what do you do sir you
know what's all that kind of
stuff um but I do agree with you that
there's something very curious about
this work we do that once you get it
it's hard to be anywhere else one way I
understand it is in terms of the three
Horizon model that a lot of people in
the Lial web are effectively living in
the third Horizon they're their
day-to-day lives in the first horizon
they manage their Affairs and they speak
to other people who are interested in
Innovation a lot of political
discussions about what's happening in
Innovation but their heart is already in
the third Horizon they're already trying
to live a different kind of world and
orienting towards that um and that means
that our concerns are just quite
different from day-to-day concerns of
people
who uh don't go there as often um it was
quite interesting when Daniel visited
London actually actually a couple of my
neighbors uh came to the event that I
hosted with danenberger and um quite
varied responses some were like wow what
an amazing Galaxy brain how brilliant
and others were like he made no no sense
to me whatsoever I was left not sure
what he was saying and
um I don't feel lonely though um I I
feel when you begin speaking about these
things there's usually a way in you know
sometimes it's language of love some is
a language of climate something a
language of
Education um and then people will tell
you their story you tell them theirs and
so it goes on
um slow work slow gradual work but I
feel it's coming somehow no just that
it's I I feel there's a bit more
appetite for that kind of
conversation um and it's more like
people find you than you just bump into
them you know they hear you randomly
online somewhere you're on a radio
program like on Friday I'm doing I was
invited to speak about Robert Pig on BBC
Radio 4 I think it is um and because and
as a result of that interview someone
will probably hear me and so I read that
book Zen in the art Motorcycle
Maintenance years ago and then you might
get into a conversation about and what
do you think of it now and is it
relevant today
and probably the um the thing that I've
learned the most on this podcast
that was surprising to me is how
different people are around the world
you mentioned people's reactions to
Daniel I've heard that as well um every
week I do a most weeks I do a frankly
which are not scripted I just sit down
with some notes and and I
record um the one coming out this week
is on some uh uh thought experiments
around Earth Day and I have like 10
people in my inner circle that that
watch them to make sure I don't get in
trouble by posting them online and
almost every week two people hate it and
eight people love it but it's different
and for different reasons and some
people this morning in the feedback they
loved the solar panel thing um and
others didn't and others that was their
their the only part they didn't like and
so it's it's fascinating to me the wide
disparity of temperament and emotion and
philosophy and ways of learning with the
different humans around the world which
is why I think your work at perspectiva
um and this metamodern framework is so
important because we need to have a
social discourse that cuts through the
AI and the Bullocks online and and other
things do you have any thoughts on that
I do I do I mean um I I I I share that
feeling of how extraordinary there's a
there's a in Yorkshire in the UK they
have this expression there's not Queer
as Folk it's a very Yorkshire way of
putting it not Queer as Folk there's
nothing as strange as people roughly
translated and um and I I agree with
that it's quite beautiful after a while
just how particular everyone is in terms
of the metamodern sensibility and so on
um my colleague evil mench who's a
former Zen monk uh and now doing a lot
of theoretical work for perspectiva
thinking how we apply and practice some
of our premises about what's happening
in the world he has a lovely that our
challenge in an age of AI is to make
Consciousness
relevant to make Consciousness relevant
I find that quite intriguing it's uh I'm
not sure about uh you know artificial
general intelligence and and whether
they end ever be anything like conscious
AI or not I doubt it personally but I I
could be wrong but I do believe that at
least for some
time the fact that we have Consciousness
is distinct what it's not distinctly
human we have Consciousness and language
and all that comes with that and I think
the beauty is in what do we do with that
like how do we find someone said
Consciousness is not just a thing out
there it's the inside of the whole world
the inside of the whole world and this
is why when you did one of your Frankl
Nate quite a recent one about I want to
speak to you about Lord of the Rings and
passing but first of all the other the
other frankly was um where you said uh
one of the things you're sure will not
happen you're 100% sure is God is not
going to save us right and I knew what
you meant so it's not like I disagreed
as such but I also when I heard it I
thought H I'd want to parse that a bit
because it's not as though there's going
to be a crack of lightning and a man in
the clouds will say I'll save everything
guys no problem on the other hand I do
think that when people say
transformation and Consciousness these
big words I don't find it absurd I don't
find it wishful thinking I do think it's
kind of the work you know at some level
we need to become different kinds of
human
beings um with a with a different mind
and a different metaphysics even a
different sense of what time is and what
causality is and what um space is and uh
our sense of causation and so on and I
don't think that happens in the way that
policy happens I think it happens
culturally over a period of time and
there's a practice element to that you
have to lead the way with certain forms
of practice um and that's what I mean by
when you said that I wasn't so sure it's
like it's not that God will save us but
rather if we get some clearer
orientation to the our relationship to
reality that mean it may save us in some
way well that was my intent the whole
thing was a thought experiment but but
let's let's uh return to that episode it
was uh 17 things I'm 100% certain about
I'm curious uh as a follow-up is there
anything that you're absolutely or
largely certain about and how did you
come to feel that
way it was a good question cuz I I was I
noticed that you were going to ask this
and I
um I'm not sure I'm not by Nature that
certain about things I am quite it's
again the chess player in me is a little
bit on the one hand on the other hand
um I I did write something it's a good
place it's a good place to be to be well
I I did I did um I did write something
called perspectiva and 10 premises which
is my attempt to sort of lay out the
organization's kind of turf as it were
like this is these are the things we're
interested in and that can be found
online but But it includes
um a description of you know boring from
Zack Stein that we're in a time between
worlds I think there is a sense in which
modernity
is giving way to something else um and
either through collapse or through some
kind of transformation there'll be a
different kind of world before long
100% certain though I don't think so um
what I'm 100% certain of I think is that
our our our future viable and desirable
Futures depend upon a fundamental shift
in our relationship to reality I'm 100%
sure of that I don't think we can
survive and thrive with our current mind
our current mindset I do think we have
to reorient
to what kind of organism we are what
we're living
for how we seek meaning what
cosmological purpose is why this planet
is here what what Consciousness is for
what kind of value is there how do we
app approach it and appreciate it what
goodness truth and Beauty are I think
unless we can grapple with these
questions now it's not like 8 billion
people will do that but unless
sufficient number of people can shape
the culture such that these kind of
questions
again animate the human endeavor then I
think some kind of collapse or
authoritarian dystopia is
likely so you may have just answered my
next question which is what what is the
work you're doing at perspectiva and if
you're successful what what might be the
result of
it well as you know the we're we're in
the uh in the runaway train in the
dining car here and and there's
hopefully a growing size this dining car
and plenty of people people in it um so
it's very much not just for perspectiva
but in so far as I feel we have a
responsibility those 10 premises lay it
out and and uh uh as I say my colleague
is trying to turn that into practice
forms but I've tried to make it more
succinct and my succinct version is what
I call the flip the formation and the
fun so I feel our contribution is to try
to achieve overtime the flip the
formation found what does that mean the
flip is what I just mentioned it's a
paradigmatic shift in our relationship
to reality um it borrows on a theory
from um his name suddenly escapes me but
there's a book called The Flip by this
author and his name will come back to me
in a minute um where
essentially we recognize that
Consciousness is an ontological primary
a fundamental feature of reality and
that changes our perspective on
virtually everything um but even if you
don't go that way even if you just want
to say we have a new attitude uh a new
epistemology a new culture depending on
your language there's a flip of some
kind the formation is more like building
it's more about a transformative Civic
aesthetic and moral education playing
out not everywhere when people say at
scale again there's this mistake that
somehow it goes across the planet you
just need a critical mass of
innovation um whereby the purpose of the
economy is no longer just
human enrichment but rather to serve a
learning civilization that is learning
how to live with different ecological
understanding and so on and finally the
fun is partly because it's a literation
partly playing off the joke that the way
to solve the planetary problems planet's
problems is to to have to host a better
party sometimes people joke create a
better party invite people to that party
as a way of saying bring the people who
are in the consumerist trans and bring
the governments who are in the growth
addicted policy mandate the only way of
winning an election is to promise this
thing somehow show an
alternative through different forms of
practice different Community experiments
that shows something like
um an economy that works on different
principles um but prior to getting there
the cultural sensibility that that
economy would have to have so the flip
the formation of the fun changing our
relationship to reality um a kind of Ed
Mass education at scale and uh new
political economy and the relationship
between them that's roughly what our
work's
about so let me ask you one one final
question before I get to the uh the
usual closing questions of my guest um
when you talked about why playing chess
was a different way of thinking one
thing you left out that I think of when
I hear about people playing chess is the
ability to think many moves ahead uh
which I'm not so good at which is why
probably I'm not good at chess but to
use a chess analogy is there any Queen's
Gambit move that you could uh visualize
that could not solve the metac crisis
but um make for a softer Landing of of
what we
expect so I that's a huge question I no
it's okay it's okay uh most of your
questions are huge don't worry um but
the the the sense I have is that this is
a bit of an urban myth that chess
players think really far ahead now it's
true oh that in a certain position there
are some positions where you you do
something we call calculation where uh
and you have a vision of you know I go
there he goes there I go there he goes
there and and you follow it through one
line and you there's multiple variations
it's almost like a tree with branches
and you see right to the end and that's
part of the of being a good player
however that's quite rare it's also true
that I think the Russian Grandmaster
Peter fidler said anything more than
four moves has a mistake in it and but
by that meant even when you get very
good you begin to distrust the long-term
Vision you begin to say between here and
there I know I want to get there and if
I'm right then that's where we're going
but frankly I'm unlikely to get
everything right there will be surprises
on the way so really the a huge mapping
mapping on to our crisis I think is it
is because your real responsibility is
the next move like that's the skill and
it's primarily a perceptual skill it's
reading the position clearly so what a
chess player has is
um is a good perception of what's going
on and what the priorities are they say
in The Beginner's Minds there are many
possibilities and the expert there are
few there are few because we screen out
a lot of irrelevant information and very
quickly zoom in okay there's one or two
moves here whereas for someone coming to
the game new there's multiple moves in
the same way someone like Daniel or or
someone of that kind of caliber of mind
can very quickly see what what the
essential things are this has to happen
and because of that it's almost like a
premise and then you build out from
there so the way I'd see it as a chess
player is try and see the position as
clearly as you can um which which means
a kind of systemic reading of the
position
and chess is in some ways the connection
between system and psyche that's one way
of understanding it it's psyche meets
system and your job is to find the next
move and that's really it excellent
thank you um so you've watched enough
episodes you know what my closing
questions are uh you've been researching
and writing and speaking about the
pickle which is the the global meta
crisis for some time what sort of
personal advice do you have for the
viewers of this program the listeners uh
on the podcast platforms who are aware
of these things and would like some uh
Direction on what to do both in their
own lives and to play a role in in the
larger pickle well I struggle with
giving advice um because I think um the
we come back to Collective individuation
and uh when you give advice you tend to
go for sort of the the lowest common
denominator right you tend to f
something that works for everyone um and
that's usually not what people need to
hear so I could you know I could say
spend spend time in Good Company every
day take a walk eat well sleep well you
know that kind of thing but really what
I want to say is
um I would put a word in for calling and
by that I mean I do believe when you ask
what I'm 100% sure of it's not 100% it's
maybe 80 but I do believe each of us has
a sense of what we're meant to be doing
um and it's often very clear and it's
sometimes quite quiet but I would
encourage everyone to listen in for that
feeling of this is not what I meant to
be doing and this is what I'm meant to
be doing and to move towards that sense
of what you're meant to be doing now
meant to gets into a whole can of worms
what do you mean is there some grand
plan whatever I'm not sure it's also
just about your skills your social
context your history your identity you
can give it in secular form but it can
often feel feel quite mystical it can
often feel ah this is my life this is
what I'm meant to be doing and I'd
encourage people just to trust that
feeling I think um and look for it
because when you find it life begins you
know before then it's like you're kind
of waiting for that but when you
actually find that feeling of ah this
then it's uh life takes on a new
Vitality I like that I like that answer
uh how would you change that advice for
young people and I have given talks to
young people about finding their their
passion or finding their purpose and
sometimes I get feedback like they don't
have a passion or a purpose they don't
know what their calling is yet so how
would you alter that advice for early
20s age humans very it's very difficult
today uh I don't know how I would answer
but here's what I'm thinking of when you
say that um I bored this from Bonita Roy
uh who you might know she she said that
um
the challenge today is that young people
have to individuate themselves from the
whole world and by that I understand
this that the idea of individuation that
I mentioned earlier is often relative to
a assumption that there is a kind of
world that you can separate yourself
from so you you decouple from the social
surround and you sort of find your own
form and then you re-enter
somehow but when you don't really see a
future when you can't imagine owning
your own home or you can't imagine um
wanting what the world has to offer and
you see a lot of debt and you see a lot
of illness and you see ecocide and you
see war and so on um it's very hard in
that context to say go ahead an
individual AG right so in a sense their
challenge is to create a new world now
the only bit of hope I have to offer
here comes a little bit from the
framework of
um anthropology uh Margaret me's
uh book called the generation gap I
think it's the 70s she wrote that but um
she speaks about prefigurative culture
in there um and unlike postf figurative
culture and configurative culture um
they are more about the past and the
present prefigurative culture is very
much about trying to create a new world
in the absence of a world now this is
where I don't have it on the inside I'm
lucky to have a world you know I
feel I was one of fukuyama's children I
grew up in the sense that I grew up in
the at the purported end of History
where liberal democracy made sense and
then there were various things happened
the Twin Towers the Iraq War climate
started to bite debt crisis and so on
and so on and no longer clear the world
was quite so stable but nonetheless I
feel I I sort of know what normal looks
like at some level whereas I'm not sure
younger people necessarily do and also
they're digital natives so their world
changes in that
way I don't know if i' have advice to
them but what I'd want to listen out for
and when I speak to them I'd want to
listen because their world is quite
different from
mine where they have flow states where
do they feel flow I'd want to understand
that individually what makes them feel
like they lose track of time and they're
concentrated and Alive I'd also want to
know about their Collective Flow State
when do they feel together particularly
Offline that they're actually really
alive and I'd asked them what it would
look like to create a world out of those
feelings um and I hope that conversation
would go somewhere good um something
like that I think it would uh you should
maybe try that in in London or
thereabouts um what do you care most
about in the world
Jonathan I mean my heart responses my my
family um my wife and children um but
beyond
that um I think I
care there's something about about
getting real that expression that means
something to me
um I care about I I I I recognize
delusion as a sort of feature not a bug
of The Human Experience I think we're
all to some extent deluded and I think
Spiritual Development and growth and so
on is related to becoming less deluded
and and wiser so I care about that
ongoing lifelong journey to improve your
relationship with reality um to get
clearer about what's really going on who
you really are and so on
um and I also care about the moments
where tears well up I'm particularly I I
feel they're almost Messengers so I
would encourage everyone notice when you
well up it can often be a Disney movie
it can often be the funniest thing like
not at all direct cause and consequence
but often there's a buildup of emotion
for whatever reason in your life and
suddenly you're watching something soppy
on the TV or you hear a song lyric and
you find this emotion welling
up I find those moments almost like the
interior trying to speak to you so I
would I care about tears as Messengers
let's say I think it I think we should
it's important to cry and I think it's
important to laugh and I think when your
tears come that somehow you pay
attention to them and like they're
friends like okay what are you asking me
to do I like
that um given how uh careful and
equivocal and thoughtful you've been so
far in this conversation I expect you're
going to punt on on this one but if you
had a magic wand what is one thing you
would do to change the course of the
human uh predicament if there were no
personal recourse to
you
um there a few different things but if
there's one thing it would probably be
that everyone has a
regular meditation Andor yoga
practice that if everyone had um a
moment of the day where they were
grounding themselves and trying to find
their better nature and remembering they
have a body and
uh remembering their mortal and how
precious it is to be alive if we could
have each of us have a moment half an
hour to an hour of that every
day I can't help but think that
would boardwell for for Humanity as a
whole I agree uh you said there were a
few things was there anything you wanted
to add to that
well I think this is a bit more
controversial and political and and it
doesn't I'm a little bit hyp critical
here cuz I don't always apply it in my
own life but I do think there'll come a
time when we look at the animal industry
as a kind of abomination and uh I can
imagine a world that was if not vegan
and at least more vegetarian perhaps
with the occasional ritual meal that was
uh some kind of important human cultural
experience but not Isles in the
supermarket full of dead flesh I feel
there is something deeply deluded and
disturb disturbed about that um like I
say I'm fond of the occasional you know
dish myself it's not like I'm walking
the talk there but if you ask me what
would make a difference at a planetary
level if we didn't have that violence
baked into our daily life um and we
weren't in flight from it we weren't in
denial about our complicity in that
violence every day I think that would
also orre well for our Spirits our
relationships and our relationship to
the natural world
thank you for that um
so I I think this was great I um again
I'll I'll mention um I knew that you
were a thinker like this and and uh I
would love to have you back on the show
because you have so much to say thank
you for your work and thank you for your
time today to be continued my friend
pleasure if you enjoyed or learned from
this episode of the great simplification
please follow us on your favorite
podcast platform and visit the greats
simplification tocom for more
information on future releases this show
is hosted by Nate Hain edited by no
troublemakers media and curated by
Leslie batut and Lizzy serani
