I would like to offer you today a
broader definition of human
intelligence one that I think takes into
account the whole person both our
deepest challenges as well as our most
profound
strengths I believe our standard model
of intelligence is systematically
letting far too many kids fall between
the cracks in an educational system that
has such limited Notions of human
potential let me share with you two
school evaluations that I think do a
nice job illustrating this
point so this one is a middle school
assessment about a quiet but friendly
and hardworking young man who's enrolled
in a small private Academy depending on
the subject he works at a variety of
different grade levels his teachers
report he is a willing participant in
every facet of school and becomes
fervent even obsessive about activities
of particular interest showing Superior
grasp of academic Concepts in his
homework class discussions and Pro
projects He occasionally suggests
alternatives to teacher directed
assignments so that he can demonstrate
his comprehension and skill as a result
his relationships with peers older
students with mutual interests and
adults continue to improve okay now I
want to show you another school
evaluation about an 8-year-old boy who
was referred to a neurologist according
to this neurologist information provided
by mother and observations in the office
setting indicate that difficulties
displayed have a multifactorial basis
including Attention Deficit Hyperactive
Ive disorder mild Oppositional Defiant
Disorder generalized anxiety disorder
and Mild unevenness in skill development
now I want to ask you all a question
raise your hand if you thought I was
talking about two completely different
children so I see some hands here I mean
would it surprise anyone in this room to
know that this was actually the same kid
Blain at different points in this kid's
life one when he was 8 years old and one
in Middle
School do you think just looking at this
report by the way these are the
recommendations of this kid we have a
whole bunch of things including
counseling uh medication social
interventions Behavioral Management is
there anything in this evaluation that
would have allowed you to
predict this kid I want you to think
about that for a
second in recent years a number of very
thoughtful Educators clinicians
psychologists and parents have
identified the unique needs and learning
styles of a particular classification of
students called the twice exceptional
student so I want to tell you today
about this twice exceptional these twice
exceptional students what you find is
that twice exceptional students
simultaneously have exemplary
strengths as well as extraordinary
challenges so you may see the child
could have difficulty with written
expression high anxiety could become
easily frustrated difficulty with social
interactions uneven academic performance
while also having a rich vocabulary
being resourceful being curious
imaginative creative having a special
talent or interest all in a single
package now it's estimated there are
about 300,000 of these kids in this
country but I think that's a gross
underestimate for a number of reasons
for one I don't think we fully realize
that a lot of these challenges can be
strength in the right context but I also
think we have a really narrow notion of
strength to begin
with so I think in order to really find
out how many of these kids are falling
through the cracks and really get the
best out of these students I think we
need to take into account a 4C model so
we need to take it into account capacity
competence commitment and creativity
importantly they're not all the same
thing you often you do sometimes see
them all in the same package but I think
it's really important to differentiate
them from each other so first of all
what is the difference between capacity
and
competence well here's a chart of
so-called of one of our biggest metrics
of potential IQ the IQ test most of you
heard of the IQ test test it's supposed
to forecast your ability to achieve
academically on actual competent tests
of standardized achievement and what you
see here is yeah it's true IQ does
correlate with standardized achievement
I'm not saying that IQ is a useless
measure of human of potential and
academics but what you see here is that
about 50% of individuals are
underperforming based on their predicted
measure of potential and often
unrecognized 50% are
overperforming based on their predicted
measure of human potential that often is
not made nearly as much we need to leave
much more room in our models and school
for children to surprise us something is
clearly not complete here in our
understanding of human
intelligence but if we just stop there
there's obviously more to getting out of
seeing possibility in children than just
their academic performance their cap
their capacity or even their competence
we also have commitments you see kids in
special education have so many
commitments so much values they have so
many values and passions for special
interest areas for things that they're
um for making the world a better place I
think something is deeply fed with an
education system where if a child comes
to you and says look I'd really like
resources to end violence or end
bullying or um to develop my musical uh
talents etc etc that we say hold on we
have to measure your IQ or measure your
see look at your standardized test to
see whether or not you score above a
certain threshold in order to make the
world a better place I think something
has deeply followed with a system where
we don't just immediately say great how
can we help you get
there and in addition to Commitment I
also see creativity as extraordinarily
important you find that creativity often
comes in the most unexpected
packages so you see that you see these
kids right here these happy engaged
group of kids well these are kids on the
autism spectrum now according to a lot
of popular Notions of autism they're not
they're not capable of deep social
interactions and bondage but what do you
find when you actually work with kids in
the autism spectrum is that they um they
are they crave connection they deeply
crave connection and my colleague Matt
larner has been designing these improv
exercises that puts them in this kind of
situation where they can be funny with
each other where they can really bond
with each other neat fun ways and finds
that instead of the social awkwardness
that you um the that a lot of people a
lot of what may be referred to as
neurotypical people would call social
awkwardness among people in the autism
Spectrum actually it's completely
reframed as social creativity in this
context and they are genuinely creative
in this context I don't know about you
but I would much rather be called
socially creative than socially awkward
and at least have that
framing so I really do believe we need a
new theory of human intelligence one
that is more holistic and takes to
account a child's passions personal
goals as well as their ability level
because the more that we engage and are
motivated to achieve the more that
increases our actual ability and the
more the ability achieves it then
becomes an upward spiral where then our
engagement is greater as well and most
importantly once it's connected to a
personal passion or a dream then we can
start to realize a real possible
possibility we
have now I'd be remiss if I didn't tell
you that I uh this is deeply personal
for me when I was a child I was
diagnosed with a learning disability
called Central auditory processing
disorder it made it very difficult for
me to process information in real time
and I was held back in third grade uh as
a result a lot of the kids uh and
teachers thought I was um they took my
slowness as an indicator of being stupid
and I was kept in special education till
9th grade when a teacher took me aside
and she said you know I see
you I see your
frustration why are you still here and
she inspired me I realized I had no good
answer to that question and she inspired
me to see what I was possibly what was
what was I capable of could my
capability exceed my capacity that
everyone was telling me and so I took
myself out of special education I signed
up for lots of classes I joined the
school orchestra I joined the choir by
my senior year most of my friends were
in gifted education and I wanted to be
in gifted education I went to the school
psychologist and I said you know I would
love to um my senior year be in gift
education and he he said well you you
look gift it
um you know uh that's good good start um
I I'm get you're I told him I'm getting
straight A's I'm getting straight A in
all my class he said that sounds gifted
as well but I have to see if you're
actually gifted I need to look at your
IQ score when you're age 11 so he pulled
out my test my score at age 11 which
turned out that my measured IQ at age 11
I've never revealed this in a talk was
borine
mentally intellectually impaired and he
said and he took out a bell curve and he
said look up here on the right these are
the kids who are in your gifted class
these are all your friends basically um
you know to the left here um about in
the center is about average and he moved
to the left of the bell curve and said
this is you I'm sorry you don't qualify
for gifted education I was so upset um
and shy at that moment and I just
remember thinking to myself gosh at what
point can my is my achievement allowed
to Trump my potential when I'm actually
doing it at what point can that Trump
what was uh measured as my potential um
I knew at that moment that I wanted to
do something to change the system and I
applied to Carnegie Millan University
and put in a personal statement and I
said look I really want to change our
metrics of human potential and and um I
think far too many people are falling
between the cracks in terms of our
standard models and they rejected me to
Carnegie Mill and they said sorry your
SAT scores are not high enough to
redefine
intelligence
again again I was rejected because they
were looking at my SAT scores potential
over what I was trying to show them
right in front of their face so I looked
at the different departments at Carnegie
melon to see which ones don't look at
SAT scores and I found the Opera
Department I went in the following week
did not tell the Opera Department I was
already rejected by their
University and I said hi I just love
Opera and I'd like to audition and um I
sang stars from lay as Rob sang my heart
out and they accepted me on a partial
scholarship to Carnegie Millan
University for my singing ability
apparently the Departments don't talk to
each other very
much I was just rejected um once I got
to carum melon I I should say it's a
lovely Department no disrespect but I
endured a full semester of dance classes
and ballet and acting classes I'm a
terrible actor um uh singing classes not
a bad not a terrible singer um and uh
and I went in second semester freshman
year to the psychology department at car
melon my heart beating so fast trying to
pretend that I haven't been planning
this my whole life and I walked into the
the department and the secretary was
there eating a Boney sandwich and uh I
said hey I just took a course in
Psychology I loved it do you think maybe
I could be a minor in Psychology it's
called foot in the door technique you
start small and work up and she's like
whatever like no one's ever been as
excited to be a minor in Psychology at
car
M thing that she's like just sign this
paper and I remember as I was skipping
back to my door in my tights because I
just come from dance class that day I
was remember thinking to myself with
this paper in my hand my gosh this is
all it came down to in life was finding
a way to sign the paper to get to that
space where there was high expectations
for everyone where everyone just saw a
different aspect of me and there was no
question she all she wanted to do was
finish her bony sandwich she didn't ask
to say well I'm sorry let me see what
are your SAT scores or sit down and let
me have you take an IQ test no I was
there I had figured a strategy through
my commitment and creativity to get
there and once I was there it didn't
matter anymore what my potential was so
following semester I went back to the
same secretary I think somehow she was
still eating the same balone sandwich I
don't know how that's possible but I
said look I would like to be a major in
Psychology I took another course and it
was just even better than the first this
depart who knew this department would
have such a good psychology department
and she said fine just sign the two
pieces of paper you can have whatever
you want so I changed my major
psychology and then working my way up I
graduated F Beta Kappa Straight A's
Carnegie melan got accepted to Yale
University for a PhD program oh thank
you thank
you and in 2009 I actually did graduate
from Yale with a PhD and my dissertation
was a new theory of human intelligence
so now I've seen through personal
experience as well as lots and lots of
research just how many kids really are
falling between the
cracks I think that if we're ever going
to get the best out of students we need
to
really understand this coexistence of
ability and disability not treat them as
opposites not have gifted education here
and special education here and set up
this false dichotomy in our school
system that we only have these two
binary characters
these two binary
categories I think in order to really
see the true possibilities in all
students we need to have a theory of
intelligence that is holistic and really
takes into account and appreciates the
whole person thank you so much
[Applause]
