hello you found the portal I'm your host
Eric Weinstein and I think that today's
must be the most unusual episode yet of
a podcast that has been marked by almost
regular unusual episodes now this is the
first podcast that I'm recording at home
I don't really have a home recording
studio so we're really doing this from
chicken wire and masking tape but I am
sheltering in place because of the
worldwide kovat pandemic and what we've
been asked by the state of California
and by the federal government is to
shelter in place for an upcoming month
because today is April 1st now during a
pandemic I can assure you that no one is
interested in April Fool's jokes so the
question is what to do with the April
Fool's tradition in a situation in which
nobody wants a prank I thought that this
was probably the best time to launch an
idea that I've been playing with for
years and that idea is that it is
dangerous to have a world in which we
are afraid to talk about what we think
is true when I think about what happened
during the beginning of the kovat
pandemic I find that we were in general
intimidated from sharing our fears about
the virus we were told that if we wore
masks that we were acting in a peculiar
fashion if we refused to shake hands
that we were behaving in a strange and
unpleasant social way we did not want to
be alarmist we did not want to be seen
as Chicken Little and in fact it was
extremely important that we not be seen
as xenophobic given that the outbreak
was originating in Wuhan China in fact
perhaps the most dangerous idea was that
this outbreak might have been connected
to some research being done in a lab
perhaps a bioweapons lab we really don't
know where this epidemic began what is
the etiology of something that is
causing the entire world economy to
effectively shut down what I believe is
that that silence has been deadly we
have many people who have now lost their
lives because we did not feel free to
exchange ideas to think and to talk and
in fact many of the people who warned us
first were the freest members of society
having been previously canceled
by standard mainstream institutions and
their associated media so what I thought
would be important for in April Fool's
Day that no one wants to actually
participate in was to deal with an idea
that maybe one day a year we should all
be free to share crazy ideas that are
going around between our ears and in our
head we're having conversations with
ourselves wondering is anyone else
seeing the same thing that I'm seeing
but we are too afraid because the social
stigma for actually believing in things
that maybe things are possible or
perhaps there's a conspiracy somewhere
perhaps we are ill-prepared for example
I believe that our current pandemic is
exacerbated because our government and
our readiness czars
failed to stock adequate supplies and
that these supplies were called for in
the academic literature for years there
was absolutely no excuse not to have
personal project protective equipment
stocked for doctors and nurses and
hospitals to say nothing of all of the
people who are in the frontlines of
treating patients sick with code now
currently I don't believe that you can
trust the World Health Organization
absolutely not I don't think you can
trust the Surgeon General of the United
States and I absolutely don't think you
can trust the CDC because they are all
covering for our inadequacy this was a
problem that we always knew was coming
and we at one point had stocks which
apparently were depleted under a
previous administration and not
restocked under this administration in
fact our fear of dealing with a
pervasive institutional incompetence has
blinded us to the degradation in our
society across all major institutions as
I've discussed before on the program I
believe that this has a singular
etiology that is that because of
embedded growth obligations coming from
the previous era of unsustainable
post-war growth from about nineteen
forty five to nineteen seventy one
seventy three something like that we
built in expectations to our system that
cannot currently be met we will not have
technology that follows the same break
neck pace of innovation as a result we
have a system whereby the head
of our organizations are forced to cover
for their inadequacies because growth is
built into the system that cannot be
sustained therefore there is not the
funding the manpower there is not the
wherewithal to continue many of our
programs because we do not actually have
the ability to continue to simply grow
our way out at least so far so what's
today's program about well I thought
that what I would do is to let go of
something that I've been keeping pretty
close for I think about 37 years when I
was around 19 I started it's hard to
talk about when I was around 18 or 19 I
was at the University of Pennsylvania
and I thought I saw a glimmer of hope I
thought I saw that some new equations
that were being played with might
actually provide a solution to some of
the problems that had bedeviled Einstein
and others for years in the quest for a
unified field theory
now it's an embarrassing thing to say
that one is a unified field theorist it
is effectively equivalent to saying I'm
interested in perpetual motion machines
or that I have a private cure for cancer
that I'm trying on rabbits in my
backyard however I actually think that
it's important to fess up because that's
exactly what this is now in my situation
I have an extremely unusual history and
I really don't want to get bogged down
in all of the things that happened while
I was a student trying to develop this
theory because it is not a particularly
happy story I believe that this theory
is an incredibly joyous one now in this
situation I want to talk about what it
means to have a theory of everything
we've never seen one and in fact not
only have we never seen a theory of
everything we've never even seen I
believe a candidate for a theory of
everything and because a theory of
everything would have to
different characteristics they might
believe every theory that has gone
before we don't think enough about what
the difference is between what we would
normally call in physics and effective
theory and a fundamental one now if
you're familiar with the MC Escher
drawing called drawing hands it is a
lithograph of two hands apparently
drawing each other into existence on
some kind of a canvas or piece of paper
that is sometimes referred to as a
strange loop but it in fact is an
attempt to answer the question what is
the fire that lights itself this is the
problem that be devils us when we search
for a unified theory that doesn't
bedevil us in my opinion in any previous
effective theory now why is that well
many people confuse a theory of
everything is if they imagine that it's
a theory in which you can compute every
eventualities and it is absolutely not
that because the computational power is
very different than the question of
whether or not the rules are effectively
given I've analogized it to a game of
chess and knowing all of the rules is
equivalent to a theory of everything
knowing how to play chess well is an
entirely different question but in the
case of a theory of everything or a
unified field theory if you will many
people also take it to be an answer to
the question why is there something
rather than nothing and I don't think
that this is in fact what a theory of
everything is meant to be either now why
is that well because I believe at some
level it is impossible for most of us to
imagine a an airtight argument
mathematically speaking which coaxes out
of an absolute void a something however
there's a different question which I
think might actually animate us and
which is the right question to ask of a
potential candidate and that is how does
one get everything from almost nothing
in the MC Escher drawing or lithograph
hands drawing hands or
hands what we see is that the paper is
presupposed that is if you could imagine
a theory of everything it would be like
saying if I posit the paper can the
paper will the ink into being such that
the ink gives rise to the pens and the
pens draw the hands which in fact
manipulate the pens to use the ink that
kind of a problem is one which is of a
very different character than everything
that is gone before it is also in my
opinion an explanation of why the
physics community has been stalled for
nearly 50 years since around 1973 when
the standard model was intellectually in
place now consider this we have never
had in modern times the drought where no
person working in pure fundamental
theory has taken a trip to Stockholm
just as a rough indicator for
contributing to the standard model no
one in my opinion since let see Frank
will check was born in 1951 no one born
after that time has in fact contributed
to the standard model in a clear and
profound way that is not to say that no
work has been done but for the most part
the current generation of physicists has
for more than 40 years in almost 50
years remained stagnant within the
standard paradigm of physics which is
positing theories that are then verified
by experiment now my belief which is
relatively radical is that there is no
way to get to our final destination
using the tools that have gotten us to
where we are now in other words what got
you here cannot get you there and in
particular one of the biggest problems
we have is the political economy of
science we have effectively starved our
scientific enterprise for resources
creating a dire and cutthroat
competition which is completely deranged
the scientific tradition and so one of
the things that's going to happen in
this lecture this is that I'm simply
going to announce that I have broken and
have broken for many years with just
about every expectation of standard
science that is not to say that the
equations or the style of present
is going to be foreign quite the
contrary I have every intention of
writing up some results in standard
terminology wherever possible using
popular mathematical typesetting
programs but it goes far deeper than
this my belief is that what we've
created is a career structure a journal
structure an employment structure an
access structure that cannot possibly
complete the job and why is that well
what if in the last leg in fact we had a
situation by which an attempt at the
fundamental theory would result almost
certainly in career suicide now if you
think of that as an explanation you
would realize that it has the power to
synchronize failure across many
seemingly independent experiments and I
believe that that's exactly what's been
going on through the so called string
theory revolutions one two and perhaps
three now in that case what happened was
a theory became fixed in the minds of
really the baby boom generation of
physicists because it allowed for
infinite elaboration within a
mathematical work more particularly a
geometric context and those supposed
physicists spent their time submitting
papers to what's called the high energy
section of the so-called preprint
archive but in fact most of these papers
have nothing to do with high energy
physics whatsoever and if you're looking
for the the designation it's hep th high
energy physics - theory now if you look
through those papers they don't seem to
have much to do with particles they
don't seem to have to do with forces in
space-time they seem to have to do with
very strange and obscure mathematical
issues and in the years since the string
theory program got particularly
reanimated
I guess that would be around 1984 with
the anomaly cancellation of Greene and
Schwartz what you'll find is is that
physics became very active and
simultaneously ground to a halt it it
failed to remain a physical subject it
became something like a medieval quest
for the number of angels to dance on the
head of a pit now in this circumstance I
think it's very important to realize
that this is not a paper and we're not
submitting to the archive in fact the
archive requires people who are not
employed at universities to get
permission from some member of the
community which is called an endorsement
which I find absolutely insulting and I
refuse to go along furthermore we are
expected to cite papers sometimes which
are behind paywalls
and I think that it's absolutely immoral
to ask people to pay outside the system
to read the papers to cite other
people's work I can go on about the
number of things that are currently
wrong with the system but instead what I
would like to do is to simply joyously
reject it I have every intention of
simply sharing this with you and
jealously guarding my right to Shepherd
this through now what is that in two
previous episodes we've had interactions
with academics which I think are
interesting in bear scrutiny in the
first case in a in an interview with The
Economist's Tyler Cowen I talked to
Tyler about the fact that the Boskin
Commission was in fact committing
economic malpractice now why was that it
was because they decided that they
needed to transfer a trillion dollars
over ten years and that they had found a
devious way of doing it which is to
adjust the CPI by backing out the amount
of adjustment needed to get a trillion
dollars they decided that a 1.1 percent
overstatement in the CPI would cause a
reduction in entitlements that is
Medicare and Medicaid payments together
with Social Security as well as an
increase in taxes because tax brackets
are also indexed now to my mind it is
absolutely unconscionable to say that
you have a right to Train
for wealth cryptically by adjusting a
fundamental barometer that would be like
saying in order to meet our global
warming targets we have to recalibrate
all the thermometers to show that in
fact things had cooled one simply can't
do that at science but Tyler's response
I found was very interesting his
perspective was that this was in fact
not a terrible thing because it was
quote directionally correct and in
general he believed that because the CPI
should be considered overstated that
this was not the world's most terrible
thing to do as an economist I respect
Tyler a great deal and I enjoy his
company but I have to say that I am
absolutely of a different opinion my
belief is is that one has no rights and
no ability as a scientist to fudge the
data to meet social goals in this
fashion
another interesting interaction was the
interaction with Professor ACMA scholar
of the University of Chicago now when
she listened to episode 19 about Brett
Weinstein she found that it was a very
compelling episode but strangely even
though the point of the episode was to
surface breaths long forgotten theory
because Brett had not been acknowledged
as having predicted that laboratory mice
would in particular have radically
elongated telomeres where it was thought
that all mice had long radically
elongated telomeres which has incredible
potential implications for a drug
testing and all of the work that is done
on laboratory rodents as model organisms
this is an episode you should definitely
listen to if you haven't already
but Agnes's perspective was very
different than mine her feeling was that
because we were in a situation in which
the work actually surfaced that the
system worked even if it was the case
that Brett's name was erased from the
history of the development and that his
theory was put in a situation in which
it was not able to carry the day because
in fact there was no record of the fact
that a prediction
been made now I disagreed with Agnes on
that program facili but what I found was
is that it was very telling in general
our academic population has given up on
the previous and quaint idea of decency
propriety truth fairness because there
simply isn't the resource for everyone
now I believe that current science is
not necessarily unsalvageable but it
will be unsalvageable if we don't get
the very people that I rail against far
more money and I know that's very
confusing but my belief is as the
inadequate resources that we have put
aside are very similar to the inadequate
masks that we have put aside for our
doctors we have asked some of the
world's most gifted and smartest people
to devote their lives to the study of
science and technology and we've
inadequately prepared them we've put
their lives and their families lives
under incredible pressures and what I
wish to do is to in fact point to the
very people who I have been most angry
at for years and say the part of the
problem is that we need to take a hard
look at how we've invested in science
and technology and give the very people
that I'm most angry at more money I will
explain more about this later
but I do want to give you an
introduction to this episode what I will
be doing is to screen a very unusual and
somewhat awkward lecture at the
University of Oxford now why is it so
awkward well first of all I had left
standard research perhaps 20 years
earlier almost further I'm not a
physicist and I have only taken one or
two courses in the physics major
sequence I think I've taken one semester
of mechanics and perhaps I took an
advanced general relativity course in
college but in general no one goes into
a theoretical physics department and
attempts to lecture physics physicists
on physics and why is that well because
physics is incredibly demand
and this is almost certainly the world's
most interesting and most accomplished
intellectual community these are guys
that don't miss a trick there are so
many things to know and it is such a
difficult field that it is effectively
almost impossible to contribute from
outside chemists don't do it and once in
a blue moon mathematicians will attempt
to talk about actual real physics so one
thing that you're seeing is a very
unusual circumstance where somebody is
trying to figure out how to give their
first lecture in a physics department
and it concerns the possibility of a
theory which attempts to solve the
problem of how does a fire light itself
another thing that you'll see is is that
it's relatively difficult to read my
handwriting I'm not going to make any
bones about it I've been very vocal
about having learning differences
dysgraphia dyslexia all sorts of
different issues symbols come extremely
difficult to me I don't want to spend
this time making excuses what I do want
to say is the following I will be
attempting to record a short PowerPoint
presentation for after the lecture to
say at least some of what some of the
constructions are more clearly this is
not meant to be the actual presentation
of the theory what this is is an
introduction a down payment and above
all a historical account of what
happened seven years ago at the
University of Oxford when I tried to
present these ideas I've talked before
about the twin nuclei problem and our
need to get off of this planet and if we
have a hope of getting off of this
planet it really comes from fundamental
physics you see a hundred years ago or
perhaps 105 when Albert Einstein gave us
general relativity he effectively
consigned us for life to the solar
system why is that
well his model his geometric model of
space and time effectively creates a
speed limit known as C or the speed of
light now there are three rocks that are
at least interesting for habitation by
humans although two of them are marginal
the Moon and Mars one of them of course
is unbelievable the earth but I doubt
that we're going to be able to steward
the
through our new godlike powers which
I've called it - a nucleotide problem of
cell and atom we've unlocked the power
of both and I don't think we have the
wisdom to stay all in one place so the
question that I had was if there is any
ability to escape to the cosmos that we
can see in the night sky where would it
come from
we are almost positive that Albert
Einstein's theory of relativity is in
some weird way incomplete the
Schwarzschild singularities which give
us black holes and the initial
singularities of the robertson-walker
Freedman universe which are associated
with the Big Bang are some clue that
there is some subtle flaw united Stein's
theory so how to go beyond Einstein I
mean what Einstein did to Newton was to
recover Newton as a special case of a
more general theory that is more
flexible and in fact this is the same
problem that we have because Albert
Einstein's theory is so fundamental we
effectively begin every theory of
physics seminar with a statement about
space-time in other words Albert
Einstein is locked in at the ground
floor so if we can't get below the
ground floor to the foundations it's
very difficult to make progress this is
one of the things that is making it
almost impossible for us to go beyond
the initial revolutions of the 20th
century do I know that this new theory
if it works will allow us to escape
I do not there's no one who can I can
say that and I don't think I have the
skills to develop the physical
consequences of the theory even if the
theory turns out to be mostly right what
I will say is that I think that the
theory is the first of its kind that
I've seen I believe that in part what
you will see is that at a minimum it is
like fool's gold
it appears to explain why we think we
see three or three generations but it
also says that perhaps they aren't
really three generations of matter
perhaps there are only two even though
physicists tell us that there are at
least three or perhaps more I believe
that physics tells us that the universe
is chiral
that is left-right asymmetric but the
theory is itself not chiral
instead it chooses
to present a different idea which is
that perhaps chirality is emergent much
the way our hands are individually
left-right asymmetric as our pinky is
not a reflection of our thumb but the
thumb on each hand is a pairing to the
other one as is the pinky now what does
that mean
it means that if perhaps there is matter
and there is force that is decoupled
from our ordinary world that that matter
might restore the parody or the
chirality rather would break the
chirality and restore parody between
these two halves the matter we see in
the matter that is missing there are a
good number of other things that happen
in the theory it replaces space time
with what I've termed an observers now
an observers is an unusual gadget in
that it's thought of as two separate
places where physics takes place
connected by a map that means
effectively that we are in something
like a stadium where there is there are
stands and there is a pitch and the
playing field that we think we see may
not in fact be where most of the action
is taking place in fact not all of the
fields live on the same space so when we
see waves and particles dancing around
they may have separate origins in each
of the two components of the observers
what I hope to do after this is to
gracefully and gradually develop the
theory under my leadership now why do I
say that there is a belief in physics
and in most fields that the field should
behave in a communal fashion and that
people should put forward their ideas
and other people should joyously build
upon them and that the community should
be allowed to name the various
accomplishments for whoever they say
accomplish those things there's not a
way there's not a way in hell that I'm
letting that happen my experience with
this community is is that it simply
can't be trusted to behave equitably
given the fact that it is so resource
starved and constrained people simply do
not have the freedom to be generous kind
and accurate as to who did what
furthermore there is an incredible
premium
on cherry topping that is who finished
something off is considered bizarrely
much more important than who found
something to begin with
imagine you located an island and you
named the island after the first person
who could plant the flag on the top of
the highest peak this is patently
offensive and ridiculous there's a story
years ago about how Hilbert almost
scooped Einstein by giving the Hilbert
action from which Einstein's equations
could be recovered really not a chance
so if Hilbert came up with the Hilbert
action and recovered Einstein's
equations so what I mean the real theory
actually takes place in Einstein and
Grossman before Albert Einstein even
works out a lot of the flaws in the
original theory it's about the ideas
it's not about the formulas and it's not
about racing to the final form now I
know that the community won't agree with
that but think about this what I'm doing
is taking an incredible risk I'm
addressing you here on April Fool's Day
and I'm saying that if there is a fool
it is certainly me because I have sat on
this theory for almost 40 years now I've
never known is it true is it false it's
impossible to tell when you're only
talking to yourself but in this
situation what I've done is I've taken a
tremendous amount of risk and now I'm
trying to share it with you
hopefully I know that well Newton did
his greatest work when he was sheltering
sheltering from a Great Plague in
England and I would like to think that
perhaps whether or not this is correct
simply the act of somebody trying
honestly to share hope and some path
forward would be uplifting now under the
worst circumstances if this doesn't work
what do I think is a question I'm asked
frequently there are two things that
I'll say many years ago around 1987 I
put forward some equations that I
thought might become my thesis at the
Harvard Department of Mathematics and
they were disallowed for a variety of
reasons those let equations were later
discovered in I believe 1994 and I sat
in a lecture in which I saw these
equations go up on a board
the very end at MIT and I looked at
those equations and I said huh those are
the exact equations I was told could
never work why is the leading physicist
in the world placing them on the board
and saying that these are the equations
from which all of something called
donaldson theory can be derived what I'm
giving you
at least at a minimum had the ability
years earlier to provide those equations
from a different source
there's something called Seibert Witten
theory which I have no claim on but the
actual equations that are called the
cyber quittin equations came originally
as an outgrowth from investigations of
this theory so at a bare minimum the
cyber Witten revolution should have
happened at Harvard rather than
Princeton and it should have been
recognized that this theory was capable
of at least at a minimum giving birth to
that as a side project the other thing
that I think is incredibly important is
is that we've never seen how a universe
that looks like ours could possibly
emerge from almost no assumptions
whatsoever
and I believe that even if this theory
were to turn out to be wrong which I
don't think is likely I believe that it
would give us something to go on
we would at least have a first candidate
of how a hopeful theory of everything
would look and how it would go wrong so
under any circumstance I think that I'm
going to be fine if the theory doesn't
work out I will have at least taken my
shot on goal and I think that that's
probably more than almost anyone can ask
from a life to attempt to make contact
with the deepest question that we've
ever had which is what is this place and
what brought it into being lastly I want
to just talk about a personal aspect of
this which is what does it mean to come
to an end whether or not this theory in
fact does what I claim I think it does I
don't know but I do know that sooner or
later in the era of intercontinental
exploration someone found the last
landmass and that must have been a very
strange moment when there was nothing
left to do I think whether or not this
theory in fact accomplishes that is one
question but we all have to plan for
what it is that we think will happen
when man at last learns his own source
code in fact this was the last edge
question that I answered for Jon
Brockman which is does something
unprecedented happen when man at last
learns his own source code I don't know
the answer of this but I want to return
to the same spirit that I started this
when I was 18 or 19 which is that of
joyous investigation of brave open
hearted undertakings and I also want to
bring back a different style of
scientific investigation there has been
far too much communalism in fact there
is a belief that there are no lone
researchers and that everything is
produced by a community and pardon my
french but this is absolute horseshit I
have been so long alone with these
principles equations and ideas that I
don't even know what my adult life will
look like once I discourage them and I
begin to talk about them with the
community at large I've talked to many
theoretical physicists who've taken some
interest in them but I've never put out
enough to absolutely ensure that people
are seeing what it is that I'm seeing so
whether or not the April Fool's joke is
on me I cannot tell you but I can
promise you that I'm not trying to play
one on you what I hope to show you is a
lecture that was the first of three
versions of this lecture that were
delivered in Oxford over the course of a
week and one of the things that has held
me back is is that I have a great number
of people who I have to thank for
effectively being my Underground
Railroad when my career got into serious
trouble
to make sure who made sure that I always
had an opportunity to fight another day
and some of the most important of those
people one of whom occurs on this video
is Marcus - so toy and Marcus I just
wanted to say thank you for your brave
your courage your friendship and your
encouragement I know I've been
absolutely impossible to you I've made
you wait for this and I just want to say
how much I love you I also want to thank
Isadora singer for effectively saving me
from not getting a PhD I think putting
pressure on the Harvard Department and
for coming to my assistance making sure
that I got a postdoc at MIT despite not
having any publications at all I'd like
to think Raul Bhatt who's no longer with
us who I should have invited to my
wedding I was very angry at him but I
didn't realize that he was saving me in
a very difficult situation against the
department that probably just wanted to
see me gone I'd like to thank Peter
Thiel one of my closest friends is like
a brother to me
for allowing me these seven years since
this lecture to lick my wounds to get
strong to have a 401k to buy a house and
to begin coming back to regular society
after a very difficult and strained
career I'd like to thank Adil Abdul Ali
and Michel Grossberg the two greatest
best friends from college a guy could
have I'd like to thank my grandfather
Harry Rubin who believed in things that
couldn't possibly be true and made some
of them happen I'd like to thank my
parents Karen and les Weinstein for all
the good things that they did I'd like
to thank my brother Brett Weinstein and
his family Heather and the kids for
sticking by me and I'd like to thank my
in-laws in Bombay and yeah I hope you
guys are well and lastly I would very
much like to thank my wife and my two
kids for putting up with a lot of lost
weekend's a lot of lost vacations and
believing that just maybe there was
something to this and sticking by me all
these years so I hope everybody really
enjoys this it may not be comprehensible
and after this video finishes I'll do a
short presentation of some of the
constructions that took place not all of
the equations and things
I think some of them were sort of
botched on the board they became
disoriented the night before and
rearranged things in a way that probably
wasn't optimal but I I'll attempt to
clarify these things going forward and
to begin to present the theory as I see
whether or not I can bring myself to
once again work on it somewhat close to
full time as a 54 year old father of two
so sit back relax and coming up next is
the first of my three lectures at Oxford
University on geometric unity be well
[Music]
well welcome to this special Simoni
lecture and my name is Marcus DeSoto I'm
a professor of mathematics here and the
Simoni professor for the public
understanding of science and Chancellor
mone prepared a manifesto when he in
dealt this chair to guide the holder of
the professorship in their mission and
I'd like to read one part of that
manifesto to you
it said scientific speculation when so
labeled and when the concept of
speculation and its place in the
scientific method has been made clear to
the audience can be very exciting it is
a very effective communication tool and
it is by no means discouraged and it is
in the spirit of this part of my mission
there's a Simoni professor that I would
like to introduce today's Simoni special
lecture I first met Eric vine Stein when
we were both postdocs at the Hebrew
University just over 20 years ago
and I had the feeling then that he was
working on something big but it wasn't
until two years ago that Eric met me in
a bar in New York and we began he began
to explain the mathematics that he'd
been working on in private for the last
20 years as he took me through the
equations he had been formulating I
began to see emerging before my eyes
potential answers to many of the major
problems in physics it was an extremely
exciting daring proposal and also
mathematically so natural that it
started to work its magic on me over the
last two years I have had the privilege
of being taken through the twists and
turns of Eric's ideas after our postdocs
in Israel when I went the academic route
getting my professorship here in Oxford
Eric went to more independent roots
working in economics government and
finance so he comes here today as
something of an insider and an outsider
a difficult place from which to propose
bold ideas but having spent time seeing
how powerful these ideas appear to be I
felt it was time that Eric shared his
ideas more widely as I believe his
perspective could give the scientific
community a new story to explain some of
the big questions on the side
books and therefore very happy to
provide a platform here in Oxford for
Eric to share his ideas on a new theory
he calls geometric unity the lecture
will be approximately 17 minutes after
which we will have a period to ask
questions Eric so it's it's a great
pleasure to be here in Oxford for those
of you who are not aware it is possible
that no other university in the world
has kept so tightly and kept the faith
for so long with Einstein's great vision
of a final theory for physics as a
theory of pure geometry a sort of
elegance and simplicity of the highest
order and the names that are associated
with Oxford that weigh heavy on me are
attea Penrose Siegel Woodhouse Hitchin
it's a very long list of people who even
when fashion did not hold those ideas in
favor always kept the faith that there
was much to be learned from the
geometric perspective on physics of
course unified field theory and some
sense acquired a stigma with Einsteins
failure to find it in the sense that
even someone like Einstein being tempted
by the siren song of geometry might lose
their footing and go astray and in the
years since we've had a replacement
theory which is that what is really
calling our generations is the is the
quest to quantize general relativity and
gravity and I'd like to to go back to
the sort of earlier perspective that
there's no evidence to date in my mind
that we are being called to quantize
general relativity directly in fact
there's been more effort spent on that
quest without very tangible results then
Einstein spent as one man searching for
years for a unified field theory so we
have to in some sense begin to undo some
of what we think we know in order to
truly reconsider and allow me to put
some of these
Diaz before you today Marcus asked me to
begin presenting these ideas here and
hopefully this is the first opportunity
but if the ideas are not good then
lighting on the aisles will lead you to
safety and your exits may be behind you
but in the event of a good flight
hopefully this will begin a conversation
rather than n1 I feel in some sense that
I'm presenting the works of another man
a younger man someone who came of age
right in the middle of the Great string
theory boom with the anomaly
cancellation in 1984 and I look at this
work and I see a young person struggling
with the idea why can't I see that
string theory is going to answer all of
these questions over the next 10 years
as we were told at the time and making a
very dangerous decision which was I
think I'm not going to follow that
particular path and I'm going to follow
another and it's not clear where this
path is going to lead us but we're going
to explore it today and see as best we
can so in some sense
I've been able to polish some of that
young man's work but I'm also struggling
to reconstruct it because as someone
spending full time on that theory he
knew a lot of things that I no longer
know so with that as a beginning I'm
just gonna say one disclaimer which is
that this is not a usual talk and
whatever contract a speaker usually has
with the audience right now we're going
to break that contract this is a this is
a talk about ideas and some of these
ideas are bold some of them may offend
some people because there's a sense that
you don't have a right to be considering
those ideas but I go back to the
admonition of Jim Watson that said if
you're going to try to make progress big
progress you are by definition
unqualified to be doing whatever it is
that you're doing so in that spirit let
us begin what is physics to
today how do they see it different from
the way in which we might imagine the
lay person sees physics ed Witten was
asked this question in a talk he gave on
physics and geometry many years ago and
he pointed us to three fundamental
insights which were his big three
insights in physics and they correspond
to the three great equations so the
first one is is that somehow physics
takes place in an arena and that arena
is a manifold X together with some kind
of semi roumanian metric structure
something that allows us to take length
and angle so that we can perform
measurements at every point in this
space-time or higher dimensional
structure leaving us a little bit of
headroom the equation most associated
with this is the Einstein field equation
and of course I've run in to the market
so it says that a piece of the Riemann
curvature tensor the Ricci tensor - an
even smaller piece the scalar curvature
multiplied by the metric is equal or
plus the cosmological constant is equal
to some amount of matter and energy the
stress energy tensor so it's
intrinsically a curvature equation the
second fundamental insight I'm going to
begin to start drawing pictures here as
well so if this is the space-time
manifold the arena the second one
concerns symmetry groups which cannot
necessarily be deduced from any
structure inside of the arena
they are additional data that come to us
out of the blue without explanation in
these symmetries form a non abelian
group which is currently su3 color cross
su - weak isospin cross u1 weak
hypercharge which breaks down to su 3
cross u1 where the broken u1 is the
electromagnetic symmetry this equation
is also a curvature equation the
corresponding equation and it says that
this time the curvature of an auxiliary
structure known as a gage potential
when differentiated in a particular way
is equal again to the amount of stuff in
the system that is not directly involved
in the left-hand side of the equation so
it has many similarities to the above
equation both involve curvature one
involves a projection or a series of
projections the other involves a
differential operator the Third Point
surrounds the matter in the system and
here we have a Dirac equation again
coupled to a connection but one of the
great insights is is that because the
reason for the lightness of matter in
the natural mass scale of physics has to
do with the fact that this sigh really
should have two components and the
differential operator should map to one
component on the other side of the
equation but the mass operator should
map to another and so if one of the
components is missing if the equation is
intrinsically lopsided chiral asymmetric
then the mass term and the differential
term have difficulty interacting which
is sort of overcompensating for the mass
scale of the universe so you get to a
point where you actually have to define
a massless equation but then just like
over shooting a putt it's easier to
knock it back by putting in a Higgs
field in order to generate and as if
fundamental mass through the Okawa
couplings
so matter is asymmetric and therefore
light and then interestingly he went on
to say one more thing he said of course
these three central observations must be
supplemented with the idea that this all
takes place treated in a quantum
mechanical fashion our quantum field
theory so it's a bit of an aftermarket
modification rather than in his opinion
at the time one of the core insights I
actually think that that's in some sense
about right now one of my differences
with with the community in some sense is
that I question whether the quantum
isn't in good enough shape that we don't
know whether we have a serious quantum
mechanical problem or not we know that
we have a quantum mechanical problem the
quantum field theory attic problem
relative to the current formulations of
these theories but we know that in some
other cases the quantum becomes
incredibly natural sometimes sort of
almost magically natural and we don't
know whether the true theories that we
will need to be generalizing in some
sense have beautiful quantum mechanical
treatments whereas the affective
theories that we're dealing with now may
not survive the quantization so what I
want to do
is I want to met imagine a different
sort of incompatibility so let's take
our great three theories and just
visually treat them as the vertices of a
triangle so I'm going to put general
relativity in Einstein's formulation and
I'm gonna put the probably won't write
this again yang-mills Maxwell Anderson
Higgs Theory over here and I'm gonna
write the Dirac theory what I want to
explore is the incompatibility is not at
the quantum level but the geometric
input all three of these are geometric
theories and the question is what are
the compatibilities are
incompatibilities at the level of
geometry before the theory is treated
quantum mechanically well in the case of
Einstein's general relativity we can
rewrite the Einstein theory by saying
that there's a projection map due to
Einstein of a curvature tensor where I'm
going to write that curvature tensor as
I would in the yang-mills theory that
should be an LC for lemme chavita
so the Einstein projection of the
curvature tensor of the leve chavita
connection of the metric on this side
and on this side I'm going to write down
this differential operator the adjoint
of the exterior derivative coupled to a
connection and you begin to see that
we're missing an opportunity potentially
what if the FAs were the same in both
contexts then you're applying to
separate operators 1 0 with order and
destructive in the sense that it doesn't
see the entire curvature tensor the
other inclusive but a first-order
and so the question is is there any
opportunity to do anything that combines
these two but the problem is is that the
hallmark of the yang-mills theory is the
freedom to choose the data the internal
quantum numbers that give all the
particles their personalities beyond the
mass and the spin additional to all of
that freedom is some means of taking
away some of the redundancy that comes
with that freedom which is the action of
the gauge group now we can allow the
gauge group of symmetries to act on both
sides of the equation
but the key problem is is that if I act
on connections on the right and then
take the Einstein projection this is not
equal to first taking the projection
and then conjugating with the gauge
action so the problem is is that the
projection is based on the fact that you
have a relationship between the
intrinsic geometry if this is an add
value to form the to form portion of
this and the adjoint portion of this are
both associated to the structure group
of the tangent bundle but the gauge
rotation is only acting on one of the
two factors yet the projection is making
use of both of them so there is a
fundamental incompatibility in the claim
that Einstein's theory is a gauge theory
relies more on analogy than an exact
mapping between the two theories what
about the incompatibilities between the
einstein theory of general relativity
and the Dirac theory of matter I was
very struck that if we're going to try
to quantize gravity and we associate
gravity with the spin to field G mu nu
we actually have a pretty serious
problem which is if you think about
spinners electrons quarks as being waves
in a medium and you think about photons
as being waves in a different medium
photons medium does not depend on the
existence of a metric one forms are
defined whether or not a metric is
present yet spinners are not so if we
are going to take the spin to G mu nu
field to be quantum mechanical if it
blinks out and does whatever the quantum
does between observations in the case of
the photon it's saying that the waves
may blink out but the ocean need not
blink out in the case of the Dirac
theory it is the ocean the medium in
which the waves live that becomes
uncertain itself so even if you're
comfortable with the quantum to me this
becomes a bridge too far so the question
is how do we liberate the definition
how do we get the metric out from its
responsibilities it's been assigned far
too many responsibilities its
responsible for a volume form for
differential operators it's responsible
for measurement it's responsible for
being a dynamical field part of the
field content of the system lastly we
have the compatibility comparing
yang-mills and in the Dirac theory these
may be the most mild of the various
incompatibilities but it is an
incompatibility of naturality where the
direct field Einsteins field and the
connection fields are all geometrically
well motivated we push a lot of the
artificiality that we do not understand
into the potential for the scalar field
that gives everything its mass so we
tended to treat it as something of a
mysterious fudge factor so the question
is if we have a Higgs field why is it
here and why is it geometric it has long
been the most artificial sector of our
models the proposal that I want to put
to you today is that one of the reasons
that we may be having trouble with
unification is is that the duty our duty
may be to generalize all three vertices
before we can make progress that's
daunting because in each case it would
appear that we can make an argument that
this that and the other vertex are the
simplest possible theories that could
live at that vertex we know for example
the Dirac operator is the most
fundamental of all the elliptic
operators in Euclidean signature
generating all of a Tia singer theory we
know that einstein's theory is in some
sense a unique spin to massless field
capable of communicating gravity which
can be arrived at from field theoretic
rather than geometric considerations in
the yang-mills case it can be argued
that the yang-mills theory is the
simplest theory that can possibly result
where we're taking the simplest
lagrangian in the Einstein case looking
only at the scalar curvature in the
yang-mills case we have no substructure
and so we're doing the most
simple-minded thing we can do by taking
the norm square of the curvature and
saying whatever the field strength is
let's measure that size so if each one
of these as simple as possible doesn't
Occam's razor tell us that if we wish to
remain in geometric field theory that
we've already reached bottom and that
what we're being asked to do is to
abandon this is merely an effective
theory that's possible and I would say
that that in some sense represents a lot
of conventional wisdom but there are
other possibilities there are other
possibilities that while each of these
may be simplest in its category they are
not simplest in their interaction for
example we know that Dirac famously took
the square root of the klein-gordon
equation to achieve the Dirac equation
he actually took two square roots one of
the differential operator and another of
the algebra on which it acts but could
not could we not do the same thing by
reinterpreting what we saw in Donaldson
theory the insurance Simon's theory and
finding that there are first-order
equations that imply second-order
equations that are nonlinear and in the
curvature so let's imagine the following
we replace the standard model with a
true second-order theory we imagine that
general relativity is replaced by a true
first-order theory and then we find that
the true second-order theory admits of a
square root and can be linked with the
true first-order theory this would be a
program for some kind of unification of
de rocks type but in the force sector
the question is does this really make
any sense
are there any possibilities to do any
such thing
so what I'd like to do is I'd like to
talk a little bit about what the
geometric unity proposal is so we have a
division into intrinsic theories and
auxiliary theories between physics and
mathematics more specifically geometry
an intrinsic physical theory would be
general relativity an auxiliary physical
theory would be the yang-mills theory
with the freedom to choose internal
quantum numbers at the mathematical
level an intrinsic Theory would be to be
a little fastidious the older semi
Romani in geometry a study of manifolds
with length and angle but auxiliary
geometry is really what's taken off of
late since the revolution partially
begun at Oxford when is singer brought
insights from Stony Brook to the UK and
so we're gonna call this fiber bundle
theory or modern gauge theory geometric
unity is the search for some way to
break down the walls between these four
boxes what's natural to one theory is
unnatural to another semi romani and
geometry is dominated by these
projection operators as well as the
ability to use the levy chavita
connection now some aspects of this are
less explored torsion tensors are
definable in semi romani in geometry but
they are not used to the extent that you
might imagine in the case of fiber
bundle theory
the discovery of physicists that the
gauge group was fantastically important
came as something of a shock to the
mathematicians who had missed that
structure and have since exploited it to
great effect so what we'd like to do is
we'd like to come up with some theory
that is intrinsic but allows us to play
some of the games that exist in other
boxes how can we how can we try to have
our cake eat it and use all the full
suite of techniques that are available
to us so our perspective is is that it
is the quantum that maybe the
comparatively easy part and that the
unification of the geometry which is not
occurred maybe what we're being asked to
do so let's try to figure out what would
a final Theory even look like when I was
a bit younger I remember reading this
question of Einstein which he said I'm
not really interested in some of the
details of physics what really concerns
me is whether the creator had any choice
in how the world was constructed and
some people may have read that as a
philosophical statement but I took that
as an actual call for a research program
so I'd like to describe that research
program and try to unpack what I think
he was saying
we talk a lot about unification but we
hardly ever actually imagine if we had a
unified theory what would it look like
let us imagine that we cannot figure out
the puzzle of why is there something
rather than nothing but if we do have a
something that that something has this
little structure as possible but still
invites us to work mathematically so to
me the two great theories that we have
mathematically and in physics are
calculus and linear algebra if we have
calculus and linear algebra I mean
imagine that we have some manifold at
least one of dimension four but it's not
a space-time it doesn't have a metric
it's not broken down into two different
kinds of coordinates which then have
some bleed into each other but still
maintains a distinction it's just some
sort of flabby proto space-time and in
the end it's got to fill up with stuff
and give us some kind of an equation so
let me write an equation
so I have in mind differential operators
parameterised by some fields Omega which
when composed are not of second-order if
these are first-order operators but at
zero with order and some sort of further
differential operator saying that
whatever those two operators are in
composition is in some sense harmonic is
such a program even possible so if the
universe is in fact capable of being the
fire that lights itself is it capable of
managing its own flame as well and
closing up what I'd like to do is to set
ourselves an almost impossible task
which is to begin with this little data
in a sandbox to use the computer science
concept so if here's physical reality
standard physics is over here we're
going to start with the sandbox and all
we're going to put in it is x4 and we're
going to set ourselves a straight
jacketed task of seeing how close we can
come to dragging out a model that looks
like the natural world that follows this
trajectory
while it may appear that that is not a
particularly smart thing to do I would
like to think that we could agree that
it is quite possible that if that were
to be the case we might say that this is
what Einstein meant by a creator which
was his anthropomorphic concept for
necessity and elegance and design having
no choice in the making of the world so
with that let us begin to think about
what we mean today by geometric unity
Jihu comes in four flavors but I'm only
getting one shot to do this so I'm going
to do the most exciting of them to me
there's a completely exhaust flavor and
what I'm going to do is I'm going to
take the concept of observation and I'm
going to break the world into two pieces
a place where we do our observation and
a place where most of the activity takes
place and I'm going to try to do this
without loss of generality so in this
case we have x4 and it can map into some
other space and we're going to call this
an observers the idea of an observer is
a bit like a stadium you have a playing
field and you have stands they aren't
distinct entities they're coupled and so
fundamentally we're going to replace one
space with two excitedness model simply
means that U is unrestricted although
larger than x4 so any manifold of four
dimension higher that is capable of
admitting export as an immersion the
next model we have is the bundle
theoretic in which case use sits over X
as a fiber bundle
the most exciting which is the one we'll
deal with today is the endogenous model
where x4 actually grows the space you
where the activity takes place so we
talked about extra dimensions but these
are in some sense not extra dimensions
their implicit dimensions within x4 and
last to proceed without loss of
generality we have the tautological
model in that case X 4 equals u and the
immersion is the identity and without
loss of generality we simply play our
games on one space okay now we need
rules
and the rules are sorry feedback no
choice of fundamental metric so we
imagine that Einstein was presented with
the fork in the road and it's always
disturbing not to follow Einsteins path
but we're in fact going to turn
Einsteins game on its head and see if we
can get anywhere with that right so it's
also a possibility that because
Einstein's theory is so perfect that if
there's anything wrong with it it's very
hard to untap of it so let's make no
choice of fundamental metric and in fact
let's go more ambitious and let's say
we're going to reverse the logic of
Einstein Einstein the metric is
fundamental but the levy chavita
connection from which we deduce the
curvature is emergent right so the
fundamental theorem of romani and
geometry is is that every connection
causes every metric causes a connection
to emerge and then the curvature is
built on the connection we turn this
around we imagine we're looking for a
connection and we wish it to build a
metric because connections are amenable
to quantization in a way that metrics
are not the next point is that we always
want to have a plan to return to finite
dimensions without losing sight of the
quantum and lastly we want to liberate
matter from its dependence on the metric
for its very existence
so what we now need to build fermions
onto our four dimensional manifold
in some way without ever choosing a
metric if we're even having to have any
hope of playing a game involving matter
starting from this perspective of no
information other than the most bare
information let's get started
we take x4 you need metrics we have none
we're not allowed to choose one so we do
the standard trick as we choose them all
so we allow you 14 to equal the space of
metrics on X for point wise therefore if
we propagate on top of this and you call
this the projection operator if we
propagate on you 14 we are in some sense
following a Fineman like idea of
propagating over the space of all
metrics but not at a field level that a
point wise tensorial level is there a
metric on you 14 well we both want one
and don't want one if we had a metric
from the space of all metrics we could
define fermions but we would also lock
out any ability to do dynamics we want
some choice over what this metric is but
we don't want full choice because we
want enough to be able to define the
matter fields to begin with it turns out
that if this is X 4 and this is this
particular endogenous choice of U 14 we
have a 10 dimensional metric along the
fibers so we have a G 10 mu nu further
for every point in the fibers we get a
metric downstairs on the base space so
if we pull back the cotangent bundle we
get a metric G 4 mu nu on pi star of the
cotangent bundle of X we now define the
chimeric bundle right and the chimeric
bundle is the sum of the
vertical tangent bundle along the fibers
with the pullback which we're going to
call the horizontal bundle from the base
space so the chimeric bundle is going to
be the vertical tangent space of ten
dimensions to you direct sum the
four-dimensional cotangent space which
we're going to call horizontal to you
and the great thing about the chimeric
bundle is is that it has an a priori
metric it's kind of metrics on the floor
metric on the ten we can always decide
that the two of them are naturally
perpendicular to each other
furthermore it is almost canonically
isomorphic to the tangent bundle of the
cotangent bundle because we either have
four out of 14 or 10 out of 14
dimensions on the nose so the question
is what are we missing and the answer is
that we're missing exactly the data of a
connection so this bundle chimeric see
we have c is equal to the tangent bundle
of you up to a choice of a connection
theta and this is exactly what we wanted
we have a situation where we have some
field on the manifold X in the form of a
connection which is amenable more
friendly to quantization which is now
determining a metric turning around the
levee chavita game and the only problem
is is that we've had to buy ourselves
into a different space than the one we
thought we wanted to work on but now as
theta changes the fermions are defined
on the chimeric bundle and it's the
isomorphism from the chimeric bundle to
the tangent bundle of the space U which
is varying which means that the fermions
no longer depend on the metric they no
longer depend on the theta connection
they are there if things go quantum
mechanical and we've achieved our
objective of putting the matter fields
and the spin one fields on something of
the same footing
but and I want to emphasize this one
thing most of us we think a lot about
final theories and and about unification
but until you actually start daring to
try to do it you don't realize what the
process of it feels like now try to
imagine conducting your life or you have
no children let's say and no film tropic
urges what you want to do is you want to
use all of your money for yourself and
die penniless right like a perfect
finish assuming that that's what you
wanted to do it would be pretty
nerve-wracking at the end right how many
days left do I have how many dollars
left I have this is the process of
unification in physics you start giving
away all of your most valuable
possessions and you don't know whether
you've given them away too early whether
you've husband them too long and so in
this process what we've just done is
we've started to paint ourselves into a
corner we got something we wanted but
we've given away freedom we're now
dealing with a fourteen dimensional
world now let me just sum this up by
saying
between fundamental and emergent
standard model and gr let's do G our
fundamental is the metric Mergent is the
connection here in GU it is the
connection that's fundamental and the
metric that's emergent in the next unit
of G u so this is sort of the first unit
of G you there any quick questions
having to do with confusion or may I
proceed to the next unit okay the next
unit of G U is the unified field content
what does it mean for our fields to
become unified there are in fact only at
this moment two fields that know about X
theta which is the connection that we've
just talked about and a section Sigma
that takes us back so that we can
communicate back and forth between U and
X we now need field content that only
knows about you which now has a metric
depending on theta
a particular member of the audience is a
hedge fund manager who taught me that
there is something of a universal trade
and a universal trade has four
components you have to have a view you
have to have a trade expression you have
to be able to calculate your cost of
carry and you need a catalyst our view
is going to be that somebody doesn't
understand what trade is possible and
we're going to make a trade that looks
like one of the worst trades of all time
and hopefully if we if we have enough
conviction we're gonna have a catalyst
to show that we actually got the better
part of the deal what is that trade what
is it that we think has been blocking
progress in gr and romani and geometry
as we've said we have the projection
operators and we also have the levy
chavita connection in the auxiliary
theory we have freedom to choose our
field content and we have the ability to
get rid of much excess through the
symmetries of the gauge group we are
going to take particle theory we're
going to make a bad trade or what
appears to be a bad trade which is that
we are going to give away the freedom to
choose our field content which is
already extremely as I think I said in
the abstract Baroque with all of the
different particle properties and we are
going to lose the ability to use the
gauge group because we're going to trade
it all
you have the family cow and you have
some magic beans so it's now time to
trade the family cow for the magic beans
and bring them home and see whether or
not we got the better of the deal okay
what is it that we get for the leve
chavita connection well not much
one thing we get is that normally the
space of connections is an affine space
not a vector space but in affine space
almost a vector space a vector space up
to a choice of origin but with the leve
chavita connection rather than having an
infinite plane with an ability to take
differences but no real ability to have
a group structure you pick out one point
which then becomes the origin that means
that any connection a has a torsion
tensor a which is equal to the
connection minus the levy chavita
connection so we get a tensor that we
don't usually have gauge potentials are
not usually well-defined they're only
defined up to a choice of gauge so
that's one of the things we get for our
levy chavita connection but because the
gauge group is going to go missing this
has terrible properties from with
respect to the gauge group it almost
looks like a representation but in fact
if we let the gauge group act there's
going to be an affine shift furthermore
as we've said before the ability to use
projection operators together with the
gauge group is frustrated by virtue of
the fact that these two things do not
commute with each
so now the question is how are we going
to prove that we're actually making a
good trade okay first thing we need to
do is is that we still have the right to
choose intrinsic field content we have
an intrinsic field theory so if you
consider the structure bundle of The
Spinners
right we built the chimeric bundle so we
can define dirac spinors on the chimeric
bundle for in Euclidean signature a $14
of dimension to to the dimension of the
space / - right so two to the 14 / - 2
to the seventh is 128 so we have a map
into a structure group of you 128 at
least in Euclidean signature we can get
to mix signatures later from that we can
form the associated bundle
and sections of this bundle are either
depending upon how you want to think
about it the gauge group H or C a space
of Sigma fields nonlinear there's no
reason that we can't choose this as
field content again we're being led by
the nose like a bowl if we want to make
use of the symmetries of the theory we
have to promote some symmetry to being
part of the theory and we have to let it
be subjected to dynamical laws we're
gonna lose control over it
but we're not dead yet right we're
fighting for our life to make sure that
this trade has some hope so potentially
by including symmetries as field content
we will have some opportunity to make
use of the projection so for those of
you who so when I was thinking about
this I to be amazed by ships and bottles
I must confess that I never figured out
what the trick was for ships in bottles
but once I saw it I remembered thank you
that's really clever so if you've never
seen it you have a ship which is like a
curvature tensor and imagine that the
mast is is the Ricci curvature if you
just try to shove it into the bottle
you're undoubtedly gonna snap the mast
so you imagine you've transformed your
gauge fields you've kept track of where
the Ricci curvature was you try to push
it from one space like add value to
forms into another space like add valued
one forms where connections live that's
not a good idea instead what we do is
the following
imagine that you're carrying around
group theoretic information and what you
do is you do a transformation based on
the group Theory so you lower the mast
you push it through the neck having some
string attached to the mast and then you
undo the transformation on the other
side this is exactly what we're going to
hope is going to save us in this bad
trade that we've made because we're
going to add field content that has the
ability to lower the mast and bring the
mast back up we're going to hope to have
a theory which is going to create a
commutative situation but then once
we've had this idea we start to get a
little bolder let's think about unified
content we know that we want a space of
connections a for our field theory but
we know because we have a levee chavita
connection that this is going to be
equal on the nose to add valued one
forms as a vector space the gauge group
represents an ad valued one forms so if
we also have the gauge group but we
think of that instead as a space of
Sigma fields what if we take the semi
direct product at a group theoretic
level between the two and call this a
our group of interest well by analogy
we've always had a problem with the
Pangkor a group being too intrinsically
tied to rigid flat minkovski space what
if we wanted to do quantum field theory
in some situation which was more
amenable to a curved space situation
it's possible that we should be basing
it around something more akin to the
gauge group and in this case we're
mimicking the construction where C here
would be analogous to the Lorentz group
fixing a point in in Minkowski space and
AD valued one forms would be analogous
to the Momentum's when we take in the
semi direct product to create the in
homogeneous Lorentz group otherwise
known as the Pangkor a group or rather
it's double cover to allow spin so we're
going to call this the inhomogeneous
gauge group or Iggy
and this is going to be a really
interesting space because it has a
couple of properties one is it has a
very interesting subgroup now of course
H includes into G by just including on
to the first factor but in fact there's
a more interesting homomorphism brought
to you by the levy chavita connection so
this magic bean trade is going to start
to enter more and more into our
consciousness if I take an element H and
I map that in the obvious way into the
first factor but I map it onto the more
ore cart and for I think that's what I
wish I remembered more of this stuff
into the second factor it turns out that
this is actually a group homomorphism
and so we have a non-trivial embedding
which is in some sense diagonal between
the two factors that subgroup we are
going to refer to as the tilted gauge
group and now our field content at least
in the bosonic sector is going to be a
group manifold an infinite dimensional
function space lead group but a group
nonetheless and we can now look at G mod
the Tilted gauge group and if we have
any interesting representation of H we
can form homogeneous vector bundles and
work with induced representations and
that's what the fermions are going to be
so the fermions and our theories are
going to be H modules and the idea is
that we're going to work with vector
bundles curly e of the form in
homogeneous gauge group
product it over the Tilted gage group
now just as in the finite-dimensional
case we have a linear and a nonlinear
component right because that topological
level this is just a cartoon Cartesian
product so if we wish to take products
of fermions of spin oriole fields we
have a place to accept them we can't
figure out necessarily how to map them
into the nonlinear sector but we don't
want to so just the way when we look at
supersymmetry we can take products of
the spin 1/2 fields and map them into
the linear sector we can do the same
thing here so what we're talking about
is something like a super symmetric
extension of the inhomogeneous gauge
group analogous to super symmetric
extensions of the double cover of the
inhomogeneous Lorentz or plonker a go
further because this construction is at
the level of groups we've left a slot on
the left hand side on which to act so
for example if we want to take regular
representations on the group we can act
by the group G on the left hand side
because we're allowing the tilted gage
group to act on the right hand side so
it's perfectly built for representation
theory and if you think back to Vig
neurs classification and the concept
that a particle should correspond to an
irreducible representation of the in
homogeneous gauge group in homogeneous
Lorentz group we may be able to play the
same games here up to the issue of
infinite dimensionality so right now our
field content is looking pretty good
it's looking unified in the sense that
it has an algebraic structure that is
not usually enjoyed by field content and
the field content from different sectors
can interact and know about each other
provided we can drag something of this
out of this with meaning now
what would it mean to be able to use a
gauge group in an intrinsic theory like
this we would be talking about something
like an action let's say a first-order
action and it would take the group G
let's say to the real numbers invariant
not under the full group but under the
tilted gauge subgroup and now the
question is do we have any such actions
that are particularly nice and could we
recognize them the way Einstein did by
trying to write down not the action in
Hilbert was the first one to write that
down but I you know I always feel
defensive because I think Einstein and
Grossman did so much more to begin the
theory and that the Lagrangian that got
written down was really just an
inevitability
so just humor me for this talk and let
me call it the Einstein Grossman
Lagrangian Hilbert certainly done
fantastic things and has a lot of credit
elsewhere and he did do it first but
here what we we had was that Einstein
thought in terms of the differential of
the action not the action itself so what
we're looking for is equations of motion
or some field alpha where alpha belongs
to the one forms on the group now in
this section of G you unified field
content is only one part of it but what
we really want
is unified field content plus a toolkit
so we've restricted ourselves to one
gauge group this big unitary group on
the spinners using whatever sort of
inner product naturally exists on the
spinners and not spinners value in an
auxiliary structure but intrinsic
spinners the toolkit that we have is
that the adroit bundle looks like the
clifford algebra at the level of vector
spaces which is just looking like the
exterior algebra on the chimeric bundle
that means that it's graded by degrees
chimeric bundle has dimension 14 so
there's a zero part of one part a two
part all the way up to 14 plus we have
forms in the manifold and so the
question is if I want to look at Omega I
valued in the adjoint bundle there's
going to be some element Phi I which is
pure trace right because it's the same
representations appearing where in the
usually auxiliary directions as well as
the geometric directions so we get an
entire suite of invariants together with
trivially associated invariants that
come from using the Hodge star operator
on the form so I'm just going to call
them for completeness I'm going to deal
with them
now this is a tremendous amount of
freedom that we've just gained normally
we keep losing freedom but this is the
first time we actually begin to see that
we have a lot of freedom and we're gonna
actually retain some of this freedom
through the it to the end of the talk
but the idea being that I can now start
to define operators which correspond to
the ship in the bottle problem I can
take field content epsilon and PI where
epsilon where these are elements of the
in homogeneous gauge group in other
words epsilon is a is a gauge
transformation and pi is an is a gauge
potential and I can start to define
operators I'm using so in this case if I
have a Phi which is one of these
invariants in the form piece I can
either take a contraction or I can take
a wedge product in the Lee algebra piece
I can either take a Lee product or
because I'm looking at the unitary group
there's a second possibility which is I
can multiply everything by I and go from
skew-hermitian to hermitian and take a
Jordan product using anticommutator x'
rather than commutator so I actually
have a fair amount of freedom and I'm
going to use a magic bracket notation
which in whatever situation I'm looking
for knows what it wants to be is does it
want to do contractions is wanting to
wedge product leap product Jordan
product but the point is I now have a
suite of ways of moving forms around so
for example I can define a Shia operator
that takes I forms valued in the adjoint
bundle
to much higher degree forms value than
the adjoint bundle so for this in this
case for example it would take a to form
to a D minus 3 plus 2 or a D minus 1
form so curvature is an add value to
form and if I had such a she AB operator
it would take add value to forms to add
value D minus 1 forms which is exactly
the right space to be an alpha coming
from the derivative of an action this is
exactly what Einstein was doing he took
the curvature which was large and he
bent it back and he sheared off the viol
curvature and they took that part and he
pushed it back along the space of
metrics to give us something which we
nowadays call Ricci flow an ability for
the curvature to direct us to the next
structure well we're doing the same
thing here we're taking the curvature
and we can now push it back onto the
space of connections
three plus I so in this case the idea is
that we've actually got something for
our magic beans we have an ability now
to get equations of motion which go
along the group in some sense it's as if
it was a gradient vector field except
we're using forms rather than vectors
but now what are the transformation
properties well because the curvature so
you have XI AB because the curvature of
a connection hit by a gauge
transformation is equal on the nose to
the adjoint action on the Lee algebra of
the curvature we know that if we have
two possible actions of conjugation
under a bracket and the bracket respects
the action of the gauge group we know
that this is going to be well preserved
in other words we're going to get a form
that is gauge invariant relative to the
tilted gauge group and so as a result we
now have the possibility for equations
of motion which are well defined even
though they involve projection operators
because we built the symmetries into the
theory and we're working on a group
manifold to begin with what about the
torsion can we rescue the torsion here
again we have good news
the torsion is problematic but if I look
at a different field which I'm going to
call the Augmented torsion and I define
it to be the regular torsion which would
be pi minus this expression this turns
out to be beautifully invariant again so
neither this term nor this term is gauge
invariant but there they failed to be
gauge invariant in exactly the same way
so an important principle of life which
I took too long to realize is that if
you have one disease you're in real
trouble
but if you have two diseases you always
have the possibility of having one
disease kill the other disease this is
true and renormalization theory it's
true in black-scholes theory it's true
all over the place so what we have here
is we've got more diseases into the
theory but an even number of diseases
allow us to have no disease at all so
now we have two great tensors we've got
1 tensor coming from the curvature and
the shiaa operator we have another
tensor coming from the torsion and it's
augmentation
no we're doing okay
okay we're not doing physics yet we're
just building tools we've built
ourselves a little bit of freedom we
have some reprieves we've still got some
very big debts to pay back for this
magic beans trade we're in the wrong
dimension we don't have good field
content we're stuck on this one spinner
we've built ourselves some projection
operators we picked up some symmetric
nonlinear Sigma field what can we write
down in terms of equations of motion
let's start with einstein's concept if
we do xi AB of the curvature tensor of
the gage potential hit with an operator
defined by the epsilon Sigma field plus
the star operator acting on the
Augmented torsion of the pair this
contains all of the information when PI
is zero in Einstein's tensor in other
words there is a spin Oriole analog of
the viol curvature Aspen Oriole analog
of the traceless Ricci curvature and
Aspen Oriole analog of the scalar
curvature this operator should shear off
the analog of the viol purva Chur just
the way Einstein is projection shears
off the viol curvature when you're
looking at the tangent bundle in this
tournament which is now gauge invariant
may be considered as containing a piece
that looks like lambda times G mu nu or
a cosmological constant in this piece
here
can be made to contain a piece that
looks like Einstein's tensor and so this
looks very much like the vacuum field
equations but we have to add in
something else I'm gonna be a little bit
vague because I'm still giving myself
some freedom as we write this up but
we're going to define whatever tensor we
need for this term these terms here this
is gauge invariant this is gauge
invariant and this is gauge invariant
with respect to the tilted gauge group
these two tensors together should be
exact and this tensor on its own should
be exact
we're going to call the exact tensor the
swerve ature so the particular she have
operator we call the swerve so that it's
swerve curvature plus the adjustment
needed for exactness and another gauge
invariant term which is not usually
gauge invariant so that's pretty cool if
that works
we've now taken the Einstein equation
and we've put it not on the space of
metrics but we've put a generalization
in an analogue on the space of gauge
potentials much more amenable to
quantization with much more algebraic
structure and symmetry in the form of
the in homogeneous gauge group in its
homogeneous vector bundle some of which
may be super symmetric now the question
is we've we've integrated so tightly
with the matter field we have to ask
ourselves the question can we see
unification here let's define matter
content in the form of Omega zero tenser
than the spinners which is a fancy way
of saying spinners together with a copy
of the one forms tenser than the
spinners and let me come up with two
other copies of the same data so I'll
make Omega D minus one just by duality
so imagine that there's a Hodge star
operator and there's a little kid I had
the soma cube I don't know if you ever
played with one of these things they're
fantastic and I later found out that
this guy who invented the soma cube
which you had to put the others pieces
there was one piece that looked like
this this object and he was like this
amazing guy in the resistance during
world war ii so I would like to name
this the somatic complex after I guess
his name is P at Hine I think so this
this complex I'm going to choose to
start filling in some operators the
exterior derivative coupled to a
connection but on the case of spinors
we're gonna put a slash through it let's
make this the identity we'd now like to
come up with a second operator here and
this second operator here should have
the property that the complex should be
exact
than the obstruction to it being a true
complex to know potency should be
exactly the generalization of the
Einstein equations
thus unifying the spin oriole matter
with the intrinsic replacement for the
curvature equations well we know that da
composed with itself is going to be the
curvature and we know that we want that
to be hit by a Shia operator and if she
has a derivation you can start to see
that that's gonna be curvature so you
want something like FA followed by she
AB over here to cancel then you think
okay well how am I going to get at
getting this augmented torsion and then
you realize that the information in the
in homogeneous gauge group you actually
have information not for one connection
but for two connections so in one case I
can do plus star to pick up the a sub PI
but I'm also gonna have a derivative
operator if I just do a star operation
so I need another derivative operator to
kill it off here so I'm going to take
minus the derivative with respect to the
connection H inverse da not H which
defines a connection one form as well as
having the same derivative cup coming
from the levy chavita connection on you
so in other words I have two derivative
operators here I have to add valued one
forms the difference between them is
going to be of zero with order and it's
going to be precisely the augmented
torsion that's the same game I'm going
to repeat here
so I'm going to do the same thing here
I'm going to define a bunch of terms
where in the numerator I'm going to pick
up the pie as well as the derivative in
the denominator because I have no
derivative here I'm going to pick up
this H inverse da not an H I'm going to
do that again on the other side they're
gonna be plus and minus signs but it's a
magic bracket that knows whether or not
should be a plus sign or a minus sign
and I apologize for that but I'm not
able to keep that straight and then
there's gonna be one extra term where
all these T's have the epsilon and PI's
okay so some crazy series of
differential operators on the northern
route so if you take the high road or
you take the low road when you take the
composition of the to the differential
operators fall out and you're left with
an obstruction term that looks like the
Einstein field equations well that's
pretty good if true can you go farther
well look at how close this field
content is to the picture from
deformation theory that we learned about
in low dimensions the low dimensional
world works by saying that symmetries
map to field content map to equations
usually in the curvature and when you
linearize that
if you're in low enough dimensions you
have Omega 0 Omega 1 sometimes I make a
zero again and then something that comes
from Omega 2 and if you can get that
sequence to terminate by looking at
something like a half signature at
theorem or a bent back to Ram complex in
the case of dimension 3 you haven't a
tee a singer theory and remember we need
some way to get out of infinite
dimensional trouble all right you have
to have someone to call when things go
wrong overseas you have to be able to
get your way home and in some sense we
call it a tee and singer and say we're
in some infinite dimensional space can't
you cut out some finite dimensional
problem that we can solve even though we
start getting ourselves into serious
trouble
and so we're going to do the same thing
down here we're going to have a mega
zero add Omega 1 add direct sum Omega
zero add Omega D minus 1 ad and it's
almost the same operators and this is
now not just a great guess it's actually
the information for the deformation
theory of the linearized replacement of
the einstein field equations so this is
computing the director iski tangent
space just as if you were doing
self-dual theory or chern-simons theory
you've got two somatic complexes right
one of them is bose one of them is
firming the obstruction to both of them
is a common generalization of the
Einstein field equations what's more is
if you if you start to think about this
this is some version of Hodge theory
with funky operators so you can ask
yourself well what are the harmonic
forms in a fractional spin context well
they're different depending upon whether
you take the degree 0 piece together
with the degree
P so you take the degree one piece let's
just take the degree one piece you get
some kind of equation so I'm going to
decide that I have a Zeta field which is
an Omega 1 tensor spinors and a field
new jewelry strikes me as a kiddush
field new is omega 0 tensor s ok what
equation would they solve if we were
doing Hodge theory relative to this
complex the equation would look
something like this
there'd be one equation that was very
simple and then there'd be one equation
that would be like really hard to guess
kahshanna I hope I'm not screwing this
up but look all these words and I still
feel like I'm managing to run out of
room
now if you have something like that that
would be a hell of a Dirac equation
right you've got differential operators
over here you've got differential
operators I guess I didn't write them in
but you would have two differential
operators over here and you'd have this
differential operator coming from this
more cartoon form so I apologize and
being a little loose here but the idea
is you have two of these terms or
zeroeth order three of these terms would
be first-order and on this side one term
would be first-order and that's not
there that's right that was a mistake
oh no sorry that was a mistake
calling it a mistake these are two
separate equations right so you have two
separate fields nu and Zeta and you have
a couple set of differential equations
that are playing the role of the Dirac
theory coming from the Hodge theory of a
complex whose obstruction to being calm
ology theory would be the replacement to
the Einstein field equations which would
be rendered gauge invariant on a group
relative to a tilted sub group okay what
would so now we've dealt with two of the
three sectors is there any
generalization of the yang-mills
equation well if we were to take the
Einstein field equations ation and take
the norm square of it oh there's some
point I should make here just one second
I've been treating this as if everything
is first-order well what really happens
here
is that you've got symmetries you've got
symmetric field content you've got
ordinary connections and we're
neglecting to draw the fact that there
have to be equations here too
these equations are first-order so why
do we get to call this a first-order
theory if there are equations here which
are of second-order well it's not a pure
first-order theory but when I say a
first-order theory in this context what
I really mean is that the second-order
equations are completely redundant on
the first-order equations by virtue of
the symmetry principle that is any
solution of the first-order equations
should automatically apply imply a
solution of the second order equations
so from that perspective I can pretend
that this isn't here because it is
sufficient to solve the first-order
equations so I can now look let's call
that entire replacement which we
previously called alpha I miss that
alpha equal to epsilon because I've
actually been using Absalon the portion
of it that is just the first-order
equations and take the norm square of
that that gives me a new Lagrangian and
if I solve that new Lagrangian it leads
to equations of motion that look like
exactly what we said before
and it ends up defining an operator that
looks something like this da star the
adjoint of the Shehab operator so in
other words this piece gives you some
portion that looks like right from the
swerve ature tensor there's going to be
some component that's playing the role
of Einsteins field equations directly
and the Ricci tensor but generalized and
then you're gonna have some differential
operator here so that the replacement
for the yang-mills term instead of da
star of fa you've got these two XI a
band at XI AB and an adjoint XI AB
together in the center generalizing the
yang-mills theory then you say well how
come we don't just see the yang-mills
theory why don't we see general
relativity as well but in the full
expansion there's also a term that
zeroeth order that's effectively acting
like the identity which hits this as
well so you have one piece that looks
like the yang-mills theory and in these
second-order equations you also have a
piece that looks like the Einstein
theory and this is in the vacuum
equations so then the question is how do
you see the Dirac theory coming out of
this and so what we're just trying to
put together now before we come out with
the manuscript for this is putting these
two elliptic complexes together the
direct terms go between the two
complexes right so the idea is that the
stress-energy tensor should be the up
and back term and the Dirac equations
should come out of the term that goes up
and over versus the term that goes over
and up and you need some cancellations
to make sure that everything is of zero
width order properly invariant etc and
that's taking
little time because frankly I'm not good
keeping track of indices minus signs
left right - it's a learning-disabled
nightmare
so we've got one more unit to go I mean
there's a fifth unit that has to do with
mathematical applications but this is
sort of a physics talk for today is
there any questions before we go into
the last unit and then really handle
questions for real all right let me show
you the next a little bit we've got
problems we're not in four dimensions
we're in 14 we don't have great field
content because we've just got these
unadorned spinners and we're doing gauge
transformations effectively on the
intrinsic geometric quantities not on
some safe auxiliary data that's tensor
product with what are our spinners are
how is it that we're gonna find anything
realistic and then we have to remember
everything we've been doing recently has
been done on you we've forgotten about X
how does all of this look to X so X is
sitting down here and all the action is
happening up here on you 14 there's a
projection operator I've used PI twice
it's not here the field contents just
projection and I've got a Sigma which is
a section what does Zeta
pulled back or new pulled back look like
on x4
okay let's try to think about how we
would come up with this filled content
starting from first principles let's
imagine that there's nothing to begin
with then you have one copy of matter
whatever it is that we see in our world
the first generation in order for that
to become interesting it has to have an
equation so it has to get mapped
somewhere then we've seen the muon and
all the rest of the matter that comes
with it we have a second generation then
in the mid-1970s pearl finds the tau
particle and we start to get panicked
that we don't understand what's going on
one thing we can do is we could move
these equations around a little bit and
move the equation for the first
generation back and then we could start
adding particles let's imagine that we
could guess what particles we'd add we'd
add a pseudo generation of 16 particles
spin three halves never-before-seen not
necessarily superpartners but we read a
Schwinger matter with familiar internal
quantum numbers but potentially so that
they're flipped so that matter looks
like antimatter to this generation then
we add just for the heck of it
144 spin 1/2 fermions which contain a
bunch of particles with familiar quantum
numbers but also some very exotic
looking particles that nobody's ever
seen before now we start doing something
different we make an accusation one of
our generations isn't a regular
generation it's an imposter at low
energy in a cooled state potentially it
looks just the same as these other
generations but were we somehow able to
turn up the energy imagine that it would
unify differently with this new matter
that we've posited rather than simply
unifying onto itself so two of the
generations would unify into themselves
but this third generation
would fuse with the new particles that
we've already added we consolidate
geometrically we can add some 0 with
order terms and we imagine that there is
an elliptic complex that would govern
the state of affairs we then choose to
add some stuff that we can't see it all
that's dark and this matter would be
governed by forces that were dark to
there might be dark electromagnetism and
dark strong and dark weak it might be
that things break in that sector
completely differently and it doesn't
break down to an su 3 cross su 2 cross u
1 because these are different su 3 s su
2 s nu ones and it may be that there
would be like a high energy su 5 you
know or some
p'tee Salam Model imagine then that
chirality was not fundamental but it was
emergent that you had some complex and
as long as there were cross terms these
two halves would talk to each other but
if the cross terms went away the two
terms would become decoupled and just
the way we have a left hand and we have
a right hand and you asked me right
imagine you have a neurological
condition and in Oliver Sacks sort of an
idiom if somebody's only aware of one
side of their body they say oh my god
I'm deformed I'm asymmetric right but we
actually have a symmetry between the two
things that can't see each other then we
would still have a chiral world but the
chirality wouldn't be fundamental
there'd be something else keeping the
fermions light and that would be the
absence of the cross strands now if you
look at what happens in our replacement
for the Einstein field equations the
term that would counterbalance the
scalar curvature if you put these
equations on a sphere they wouldn't be
satisfied if the T term had a zero
expectation value because there would be
non-trivial scalar curvature and the
curtain to swerve ature terms but
there'd be nothing to counterbalance so
it's fundamentally the scalar curvature
that would coax the valve on the
Augmented torsion out of the vacuum to
have a nonzero level and if you pumped
up that sphere and it smeared out the
curvature which you can't get rid of
because of topological consider
Asians let's say from churned a theory
you would have a very diffuse very small
turn and that term would be the term
that was playing the role of the
cosmological constant so in a large
universe you'd have a curvature that was
spread out and things would be very
light and things would get very dark due
to the absence of curvature linking the
sectors and that turns out to be exactly
our complex so in other words just to
recap starting with nothing other than a
four manifold we built a bundle you the
bundle you had no metric but it almost
had a metric and had a metric up to a
connection there was another bundle on
top of that bundle called the chimeric
bundle the chimeric bundle had an
intrinsic metric we built our spinners
on that we restricted ourselves to those
spinners we moved most of our attention
to the emergent metric on u14 which gave
gave us a map between the chimeric
bundle and the tangent bundle of u14 we
built a tool kit allowing us to choose
symmetric field content to define
equations of motion on the cotangent
space of that field content to form a
homogeneous vector bundle with the
fermions to come up with unifications of
the einstein field equations yang-mills
equations and Dirac equations we then
broke those things apart under
decomposition pulling things back from
u14 and we found a three generation
model where nothing has been put in by
hand and we have a 10 dimensional normal
component which looks like the spin 10
theory
I can tell you where there are problems
in this story I can tell you that when
we move from Euclidean metric to
minkovski metric we seem to be off by a
sign somewhere or I could be mistaken I
could tell you that the propagation in
14 dimensions has to be worked out so
that we would be fooled into thinking we
were in a four dimensional world there
are lots of things to ask about this
theory but I find it remarkable that
tying our hands we find ourselves with
new equations unifications and three
generations in a way that seems
surprisingly rich certainly unexpected
and I think I'll stop there thank you
very much for your time
[Applause]
so thanks for watching that video but I
thought I would do since that was the
first time I'd really presented the
theory at all in public and I'd gotten
somewhat turned around on my trip to
England and trying probably stupidly to
do last-minute Corrections got me a bit
confused in a few places and I wrote
some things on the board I probably
shouldn't have I thought I would try a
partial explainer for technically
oriented people so that they're not
mystified by the video and any errors
here of my own I'm known to make many so
hopefully they won't be too serious but
we'll find out so this is a
supplementary explainer for the
geometric unity talk at Oxford that you
just saw
first of all I think the most important
thing to begin with is to ask what new
hard problems arise when you're trying
to think about a fundamental theory that
aren't found in any earlier theory now
every time you have an effective theory
which is a partial theory there is
always the idea that you can have
recourse to a lower-level strata so you
don't have to explain in some sense
everything coming from very little or
nothing I think that the really
difficult issue that people don't talk
enough about is the problem of the fire
that lights itself and I think this was
beautifully demonstrated by MC Escher in
his famous lithograph drawing hands
where he takes the idea of the canvas or
the paper as a given but somehow he
imagines that the canvas could will into
existence the ink needed to draw the
hands that move the pen to draw the
hands that concept is actually the super
tricky part in my opinion about going
from effective theories to any attempt
at a fundamental theory so with that
said what I want to think about is what
antecedents does this concept have in
physics and I find that there really
aren't any candidate
theories of everything are unified field
theories that I can find that plausibly
give us an idea of how a canvas would
will an entire universe into being and
so that really to me is the conceptual
problem that I think b-doubles
this and makes the step quite a bit more
difficult than some of the previous
technical steps if you ask for
antecedents however there is one that at
least within physics is relatively
famous and that is by John Archibald
wheeler and it is a picture in some
sense of the universe contemplating
itself and so this idea that somehow the
universe would contemplate itself into
existence maybe the letter U is in some
sense analogous to the paper and somehow
the eye rather than the hand is drawn
across to look at a different part of
the of the U and whether or not that has
meaning is intrinsically always a
question people are animated by it but I
don't know that people have actually
worked on it the quote of Einstein's I
think that really speaks to me often the
most and maybe even was my thesis
problem was he asked whether the creator
had any choice in how the universe was
constructed and so I think if you
believe that the canvas is itself the
that which generates all of the content
and all of the action you're you're left
with a puzzle as to how would you move
forward from this it might be easier in
a mathematical sense to temporarily put
the U on its back to put it more in line
with a standard picture that many
mathematicians and physicists will be
familiar with in sector one of the
geometric unity theory space-time is
replaced and recovered by the observers
contemplating itself and so there are
several sectors of G U and I wanted to
go through at least four of them
in Einstein's space-time we have not
only four degrees of freedom but also a
spacetime metric representing rulers and
protractors if we're going to replace
that it's very tricky because it's
almost impossible to think about what
would be underneath einstein's theory
now there's a huge problem in the spin
oriole sector which I don't know why
more people don't worry about which is
that spinners aren't defined for
representations of the double cover of
gl4 are the general linear groups
effective spin analog and as such if we
imagine that we will one day quantize
gravity we will lose our definition not
of the electrons but let's say of the
medium in which the electrons operate
that is there will be no spin oriole
bundle until we have an observation of a
metric so one thing we can do is to take
a manifold X D as the starting point and
see if we can create an entire universe
from no other data and not even with a
metric so since we don't choose a metric
what we instead do is to work over the
space of all possible point wise metrics
so not quite in the Fineman sense but in
the sense that we will work over a
bundle that is a quite larger quite a
bit larger dimension so for example if X
was a four-dimensional therefore D
equals four
then Y in this case would be d squared
which would be 16 + 3 D which would be
12
making 28 divided by 2 which would be 14
so in other words a four-dimensional
universe or sorry a four-dimensional
proto spacetime not a spacetime but a
proto space-time with no metric would
give rise to a 14 dimensional observers
portion called Y now I believe that in
the lecture in Oxford I called that you
so I'm sorry for the confusion but of
course this shifts around every time I
take it out of the garage and that's one
of the problems with working on a theory
in solitude for many years
so we have two separate spaces and we
have fields on the two spaces now what
I'm going to do is I'm gonna refer to
fields on the XD space by hebrew letters
so instead of g mu nu for a metric i
just wrote
gimel mem noon and the idea being that i
want to separate latin and greek fields
on the y space from the rather rarer
field that actually lived directly on X
so this is a little bit confusing one
way of thinking about it is to think of
the observer s-- as the stands plus the
pitch in a stadium I think I may have
said that in the in the lecture but this
is what replaces the questions of where
and when in the newspaper story that is
a fundamental theory where and when
correspond to space and time who and
what correspond to bosons and fermions
and how and why correspond to equations
and the Lagrangian that generates them
so if you think about those six
quantities you'll realize that that's
really what the content of a fundamental
theory is assuming that it can be
quantized properly most fields and in
this case we're going to call the
collection of two tuples Omega so the
inside of Omega that will be in the
first tuple will have epsilon and PI
written a sort of a non-traditional
variation of how we write this symbol
for pi in the second tuple we'll have
the letters nu and Zeta and I would like
them not to move because they honor
particular people who are important so
most fields in this case Omega are
dancing on Y which was called you in the
lecture unfortunately but they are
observed via pull back as if they lived
on X in other words if you're sitting in
the stands you might feel that you're
actually literally on the pitch even
though that's not true so what we've
done is we've taken the U of wheeler
we've put it on its back and created a W
structure and the W structure is meant
to say that there's a bundle on top of a
bundle again geometric unity is more
flexible than this but I wanted to make
the most concrete approach to the
possible for at least this introduction
and sometimes we don't knit we don't
need to state that why would in fact be
a bundle you could be an immersion of X
into any old manifold but I'd like to go
with the most ambitious version of GU
first so the two projection maps are PI
2 and PI 1 and what we're going to say
up top is is that we're going to have a
a symbol Z and an action of a group row
on Z standing in for any bundle
associated to the principal bundle which
is generated as the unitary bundle of
the spin of the spinners on the chimeric
tangent bundle 2y that's a bit of a
mouthful but the key issue was that on
the manifold Y there happens to be a
bundle which is isomorphic non canonical
e to the tangent bundle of Y which can
has a definite and canonical metric and
in fact there that carries the spinners
so this is the way in which we get
spinners without ever having to choose a
metric but we pick up some technical
debt to use the computer science concept
by actually having to now work on two
different spaces x and y and we're not
merely working on x anymore this leads
to the Mark of Zorro that is we know
that whenever we have a metric by the
fundamental theorem of Romani in
geometry we always get a connection it
happens however that what is missing to
turn the canonical chimeric bundle on Y
into the tangent bundle of Y is in fact
a connection on the space X so there is
one way in which we've reversed the
fundamental theorem of Romani in
geometry where a connection on X leads
to a metric on Y so if we do the full
transmission mechanism out and gimel on
x leads to alpha sub gimel for the leve
chavita connection on x alpha sub gimel
live leads to g sub alpha which is or
sorry the G sub Aleph I'm not used to
using Hebrew
in math so jisub
Alif then is a metric on why and that
creates a levy chavita connection of the
metric on the space Y as well which then
B induces one on the spin oriole bundles
in Sector two the in homogeneous gauge
group on Y replaces the Pangkor a group
and the internal symmetries that are
found on X and in fact you use a
fermionic extension of the inhomogeneous
gauge group to replace the
supersymmetric punker a group and that
would be with field content 0 forms 10
surd and spinner tensor with spinners
direct some one forms tensor two
spinners all up on Y as the fermionic
field content so that gets rid of the
biggest problem because the internal
symmetry group is what causes the
failure I think of supersymmetric
particles to be seen in nature which is
we have two different two different
origin stories which is a little bit
like lilith and in Genesis we can't
easily say we have a unified theory if
space-time and the SU 3 cross su 2 cross
u one group that lives on space-time
have different origins and cannot be
related in this situation we tie our
hands and we have no choice over the the
group content so just to fix bundle
notation we let H be the structure group
of a bundle piece of H over a base space
B we use PI for the projection map we've
reserved the variation in the PI
orthography for the field content and we
try to use write principle actions I'm
terrible with left and right but we do
our best we use H here not G because we
want to reserve G for the inhomogeneous
extension of H once we move to function
spaces so with function spaces we can
take the bundle of groups using the
adjoint action of H on itself
form The Associated bundle and then
moved to C infinity sections to get the
so-called gage group of automorphisms we
have a space of connections typically
denoted by a and we're going to promote
Omega 1 tensor in the adjoint bundle to
notation of script n as the affine group
which acts directly on the space of
connections now the in homogeneous gauge
group is formed as the semi direct
product of the gauge group of
automorphisms together with the affine
group of translations of the space of
connections and you can see here is a
version of an explicit group
multiplication well I hope I got that
one right and then we have an action of
G that is the inhomogeneous gauge group
on the space of connections because we
have two different ways to act on
connections we can either act by gauge
trans transformations or we can act by
affine translations so putting them
together gives us something for the
inhomogeneous gauge group to do we then
get a bi connection in other words
because we have two different ways of
pushing a connection around if we have a
choice of a base connection we can push
the base connection around in two
different ways according to the portion
of it that is coming from the gauge
transformations curly H or the affine
translations coming from curly n we can
call this map the BI connection which
gives us two separate connections for
any point in the in homogeneous gauge
group and we can notice that it can be
viewed as a a section of a bundle over
the base space to come when we find an
interesting embedding of the gauge group
that is not the standard one in the in
homogeneous gauge group so our summary
diagram looks something like this
take a look at the Tau sub a knot we
will find a homomorphism of the gauge
group into its inhomogeneous extension
that isn't simply inclusion under the
first factor we and I'm realizing that I
have the wrong pipe reduction just be a
simple PI projecting down we have a map
from the gate in homogeneous gauge group
via the by connection to a cross a
connections across connections and that
that behaves well according to the
difference operator Delta that takes the
difference of two connections and gives
an honest add value at 1/4 ok the
infinitesimal action of the gauge
transformation of a gauge transformation
or at least an infinitesimal one on a
point inside of the group is given by a
somewhat almost familiar expression
which should remind us of how the first
term in the gauge deformation complex
for self-dual yang-mills actually get
started
and so by acting via this interesting
embedding of the inhomogeneous gauge
group on sorry the embedding of the
gauge group inside it's in homogeneous
extension but the non-trivial one we get
something very close to the original
first step of the two step deformation
complex now in Sector 3 there are
payoffs to the magic beans trade the big
issue here is is that we've forgone the
privilege of being able to choose and
dial in our own field content and we've
decided to remain restricted to anything
we can generate only from XD in this
case X 4 so we generated y 14 from X 4
and then we generated chimeric tangent
bundles on top of that we built spinners
off of the chimeric tangent bundle and
we have not made any other choices so
we're dealing what I think it's u 128 u
u 2 to the seventh that is our structure
group and we it's fixed by the choice of
X for not anything else
so what do we get well as promised there
is a tilted homomorphism which takes the
gauge group into its inhomogeneous
extension it acts as inclusion on the
first factor but it uses the levy
chavita connection to create a second
sort of more cartan form I hope I
remember the terminology right it's been
a long time
the map is injective because it's
injective under the first factor but it
actually gives us a non trivial
embedding of the gauge group in its in
homogeneous extension which makes the
whole theory work we then get to see I
have operators now a shiev operator is a
map from the group crossed the ad valued
I forms in this case the particulars
about operators were interested in is
mapping I forms 2d minus 3 plus I forms
so for example it would map a to form 2d
minus 3 plus I so if d for example were
14 then and and i were equal to 2 then
14 minus 3 is equal to 11 plus 2 is
equal to 13 so that would be an ad
valued 14 minus 1 form which is exactly
the right place for something to form a
current that is the differential of a
Lagrangian on this space now the
Augmented torsion the torsion is a very
strange object it's introduced sort of
right at the beginning of learning
differential geometry but it really
doesn't get used very much one of the
reasons it doesn't get used in gauge
theory is that it's not gauge invariant
it has a gauge invariant piece to it but
then a piece that spoils the gauge
invariance but we because we have two
connections one of the ideas was to
introduce two diseases and then to take
a difference and as long as the disease
is the same in both the difference will
not have the disease because both
diseases are in
polluted but with a minus sign between
them so the Augmented torsion is
relatively well behaved relative to this
particular slanted or tilted embedding
of the gauge group in its inhomogeneous
extension which this is very nice
because now we actually have a use for
the torsion we have an understanding of
why it may never figured particularly
into geometry is that you need two of
two connections rather than one to see
the advantages of torsion at all so
here's an example of one
ship-in-a-bottle operator I think this
would be sort of analogous if I'm not
mistaken to trying to take the Ricci
curvature from the entire Riemann
curvature but if you think about what
Einstein did Einstein had to go further
and reduce the Ricci curvature to the
scalar curvature and then sort of dial
the components of the traceless Ricci
and the scalar curvature to get the
right proportions so there are many Xie
operators and you have to be very
careful about which one you want and
once you know exactly what it is you're
trying to hit you can choose the Shehab
operator to be bespoke and get the
contraction that you need now I've I've
made you guys sit through a lot so I
wanted to give you sort of humorously a
a feeling of positivity for the
exhaustion so the years of anxious
searching in the dark with their intense
longing their intense alternations of
confidence in exhaustion and the final
emergence into the light only those who
have experienced it can understand it I
just always thought this was like the
most sensitive and beautiful quote and I
wish it were one of his better known
quotes but I think it's so singular that
it's hard to it's hard to feel what it
was that he was talking about because in
fact he sort of explains this in the
last line so given that you've been on a
long journey here is something of what
geometric unity equations might look
like so in the first place you have the
swerved curvature the Shi AB applied to
the curvature tensor that in general
does not work out
to be exact so you can't have it as the
differential of a Lagrangian and in fact
that we talk about swirls swerves twirls
Eddie's there has to be a quadratic Eddy
tensor that I occasionally forget when I
pull this thing out of mothballs and the
two of those together make up what I
call the total swerve ature and on the
other side of the equation you have the
displaced torsion which I've called
dysplasia and to get rid of the pesky
sort of minus sign and Hodge star
operator this would be the replacement
for the Einstein equation not on X where
we would perceive it but on Y before
being pulled back on to the manifold X
so a condensation of that would be very
simple in simplest terms we would be
saying that the swerve ature is equal to
visit to the dysplasia and at least in
this sector of the four main equations
of theoretical physics this would be the
replacement for the Einstein equations
again on Y before being pulled back to X
next is the sketch of the fermionic
field content I'm not sure whether that
should have been sector for sector three
but it's gonna be very brief I showed
some pictures during the lecture and I'm
not gonna go back through them but I
wanted to just give you an idea of where
this mysterious third generation I think
comes from so if we review the three
identities here we see that if we have a
space V thought of like as a tangent
bundle and then you have spinners built
on the tangent bundle when you product
tensor product the tangent bundle with
its own spinners it breaks up into two
pieces one piece is the so-called cart
and product which is sort of the some of
the highest weights and the other is a
second copy of the spinners gotten
through the Clifford contraction so
that's well known but now what I think
fewer people know many people know that
the spinners have a sort of an
exponential property that is the
spinners of a direct song
are the tensor product of the spinners
of the two summons of the direct Sun so
that's a very nice sort of version of an
exponential and exponential would take a
sum and turn it into a product what
happens when you're trying to think
about a tangent space in Y is being
broken up into a tangent space along an
immersed X together with its normal
bundle so imagine that x and y are the
tangent space to X and a normal bundle
so there were read a Schwinger piece
that is the spin three-halves piece has
a funny kind of an almost exponential
property that is they're worried to
Schwinger content of a direct sum of
vector spaces is equal to the rita
Schwinger of the first tensor product
did with the ordinary spinners in the
second direct sum with the ordinary
spinners in the first tensor product it
with the Ricci with this re they worry -
winger content of the second son man but
then there's this extra interesting term
which is the spinners on the first sum
and tensor product did with the spinners
on the second Samantha now recalling
that when I started my career we did not
know that neutrinos were massive and I
figured that they probably had to be
massive because I desperately wanted a
16 dimensional space of internal quantum
numbers not 15 because my my ideas only
work if the space of internal quantum
numbers is of dimension 2 to the N and
one of my favorite equations at the time
was 15 equals 2 to the fourth not
literally true but almost true and
thankfully in the late 1990s the case
for 16 particles in a generation was
strengthened when neutrinos were found
to have mass but that remaining term in
the south-east corner the spinners on X
tensor spinners and why looks like the
term above it in line 2.15 and that in
fact is the third generation of matter
in my opinion
that is it is not a true generation it
is broken off and would unify very
differently if we were able to heat the
universe to the proper temperature so
starting to sum up this is not the full
theory I'm just presenting this in part
to dip my toe back into the water it's a
daunting task to try to address people
about something you've been thinking
about for a long time and if no idea
whether it's even remotely correct this
is the Einsteinian replacement and it
must be pulled back to X that's the
first thing the yang-mills Maxwell peace
comes from a direct square of the
Einstein replacement that is I don't
believe that we're really looking for a
unifying equation I think we're looking
for a unifying Dirac Square direct
famously took the square root of the
client Gordon equation and he gave us
the Dirac equation and in fact I believe
that the Dirac equation and the Einstein
equation are to be augmented and fit
into the square root part of a direct
Square and I believe that the yang-mills
content and Higgs version of the
klein-gordon equation would go in the
square part of the Dirac Square so two
of these equations unified differently
than two others and the two pairs are
unified in the content of a direct
square the Dirac piece will be done
separately elsewhere when I get around
to it and contains the Rita Schwinger
field content which is fundamental and
new there are only two generations in
this model I think people have accepted
that there are three but I don't believe
that there are three I think that there
are two and that the third unifies with
other matter at higher energies the
quartic Biggs piece comes from the Dirac
squaring of a quadratic remember there's
a Eddy tensor which is quadratic in the
Augmented torsion the metric does
multiple duties here is it's the main
field in this version of G U with the
sort of strongest assumptions as field
content on that is originally on X
whereas most of the rest of the field
content is on
but it also acts as the observer pulling
back the full content of Y onto X to be
interpreted as if it came from X all
along generating the internal the the
sort of illusion of internal quantum
numbers and I should say that the p'tee
Salam theory which is usually advertised
as think su for cross su 2 across su 2
is really much more naturally spin 6
cross spin for when the trace portion of
the space of metrics is put in with the
proper sign if you're trying to generate
the sector that begins as X 1 comma 3
remember XD where X where D equals 4 is
the generic situation but you have all
these different sectors I believe that
these sectors probably exist if this
model is correct
but we are trapped in the 1 3 sector so
you have to figure out what the
implications are for pushing that
indefinite signature up into an
indefinite signature on the y manifold
and there are signatures that make it
look like the p'tee salam rather than
directly in the spin 10 su 5 line of
thinking so we will attempt to present
the full theory shortly and shortly keep
in mind this took seven years to just
bring me to want to come back to this
but it must be reassembled from decades
of notes and that's part of the problem
when you're working alone and you're not
really expecting to talk to anybody so I
want to thank you for your patience and
your time and I just want to read a
bunch of names that people who matter to
me and if I have done anything wrong
this is not no reflection on them marcos
de Soto
Peter teal is the door singer Raul bot
Michael Grossberg Adil Abdul Ali Harry
and Sophie Rubin Brett Weinstein and
family Heather hanging and Zach and Toby
Peter fried Scott Axelrod Nima our
Connie Hamed Luiz Alvarez Gamay Edward
Frenkel drawer Barnett on slow mo
Sternberg David Koch Don Daniel Barr k
kharon and less Weinstein Haynes Miller
Ralph Camry John Tate Sidney Coleman
Graham Siegel Robert Herman and here
mr. Milani errors and omissions because
I've too many people to thank our are
all my own as for the claims that should
reflect badly on no one else other than
myself and most especially I just want
to say that I've asked a tremendous
amount from my family to stick with me
on this quixotic quest and I want to
thank Pia Milani nyla Weinstein and Zev
Weinstein I love you all very much and
thank you for making this possible I do
want to leave you with one thought I
really think that we've gotten
completely bent out of shape about
trying to court formalize and routinize
science and it doesn't work you cannot
mandate science as social engineering
you can't decide that science is always
in the zeitgeist and done by committee
in fact it is essential to understand
that science will not conform to what
you want one of the things that I I'm
very proud of I think it's quite true is
the saying that great science has the
scientific method as its radio edit I
don't think that great science is
actually done the way we say it's done
and I think that directs 1963 Scientific
American article should be read by
absolutely absolutely everyone every
time major theories have come out
they've almost always been wrong but
they're not wrong in an important way
and I think that we have to fix the
political economy of people racing to
correct theories or point out that there
is no agreement with the experiment we
are killing many of our best ideas by
creating a terrible and combative
environment which already attempts to
apportion credit for work and more
importantly risk undertaken by
individuals and I just think that I want
people to understand that I've always
wanted to share this but I I I detest
the culture that I saw that cropped up
around what has now become known as the
cyber Whidden equations when they were
put forward there was a period of time
where I watched people as if it a
feeding trough
trying to stay up around the clock to
use a new machine tool that had been
given to them to claim credit and it
profoundly pushed me away from the
community we have to become more ethical
and we have to honor the people who are
trying to speak and act imaginatively
now if this doesn't work if it's silly
I'll have egg on my face and I'll go on
I'll be fine but I'm very worried that
maybe that some of the best ideas are
between the ears of people without the
confidence in the hutzpah and just the
sort of almost psychotic drive to push
things across the finishing line we've
got to be kinder and nicer and more
decent and stop stealing people's lives
their credit their future and their
ability to have families and make a
living and that's absolutely essential
to me and I look forward to finding out
whether this theory has merit to it or
is without merit but I guarantee that if
I'm going to go down with the ship I'm
also not going to be knocked off the
ship as I was many years ago completely
unfairly and I won't dwell on it but the
amount of power you professors have is
absolutely almost without parallel
because nobody really understands enough
to adjudicate disputes that happen in
academics I'm going to insist that we
fund you better and that you are nicer
to the people who depend upon you in
this beautiful chain that we call
science scientific method and most
particularly American science which i
think is still the envy of the world so
you've been through the portal I know it
was a long slog I hope you found it
interesting and enjoyable and we'll see
you again soon be well everybody stay
safe
