[Music]
the field of economics is a joke right
now whoever has a degree in economics
should feel useless they should
seriously go over in the corner and cry
my entire economics libraries burned
down or should I say we start cold
because everything on this planet is
part of the circle nothing goes to waste
what economics never got was that in
order to grow something something else
needs to get smaller and all this time
guess what has been getting smaller so
that we can grow on nature resources
habitats clean water life so forget
growth growth is dead it is a magician's
trick stuff doesn't just magically
appear and disappear the molecules in
your body didn't come out of nowhere
they have been on this farm have been
years when you die your body turns into
organic mush one delicious food but the
other beings on the planet that take
over from you and the circle begins
again and again so where did it all go
wrong
economics itself is wrong it's very
existence it's very foundation because
it was built on the concept of profit a
concept that makes no sense in a
circular system so please do away with
the calculators economic theories
lectures bank stock markets and graphs
endless graphs it's all completely
useless our failure goes back to even
before money actually existed our whole
civilization will set up their own way
eat eat eat destroy destroy destroy eat
more strong more even more even more
everything out and co2
this was our definition of economic
growth I'm Dean Walker and welcome to
the poetry of predicament podcast a
podcast for people brave enough to face
humanities challenges and problems and
most importantly are numerous
predicaments the poetry of predicament
is a podcast meant to inspire us to
bring forth grace beauty and connection
with the web of life in the face of a
predicament laden world today we speak
with a poet and a piercing social
commentator George suck roughly this get
ready for some spot-on analysis of what
we're facing in these times with medium
author George
Socrates all right welcome back to the
poetry of predicament podcast and what a
remarkably busy week this is where
multiple huge fires in California
extraordinary political hubbub going
around going on as usual in the USA and
in the UK with brexit and elsewhere
around the world
in so many different troubling ways and
this has also been an extraordinarily
busy week here in podcast world where I
just had the real pleasure of meeting
and then having some wonderful
conversations and today is no exception
George Tucker ah Cletus and I know I'm
still not quite saying it right it's a
struggle for me to kind of get my mouth
around a lot of consonants and thank you
for your patience with me attempting
George George's huh
is a relative newcomer to writing site
that I respect a great deal medium and
in a very short time George you you're
you're writing both your poetry and your
prose your analysis really more
accurately has it really struck a chord
with me it's it's rare that I get that
combination of an artfulness and dead-on
accuracy to what I believe is actually
going on in our world and so the
analysis is as valuable and as rich as
the poetic side or the prose side of
what you do and so it's really been a
pleasure to meet you in the past few
minutes before we hit the record button
and and I am I'm just really happy that
you are here turns out we've you know
got a few different places where I think
we overlap from time to time whether we
know it or not so it's a pleasure to
expand that in a conscious way those
those intersections so George thank you
folks so much for showing up and for
joining me here and us here on the
podcast and let me just read a couple of
sentences that you've written about
yourself and medium and then ask you to
fill in some gaps anything that you'd
like to add to that
otto by a autobiographical couple of
sentences george is a molecular
biologist food scientist add excuse me
advocate for an earth of empathy
gratitude compassion and awareness
recovering workaholic and author of age
of separateness george
Sacre clevis welcome to the poetry of
predicament
it is lovely to be here Dean thank you
very much for inviting me
all right anything you'd like to add to
that those couple of sentences about
yourself I would like to remove
something actually I think there are all
of us as we were mature in life we think
we have a path we're progressing in in
an additive way you know adding degrees
degree junkie at some point in my life
and we'll reach that point at least I
reached a point where I thought I was
someone until well climbing boxes came
interview as well as other side effects
of the Chrono Cross this follows
experience in my immediate environment
people getting sick for the both having
my work experiences and I just would
like to add that I am all of the above
but above all I am a work in progress
and they're all journey yeah yes Amen we
are all works in progress and there's a
particular way of describing that work
in progress mess that you're that you're
mentioning there's a particular way of
talking about it that I'm fond of using
and that's to describe that state of
being of being aware of the malleability
in the evolutionary quality moment by
moment that we are invited to live in to
call it calling it the liquid state and
it's a for the average person who's not
familiar with this as being something
natural and something that actually
promises an extraordinary growth into a
new
state of being for a lot of people like
this can be a state to be feared to be
retracted from well you know and
identified conditions us to believe we
have a default identity I'm a dentist
you are therapists you are this year now
everyone is completely unique and
everyone is on a journey to discover I
[Music]
think that our circumstances and degrees
that we study more countries are just
different lenses which we experience
life and it's not so much about what you
do it's how you use that lens how you
use that information to learn from it
for me writing is is is a catharsis
writing is a way to to to cleanse my
sins as a human being on this planet and
to bring other people with me to bring
other people into a collective awareness
of where we are when I read my own
writings on going I I feel touched by
them and I feel I feel connection with
people the language is a is a powerful
tool yeah yeah it truly is you know we
we both connected to some degree or
another with the relatively recently
created deep adaptation forum that was
created by gem Bendele in 28 to actually
in this year earlier this year but his
kind of rocket to notoriety happened in
2018
and just for those who aren't yet
familiar with a deep adaptation notion
Bendele came from a background of a
academics professor of sustainability
development in the UK and he really took
a tremendous risk by publishing his
paper about what he's calling deep
adaptation in in early 2018 and right in
the centre of what he's talking about is
an acknowledgement that not only is
there really no sustainable sustainable
version of our predatory capitalist
system but even more I think daring in
is his declaration of that we are in the
midst of collapse now and and what was
how he couched it at the beginning in
2018 in his paper was that it's imminent
imminent social collapse was going to be
coming from how we do things how we do
this human operating system and since
then it's it's become quite clear to him
and in his you know in his subsequent
papers and presentations that uh that
they know it's going on now and yes
there will be more and more dramatic
elements of collapse in our world both
human and earth systems but it is
actually going on now and that's what I
keep reading in your writing as well and
I you know I just noticed before we hit
the record button today as we were just
meeting on this call you mentioned
something about being a little reluctant
to use the word collapse I'm wondering
if you could say more about that yeah I
mean collapse I think is a bit of a
young misleading word in the sense that
collapse sounds as a
something is happening suddenly like a
building collapsing and there is a
specific cutoff point beyond which you
know that you are in Klaus I don't think
any of those things are true and I don't
think that goes against well Jenna
Mendel is saying um I completely agree
with him that we are in the middle of
midst of collapse we are we may still be
able to have food in supermarkets but
all the wheels have been set in motion
we are in the sixth mass extinction we
are in the middle well underway of an
ecological collapse of to use a
scientific term an ecosystem collapse
which is all of a sudden have lots of
species studied disappear and then this
process of course accelerates because
all of these phases are connected one of
my degrees is in biology we still it's a
very very simple concept and I think to
be honest most people get that but I do
think in collapse is a bit of a
misleading word because it makes some
people feel that it's really dramatic
which it's not necessary depending on
which part of the world live and it
makes some other people squeals we
obviously make some other people feel
that actually collapse is something that
will happen at some point in time not so
then the last minute we're going to be
okay my fear and this is well into most
of my writings is that humans are very
adaptable and although that is good
point one's being adaptable is also very
bad because we are witnessing collapse
at the moment and we are used to it we
are becoming useful swimming in our own
excrement sorry for the ugly picture but
this is what humanity does and we have
weakness collapse before I think this is
the only thing people don't realize that
collapse is happening multiple times in
our civilization it just has not
happened on a planetary global scale it
hasn't happened as as in the form of the
final collapse which this would be the
final collapse not necessarily the
extinction of the species but it will be
quite a like quite an unrecognizable
planet the one things are going so
that's that's my view on collapse I just
think it's a much broader turnaround
that needs to be to be to be felt I
think that some of the posts that I see
on developed Asian are a bit for example
do you see people talking about how they
are pickling vegetables and saying oh
I'm getting ready for the collapse I
don't think it's like that it's like I
said it's not going to happen from one
day to another and you don't even know
if if pickling is going to be still that
war hope you survive all of us we don't
know what we're having fortunately there
we have no idea whether it's going to be
electricity that goes out first or
apples or we just don't know yeah yeah
well said thank you it's it's
fascinating to me I'm connected with
many many people in that have crossed
themselves over the threshold who call
themselves collapse aware and there's a
continuum beyond that that that goes all
the way to the folks who put themselves
into a
category of near-term human extinction
people so you know there's a there's a
quite a range of severity of voting for
this is what's going to happen and this
is how we must define collapse and this
is what will happen and and various
people have their own version of a
timeline but that they're estimating and
so on I like to just go go back to you
know I mentioned to you that there was
another article that I'd like to just
bounce off of a little bit with you in
our conversation and it's one that you
called again it's in medium and you call
it the nothing manifesto revolution of
nothing and for there are many ways that
I like this piece and particularly it
rings with how you're just kind of
delineating your take on collapse and it
also overlaps with why I named my own
the only book I've ever written a couple
years ago I put out the impossible
conversation and that was actually what
I'm about to mention from your article
is is exactly why I named it the
impossible conversation and that is and
that is we are so encased these days in
the mythology of infinite growth on a
finite planet and our our little roles
each of us take on our particular
version of a good contributor to the
infinite growth paradigm we do our
version of it and
hold up our end of it and I can't I'm
hard-pressed I can't imagine a harder
addiction to break than the addiction to
this system this fossil fuel driven
extravaganza that we're in of
consumption and production and
extraction and so on that you articulate
so well and in this particular piece
that you've written you give us a number
of different elements that it would be
really good for a person who's
interested in in proceeding on this
track of hopefully shaking loose of this
addiction what are some of the premises
what are some of the distinctions what
are some of the understandings that
would that I would need if I was a
person who wanted to to find some other
way of being than deeply addicted to
this system and you you kind of carve it
out by saying what if we did nothing you
know
reflecting on or contrasting with in
this system we pride ourselves on doing
more and more and more faster and faster
and as you said in the other piece
eating eat more eat more destroy more
destroy more and what what more stark
contrast then doing nothing so let me
just don't swing open that gate about
this other article and I'm wondering if
this sparks you to to say anything yeah
I mean we are we are addicted not just
to fossil fuels this is this this goes
back to the start of our civilization we
are addicted to ambition
as a species and this is making us
consume and purchase things that we
don't need that have absolutely
tremendous co2 footprint what is what is
really interesting is how this
complicated complex lifestyle and
civilization that we developed all comes
down to just one single molecule co2 it
isn't that ironic
because it's both mental and physical
it's in fact a mental is the biggest
challenge because the solution is not
about shutting down a few coal mines and
putting out some wind turbines and
sucking up co2 out of the air the scale
of the change that we need to do can
only happen if we feel in our hearts how
wrong our life is it's very very
difficult to do that because I mean we
grew up in this life from you know I
grew up with refrigerator there is an
electricity around the house and it's
it's very difficult to understand you
know growing beef is is wrong that we're
using something like like 70% of the
Earth's landmass to grow crops and we
obviously reach the limit of that and
that thing it might be natural but is it
still the real figure is absolutely
shocking and because because it's a what
I what I learned from my scientific
career is that when you have such a
complicated complex problem it is ironic
that the solution is usually a very
simple solution
and the simple solution here is do
nothing do let as humanity leave Earth
alone I think if the Opia is a fantastic
example they are simply moving fences
around huge areas of those pastures are
not accessible to cattle and what
they're seeing is that the landscape is
recovering there are rivers that are
flowing out of nowhere it's it's in this
miracle if you just leave Earth alone
and there's a number of ways that you
can do that but George you were you just
broke up when you were saying where they
were putting up fences to allow it to
recover where was it that they were
describing it's in Ethiopia Ethiopia
thank you but you have also examples in
Western Europe
where
urbanization is leading to villages in
the computer being abandoned and in fact
beyond total forested area in Europe
over the last decades was grown by about
the size of Switzerland so these are the
few glimmers of hope things are possible
but I think that hope is a very
dangerous word and this is why I'm very
skeptical of big words and slogans like
the Green Deal these have already been
hijacked and this is by no means a
critique on no McLaughlin's book I think
she's very much aware of this race and I
did
and also um they can watch do would
agree with me that the Green Deal is in
danger of being just use as a way to the
investors of course will be interested
in profit yep and also to give hope to
the public so that that can act as a
smokescreen collapse isn't it common
collapse hasn't happened already yeah
it's very dangerous so if you don't mind
I'd like to stay there for just a few
moments because it's the whole notion of
hope has been a reoccurring topic well
for years for the folks that have
started this conversation you know debt
even decades ago but but recent more
recently there have been a few
remarkable authors you know Derrick
Jensen comes to mind debo Zarko comes to
mind and a few others and I I'm curious
if we could just spend a little time on
this idea of hope if I may I'd like to
start by just sharing this I have many
conversations with people I call them
knife my impossible conversations and so
often it starts with I ask people when
they say the word hope which usually
gets brought up and early in the
conversation what they mean when they
say hope and to just lump many of them
together if I might
it comes out something like gee I hope
the experts come up with answers to
these pesky problems so that we can get
on with and return to business and life
as usual I think that's what I'm reading
when you poke at the word hope in you
know for instance this this piece
on the nothing manifesto what do you
mean when you say the word hope it's
kind of like a pill it's a delusion
it's a drug it's a way of kicking the
can down the road it's a way of no the
house isn't on fire it's it's not you
know hope is a way of blinding yourself
and and it's uh it's quite tragic that a
species that is so intelligent he's
actually intelligent enough to deceive
itself we have an amazing capacity to
self-medicate to be in denial to have
really really complex mechanisms in our
in our brain which I always get some
inspiration for my biology back on all
that homeostasis and the example I
always get was the LLC which not many
people know about because the RLC has
almost disappeared and humans in many
decades took for the RLC to disappear
simply got used to with homeless fish
have it was water there was no collapse
there was no perception of collapse it
was a slowly deteriorating change line
same with the Dust Bowl in the nineteen
thirties in the US we just destroyed
these ecosystems and we left but the
thing is we can't leave now we have
nowhere to go because we're going to
destroy the whole calm
but we're using the same mental
mechanism of homeostasis which I've
written a full article about the planet
pioneering borrowing this biological
term to describe a mental state also
similar to hyper normalization the
famous I don't practice film which I
think that it's also happened in the
media landscape and we have more work on
the other hand climate change and
movements like extinction rebellion just
part of one's daily life and we become
desensitized
this is policy that can be employed by
the private sector by governments to
further desensitize us and to say to us
yeah okay well no we're not denying it
climate change it is happening it is
very scary
yeah because it really keeps you yeah
I'm at some point we might just say well
collapse is happening yeah I I I'm
completely in agreement with the what
you've just been laying out and it
reminds me of the shock that I felt in
writing my own book because it was
shocking enough to discover not only the
reality and the the ever-increasing
reality of abrupt climate change far
beyond normal interpretations of climate
change and then on top of that a handful
of other extinction level measures of
human impact on the planet you know my
head was already exploding with all of
that
and what I didn't expect I had no idea
how deeply I would be sucked into how we
talked to ourselves how we control
ourselves in the narrative the narrative
that we're living within it started you
know hundreds perhaps thousands of years
ago with the notions that became became
colonization and a prophet orientation
to a now predatory capitalist model and
so on and so now we're we're firmly
living in and ensconced in this
structure this rigidify destructure yeah
and again from from the biological
perspective and again I'm not an expert
in this field but we make sense to think
that our brain is rigid the reason our
brain widget is because it evolved
during thousands of years when the
climate is stable our resources abundant
and there is evolutionary development in
the human brain to minimize risk and to
apply brakes on the destructive
processes that we use to exploit the
resources around us I've written many
articles on this because that was the
point where I have exploded I've written
an article called our DNA makes us
destroy this planet yeah it's I think
it's hard to put something like
destroying the planet is our destiny and
I I unfortunately believe that it is our
destiny then again we can change our
biological destiny so there is hope in
that sense but I think we do need
realize the default path is actually to
destroy on it if we do realize that then
hopefully we can scare ourselves not to
be able to wake up from this primitive
mind that likes to take risk that likes
the risk of a stock market like to take
risk by waging war and the country next
door to appropriated swing sources likes
to take all kinds of lists in order to
to further itself to lose it risk as a
survival strategy as opposed to using
conservative approaches circular
approaches no D growth approaches as a
survival strategy that is a
revolutionary concept yeah you know I
what what came forward for me when you
were just speaking was there's a there's
an odd aggression that's showing up any
I wish I could say that it was the
aggression between people who are solid
denialists and then people who are aware
of you know the the truth of what's
going on in our earth and human systems
but it's not that just in the past few
months in particular there have been a
number of examples of people who are
really close to one another in terms of
philosophical orientations in tour in
terms of how how we frame or see the
world you know that that we we we have
to do something about climate change and
this is very important and and some
people are activists in that and other
people are academic admissions and
they're there
far apart from one another and this is
where a new kind of dick of aggression
is showing up a contrarian ism of people
who are so close in their orientation to
life and in the frame of how they see
the important issues that not matter
most to them and it's it's fascinating
to me and it's heartbreaking to me that
people can be so close to a to a common
ground of seeing what's what's truly
important in these times and what will
it take for us to survive to possibly
even thrive and what it really comes
down to to me is the willingness to
declare or to just state that we are
indeed in collapse that there is some
substantial part of our system at its
core that it has failed and so that that
tiny difference between the people that
I'm talking about you know these are
famous science communicators even people
who are really good at what they do
communicating the extraordinarily
difficult conversation about climate
change and people that are just an inch
away from them on the spectrum and what
seems to be the difference is the
ability to say we've failed yeah because
it is and it will always be a risky
statement to make and we unfortunately
are individuals within parties that a
lot of things depend on what we say a
job
being trolled on the internet being
threatened I have conversations with a
few very small circle of on a scientist
that I know and conversations that I had
with them in private are completely
different to their Twitter posts in
private they tell me the world is coming
to an end very soon on Twitter and in
public they have of course a much more
conservative yeah stand and this is
where the wrinkle factor comes in
someone who doesn't have to obey someone
who is not being paid by anyone who is
unchanged in that sense who has the
freedom to say what they want to say
it's someone that broke through the
barrier it almost kind of opened up
gates for a lot of people to follow you
know it's it's interesting I I have had
very few conte inner inner circle
conversations like you're describing
where you you've had some ability to to
speak with these people kind of offline
out of the public arena and to be able
to hear a different take on it and I'm
now wondering how much of that is so I
appreciate you bringing it up and I
guess I have some homework to do to to
see if I can find out some of those
things a very nice part in the interview
that my only client gave I believe what
was it channel 4 where it's a good
question about the generally it's so so
what do you think is going to happen are
you
there are new customers and I won't tell
you what she answers but it's uh it's a
surprising and they're slightly a long
answer I think that she begins it was
for me was a little bit more pessimistic
than I thought not very brave the very I
think I think it's the attitude we
should have ready we only have one earth
even if we think that know that you know
two degrees change three degrees change
is already locked in for me personally
even if we can say one species on this
planet one definitely little piece of
bacteria swimming in a slime ah that
would be a victory yeah if we could take
that one piece of life because that is
how cautious it is yeah
we don't we don't know if there's other
Earth's some I think the 80s called
sagging there were a lot more but now
scientists are starting to understand
actually we might be quite rare yeah and
that was that was a channel for Naomi
Klein interview and that was fairly
recent a few weeks ago I can send you a
link
oh well thank you I'd appreciate it I'm
I'm gonna go ahead and excerpt from that
from that interview and I'll put it in
right in this part of our conversation
so I really appreciate that thank you
you know you might be headed now George
you might just have have headed into
[Music]
what is really
the most important part for me of any of
these conversations that I'm privileged
to have and that is there are times when
I I just need to slow down and realize
what we're actually talking about and it
started to dawn on me and what as soon
as you told the piece about Naomi Klein
and then this last piece he just shared
I never would have guessed growing up in
the world that I was privileged to grow
up in I never would have guessed that a
part of of my lifetime would be
confronting what's now called the sixth
mass extinction mmm and yeah and I never
thought that I would have conversations
like this where
you know little cute expressions like
carpe diem and smell the roses and so on
would shift from cute little greeting
card expressions to really survival
level coping strategies to keep
ourselves present somehow in the face of
ever larger stressors and I'm I'm
curious if you would share a little bit
about how if you have your own version
of a dynamic like I'm describing for
myself how has how has this realization
of our of our situation
how has it landed on you and how do you
integrate it in your heart how do you
keep yourself inspired and connected
with life while carrying the support
then talk about this and to talk about
this a lot because it really takes at
all of us and it's it's you know
existential stress it's de special
anxiety it's even in the news these days
yeah I do believe the polls that say
that the young generation is really
feeling that well I'm of an older age
group so I grew up in a in a world we
were told humanity improves with every
decades on my industry to human rights
to discoveries the world we just gets
better and better
look there's Greenpeace now they're
chasing away the oil Crockett Shannon
you know people are cleaning up the
environment it's all gonna be great and
then you come to the realization that
there is climate change as a scientist I
was I had my big wake-up call in 2007
and that can with with Al Gore's
Inconvenient Truth that was kind of the
definitive evidence for me and then I
think a couple of years ago or it was
when I are the second realization that
we were not alone Antonia this is
actually quite short once it's
accelerating in human years
it refused a shion's but in geological
timescales
this is absolutely you know it's it's a
snapshot it's written about this as well
it's like put the egg on a pan and the
egg pecan is hot and the egg is still
transparent and that is what gives the
climate change deniers get what you
needed to say look nothing's happening
the egg is falling yeah but just check
you know a million for the second or
whatever it is later and you've got this
change it is and I've talked about this
I've written about this because we need
to keep ourselves saying if we had any
chance of working towards mitigating
what I think that gives essential stress
that warm there is that is a cocktail of
feelings that has never existed before
psychotherapy was not meant to help
people through existential stress
because this is not about the fear that
will not materialize this fear about
something that will happen that will
kind of unpredictable ways in which if
my are
into your world to your family your
children all the children of your
children and it is an it is an emotional
roller coaster I would have to say has
been from my heart
and I think very very common thing if
you go through stages of weeks of anger
or depression or sadness and at the end
of the day the best I think arrival
point is that you know what the end of
the world is actually coming I think for
me just being aware of that and actually
feeling it in my body help me I've got
another article it's important where I I
put some pictures in it which were
pictures from strange times in in human
history from the Dark Ages or Catholic
churches and they are pictures of the
apocalypse you might know a painter
Hieronymus Bosch with famous about those
ones and I thought for me that was sort
of that realization point that thinking
that the apocalypse was this
Wi-Fi kind of religious and it's now
happening it is actually happening yeah
it is actually happening and it also it
kind of made me think that we somehow
always knew those paintings now are
bitter irony aren't they
my quite bitter honor irony because
they're quite quite telling yeah you
know uh it's it's just a pleasure to to
speak with you George did you know what
I mentioned at the beginning that was
the original reason why I reached out to
connect with you was your blend of of an
artfulness and heart with also a real
eye for piercing analysis of what's
going on and being able to put the two
together and and again I just really
respect and appreciate that gift of
being able to blend those pieces the way
you do and then thank you for what
you've just gotten through saying you
know a little bit of a a snapshot of
your how you map this out how you
position yourself or find yourself and
in what I call an internal mapping of
how do I make sense of this world as
it's laying out and and what are my
reactions that that want to just come up
naturally and what are the what are the
reactions that I aspire to I was hearing
you share a little bit of each of those
and I and I thank you for that and I'm
curious if if you could shift gears to
[Music]
to speak to other people who don't
necessarily have the background of
either just the skill of writing and and
that kind of mapping and and
articulating but also don't necessarily
have the the kind of scientific
background and acuity that you also have
I'm wondering if you could offer any
suggestions for folks who would like to
bridge from whatever their world is
whatever they've grown up with and the
people who are just really bumping into
ya there there are big troubles going on
in this world
something is really not right you know
they might again they say it in their
own way they might have a simpler
version of it but they just know in
their gut that things are not okay are
there are there any elements that you
could share that could help them bridge
to a new way of holding or seeing this
world yeah the problem is that we are
all different levels of realization and
it also does take some time to go
through the brief different stages of
having gone through but I myself I
sometimes are ultra mode between grief
and denial and optimism and pessimism
and that kind of overwhelming it's
essential cocktail but I think that what
we can all have in common
recognizing that we are in a situation
because I don't think I think very few
people know - no idea
I think some people don't consciously
haven't consciously accepted them quick
as they are afraid but that is becoming
a minority as well and I think that
forgiveness is a really important
as much as I think that we are predatory
species and our DNA has made us really
have the destruction of the planet as
our destiny that was not our fault
that's how we evolved on this planet I
think that we just need to recognize
that move on forgive ourselves so that
we can have the strength to minimize any
of the damage that we can that's what
you do yeah and just stay close to the
other people even if it's some close
family environment that finds this
conversation a bit too strange or don't
rain stay close to them mm-hmm
because the thing is that we cannot rely
on a on a minority of you know why it's
middle-aged academic to save the world
we need to somehow reach out to everyone
and realize this is a social crisis it's
the way that we have set up our economic
system to depend on exploiting other
people I wrote another article recently
saying that racism is actually a natural
resource it's war colonialism and
capitalism depend on for cheap labor and
this is what has caused the consumption
and this is what was lost so too there
is a way to reverse this which is to be
happy with less stuff we all do it at
the same time then we won't be jealous
of each other's belongings and we won't
read big salaries
yeah at least that's the idea of D
growth right it also wouldn't hurt to
reposition ourselves with regard to
taking a stand for a universal standard
of living around the world which I I
hear hints of and particularly in your
article the nothing manifesto which
again I'll put the the link to with a
number of very simple but profound
elements that you are suggesting would
assist us in that in a transition to
some sort of alternative to this
hyper-consumption
that we have all grown up in with the
nothing manifesto George it's just been
an absolute pleasure to speak with you
and I just feel like I'm lucky to be
able to reach out and and meet folks
like yourself who have truly something
to say in this which I believe is the
most important conversation that
humanity has ever had to face and it
again is just a particular pleasure to
find someone who brings the amount of
heart and artfulness that you do I look
forward to more and more conversations
of this type as time goes on and thank
you so much for spending your time with
us on the poetry predicament thank you
so much for inviting me and this has
been really really fun as well
I hope to see you over at the deep
adaptation forum sometime soon
absolutely conversation continues all
right thank you again George take good
care of yourself take care thanks for
watching another episode of the poetry
of predicament podcast produced by Dean
Walker and the living resilience
Alliance
WWWE living resilience dotnet also
available on our website
WWE resilience dotnet is a wide array of
articles online learning series
arranging group and individual
resilience coaching and sign up for our
every other Tuesday free support group
that we call safe circle calls
