okay I'm gonna get started
um hi I'm Corey doctorow uh I'm coming
to you from Las Vegas Nevada uh where I
have just given a version of this talk
on the main stage at Defcon I'm going to
give you a shorter one here
um so uh as you can tell from my video
stream I am old uh I have two artificial
hips I have cataracts in both my eyes
and one of the things that happens when
you're 50 right after the ARP tracks you
down and gives you your membership card
they also give you a card that entitles
you to complain that things used to be
better and I do think things used to be
better I think the internet used to be
better wasn't when it wasn't just five
giant websites filled with screenshots a
text from the other four moreover I
think there's a reason it got worse and
I think it has to do with really
specific factors around platform
economics
um the platform is the endemic form of
the internet you remember when we
thought the internet was going to
disintermediate everything it turns out
that it did and then it re-intermediate
everything because that's all the
platform is they're an intermediary with
two groups of stakeholders you've got
business users on one side you got end
users on the other and the platform sits
between them but that's Uber sitting
between drivers and uh passengers Amazon
selling sitting between sellers and
buyers or
um uh you know Google's sitting between
Publishers and Searchers and uh under
the platform uh model there's a kind of
common pathology uh so what platforms do
when they start out is they use their
investors Capital to allocate surpluses
to users making life good for those
users luring them in and then locking
them in
um once those users are locked in all of
that Surplus is clawed back and it's
allocated to business customers
advertisers Publishers platform sellers
gig workers creators or performers until
all those people are locked in too and
then finally once both sides of this
two-sided Market are locked in the
platform Scoops up all the Surplus for
itself and I have a somewhat notorious
name for this that I I coined I call it
in shitification and it's the reason
that things really are worse these days
so let me give you a quick case study in
in an acidification kind of Doom Loop
let's think about Facebook right when
Facebook started
um well you know when it really started
it was a service to non-consensually
rate the fuckability of Harvard
undergraduates uh incredibly this was
the best moment in Facebook history it
only got worse after that
um but at a certain point in 2006 it
said we're tired of only having
um people with edu addresses on the
service American college kids we're
going to open up to the general public
the problem was that the general public
were already all using Myspace so
Facebook had to make a pitch to those
users and it said um hey Myspace users
has it ever occurred to you that you're
trapped on a platform run by a senescent
crapulent evil Australian billionaire
who spies on you with every hour that
God sends come and use Facebook
um you're the Privacy forward
alternative to Myspace we will never spy
on you if you come and use Facebook we
will uh ask you to tell us who matters
to you in this world world
and when those people uh post a thing
that they want the people who follow
them to see will show it to you that was
the initial Facebook promise
um now users piled into Facebook because
that's actually a pretty good offer and
um as they did they locked themselves in
this is a thing that happens with social
media
um when people who like each other join
a platform and start to use it to
interact with one another they take each
other hostage because even if they don't
like the path of the platform they like
each other and are agreeing on whether
it's time to leave the platform and if
so where to go it's one of these
transcendentally difficult things it's
what economists call the collective
action problem and so you end up in this
Mutual hostage taking where I like you
you like me we both hate the platform we
like each other but we can't agree on
where to go and so we're stuck here
now um once those users had locked
themselves in Facebook could start to
withdraw some of its Surplus from them
and start allocating it to two key
groups of business stakeholders women's
advertisers the other women's Publishers
so the advertisers they said hey
do you remember when we told these Rubes
we were never going to spy on them we
were lying uh we're gonna spawn on them
from to appetite and uh we're
gonna let you target ads really cheaply
and we're going to devote an enormous
amount of engineering uh resources to
making sure that there's very little ad
fraud so you're going to buy ads really
cheaply you're going to Target them
really accurately and then every guide
you buy is going to be seen by a human
another great offer then they went to
the Publishers and they said
do you remember when we told these Rubes
that we were going to only show them the
things that they asked to see we relying
then too why don't you take small
excerpts or the things that you publish
on your own website put them on Facebook
I had a link to the bottom of it we're
going to non-consensually ram those into
the eyeballs of our users who never
asked to see them we're going to create
a free traffic funnel that will drive
traffic to your website where you can
monetize it however you want and so
those advertisers and Publishers they
got very locked into Facebook too they
became very dependent on Facebook
because they needed the users so the
user is locked in each other and then
they locked in the business customers it
advertisers and Publishers once
everybody was fully locked in it was
time for the third stage of
insidification that's when Facebook
withdraws the Surplus to give it to
itself so for users that meant your feed
became an increasingly homeopathic dose
of the things you asked to see post by
the people you followed so there was
room for advertisements and suggested
posts from people who paid to boost
their posts for advertisers I meant the
prices were went up and after our
policing went down so you paid more for
ads and there's a much stronger
likelihood that no one was going to see
them even if you were paying for them
and for Publishers
um the Facebook was able to turn the
dial so that your post was much less
likely to be seen unless you put much
more of that post in there so until
gradually the Facebook had kind of
boiled the Frog so that every publisher
was putting the whole text of their
article in and then you know sticking
the knife in at the end was saying you
know when you link back to your website
we can't even tell if it's a malicious
website so we're not going to show posts
that have links to outside the Facebook
ecosystem to users so even if you want
to reach the users who are following you
we are not going to show them that
unless you uh keep all the links out of
your post you can put the whole Post in
don't link back to your own website
um and then you know the next stage was
uh hey tell you what we're not going to
show them to them even then you're gonna
have to pay to boost your content and so
now we have like the perfect storm
movement certification Facebook is
withdrawing surpluses from end users
advertisers Publishers that try to leave
just enough residual value that nobody
leaves but not one Penny's worth more
because the rest of it is rightfully the
property of their shareholders now this
is a super brittle equilibrium to
maintain all it takes is one privacy
scandal
one Cambridge analytica one
whistleblower one live stream mass
shooting
people can go from like oh I hate this
place but I can't figure out how to
leave to oh my god get me the out
of this in like one instant and
they're gone boom and so
um Facebook is now in this place where
they're in in terminal and certification
where they're a pile of and they're
doing what tech platforms do when they
reach terminal incidentification
um they're panicking which they call
pivoting and so the pivot in this case
is the idea that all of our futures is
to submit to being a legless sexless low
polygon heavily surveilled cartoon
characters in a virtual world they stole
from a 25 year old satirical science
fiction novel
um and so uh here we are right in end
stage incidentification and it's not
just Facebook right it's all the
platforms are starting to look like this
whether it's it's Reddit or um uh or or
um
twitch uh Amazon you know the the first
five screens on a search for Amazon or
50 ads the whole first screen is ADS
many of them are ads for things that
aren't uh the things you search for
Amazon makes 31 billion dollars a year
selling ads what they're really selling
is Payola it's the right to have a
product that isn't a match for the user
search be at the top of the search
results which means that 31 billion
dollars of the value is being extracted
from vendors who have to make it up
somehow they're either making it up by
raising their prices or by lowering
their quality we don't really see it
because Amazon has this Monopoly uh
position uh and it is able to extract
What's called the most favored nation
deal from all of its sellers that
requires them to make sure that nobody
sells their products more cheaply than
they do on Amazon so Amazon is now
taking 51 of their seller's clearing
price in uh fees of some kind or another
ad fees stocking fees Just Junk fees
basically and those buyers well you know
they can't or the sellers either they
can't afford to leave because Amazon's
locked all the buyers in it they're
pre-selling us a year shipping in
advance through a program called Prime
once you got Prime 90 of users start
their searches on Amazon and if they
find what they're looking for they don't
search anywhere else so if you're a
merchant do you gotta sell on Amazon so
Amazon can take 51 cents out of every
dollar that you make and then you can
raise your prices on Amazon and we don't
see it at least not uh in this
particularized way because you also got
to raise your prices everywhere else so
the prices at Walmart and Target and
even on the Retailer's own or the
wholesaler's own website the
manufacturer's own website are all
higher to pay for this and this is in
shidification too insidification is what
happens when you have three factors on
the one hand you have a monopoly uh or
or a cartel
um that's happened in a lot of
Industries uh everything from from uh
Intermodal shipping to running shoes to
professional wrestling to beer to
finance and there's a reason for it uh
40 years ago uh Carter uh took a couple
of Jenga blocks out of the antitrust
enforcement system in America Reagan
liked that idea and started removing
them by the fistful every Administration
since has followed suit and so what we
were left with at the start of the Biden
Administration was a kind of uh sickly
uh barely alive antitrust enforcement
that could not even get out of bed on
its own uh the body Administration has
substantially reversed that but it's
going to take a long time to undo the
damage uh even assuming that the next
Administration doesn't reverse course
again so once you've got a monopoly
you're in the Starting Gate for
acidification it's easier to treat your
customers like if you're the only
game in town but with tech you get two
more factors that produce the the pure
high grade in certification we see in
our Tech lives today
um they both have to do with with the
endemic flexibility of Digital Services
Digital Services are just flexible in a
way that uh physical services are not
you know John D Rockefeller couldn't
click a mouse and drop another extra 100
miles of train track in order to compete
with someone who is putting in a a
competing um uh oil pipeline but uh you
know when Jeff Bezos tried to buy
diapers.com and they said no we don't
want to be a subsidiary of Amazon it was
like fine click to Mouse and uh they
started selling diapers below cost they
lit 100 million dollars on fire in the
course of a couple of months diapers.com
went out of business platforms can
twiddle the knobs on their back end to
change the compensation to change the
recommendations to change the likelihood
that a performer will get an audience or
not whether they're boosted whether
they're suppressed and they can do it
from moment to moment in second to
Second and they're effectively
unconstrained by any regulation that
would limit them and how they do this so
they're unconstrained by privacy law by
labor law by Fair trading laws and
they're able to do things that would
otherwise be considered illegal labor
practices illegal privacy practices or
illegal trading practices in any other
sector one of the reasons that they are
they have all of that legal privilege uh
that legal protection is because when an
industry dwindles to a handful of
companies it's much easier for those
companies to decide on what they want to
spend their lobbying money on you know
when a sector consists of a hundred
squabbling small and medium-sized
Enterprises
um they can't even agree on where to
hold their annual meeting much less have
an agenda that emerges from it about
what they're going to ask Washington DC
or Westminster Brussels about
um but when there's three or four or
five companies in the sector they have
so much money to spend because they
don't really compete with one another
and they have so little trouble agreeing
on what to spend it on that they get
policies that are very favorable to them
and so we have the people who run these
Tech platforms that have very little
competition who get to twiddle their
knobs all day long and we can't pass a
law to make them stop touching their
knots and they love touching their knobs
and then you have the third factor of
insidification concentration unlimited
twiddling for the platforms and no
twiddling for us so the same digital
forces that impart that flexibility to
digital platforms that allow them to
reel us out and reel Us in like a fish
on a hook also allow us to push back
think about ad blocking uh the most uh
uh the the most popular consumer boycott
in the history of the human race one in
four web users is installed an ad
blocker
um and you know that's because the web
is an open platform and no one vendor
controls it and so you can just mod your
web browser you can install a plugin
that looks for things that look like ads
and just makes them disappear looks for
things that look like trackers and
blocks them
but the platforms have managed to secure
changes to technology law so that um we
can't do that elsewhere if you wanted to
do that with one of the closed platforms
like the app ecosystem you would first
have to reverse engineer the app and
reverse engineer reverse engineering the
app would trigger criminal and civil
liability under Section 1201 of the
digital loaning Copyright Act
um uh that's a 500 000 fine and a
five-year prison sentence for first
offense even if you don't violate
anyone's copyright this is basically a
charter for a felony contempted business
model where doing anything that
displeases uh an incumbent business
constitutes a a crime uh or at least a
civil uh infraction and places you in
very serious legal Jeopardy and so
that's the third piece of the puzzle
here you have companies that are highly
concentrated they can abuse us any way
they want and they have the digital
tools to make that abuse move really
quickly and allow them to play very high
speed shell game and we are not allowed
to have any self-defense mechanisms and
all of this militates for a way to not
restore the old good internet I don't
want the old good internet it's a way
for us to build the new good internet a
way for us to make the insurnet a kind
of intermediate stage between the old
good internet and the new good internet
a new good internet that that's run by
and for the people who use it a a new
internet where we seize the means of
computation
so the first thing we got to do
is we got to start breaking up the
monopolies and making it harder for new
monopolies to form this is actually
going pretty well Lena Khan the chair of
the Federal Trade Commission and her
counterpart Jonathan Cantor at the
Department of Justice antitrust division
have promulgated new merger guidelines
that put Place really strict limits on
the kind of predatory Acquisitions that
have driven the scale of the tech
companies you know the tech companies
like to call themselves Willy Wonka's
idea factories but they're really just
you know Rich Uncle Penny bags Google's
a company that made one good product a
search engine that was 25 years ago
everything else they made in-house they
fail that and it can make a video
platform they couldn't make a social
media Network it couldn't even keep
their RSS running I mean their RSS
reader running to say nothing of their
you know goofy Wi-Fi cities and Wi-Fi
balloons and all the rest of it
everything they've got that's successful
that made them into the kind of
vertically integrated Monopoly they are
they bought from someone else they
bought their video stack they bought
their ad stuff fact about the
collaboration stack mapping server
management mobile uh you name it right
they're they're not uh making things
company they're buying things company
with a sideline and operationalizing
them I want to give them a short shift
here and that's true of other tech
companies too you know Apple buys 90
companies a year Tim Cook comes home
with a new company more often than you
come home with a new bag of groceries
and so um by limiting mergers we really
limit the ability these companies to
grow because they're just not that good
at thinking up stuff they have the
innovators dilemma they're big and
unwieldy
um and on top of that there's efforts to
break them up so there's a new
bipartisan uh bill called the America
act that would break up the ad business
of Google and Facebook that bill when I
call it bipartisan I'm not kidding it's
tubing co-sponsors are Ted Cruz and
Elizabeth Warren all right so step one
limit corporate concentration on it it's
going to take a while took 69 years to
break up a t step two we gotta reduce
the twiddling by the platforms
comprehensive Privacy Law labor law that
uh ends the fiction of gig work Fair
trading law that says that if you uh
tell someone that you're going to show
them a feed from someone they subscribe
to you have to if you um tell someone
that you're going to uh uh that you're
going to give them a search result that
matches what they search for you have to
give them the best result not the one
that pays you the most money right those
are just basic Fair trading standards
you walk into the shop and you ask for a
GE light bulb and the guy behind the
counter sells you a no-name light bulb
that tells you it's GE and tricks you
into it you don't notice till you leave
that is fraud on its face and we got to
stop these companies from doing it we
also got to let those users leave the
platforms we got to help solve this
Collective action problem
you know you can think about the problem
of big Tech as being analogous to the
problem of fire debt in California until
the settlers arrived indigenous tribes
in California they used to have managed
burns on a regular basis to clear out
the dead wood the old dying trees to
open the canopy so that new growth could
emerge and when the settlers arrived
they've declared war on fire and they
stopped all the fire and what they got
wasn't no fire I think it was wildfire
because now California has all this fire
debt and it just bursts into flame every
year
we stopped the cycle of renewal that
stopped tech companies from collapsing
when they could no longer come up with
cool ideas because they were too big by
letting them buy their Rivals and now
we've got all this internet fire debt
and the big Tech platforms are on fire
and just like in California we need to
stop trying to make the places at the
urban Wildlife interface safe and start
evacuating those places so they can have
the burn we need to let the platforms
burn too and Evacuate the users so they
can't get harmed we do that with
interoperability on the one hand we need
to mandate that the platforms open up
apis so that Mastodon diaspora even you
know commercial startups like blue sky
can open up a Gateway so that you can
leave Facebook or Twitter or any of the
other big platforms but stay in touch
with the people you left behind remain
in the communities exchange messages and
DMS be part of the life of those
communities from somewhere else not
subject to their domain and in the
European Union the digital markets Act
is going to force the biggest forms to
do that but then we have to go to stage
three we need to restore our twiddling
so um we need to make it legal again to
do reverse engineering Bots and scraping
and the way that we re-permit that
without creating a system in which it's
a free-for-all where the next Cambridge
analytica can just go for it
um is by
um uh sorry that's my plane tomorrow I
need to check in for it uh It Is by is
by having those privacy laws those labor
laws those Fair trading laws so that um
when uh people
um uh help users escape the platforms
they're not allowed to abuse those users
in the way that the platforms work we
hold everyone to the same standard now
getting uh the restoration of those
rights to modify the services that we
use that have been so thoroughly
whittled away over the last 40 years is
going to be trickier and I've got a lot
of ideas about how to do this I've got a
book coming out on September the 5th
called the internet con how to seize the
means of computation it gets into a lot
of detail about this I'm running out of
time so I'll just say one idea for this
the federal government buys a lot of
technology and the federal government
could say
two tech companies we won't buy your
technology unless you make a binding
Covenant a contract not to legally
aggress against people who reverse
engineer your products for the purpose
of adding interoperability
um this is actually a really old idea in
prudent public administration when
Lincoln was arming the Union Army he
refused to buy rifles except from uh
gunsmiths who would use interoperable
tooling and ammunition
for some pretty obvious reasons right he
didn't want his generals to have to say
sorry boys the war is canceled this week
the bullet Factory decided not to make
any bullets he didn't want a single
Source supplier for critical material
the same prudent principle should apply
to every carbot for a government motor
pool every server bot for a government
data center we should use the public
purse to encourage this
so those are the three stages
limit the monopolization of these
companies
um uh limit their ability to attack Us
by changing the rules of the game as
they're going along and the Darth Vader
MBA you know I've altered the deal prey
I don't alter it further restore our
right to modify the services we use so
that they serve us and not their
shareholders and make all of it safe by
having publicly accountable rules about
what is and isn't permissible by a
platform not rules that are dreamed up
in boardrooms with shareholders first
and users a distant last as the
priorities for that
um I think all of this has the potential
to give us a much better internet I
think we all have a sense that it could
be better especially people who work in
Tech and that gives me hope because if
you remember the first Dream of the tech
worker was sure I'll work for a big dump
company for a couple of years then I'm
going to strike out on my own and put
them out of business gradually that idea
that dream narrowed to well I'm gonna
work for a big dumb company for a while
strike it on my own do a fake startup
which is going to get Aqua hired by the
company I left it's just like the
world's least efficient way of getting a
bonus and then the third phase of this
the one that we um uh is is two back
from the one we're living in now was
well
I guess I got a job for life at a big
dumb company and there's free kombucha
in the cafeteria and I guess I got
massages on Wednesdays and now we're at
like the final stage of how those
platforms are treating their Tech
workers and that's where it's like I'm
going to work for this company until
they fire my ass uh like those 12 000
googlers who got laid off six months
after the company did a stock buyback
that would have paid their salaries for
the next 27 years
nobody likes this Arrangement except for
an increasingly small contingent of
shareholders and those people they can
go themselves
um we need to seize the means of
computation we need to get back not the
old good internet but the new good
internet it could have been deliberate
policy choices created the insurer net
that we're living in and new policy
choices which are within our grasp can
give us a much better internet for our
kids to inherit thank you very much
I'm just going through the chat here
yeah let's see Pax says I'm a year
younger than them so I can't be old no
no it's just you're even older sorry
uh
well thank you all
some questions in the Q a tab I'm told
let me see if I can locate that
session with people q a here we are
thanks Andrew
show more
yeah so what do users do this is from
Tobias or Tobias what do users do about
insidification how can we slow it well
look there's like limited stuff we can
do as individuals I don't want to snow
you here I think that um you know
there's there's been because of the kind
of neoliberal emphasis on the individual
there's been like 40 years of kind of
deliberate forgetting of the power of
the collective in favor of the power of
individual think about the phrase vote
with your wallet which you know like
organized boycotts can make a difference
right I've read my MLK but
um voting with your wallet has pretty
limited utility for one thing it means
the people who have the fattest wallets
get to have the most votes we know how
that works out that's where we're living
in now but Collective action can make a
really big difference um you know I'm
wearing my sag-aftra uh shirt here today
um and there are lots of ways to get
involved in Collective action so in
particular
um Tobias is is asking about web
integrity environment a web environment
Integrity is a terrible idea from Google
to allow web servers to decide which
browsers they're going to permit by
actually causing your computer to cough
up information about it even if you
don't want it to
um this is a really bad idea but it
should be understood as being down
stream of some other policy choices like
in theory
if we didn't have all the laws that stop
you from modifying your computer there
would just be products in the market
that would allow you to turn that off
right to spoof what's going out of your
computer the reason that Google is able
to even contemplate this ridiculous
course of action is we are already kind
of three steps down uh the the grease
slide into hell you know as the old joke
from Ireland goes if you wanted to get
there I wouldn't start from here
so you gotta you know you may not be
able to uh fight Wei individually but
what you can do is be part of a movement
that's trying to make all of these
things better so Tech workers you know
there's Tech workers unions uh forming
uh and Tech worker solidarity
organizations forming all over that
makes a really big difference
um you know unionized workers uh can be
the shield for their users because it is
often the case that uh workers uh in
Tech want their users to be safe whereas
uh their bosses want their users to be
drained
um and you know we saw this with the
teacher strike in Los Angeles where uh
in 2019 their Prime demands were not
about salary or work treatment it was
about making sure that their students
had green space social workers that ice
wasn't picking up their parents at the
school gate a bunch of things that were
related to protecting the people they
served and that's one of the key roles
that a union can play in the case of
legis legislation and you know there is
a lot of legislation around these days
you know calling up your Senator calling
up your lawmaker making sure that these
get floor votes you know it was Chuck
Schumer who prevented
um the uh the vote on the access act
which would have forced interoperability
on the Platforms in the last session you
know making sure that your Senator that
your Congress people know that this
matters to you is
um you know a really big deal when
there's legislation pending so staying
on top of this through uh joining
organizations like the Electronic
Frontier Foundation where I've worked
for 22 years so that
um uh you can get alerts when this stuff
is pending in your state or with your
Senator or federal representative that's
a really important thing to do because
there are these inflection points where
uh just giving them a push can tip them
right over
um you know I have this arch nemesis a
guy called Milton Friedman
he was basically the architect of
neoliberalism Ronald Reagan's court
sorcerer he's the author of our misery
but he wasn't dumb and uh when people
would say to him Milton how are you
going to make your kooky ideas
mainstream he would say look
there's always going to be a crisis and
in a time of Crisis ideas can move from
the periphery to the center in an
instant
what we need to have are ideas lying
around so that when the crisis strikes
it won't go to waste so we need to
promulgate these ideas lying around
because I'll tell you we are lurching
from crisis to crisis in Tech right the
one thing that we can be sure that we
will not have in short supply in the
coming years is crises and so if we can
socialize the ideas make sure that
people understand that we need to stop
trying to fix the platforms by passing
rules about you know how much moderation
they have to do or who they must carry
or who they must not carry or whatever
just make it easier to leave the
platforms get out of the fire zone stop
trying to make the urban Wildlife
interface safe it's not safe it's going
to be on fire forever
then when the next Crisis arises there's
just going to be more political will for
for making it happen
all right uh
what's stopping uh content creators who
make a living from having a website on
their own domain uh the amount of work
to FTP and HTML files seems very low
that's true
um the problem is that uh 90 of all the
uh searches controlled by one company
and you know uh two or three companies
control all the social media which are
the two ways that people find out about
the stuff that you're doing you can send
email but about four companies control
all the email and all of those Services
treat domains that they haven't seen as
suspect and they claim well they might
be phishing domains they might be
um they might be uh crimeware they might
be porn they might be spam they might be
malware and so if it's you know speaking
of someone who runs his own mail server
it is unbelievably hard to reliably
deliver mail to companies like at T
Yahoo Google Microsoft and so on they
just periodically are like yeah we like
this mail server we're just not going to
accept any more mail for it from it I'd
like a three year period where I
couldn't send a receipt mail from ATT uh
this is the same thing
um that happens with webra with websites
right you put up your own website and
it's not on one of the major platforms
and Google just like super downranks it
at the index uh social media is much
less likely to recommend it or even show
it to the people who do follow you uh
and so really you know you have these
choke points and you know I often hear
from people who are like
well why don't um
why don't writers bypass Publishers in
Amazon and go independent it's like well
okay so if you bypass your publisher
most you know the one distributor that
distributes to bookstores uh and the one
chain of bookstores they're not going to
carry your work right now Amazon will
carry your work but if you're on Amazon
uh and uh you know that you're exclusive
to Amazon you're not going to be
anywhere else and if you don't want to
be on Amazon too because they're super
exploitative well then you're like in a
position where no one can find your work
none of the retailers will carry your
work none of the Distributors will
distribute your work you're basically
screwed right and so like we're solving
the wrong problem there are a lot of
platforms they're like we'll help you
print a book will help you format an
ebook and all of this will help you
escape the hegemony of the Distributors
the Publishers and the one giant
eCommerce retailer and the thing that
locks Us in is not the difficulty of
setting up a print file or converting a
file to an Epub it's all the things to
get that book into a reader's hand it's
the fact that like the App Store is
going to take 30 out of everything you
sell and so if your gross margin is 20
as is the case usually with say an audio
book you're gonna lose money on every
sale that you make through the audiobook
stores or through your own audiobook
store on the platform and so you're
gonna have to sell through Google books
or Apple Books uh otherwise you lose
money on every sale and then they get to
charge whatever they want
let's see
um and then Shirley says what about
medium and shirtification
it's a risk I mean the thing about
acidification
is that it's not the result uh
particularly Wicked or particularly
smart or even particularly foolish Tech
leaders right the people who started
like Dak and AOL and Sun Microsystems
weren't worse or better than the people
who started Google or the people who
started apple and the people who started
Microsoft
the difference is the way that we
constrain them right if if AOL could
have made competing with AOL illegal
they would have done it in a hot second
so you know medium faces all the all the
dangers that everyone else's faces and
um you know the the there's lots of
design choices that
um while not abusive at the moment could
become abusive you know rewriting URLs
so that they're captured by an analytics
engine for example I understand that
that's a way to catch spam but it's also
a way that kind of like gives you a
thing that you can turn on that lets you
do lots of other mischievous things
um one of the best ways to avoid good
incidification is to anticipate that in
the future you might have a lapse of
judgment you might allow a problem with
your finances or pressure from an
investor to tempt you into making a
compromise that in the cold light of day
you don't think should be made and
there's a name that economists have for
a way to avoid making these compromises
it's called a Ulysses Pact and it's
named after Ulysses you know from from
Homer
Ulysses uh was a hacker and when uh he
and his Sailors were sailing through the
Sea of the sirens he wanted to violate
protocols the normal protocol to avoid
hearing the song in the sirens and being
driven mad and jumping into the sea was
to fill your ears with wax but Ulysses
being a hacker he wanted to hear the
sirens and so he was like tell you what
Sailors tiny to the Mast and no matter
what I say don't release me and I'm
going to hear what no living person has
heard the song of the sirens so Ulysses
didn't say I will have the willpower to
resist the sirens he said I am strong
enough to know that when the sirens sing
I will be too weak to resist them so I
will use my strength in this moment
to prevent my weakness in the future
from tempting me into a course of action
that I will later regret we've all had a
version of this right you go on a diet
throw away all your Oreos
um
you can make binding covenants to uh um
not initify so for example free and open
source licenses including the Creative
Commons licenses they're all irrevocable
you can't change your mind about them
you can't take things out of the
comments once you put them in and
there's a reason for that and it's that
if you do a startup and your investors
come along and they go all right hippie
uh we went along with this open source
crap when we were funding you in the
first place but like
time is money
um you're gonna have to make all that
code proprietary proprietary or you're
not getting your next trash and uh the
150 good old friends that you attempted
to quit their decent reliable jobs and
put their kids college funds and their
mortgage on the line and come work for
you we're going to put them out on the
street
you can say to your boss
it's terrible and I would do this if I
could
I literally can't
because the code is irrevocably licensed
and so if medium wants to guard itself
against insidification in the future it
needs to think about how it can make
promises that it can't reneg on right
that's things like worker co-ops open
permanent open licensing
um uh creating systems that allow users
including uh writers to Port their
content out uh you know as a blob and
redirect readers to a new website all of
these things that say like that that set
up a situation
where if you do cave to Temptation
something really bad will happen to the
business
so that when the Temptation arises
your own venal nature and not your best
nature will stay your hand
well I think those are all the questions
I can go back to the chat and see how
that's going
uh thank you John for that
uh
yeah well I think that's it right we're
at 437 I think that's what we we said we
were going to do someone come in the
chat or wherever and let me know if
that's right
thank you all thanks for coming
oh thank you Beth
yeah the ring is from a guy called uh
Han cholo who sells a Comic-Con I bet
you can Google them
oh thank you Jennifer
all right guys I'm going to dial off I'm
gonna go uh do more Defcon see how badly
my computer got hacked while I was
connected to the hotel Wi-Fi
I'll see you later
