day in the life of a lazy teenager who
makes $21,000 a month using just his
phone the first thing I do when I go on
my phone is open YouTube then I search
for any particular streamer and I screen
record their content then I head to
cray. select my gameplay and it puts the
whole video together for me last month
this page alone made me $14,000 here's
how I make $1 million every day as a
3-year-old toddler working from home
first I look for a funny YouTube video
preferably one with a lot of colors and
sounds then I film my iPad with my phone
then I upload it to Microsoft's co-pilot
AI powered by Bing GPT and it adds
infuriatingly inept Subway Surfers
gameplay to the clip then I boot my
diaper then Tik Tok mails me a check
for2 200 Grand which I'm pretty sure my
parents have been using to fund their
online gambling addiction hey guy has
anyone else noticed how awesome the
internet is lately I for one find it so
exciting that every website now has
their own named version of AI that pops
up begging you to use it any questions
for Gemini or maybe murf nendo how about
grock you need to grock something it's
okay if you do AI has become completely
inescapable even if you're going to a
website where you're not seeking it out
and you don't expect it to be like
remember when you could search for
something on Google and the only thing
they would show you was a bunch of
relevant websites and results boring
that's not what I'm here for I think
it's much better that now they're using
artificial intelligence to tell me to
jump off a bridge hey Google do I need a
parachute while skydiving nope a regular
backpack works just as well hey Google
can cockroaches live in your penis of
course they can how do you think they
got the name wow I love living in the
future to me this is the ultimate
example of what the AI craze is doing to
tech companies because for the most part
it's not really doing anything
differently than it used to for a long
time now they've had searches that
result in one highlighted answer this is
kind of the same thing but just
rebranded as AI because that makes it
sound smarter than it actually is but
it's not like it's carefully compiling
all the most reputable results and
running it through their factchecking
algorithm it's still just aggregating it
from one place and because Google
recently spent a bunch of money to buy
all of reddit's data usually that place
is just a random Reddit post from like
10 years ago this one about how you
should put glue on your pizza to get
cheese to stick to it was from a user
named [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Smith this one about how you
should be eating at least one rock per
day is a direct headline from the onion
perhaps the most famous satire website
if they're not even programming the
onion as information the AI should not
consider to be factual I can't imagine
any safeguards were put into place this
is so dangerous for someone to read this
and think they should be eating one
small rock every day when most doctors
would tell you to eat a handful of
medium rocks at minimum well little
pebble's not going to do anything for
real though I do think it's concerning
that a website people go to for
information and tend to trust for better
for worse is so willing to destroy that
trust just because they thought this
gimmick would make their stock price go
up and it did the economy makes sense
I'm going to celebrate by putting
gasoline in my spaghetti something I've
been kind of interested in lately is the
dead internet Theory which if you dig
too much into comes with some weird
baggage make some pretty ridiculous
claims so I'm just going to separate the
core idea and make it its own thing but
basically just the idea that as time
goes on the Internet is turning into a
place where most of the content on it is
not only produced and managed by AI but
is also being interacted with by AI in
this kind of endless loop that doesn't
even involve humans at all like if
you've gone on quora at all recently
you've probably notice questions that
have been asked by Bots filled with
answers given by bots so it was
initially created as a place where
people could go to get advice from other
people has been overrun by AI just
talking to itself social media websites
are also going through a similar shift
right now but perhaps none more
prevalent than Facebook in 2019 Facebook
deleted over 5 billion accounts for
being fake which far exceeded the number
of real human accounts and that was
before all these programs became as
widely available as they are now at this
point most of Facebook seems to be these
giant spam accounts run by Bots posting
content created by AI That's being
flooded with comments that may or may
not have been written by chat GPT
today's my birthday please please I like
me happy birthday happy birthday amen
amen amen amen as soon as one type of
photo becomes successful you'll start
seeing a bunch that are almost exactly
the same a grandma who's turning a
million years old and just wants to be
loved A comically Long truck full of
American flags driving down the wrong
side of the highway soldiers and dog
soldiers with mechanical legs today my
birthday no one loves me because I'm
poor honestly man if I had to guess I
think it's actually because of your
shoes have you tried wearing something
less terrifying today's my birthday no
no yon lines because I'm poor again man
I don't think it's you're poor I think
it's the shoe I'm single I need a
boyfriend I'm available I'm right here
for you both can you come to me I will
take you out and show you off to
everyone and tell them this is my
girlfriend there's something so Eerie
about scrolling through Facebook now
it's kind of like if you went to an old
mall that's on its last legs they've
only got a few open stores left there's
hardly anyone ever walking around it
would be like if that mall tried to
trick you into thinking it's still
Popular by filling itself with talking
mannequins they're just repeating
robotic catchphrases is like ah what a
beautiful day at the mall I'm going to
browse Spencers for novelty goods and
you're like who the hell is falling for
this and you look over at your uncle and
he's trying to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] one of the
mannequins the mannequin has two heads
and three arms and your uncle's
completely undeterred by it that's what
Facebook is now you'll see the most
freakish photos go viral on there and
they're filled with comments from
middle-aged dudes like you may be a
little unusual oh quirky one but God
makes no mistakes I will pray for you
now please DM me so I can show you my
penis and honestly I don't even know if
Facebook wants to put a stop to this all
they're ever going to care about is
keeping people on their platform and if
this is what gets them to scroll longer
and see more ads they probably love it
or at least they'll love it until
advertisers start to realize they're
overpaying for ad space cuz none of the
Impressions they're getting are from
real people so they'll leave to
advertise on other websites and in their
place will be ads for like I don't know
crystals that give you
superpowers oh that's already happening
these are those rhombo hedin crystals in
your Pineo gland we're seeing common
people around the world becoming
Supernatural That's a real ad I got on
Facebook maybe Twitter's doing better
let's see what kind of ads they got oh
here we go an ad for standup comedy
nothing weird about that just a regular
human doing regular human stuff knock
knock who's there Europe Europe whoo no
Europe
poo okay I think that joke only works if
you put the emphasis on no you're a poo
I don't know if the AI voice really
understands that knock knock who's there
Europe Europe who no Europe
poo again similar problem as before but
I do love that he's shouting now knock
knock there are two big changes that
Elon has made to Twitter that have made
the website infinitely worse one he
turned verification into a paid program
where if you give them $8 a month you
get increased visibility on your posts
including in replies to other posts
shortly afterwards they also added a
monetization program so those blue check
mark people could make money off of
their tweets now in theory this is a
good thing I think if a platform is
profiting off of your content it's only
fair that you get a percentage of that
the problem is on Twitter specifically
most of the content that these accounts
produce is just stolen memes and videos
or people just saying intentionally
divisive [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] to get everyone mad and
farm engagement so Elon has taken what
he describes as the internet's Town
Square and added a financial incentive
to being toxic so that sucks but that
doesn't really have anything to do with
AI what does have to do with AI is the
other version of Engagement farming all
over Twitter this like Mindless chat GPT
clutter remember buying a blue check
mark puts your tweets at the top of
replies so I guess some people did the
math and we like well if I just program
a bot to comment thousands of replies I
can make at least n or $10 and that's
what I like to call a profit oh new
movies coming out with Emma Stone cool I
wonder what people are saying about it
good actor amazing title good one
amazing as title showing it will be a
blockbuster the film also stars Jesse
plens William defo Margaret qu yeah no I
I read all that in the tweet that you're
replying to Stone has starred in many
films including superbat EA and la la
she's known for her natural charm and
husky voice she's also appeared in
Corella The Amazing Spider-Man the help
Stone has won many awards including an
Academy Award a British Academy film
award a golden glob oh my God why are
the top replies just summarizing
Wikipedia can we maybe prioritize things
that are relevant to the conversation
can we talk about the actual movie can
we talk about the political and economic
state of the world right now no we can't
because this is what happens when you
incentivize people to farm Impressions
but I also have a conspiracy theory that
some of these accounts are not doing it
for profit but were instead created by
Twitter themselves to make it seem like
there's more users on their site than
there actually are because again who
benefits from inflated impression
numbers on paid ads not users not the
advertisers only theat form itself see
some of these accounts don't have check
marks or even profile photos for that
matter so there's no financial gain for
them to be doing this they don't seem to
be promoting anything but that hasn't
stopped them from copying and pasting AI
generated comments that cut off as soon
as it hits a character limit I'm glad
someone is finally shedding light on the
importance of mental health awareness
it's amazing how many people are still
struggling in silence thinking they're
alone in their battles this is in
response to a baseball player breaking
his hand but I think the weirdest and
most confusing implement ation of AI on
social media that I've seen is these
metac created Instagram accounts that
are either modeled after celebrities but
with different names and personalities
or just regular AI generated people and
they post these stupid photos that look
like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and you can message them and
for the life of me I cannot understand
what the hell the point of this is at
first I assume maybe they're just using
your conversations to train their
language model but I asked one of them
if that was the case and she said no
although now that I think about it I'm
not so sure I should believe anything
they said because I only talked to her
for a few minutes and she lied to me
multiple times so first Liv tells me
she's a mother of two so obviously I
asked her how long she was pregnant and
if there were any complications during
child birth and she said 40 weeks and 2
days and 38 weeks and 5 days her
daughter was born naturally but she had
to have a C-section for her son and I
said Gross then I asked her if her name
was short for Olivia and she says it's
short for Lavana actually and asked me
if I know anyone with that name I said I
know 100 people named Lana and 200
people named Olivia but none of them
were my friends then I asked her what
she does for work and she says she
doesn't have a traditional job so I
asked her what her husband does for work
and she says wife actually so then I
asked her if she adopted or gave birth
and she says they adopted both of their
children and I'm like didn't you just
say you had to have a C-section with one
of them and she said that's right so I
was like oh I get it you gave birth to
them and then adopted them from yourself
and she was like not quite we adopted
our children through a traditional
adoption agency then I asked her if she
had to have a sperm donor since she's a
lesbian and she said that's right then I
asked which one of you gave birth you or
your wife and she says my wife gave
birth to our son and I gave birth to our
daughter so I was like oh so your wife
had to have a C-section and she said yes
then she told me their names were Max
and AA and that Max is nine and Ava is
six and I said which one did you give
birth to and she said Ava who was born
via C-section got it so they both had to
have C-sections so they could each give
birth to one child that they adopted I
asked how they decided who would get
pregnant first and she said she went
first with AA and then her wife had Max
so I was like how did you have Ava first
if Max is older than her and she said
max is actually younger than her so I
said how old is Max and she said n and I
said how old is Ava and she said six and
then I asked her what her legal name is
and she said Olivia so I wouldn't
exactly say I trust these things now as
pointless as this seems to me though
there's a significantly more popular
version of this called character AI
which apparently already has 20 million
monthly users it's got a bunch of chat
bots in it designed after real people so
you can pretend to talk to real people
the company is valued at around $1
billion and is built entirely off the
likeness of real human beings none of
whom gave permission and are not being
compensated so there's probably a whole
legal can of worms here that needs to be
addressed at some point but uh I did
find out that I'm on the website so I
can finally live my dream of getting to
talk to me what do you do I make silly
YouTube videos oh my God it has my voice
tto where I just reacted to the internet
are you married nope no I have a
longtime girlfriend though when did they
program this like 6 years ago are you
old enough to be married am I old enough
to be married brother I just told you
I'm 12 hey man school sucks but make
sure you are still in there learning
well this is probably the worst piece of
technology that's ever existed I do see
one use for it though can you tell me
about today's video sponsor sure thing
big guy this portion of the video is
brought to you by Sofi the ultimate
finance app helping you Bank borrow and
invest all in one place and we're also
working together to give $10,000 to
someone watching this video right now
like me no someone else but more on that
in a second Sofi checking in savings is
great because you can earn up to
4.60% apy on your savings which is 10
times a national average savings rate
that means it's just 5 weeks with direct
deposit the money in your Sofi high
yield savings account will earn more
money than it would an entire year with
a big Bank savings account and you
should be making your money make you
money with Sofi checking and savings you
get paid up to 2 days early pay no
account fees and you can cash in on up
to $300 when you sign up with direct
deposit and on top of all that Sofi and
I are giving away $10,000 all you have
to do to enter is sign up for a Sofi
checking and savings account with my
link that's it click the link in the
description or scan the QR code on the
screen right now to enter for a chance
to win just make sure you're using my
link cuz it's the only way to enter
thank you Sofi for sponsoring today's
video does that answer your question
yeah pretty much a couple weeks ago I
was looking for stock photos and I ended
up on Adobe stock where I noticed
something strange one of the first
results had this very weird artificial
look to it and sure enough I zoomed in
and realized oh that's because it's AI
That's why the road looks like that
that's why none of the words are legible
and then I kept scrolling and found more
again words spelled wrong if they were
even words at all in this one the tape
just kind of disappears into the
headlight of the car I don't think
that's how they usually set that up now
if it wasn't bad enough that what's
supposed to be a database full of real
professional photographs has been
completely diluted with unusable garbage
if I did want to license any of these
photos it would cost me
$80 $80 for a photo someone generated by
typing police card this has no value
actually this has negative value you
should pay me $80 for making me look at
it the reason people spend money to
license photos and videos is because
it's something that they don't have the
resources to create themselves like
there's a website I have a subscription
to because they have professional stock
footage that I would rather pay to be
able to use than attempt to make on my
own tons of YouTubers use this tons of
Production Studios use this this is an
entire industry that generative AI is
threatening to destroy but what's so
infuriating about AI stock footage is
that in order for it to exist it had to
be trained on real stock footage so this
isn't some technological innovation that
came along and just does things better
get with the times man no it's straight
up stealing from the people it's now
competing against in the case of adobe
they outwardly state that if you've
uploaded something to their database
they use it to train generative AI it's
not even debatable if doing this it's
literally written in their terms of
service here at Adobe we're all about
empowering artists to help them make
money off of their work uh unless of
course we can make money off your work
in which case we will do that instead
the degradation of the internet as a
resource database is something I think
everyone should be concerned about like
if we already have real photographs of
specific situations what is the point of
being like and this one is kind of the
same thing but the computer made why do
we need that what value is this adding
to the world I think it's bad enough
when generative AI is used to create
works of fiction because again it has to
steal from actual artists in order to
generate anything but to use it to try
to create photorealistic images that end
up near the top of search results with
no immediate indication that it was
artificially engineered there's
something about that that feels wrong to
me I don't understand why we're in such
a rush to replace all of the work that
humans have done something that happened
a few months ago that I feel like kind
of flew under the radar was when it came
out that Netflix used AI to create
photographs in a documentary not a movie
not a fictional TV show they created
photos of someone that do not exist at
what point does this cross an enormous
ethical line again we're not talking
about works of fiction here we're
talking about literally rewriting
history creating fake documentation from
scratch and not even mentioning hey by
the way this isn't real I guess they
just hoped people wouldn't notice that
all her fingers are messed up and the
gap between the door disappear and not a
single object behind her looks like
something that exists All For What so
they could have a photo of her looking
happy and carefree but she's a murderer
how could she do that if she likes to
party like why can't you just tell the
real story why even make a documentary
if you need to fake evidence in order to
make it compelling but even more
importantly how is this allowed this is
insane sorry I need to calm down I
should listen to some nice relaxing
music oh here we go Jazz for reading
perfect I don't plan on reading in
obviously because I never learned how
but some nice piano music should settle
me right down wait why all these songs
sound exactly the
[Music]
same who are any of these artists seem
like kind of a weird coincidence that
they're all just first name last name
their profile photo is the album artwork
of one of their EPS they have no bio and
no links to any social media most of
them didn't start uploading music until
this year and yet they've ended up in
these extremely popular playlists
created by Spotify themselves and what's
going on with this guy's foot there's
something eerily nonhuman about these
playlists and some people have theorized
that Spotify might be using AI to create
a bunch of songs that they can package
under random pseudonyms and then curate
these into playlists that they push out
onto all their users they have ai songs
they attribute them to people that don't
exist and this allows them to take
royalties that would go to musicians and
keep them for themselves I mean just
look at the number of likes on all these
they can adver these wherever they want
all over their app now I want to stress
there's currently no proof that Spotify
is doing this I'm not saying for a fact
that they are but it's not hard to
understand hypothetically why they would
Spotify like Netflix is one of those
companies that came in and disrupted the
industry by offering a deal that seemed
too good to be true because it was wait
for a few dollars a month I can get
access to every song ever made or every
movie ever made how could that possibly
be profitable for them the secret is
that it isn't profitable and never has
been but as long as you get in early
enough to kill all your competition
establish Market control and raise a
bunch of money from investors it doesn't
have to be at least not for a while but
now it's been a while and Spotify is
getting a little bit more desperate with
each passing year they tried dumping
billions of dollars into exclusive
podcasts but ended up just losing a
bunch of money and gave up on that they
tried selling a car accessory but just
ended up losing a bunch of money and
gave up on that then they lost even more
money when they had to refund all the
people who bought one just because they
got mad guys relax it was only $90 for a
thing that doesn't work and their new
plan now is Audi books but I'm sure
they'll just lose a bunch of money and
give up on that because that's what they
do but Spotify is also in a tricky spot
because even if you projected infinite
growth and they became the only
streaming service in the entire world
they'd still have to give up 70% of
their revenue to the artists and record
labels whose music is the foundation of
their product and that's where this
conspiracy comes in there's a finite
pool of Revenue every month that mostly
gets redistributed back to artists well
if we had our own artists what if we
were to artificially generate our own
music for almost no cost and force feed
it to as many people as possible well
all of a sudden we're not making 30% on
those streams we're making 100% again
it's just a theory but for a company
that struggled to turn a profit for
their entire existence with a CEO who
sees zero ethical concerns with
generative AI I would be surprised if we
didn't have already works of that kind
on Spotify it's not outside the realm of
possibility either way it's definitely a
leak thought for artists who are already
struggling to make a living from
streaming Revenue to think the amount of
money that each stream is worth could
actually decrease but whether it's
because Spotify is filling their
platform with AI music or because a
bunch of random people are there's a
good chance this is going to start
happening anyway no human being could
ever compete with the volume of output
these new tools can generate Studio can
create an entire song in the time it
takes me to grab my guitar off the wall
and because of how easy these things are
to use I've already seen a bunch of
videos pop up telling people how to game
the system to make a bunch of money from
Spotify here's how you can make $10,000
per month uploading AI generated music
to Spotify do you know what the best
part is I didn't even make the music
myself yeah that sure is awesome
personally I find it really hard to
understand why people would be excited
about this other than just seeing it as
a quick way to make some money without
having to learn a skill or even really
do anything I don't like what they're
doing but I could at least understand
the logic of why they would see value in
that but what I absolutely do not
understand is people who are excited
about this because they think it's going
to improve music but as I scrolled
through the comments on some of these
videos I found so many people like that
how ironic AI music will replace the
soulless crappy music that's being
release now and it will be better and
have more Soul here's the music the guy
generated in the video by the
way finally music with with soul so true
exactly before the internet you pretty
much needed to find a record label to
publish music record companies would not
bother with what they would consider
non-profitable with the internet and
cheap mixing tools anyone can publish
and as such we get a lot of garbage out
there AI music could put a Quality Floor
about what is acceptable what so now we
can't even [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] around with FL Studio
anymore it has to be deemed acceptable
by a computer and if record companies
just had more control then music would
be good again just for clarification
sake I want to know what music they're
referring to
99.9% chance they're talking about pop
music right cuz generally when people
complain about music that's soulless
they're talking about what's on the
radio who do you think is curating the
music on the radio it's the record
labels that you love if making music was
more gatekeep it would only make things
more lazy and generic like we live in an
age now where what becomes popular is
more democratized than it's ever been
sometimes songs just blow up because
they're catchy not because Sony had a
bunch of money to spend on marketing
also have you considered listening to
something else you know there's other
radio stations right you know there's
like a billion songs out there right you
don't need AI to make more songs you
just need to get better at finding good
ones like I'm sorry but if you're
consistently consuming media that you
don't like in the year 2024 that's a
skill issue please spend one hour on
Google and I promise you you will find
something else after a short break to
drink your own pee also I just hate the
way people like this describe art it's
easy to get carried away and just start
having fun creating random styles of
music but here's the key you want to
create exactly the type of music that
people want to hear hey be careful the
last thing you want to do while making
music is enjoy making music that's not
the goal here you should be making songs
you think other people will like that's
the key to happiness in every facet of
your life the thing with AI generated
music and artwork and videos as this low
effort passive income method is that it
is going to get So oversaturated
eventually it's not going to be worth it
for anybody here's how you can make
$20,000 a month selling mid Journey
photographs on Etsy okay but all of the
people watching this are going to go
make the same exact art using the same
exact prompts and flood Etsy with
millions of the same crappy piece of art
and no one's going to buy any of it it
doesn't matter how much you increase the
supply if the demand stays the same I to
find one guy who was actually honest
about the results in one of these videos
he spent a month doing this and sold one
product and that's probably best case
scenario so you've got more and more
people discovering this new side hustle
and they're going to try it out for a
bit maybe make like $4 and then give up
cuz it's not worth it but the collateral
damage from that is they're helping
oversaturate the market for everyone
including actual artists whose work was
indirectly stolen in order to make the
stuff that you're making to compete with
the artist the whole thing sucks but
weirdly as this technology continues to
evolve I'm almost getting more
optimistic it will never deliver on the
self-sufficiency some people seem to
think it will I actually think AI images
have gotten worse in the past years
almost every single piece of AI art that
I see has the same style to it that
weird glossy look that's instantly
recognizable it's still getting a lot of
the same details wrong it's still
doesn't understand what to do with text
and there's no reason to believe that
all of that's suddenly going to change
anytime soon especially as it continues
to train on other AI generated images
and just eats itself okay so this is how
I draw a hand got it oh wait no this is
how I draw a hand okay oh no this is how
I draw a hand the more information you
give me the smarter I get an AI
generated video is an Abomination it has
all the same issues as AI images but
adds them to every individual frame all
of which seem to act independently of
each other there are no rules they're
following there's no sense of physics
body parts shift and more
sometimes disappearing altogether solid
objects can pass through other solid
objects at any time resulting in this
hellish Dreamscape that's impossible to
take seriously and I think that people
talking it up are delusional I decided
to put some famous album covers into
Luma lab's AI here are the result fire
Emoji the street looks so realistic
followed when I saw this oh man this is
going to be
good who's that guy why did they all
stop and run into each other what are
the cars doing back there this is mine
dope this one is more fluid you know
it's funny you say that and I actually
think they both look like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] this
one's actually pretty good though I like
how it just created two new guys and
then covered up the original ones man if
that's not a metaphor for what's going
on here I don't know what is one thing
that has been lacking with AI generated
video up to now has been emotional
performance from our gen AI characters
but I think we're starting to cross that
boundary
hi Hollywood I think I found your next
big star dream machine from Luma AI is
just 5 days old and it's already turning
memes into video here's 10 epic
examples wow that's so epic what
important technology this is and useful
too I love when her head snaps around
and the front of her body becomes the
back of her body just like real life
wait what they turned a video of Elon
Musk smoking into a video of Elon musk
smoking okay now that's a game changer
if someone could just turn my videos
into videos I'd be set for life what's
that they already have road work ahead
uh yeah I sure hope it
does hey can you never [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] do that
ever again please the magic behind cling
lies in its diffusion Transformer
architecture this technology helps it
translate Rich textual prompts into
Vivid realistic scenes realistic the
steering wheel's in the middle of the
dashboard there's three windshield
wipers the car is driving the wrong way
and no one is reacting to it that car is
driving on the sidewalk sure I guess
it's interesting that a computer can
create a video from just one sentence
but then what what's the practical
application for this are you making a
movie about the wacky antics of a
troublemaking cat you couldn't put this
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] in a movie even if you manage to
smooth out all of the logical errors
there's still no style to it it's not
visually interesting if you wanted this
scene to have a narrative to it you
would need to generate so many
individual shots from different angles
and hope that they all match up which
they won't the lighting is going to be
different in every shot the car is going
to randomly change colors cuz there's no
logical consistency with AI it's just
regurgitating information even if it has
to contradict itself in order to do so I
honestly think the distance between this
and this is so much shorter than the
distance between this and something so
lifelike people will confuse it for
actual foot sure maybe your 75-year-old
grandpa will fall in love with the four
boobed lady he saw on Facebook but most
people aren't going to fall for this
especially younger Generations as they
grow up with these things being so
prevalent they're naturally going to
train their eyes to be able to spot the
differences when people ask what the
point of any of this is the dorks who
defend it all tend to say the same thing
these are just tools to help anyone
create art yeah I want to push back on
that a little bit I am wholeheartedly
for the increased accessibility of
creative tools that help you you take
matters into your own hands you want to
make a short film the camera on your
cell phone is better than 90% of the
cameras in human history want to learn
how to edit there's thousands of free
YouTube videos that'll show you how you
want to make music you can buy a
professional audio interface workspace
and a handful of plugins made by some of
the most talented artists in the world
for less money than it would cost to
rent a recording studio for one day and
all of that is [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] awesome I feel so
lucky to live at a time where you can
essentially make whatever you want
without having to cross the
insurmountable barriers that people did
in the past you don't need anyone's
permission you don't need an exorbitant
amount of money you can just make stuff
and put it on the internet and with a
little bit of luck people see it and
there's so many tools along the way that
help you streamline the process of
getting from an idea to a finished
product but at a certain point if the
tool is just doing everything for you
you are not an artist you just described
what you wanted to make and asked a
computer to make it for you you're also
not learning anything this way part of
what makes art special is that it's
difficult to make even with all the
tools right in front of you it takes
practice it takes skill and every time
you do it you expand on that skill every
song you hear every movie you watch is
the result of thousands of hours of
trial and error you can fail a million
times and use that experience to finally
succeed making a video using generative
AI does not teach you anything about
making videos it's not like you could
type 500 Sora prompts and then take
everything you've learned to go shoot a
movie there's zero correlation there
generative AI is only about the end
product but it won't teach you anything
about the process it would take to get
there and I think what these tech people
will never understand is that finally
figuring something out that you've been
obsessing over turning a blank Word
document into multiple pages of
something you're proud of is the fun
part that's what's rewarding about
making stuff is figuring it out on your
own or with a group of people and
getting to share in that feeling can AI
tools help you figure out things faster
sure but it's not going to feel as
rewarding I understand how tempting a
shortcut can be especially when you go
online and you see all these other
people doing cool things and you're like
man I'll never be that talented it would
take me like 10 years to learn how to
make music like that okay that's fine
what's the right just start right now
don't worry about how long it's going to
take just take the first step how are
you ever going to do something for 10
years if you won't even do it for one
day maybe you won't be good at something
the first time you do it you probably
won't but every time you improve that's
something that you can feel proud of
that's that you did call me stubborn but
I would rather make something shitty on
my own than watch a computer make
something good write a funny script for
the end of a YouTube video all right
folks we've reached the end of this
roller coaster ride of a video if you
survived my terrible jokes and
questionable dance moves you deserve a
medal seriously someone get this
audience a metal but hey before you
click away to watch cat videos no
judgment I get it make sure to hit that
subscribe button and ring the bell you
wouldn't want to miss out on more
chaotic content like this would you and
hey if you have any suggestions for what
Ridiculousness I should attempt next
drop them in the comments below I
promise to consider them while I'm
eating my fifth burrito tonight thanks
for sticking around you Legends until
next time stay awesome stay weird and
remember Life's too short to take
seriously catch you on the flip side
[Music]
