thank you Anastasia for uh talking to us
this evening um Anastasia and my
collaboration I think goes back to about
2017 um yeah and uh through through
through errad and uh she has educated me
in what I like to call the Russian
School of dialectical thinking um which
uh uh has been a revelation really
because uh the Russians have taken a
slightly different approach to uh what
you might call the basas and lasan
approach to dialectical thinking
starting at the opposite end of the age
Spectrum uh Anastasia is a researcher
and a teacher at Moscow City University
and Moscow State University I believe um
and uh particular interest is in
creativity she wrote the chapter on
creativity in the rout ledge
International Handbook of dialectical
thinking and of course she was uh a
co-editor of that uh book so she worked
very very closely with myself and with
Mike muscolo and uh I'm sure she's got
some interesting things to say um today
uh to tell you about creativity and we
will give you a little bit of an
introduction uh to the work uh in the
chapter so without further Ado I'll hand
over to you Anastasia yes my name is
Anastasia I'm from Moscow City
University and today we are going to
discuss creativity and dialectical
thinking so uh the name of my
presentation is written on the title uh
it's the angen of the creativity how
dialectical structures can help to solve
open stud
problems uh I guess then the expression
open St problems could sound a little
bit maybe strange maybe mysterious but I
will explain everything to you a little
bit late in my
presentation uh now I would like to
attract your attention to these
pictures on the left side I can
everybody recognize can recognize the
well-known famous sketches by Leonardo
Dain so it's a scheme of his famous
flying machine and on the right side you
can you cannot recognize anything
because it's no name no no name piece of
Arts it's just
a piece of Arts made by some Urban
unknown non name artist and for me uh
it's it's these two pictures are very
much about the opposition of uh uh big
sea big creativity and little sea uh
little creativity uh so about creativity
of genius and creativity of ordinary
people and um I would say here I would
like to say here and underline it that
uh if we discuss
creativity in terms of dialectics and
especially in terms of structural
dialectics uh we uh can say that um this
supposition big CA and little CA doesn't
make uh a lot of sense uh because the
structure of the creative effect is
universal and in terms of structural
dialectical dialectics yes uh if we uh
discuss creativity in terms of
dialectics uh the structure of creative
effect is universal and uh it's a
overcoming and transforming
contradiction through operating with
oppositions
opposites uh but in my presentation uh
today um I will try to use more example
and I will try to rely on this uh little
see creativity uh and um almost all
examples that I will use and I will show
you will be from uh the creativity of
ordinary people like you and me yes so
and
um the starting point from for our
discussion for to today is the slide
about Joy
Guilford uh I think that um almost
everybody knows that uh more than 70
years ago Joy Gilford American
psychologist suggested us uh the concept
of Divergent thinking Divergent thinking
as an alternative to convergent
thinking uh and uh in fact he suggested
to to research the new type of tasks
tasks with open end yes so in my title
it was tasks with open startat and J
Gilford suggested us to research tasks
with open end so uh as an alternative to
tasks with one correct answers yes one
correct answer openend uh tasks are with
multiple uh multiple
answers uh and um we know that more than
7 years
past uh already yes now it's uh
2024 uh but if we would like to find in
the literature some typical definition
of
creativity uh widespread definition of
creativity uh we will find something
like this uh something like uh this
definition which is written Above So
creativity is typically defined the
combin synthesizing or bridging of ideas
information and knowledge to generate
Noel original and appropriate
Solutions so
[Music]
um and um I would like to why I'm saying
that it is starting point point for the
discussion today uh because um I would
like to say and to highlight that uh to
my mind there are at least three
problems with this typical uh definition
of creativity
so the first one uh is the fact that
this definition highlights uh uh almost
only combinatorics so uh this definition
regards creative process almost only as
combining combining
bridging uh and syn
synthesizing synthesizing here uh
combining
combinatorics um and uh after Guilford
of course you know that Paul torren
suggested this psychological psycho
diagnostic
measurement tool to measure creativity
and suggested this famous four
parameters criteria fluency originality
flexibility
elaboration uh and uh I would say that
all of these criteria uh are
quantitative quantitative not
qualitative but quantitative and it's
very understandable because if your
definition highlights uh combinat rics
so we will have quantitive quantitative
criteria it's
unavoidable uh and
um it's the first problem problem with
that uh the second problem to my mind is
the fact that uh the uh tasks that uh
are suggested to the
respondents uh don't reflect uh the
specific situation when a person needs a
new
solution uh and and um you can just
remember yourself uh uh in at the moment
of your life when you need really need a
new creative solution I'm sure that it's
not about combinatorics at all I'm sure
that it is something uh that you found
yourself in some problem Mass a mass of
uncertainty uncertainty and you should
to cope with it and the third problem
that I see uh in this definition that uh
it ignores a huge part of creative
process process before solving before
solving and to my mind it's very
important very important aspect and we
don't have any right to to ignore it and
uh when you really need a creative
solution yes uh so what do you do you
cope try to cope with uncertainty to
cope with that problem mass that is
surrounding you you frame the problem as
a contradiction and then you
convert uh an emotionally stressful
maybe painful emotionally strong
experience of tension of contradiction
into intellectual work with oppositions
with opposites here in this slide uh you
can see two
pictures uh I like both of them in pair
uh so it has the same name uh the name
of both paintings uh both paintings are
called torments torments of
creativity and uh I would say that uh
both
authors uh catch that very
moment uh when a person tries within the
creative process tries to cope with
uncertainty and tries to cope uh that um
with that emotionally painful experience
and to convert it into in some
intellectual work intellectual work with
opposites um right in this very moment
and on the left side of this slide uh
you can see some typical uh tips for
teachers all internet is full of such
tips and all methodological literature
for teachers is full of such tips
typical tips for teachers how to train
creativity yes for example add more
ideas generate many ideas right find
more than one right answer push past the
First
Response uh and
um of course these tips are based on
that uh typical definition of creativity
that we saw uh earlier on the first
slide uh and um of course they are also
about combinatoric about generating more
and more and more ideas and combin
combinator
uh combining them uh and I would like to
ask you to imagine now uh if somebody
for example a teacher uh come to this
person uh for example from the first
picture or from the second picture and
tell him hey find more than right
answers generate many
ideas adapt to New Uses yes so uh how do
you think what do you think what uh this
man will persons will answer to these
teachers I guess that nothing
good nothing good uh and that is because
such tips are not relevant to the moment
not relevant to the moment because it's
not moment when we are just combining or
Bridging the ideas it's the moment when
we uh human being tries to cope
with uncertainty and frame contradiction
and uh here on the top of the slide you
see that I asked the question how
uh no this slide on this slide sorry um
I asked the question this typical
definition of creativity really helpful
for educators today and uh uh now I
would like to suggest you a the of EX
theory of
examples it will be dealing with
connected to Global Research
pza uh uh
so I know that not many of you work with
uh School level of education but so I
not sure that you know well about pza
but I can assure you that everybody in
the world who work with school level of
Education knows about know about Pisa so
Pisa is a program for international
student assessment it's the most
reputable most Global uh research uh
which try
to try to investigate academical results
of school children of 15 years old uh
teenagers uh usually they uh deal with
uh reading skills and Mathematics skills
and something about biology but two
years ago they made a
research about creativity about creative
thinking because it's one of the
competence of 21st century you know and
they decide to uh make glob Global
Research uh about this soft skill as
they say uh creative thinking um and uh
they uh as a methodological base of
their research they used Guilford
methodology uh and that typical
definition of creativity that I showed
you on the first slide and they also
speak about littley creativity
creativity of ordinary people uh uh uh
the next
slide um I just would like to show you
the how many countries participated it
was more more than 80 countries really
Global um and a lot of thousand of
teenagers
participated
uh they always pza researchers also
always do ratings uh you can see that
Singapore Korea Canada alas but it
doesn't matter now it's not my point uh
today my point is the procedure of
measurement so I was very interested how
uh they measured what kind of task they
suggested to
teenagers all over the world uh to
measure their creative thinking and to
and to make this Global Research
uh because
um of course everybody body understands
that uh the results uh are very very
depend on the measurement procedure so
and um if we go deep into details and we
analyze what uh they measured in fact we
immediately recognize those four
parameters flexibility
originality uh and to
others uh and um uh here I would like to
suggest you one example I will explain
later why it's important for me to
explain explain it in details so for
example uh the task on
flexibility uh they uh on the right side
of the slide you see the picture and uh
they ask their respondents write three
different titles for the illustration on
the right yes for this illustration with
book and uh tree and bench
uh and uh on the bottom of the slide uh
you can see uh their scoring system how
did they give gave
scores and uh you can see here that for
example you have student a student B and
student C and student a uh has no credit
yes so zero score uh student B was the
best and the student C more or less yes
and uh why uh why so yes why such
scoring system uh student a told us the
big book the G book the large book so
okay according to Torance diagnostic Psy
diagnostic so the same object the same
characteristic of the same object zero
points yes uh so the student B uh the
lonely tree
the written Trail the perfect story
maximum score why because three
different objects and three different
characteristics so it's about
flexibility and students see the freedom
of a story life is story waiting to be
read the power of a story I think that
you feel that the answers of students C
are a little bit more interesting than
of students of student
B uh but it will be partial credit why
because the freedom of story and power
of story uh it's about the same object
it's not so flexible according to strong
strict rules of psycho Diagnostics by
Torrance uh one more example about
originality so it's example of a task
uh another task uh it's uh respondents
are asked
to come up with comic strip comic strip
so look the illustration
uh on the right side and uh uh come up
with a dialogue
uh comic strip uh dialogue in it yes
dialogue between the Sun and the Earth I
would like to attract your attention
here that they demand humor because it's
not accidentally because humor is a
[Music]
really significant and serious uh
characteristic of uh cognitive um
High um highly developed cognitive
structure that is why I think they
demand humor
here uh
and what did we do with my students at
the University I don't see if some of
them are here maybe because I can't I
can't see everybody now so we did a
small
research uh I asked to fulfill these P
creativity
tasks uh all of them because they are in
Open Access and they are published some
typical of course not everything but uh
some typical uh tasks are published and
uh you can go deeper into details and I
uh would like to check we would like to
check
if uh artificial intell intelligence
will cope with it and yes
expectedly uh to tell you the truth I
didn't expect anything else so GPT chart
was the best
student uh according
to all these in terms of all these
combinatoric tasks why because they are
about
combinatorics uh if we are dealing with
only with combinatorics within the
creative process of course computer will
be uh better than any person it's very
strange to to accept something to to
expect something else and uh you can
see here are the examples that were
invented by GPT chart so for the first
task is Whispers of imagination pages of
possibility bondless
chapter uh the way through literature
spaces the broad inside the volume so
you see that uh it's rather interesting
answer
and of course uh they will um get
maximum because maximum score because uh
it's about different objects and about
different characteristic so artificial
intelligence is very flexible in terms
of torrent
Diagnostics and uh uh on the right side
you can see the comic strip and uh
artificial intelligence also can do
something funny uh I won't say that it's
very very very funny but a little bit
yes so some hum there is some humor here
as it's a dialogue between the Sun and
the Earth who is the most important here
this definition is to shallow to shallow
and you see here the picture of Iceberg
and I would like to uh say that this
definition is just the top of this ice
bear is just the surf face of it and uh
this definition does not give us any
idea what is deeper what is deep in the
water what is deep in the structures of
um of
uh creative
process uh and uh I I'm sure that all
over the world and in all countries uh
the problem of using artificial
intelligence
is uh discussed very widely and very
often and they usually say that uh
artificial intelligence can replace
human beings only when we deal with
algorithmical processes but when we deal
with creativity no never uh none of GPT
chats and artificial intelligence
computers will replace human beings and
I agree with it in fact I agree with it
that really the cre creative process
creativity is about uh is
specifically uh
human ability human feature but we
should uh revise uh rethink uh
reconceptualize the definition because
if we
would
um take if we would uh give in this
definition only the aspect of
combinatorics so we will lose this
competition for sure and
uh just a moment and to go a little bit
deeper with you
today I would like
to suggest uh to your attention one
classification of problem situation that
I suppose is very fruitful for me it was
very fruitful
uh to understand how to catch this very
moment of really human creativity so
this classification was elaborated by
padak fena it's two Russian psychologist
but they in their turnone they used the
methodology of dri dner it's a German
psychologist German psychologist of uh
the end of 20th century
and uh he re he made great
researches in the field of computer
games and logical thinking and uh so
what do they suggest so the first type
of uh problem situ situation is closed
close so closed start and closed end
fixed set of premises with single
correct answers answer so it's uh the
majority of tasks that's um we meet at
school or at the University or
in any stage of um official system of
education for
example uh closed open closed beginning
and open end so multiple possible answer
and fixed set of
premises and um that is for me is about
uh to something like torren Diagnostics
and those pza tasks that I have just
shown you shown shown to you uh so uh it
was like
open-end tasks but the problem is that
they set of premise uh
pre premises sorry set of premises are
fixed and um the third type of problem
situation that we suggest to take into
account is open open open an Open start
or open beginning and open end multiple
possible answers and open set of
premises uh as for the As for the
examples of such um type of problem
situation
um I put here the example from uh old
Russian fairy tales so and some funny
picture um about it on the bottom on
below yes uh so when Russians are
um
wants anybody to do something impossible
to order their uh to to to to order
somebody to do something impossible
usually Russians are say something go
there I don't know where where to bring
that I don't know
what so
it's uh the typical typical uh
task which we can call open task open
open task Open start
problem uh but as for ordinary life as
for our everyday process I I would like
to say that um Open start
problems
um almost each uh ordinary situation can
become open stud problem
for example uh to write a book to make a
painting to compose a music uh to uh
make PhD research to make a presentation
about creativity and dialectical
thinking so uh all this um problem all
this situation could
be open open could be considered as open
open because
they have uh the space for
personal uh free goal
setting so in this task they are uh so
wide that I can put my
agency there if we are speaking about
ordinary life and task that we meet uh
every day so almost each situation can
uh can become open open problem all
these uh all these tasks could be could
become uh open open task uh task with
Open start why because they have enough
space enough space uh for me as a
person set my
free uh personally important goals about
free goal setting uh they have enough
space for me to put my agency
there um and that is why uh there are a
lot of number of Open start problems we
shouldn't invent them something invent
something special but um we should
Define them and
um um the challenge is how to catch them
and how to uh use this third type of
problem situation in the procedure of
measurement and in the procedure of uh
educational and in different educational
practices so uh if we will have time
after the presentation within the
discussion I can give you some more
example examples um from uh educational
practice because my older daughter study
design game design and they use I feel
that they use
open
open Pro Open start
problems uh it's quite interesting and
really provoke creative process uh in
students but now now I would like to
give you uh another series of examples
and it will be examples uh that have
that has very much in common with Open
start problems about this type of
problem situation I think everybody
remember covid times and everybody
remembers uh that everybody was isolated
yes and
um social media that time uh became
extremely popular and um in Russian part
of Facebook uh that times during maybe
three or four months uh was extremely
popular and wellknown fles MOB or such
Facebook activity when during uh about
art uh the name was
Art a little bit different in Russian
but it doesn't matter now so and
um during three months thousands of
people thousands of people did the same
task I would say that it was open
startat problem task uh so uh choose any
piece of art any piece of art rethink it
and uh make it out of the materials that
surround you so we remember covid times
we don't uh we cannot go anywhere so we
have only materials that surrounding me
and in our apartment on in our house and
uh so it
was thousands of people participated
in here and uh for me as a researcher
first of all it's it's about uh little C
so it's about creativity of ordinary
people uh
and
this boost of explosion of creativity of
people creativity uh was uh a response
as a response to this Open start
problem uh then I did not particip at
myself but I looked through thousands of
pictures and I noticed that we can
Define uh different strategies that
people use uh that people use when um
doing these tasks
um this
task uh and um it will be three strategy
three strategies I will share with you
my um s and my comments and then we will
uh we will see what it gives us so why
it is useful so uh here you can see
strategy one I would say it's uh
beautiful o aesthetic coping coping just
imitating yes you see that you should
choose any piece of art some original
and do something from materials that's
surrounding you yes uh uh and uh this
coping this beautiful athetic coping was
about 80% of total amount I would
say the first the first strategy and as
for General message that I hear from the
authors of these pictures so look at me
how beautiful I am yes so it's a a bit
it's very much about myself and me as a
as a person is yes uh the second
strategy is I would say playing with
materials 15 or maybe 20% of total
percent of total amount uh and for me
it's very much about originality so look
how original I am I would like to show
how original I am I would like to uh do
something that will be different from
the rest uh of
of
items
um and here strategy three uh strategy
three uh is about humor very much and
you remember that humor is important
thing for us when we are discussing
creativity it's about humor and it's a
little bit about bringing some author's
Vision here so uh and there was no a lot
of such uh Works uh not a lot of such
items maybe 5 10% of total amount I
didn't it was not my task to count them
but something something like this yes
and um um what uh usually when I do it
do this exercise and discuss this
exercise with my University student uh
we do it as a game so I told them that
imagine you are imagine that you are HR
and you have three vacancies open
vacancies in your company the company
leader secretary and the designer of
retail space so and instead of uh
ordinary CV you uh get such um strange
portfolio so you have candidate one
candidate two and candidate three and
how will what will you decide and us
students say that uh um this one will be
secretary uh because it's about accurate
accurate decision accurate um fulfill
the tasks and
imitating not very creative secretary
should not be very creative so this uh
is about uh designer because it's about
originality about the ability
to to attract audience attention
and uh this will be the company leader
because it's about uh author Vision it's
about something my some my
personal
New Vision R I showed to my students
this picture and to tell you the truth
uh to tell you the truth when I was
looking through those thousands of
pictures I wanted I tried to find
something like this so I tried to find
some um some item which could be really
uh called is
a creative real creative act and I would
say that this picture for me is out of
strategies and Beyond everything that I
showed to you before
why because the author of this uh of
this picture of this
item um would like to discuss with
us something that is important for her
personally not to show us uh how
beautiful she is or how sportive she is
or how flexible she is I don't know but
there was a text below this
picture uh it was about uh the story of
the author so it's a lady
uh a little bit more than 50 years old
and she survived from the car
accident and uh he had a lot of problems
with her back and she did a great job to
recover she couldn't move but she did a
great job to recover and now uh she
would like to show us um to show us
um that uh the beginning the start could
take place can take place at any moment
of life so the name of original photo is
the beginning uh or the start yes and um
um for me it's outstanding why I
understand that uh discussing art is
always very thin eyes uh because it
could be very subjective yes but uh when
I work with my student I always ask them
could you imagine that you look to this
picture below separately independently
without any uh original version without
um any information about this Facebook
activity without anything just an
exhibition and uh each time they say yes
we can imagine it so uh this lady was
successful to do
real independent author statement about
um problems about the topic that that
was uh that involved her
deeply uh
and what is important for us here and
it's very much about Ordinary People
creativity because she is not an artist
she is not a sportsman she's just a just
a lady who would like to uh speak with
us about important things deep
philosophical important
things and uh what why it's important
for us now uh in terms of uh new
definition of
creativity firstly uh she did it as a
response to open stud
problem uh secondly uh personal meaning
it's very very important if we speak
about human creativity the essence of
human creativity personal meaning uh is
a very important aspect so it's it is
not affordable for any artificial
intelligence uh then dialectical
structure you see here here a lot of uh
pairs of oppositions of course so black
and white uh dark and light Shadow and
light end and start so a lot of pairs
that she uh used that she operating uh
in order
to give us the idea of this of
her concept of uh life yes of life and
death and that life can uh starts at any
stage of in any age at any age at any
stage from zero
point uh and I would say that it's
unavoidable when we are uh when we talk
when we start talking about
really complex philosophical problems we
can't avoid dialectical
structures uh we don't have any chance
to not to use them uh of course we we
structured
this
uncertainty which is surrounding us with
extremums with um this extreme points
opposite opposite one another and
symbolic space uh symbols they also very
important and you see here the symbol of
EG the symbol of EG the beginning
beginning start uh and um
um show also
uses
um and here
uh this slide for me is very important
in terms of uh future research and
future educational
practices about creativity and
dialectical thinking because uh
um it's very important to understand
then that when a person dealing with
open St problem um the decision maker uh
firstly make an idea a model of this
problem and even if the task initially
formulated as open a person can simplify
it and start solving as if it was closed
one because uh and for us for
researchers and for educator it's very
important to my mind to catch this very
moment when it's happening in the mind
of
person so uh because uh as for the first
uh
strategy in spite of the fact that uh
the task was uh the same and it was open
really open has a really open structure
uh the first
strategy uh organized as if it was uh um
a task with right answer closed closed
task with right answer with one right
answer because when we
imitate uh we don't have any
opportunities we just have right
direction uh as for the second strategy
um it's also simplification for me and
uh so uh these people tried
to deal with this Open start problem as
if it was closed open so it was about
something about like in t torrent
Diagnostics so they also imitate uh the
original piece uh so it was also fixed
premises for them but they were playing
with materials and uh
did something origin original with
multiple answers and uh this very lady
she was successful to um make independ
to use uh the original piece of art only
as a reference and did her
own her own author statement her own
author Vision independent piece
independent
item
uh and we can we should understand that
nobody asked her about it nobody that
was who decided to do it in such
way uh so and it means for me as a
researcher that uh imagine that it was
three persons yes uh so it was three
different models in person's mind when
they start
solving this uh problem which has a
space which give us a space to set our
free uh goals there to put our agency
there and um um I would say that uh the
challenge is um uh to study for for me
for us as a researchers to study to use
this um type of problems and to uh study
how to uh introduce them
into first of all development practices
M to catch this very moment of model the
of modeling the
problem and here uh my favorite
quotation from nikol from Nicol Vera so
because
I belong as as Nick already said I
belong to Russian School of structural
dialectics and um everybody who belongs
to this school have a favorite quotation
from
so my my quotation is the follow the
following so um it consists of two parts
and it's about
uh the fact that thinking is universal
and unique at the same time it's about
the problem of structure and content of
thinking and uh uh in the first part of
this quotation this I need this
quotation now because it's uh
conceptualized on theoretical level
everything that I said through the the
of examples below so
um the first part of the quotation uh
the idea is about oppositions
and
Nikolai uh
explains why
oppositions are so good units to
analyze uh thinking because
oppositions uh belong to the structure
of thinking and oppositions can be found
on any meaning meaningful material and
that is why I told you in the very
beginning that it doesn't matter for
structur structural diale dialectics if
it is Leonardo or it's noname artist so
we can
uh both and leonarda and no noname
artist uh both of them uh
overcome contradiction they met
contradiction overcome it through
operating with
oppositions uh but on the other hand uh
speaking about the unique character not
Universal now but unique character of
mental act and of creative
effect uh a person
always choose the pair of opposition of
oppositions of
opposites uh which is more promising the
most promising from
the point of view of transforming
contradiction and each time we uh can
choose what to do with this problem mass
and what to do with this
um M situation of uncertainty uh which
pairs of oppositions will will be more
helpful for
us uh and I would like to sum up now I
would like to sum up uh you I I I hope
and I think that you still remember that
I uh started my today's speech with some
typical definition of uh
creativity yes and uh there is still uh
my point how to define creativity and
this uh alternative definition of
creativity uh is is published in that
rout handbook on dialectical thinking
together with this
scheme uh and um it based on of course
Nikolai
andena
ideas when they they wrote about it a
long time ago uh so creativity is a
capacity to actualize a complex of
cognitive and defective mechanisms
including including dialectical formal
logical and symbolic structures in order
to Define and transform problems that
contain a high degree of openness and
uncertainty at the start so uh here you
see
the
scheme um maybe in sometimes we will see
some version two or version three but at
the moment so uh it look like this so
it's reflect it
reflects um different types of uh
mental tools that we use formal logical
thinking symbolization dialectical
thinking uh which are actualized in
person's mind when we when he or she is
coming from point A to point to point B
uh from problem Mass from the mass of
uncertainty to the number of uh Creative
Solutions over
contradiction and operating with
oppositions and here I repeat the
picture of Iber again and uh I think
it's uh more or less relevant so we can
say that
uh I I I'm not going to say that the
typical and accepted definition of
creativity is not correct it's correct
but it's shallow it's not enough yes and
of course the synthesizing combining
Bridging the ideas is a part of uh
creative process but it's not in uh the
structure of creative of creative
processes and I would say that uh maybe
it looks it can look something like
this uh
here it's a big conversation I'm not
going to go deep into details here but I
would just would like to say that uh
here in Russia when we uh develop uh
different educational practices we try
to support these schemas this structure
uh try to
support all these uh mental tools uh and
dialectical thinking and symbolic spaces
uh here you can see some pictures from
uh our
kindergartens work uh and uh uh but not
only kindergartens uh I think you
remember igoris report some months ago
about positional me method and uh uh he
told everybody that uh the positions are
has three groups and also normative it's
about formal logic normative position
dialectical or transformative positions
it's about dialectical thinking
and symbolic symbolic group of positions
it's it's about
symbolization so the most Pro problem
point is School of course as
usually um but um we will think what to
do with this and to finalize it will be
the my final final slide so so it's a
quotation this time my favorite
quotation from
leuty um and um it's about it's not so
well known as the rest of voty ideas but
for me it was like a boost like a
push when I read it in the thought and
language his book thought and language
uh it was my starting point to invent
and to to come up with my psychological
psycho Diagnostics instrument heroes in
the city and training they are described
in the black book described in the rout
handbook on dialectical thinking so I
won't that is why I did
not did not
um say a lot about this points it was
more more important for me now now to
give you some Vision vision of the
problem but uh it was uh the starting
point yes and this quotation is about
the following things uh so let's um read
it together for the emerence of a real
productive Act of thinking leading
thought to a completely different point
Discovery it's necessary that X which is
the problem of our thinking and is a
part of structure a suddenly enters
structure B therefore the destruction of
the structure in which the problem point
x initially arises and the transfer of
this point is completely different
structure uh completely different
structure are the main conditions of
productive cre creative thinking so and
uh I put here this illustration again
because for me it's a straight
illustration to this quotation to this
idea because you can see here uh the old
broken metal uh construction yes it's
like a advertisement billboard billboard
just in the
street and you see uh that uh we can
analyze it as a structure a uh and we
see this broken element on the right
this broken element it will be our X
which is the problem of our thinking
it's really problem of our thinking
because uh it's broken ele element and
uh because of it we should throw this
metal construction away we cannot use it
but uh imagine that
somebody uh some noname artists maybe Me
Maybe maybe you uh is passing by this
metal construction and look to it and uh
suddenly something happens and this
person uh see this new structure B this
problem point X suddenly enters to the
structure B and this garbage turns to
the piece of urban art because he he uh
added just one thing just one thing just
this yellow
fighter who pretends to break this metal
construction and all this
picture uh now make sense make
additional sense so and um I that and I
would say that left go left as a key to
understanding the creat
creativity essence of human really human
creativity uh but we should invent uh
how to how to use use it where that key
holes that we can insert this key in
terms of educational practices and uh
measurement procedures
so some additional slides
these are books on the left side it's
rout International Handbook of
dialectical thinking that we just P
published uh on the on the left side on
the right side is yellow book that we
are waiting to be published in February
uh it's about our work with Eiger and
Doga and a lot of
other authors here uh it's described uh
um our work in with kindergartens and
how to develop dialectical thinking and
cre
environments creative abilities um in
kindergartens some articles in English
with
links contacts thank you for your
attention thank
you Anastasia thank you so much that was
wonderful and thank you particularly um
for for battling through bandwidth
problems uh translation problems and um
uh you just just keeping going that was
uh very very interesting I thought your
images were extremely
striking and um said a lot
about um the differences in terms of
originality of thought that goes into
these different um ideas of
creativity um I'm sure people would have
some
questions um and I'm happy for them to
put put them in the chat or to raise
hands uh and take people in turn um if
they do um I I would like to kind of
just offer one of my own to kick off
with if it's okay with
everybody and simply to ask you if you
could say a little bit more about the
role of emotion um in creativity because
you talked earlier on about the the
torment of creativity uh with those two
those two
pictures um to to what extent is is
emotion either negative or positive and
important part of the creative
process um you know it's no it's not
so trivial questions I would say h and
me and niik we we have an article about
uh complex emotions and dialectical
thinking in pres school age and we had a
research uh which showed us that
dialectical structures and complex
emotion what does mean complex emotions
it's about mixture of emotions like you
know like
um
oh light sadness or maybe
um I forgot all English words sorry but
a mixture when you when you mix uh
different emotions at once yes not
simple like just anger or just fear yes
but uh such uh complex and
um variable cocktails cocktail Shake of
the emotion that we feel uh that human
being can feel and we uh understood then
that we made this research that it's
more or less one age uh when a human
being uh started
to to catch dialectical structures
contradictions and uh this um emotional
intelligence also developing uh
developed um as for me as far as I
understand it um
emotional
component um is important and vski told
us about the uniy of effect and
intellect and effect
uh and
um um but the problem is that uh almost
everybody uh
can
feel uh the mixture of
emotion and to feel
contradictions but not everybody can
convert it into intellectual
work to produce something
new so I'm not sure that uh it's
possible to create
something really important without any
emotional
involvement no and the sign of a real
creative act is your strong emotions
towards it so I like I love my
presentation today story for
example I'm strongly involved
emotionally
but but uh I would say that
[Music]
um the opposite conversion is not always
possible if if
I uh if I try to answer if I answered
well I think you're entitled to feel
great about your presentation
anasia thank you um egole had a question
I noce your hands up
e yes thank you so
much uh about the first one when we
really need the creative solution what
are the signs yes what are
the how can we understand that we really
need uh so to my mind uh maybe I'm not
right but to my mind I suppose that uh
that is our subjective feeling of
discomfort and uncertainty when you
found
yourself uh in the middle of uh problem
mess you feel
discomfort and uh uh that is very moment
that you really need creative solution
it doesn't matter that you will find it
but you really
need and uh
in to tell you the truth I don't know
other predict predictors predictors yes
other um signs I can't I I can't say I
can't tell you anything besides it but
uh I feel that um this one about
uncertainty and about problem Mass about
that
you understand that if you don't manage
it somehow now something will happen
will be disaster so uh because but it
could be sub subjective uh for other
people it couldn't be not a disaster but
some something yes but for you
personally it will be it feels like this
and it's returning us to Nick's question
about emotions because emotional
component showed you that you really
need and uh the second your second
question about what should we do what to
do uh to to scaffold it I don't have any
exact answer because um um as you know
I'm just planning
the the experiment uh with our within
our master program uh with some students
uh about it uh but I'm trying to find
I'm trying to find this way of
scaffolding
it for example uh the last week I was at
uh some private school where our one of
our Master students Brook is working the
new school and uh she
conducting uh classes with clay with
clay with the first grade
seven years old yes seven years old
first first grade and uh she conducted
conducted as a game uh they do what they
want everything they want and for me
challenge is not to destroy their
ecological the Ecology of their
situation this
game not to destroy it but to input
there to put
into uh some work with which will be uh
some work with with thinking which could
be name the work with thinking and it's
really it's really not trivial it's a
difficult way uh because uh it's very
easy to catch from uh children
conversations something about
oppositions for example that time it was
sculpture and monuments yes and uh of
course I could
violan everything yes and to discuss
with children about about uh the
suppositions and so on but it wasn't my
task and now I'm inventing how to
scaffold it very very in gentle way to
to preserve this Ecology of the game but
not to destroy but to
um
to use uh those situations as problem
and so so we are starting now this um
this work but how to how to do it uh in
spontaneous process but I think we all
all our team and you and DOA we uh do a
lot in this uh skilles when we were
doing these skilles and there there are
a lot of indicators which can help uh
Educators to to scaffold it uh for examp
example to discuss the positions not to
so I would say in such way we don't
understand precisely what to do but
understand what not to do so what we
shouldn't
do yes so not not to me oppositions not
to be afraid of
contradictions uh to fix openly if you
if hear uh the oppositions and these
opposed um points to
show the whole structure so it's it's
it's it's understandable but the
challenge is especially with children
but with teenagers also I would say how
not to
destroy the motivation the C of the
situation and so on
uh
I think yes uh speaking about the role
of emotion I think yes you understand
it's uh what I meant thank you
