sea otters were almost completely
extinguished due to hunting and by the
19th and early 20th century they were
only found in one or two remote islands
in the
uans and one of those was going to be
used for the largest underground nuclear
test that the US ever conducted this is
the early 70s and a local biologist
tells them you guys are going to have a
problem you're going to do this
underground explosion you have thousands
of ERS here and pressure waves are going
to kill them I've got a solution we'll
take your otter and we'll bring them
back to the historical areas where they
had been found for thousands of years
and had been
extrait it's a term we call trophic
rewilding almost within a few years of
bringing those seaotter back the kelp
forest came back and fish nurse
nurseries for fish came back Eagles
started hunting differently you know so
the whole system changed that's to me
the inspiration of how animals can
transform ecosystems if we restore
them an essential component of any
healthy ecosystem is adequate nutrient
availability of vital minerals such as
nitrogen and phosphorus joining me today
to unpack how animals uniquely disperse
such nutrients across the biosphere as
well as the threats to their ongoing
ability to do so is conservation biology
Joe Roman Joe Roman is fellow and writer
in Residence at the Gund Institute for
the environment at the University of
Vermont where I happen to get my PhD his
research focusing on endangered species
conservation and Marine ecology has
appeared in science the proceedings of
the National Academy of Science Trends
in ecology and evolution and many other
journals his latest book published last
year is titled eat poop die how animals
make our world and that book is the
basis of our discussion today if you're
a fan of the earth science heavy
episodes on the great simplification you
will be sure to enjoy this one and it
does drive home the need for more Focus
from all of us on supporting
biodiversity on our one blue green
planet in the universe please welcome
Joe
Roman Joe Roman great to see you nice to
see you Nate thanks for having me on we
are going to talk talk about your new
book eat poop die uh what a a attention
grabbing title but first before we get
to that um you know you and I were at
the Gund Institute for ecological
economics uh back in the day um I never
knew how you got started in all this can
you tell us how you became interested in
wildlife biology research and then we'll
get to your your book and your current
work I grew up in New York uh the
suburbs and and and queens very few
animals around me there so the one place
that I could go to was the ocean and
particular salt marshes and for some of
your listeners they might be aware of
Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge it's the
area that you fly over when you when you
leave JFK or you land in JFK and um I
worked with a bunch of high school
students for my first job we were
cleaning the marshes and I was teaching
Marini College
with pretty much no training in Marine
ecology like teachers know I would get
up in the morning and you know write a
lecture from couple of textbooks but it
got me really excited about the
processes that work on the in the
marshes as well as the oceans and that's
sort of led to a career that's spanned
many of the oceans around the world
looking at how different animals can
impact marine ecosystems so you have
written quite a few books including one
on the history of whales and another on
the animals who have come and gone on
the United States endangered species
list not to mention you have a Blog on
managing invasive species by eating them
uh but I'd like to focus today's
conversation on your most recent book
eat poop die which in your words uh
covers the past decade or so of of your
research so what moment inspire you to
to write this book and what is this book
about and why is it
important sure um I was lucky enough to
be in a full bright in
2019 working on and we'll talk about
this I'm sure the Ecology of Wales and I
had spent a year looking at migrations
of whales what they
ate what the impact of their poop was
and where they died and as I was writing
the final lecture for the uh like the
the Capstone lecture for that Fellowship
realized that their three words can
encapsulate my entire career which was
eat poop die how animals make the world
so whales were my way in to this and
then after that I started looking at
everything from Wales of course being
the largest creatures ever to existed on
the planet down to midges which an
individual mij might not have a big
impact but they can number in the
trillions so this book follows the
stories of a few species of whales that
we still few species of animals we still
share the planet with that are moving
nutrients across thousands of miles in
the case of a m it might just be from a
lake out into the surrounding grass
lands and you think well how much could
that
be uh it turns out millions of kilos by
one estimate 2 million meatballs worth
of meat comes up out of this Lake every
de onto the grasslands around there from
midges just from midges you know tiny
little midges but they're feeding and
they're larvey in the Lakes they come up
once every couple of years to mate they
go out on to land and then they die in
enormous numbers the animals react to it
the plants react to it even the people
do the researcher that I spoke to about
this claudo Gratton he said he was
really excited when he got this number
so he brought it to the local Icelandic
farmers and they're like yeah we've
known this all the time because they're
farmers and they they're sheep farmers
and they had a term called M grass or
mid grass for the years that the mij has
emerged because for much of Icelandic
history it wasn't a global culture you
depended on that meat source so if you
had a bad year for the grasses that
means your sheep were going to have a
bad year and it was going to be a really
tough winter for you so everything from
the smallest animals to the largest ones
that are are traveling across the planet
are moving nutrients like nitrogen and
phosphorus to essential nutrients that
we need for our DNA for muscle for fats
for everything right we're we're using
this these nutrients all the time plants
depend on them and what we've been
looking at is how animals could start
moving these nutrients up around the
planet and what that might mean for
different ecosystems I have so many
questions I I don't even even know where
to begin my initial thought is you were
saying that animals are moving nutrients
around the planet uh and eat poop die
humans are animals but maybe our uh uh
moniker would be eat poop turn billions
of barrels of ancient sunlight into
microliters of dopamine then die uh
because we are also dispersing nutrients
and pollution across the planet as one
species but maybe we could talk about
that uh later but um do you have any
initial thoughts on that for sure I mean
so here here's I I you know I sort of
fell off my seat the first time I've
read this number right now on the planet
of all the mammals on the planet humans
are onethird of all bioma biomass cows
sheep pigs are two are 60% all wild
animals on the planet are only
4% of the biomass so it's not surprising
that we think humans are that animals
don't matter because we wiped most of
them out they're they still survive in
Pockets but it's this really that the
book looks at okay here's where these
animals survive and this I was talking
about mammals of course they are insects
and birds we have an impact on those not
as severe we can we can look at the the
individual animals species that have
survived and then get an idea of what it
might have been in the past and how we
can restore those Pathways in the future
everything else aside CO2 and uh
biodivers setting those things aside are
the nutrient flows and the nutrient
cycling around the world in Earth's
ecosystems a fraction of what they were
150 years ago when there was a lot more
megap and mammals or versus 10,000 years
ago when there were considerably more
mammals uh and and you know floating
around and moving around and dispersing
nutrients that's right so Chris dowy and
I uh worked on a paper he's based at um
in Arizona and he's a modeler and he's
been looking at these questions he
started out looking at Giant sloths and
thinking about how they might have moved
nutrients around then he looked at pene
animals in general and we worked
together to look at what it would have
been like historically for whales for
seabirds for large herbivores and think
about North America we think of Bison as
being pretty large herbivores they were
pretty small compared to the mastadons
the mammoths the giant sloths the
enormous armadillos that were around the
Americas at that time beavers the sides
of of
Volkswagens I've heard it described and
not that long ago we we were obsessed
with Dinosaurs but 20,000 years ago the
American uh mid midpoint was like a
serengetti with five species of saber of
tigers and and lions big cats I it was
amazing exactly it's it's almost hard to
imagine but this is sort of a starting
point for SCI scientists like Chris and
I is thinking about okay we know what
it's like now what could have been in
the past we think that those numbers
that movement of nutrient has been dep
declined by at least
90% by taking out the herbivores we also
had an impact on salmon so another way
that nutrients can move are through
especially animous fish that are
migrating from the oceans into the
mountains and a lot of times when we're
looking at these we're thinking of how
these nutrients can either be dispersed
or move uphill because of course things
like nitrogen and phosphorus as we well
know tends to flow downhill that's no
surprise it's how do you get it back how
do you get it into the mountains so it's
things like salmon it's these herbivores
it's the carnivores the whales are
moving it up and up in the ocean column
and seabirds as well are taking these
nutrients from the oceans onto land and
in fact really the first time anyone
thought about this at least in Western
science was guano Alexander humal was
one of the first people to bring guano
back from South America sending it to
France finding the highest amount of
phosphorus that had ever been found in
any substance at that point humbal
didn't believe it came from living birds
even though the locals knew the local
Inca told him that they were from that
this was from living birds he thought it
was kind of like coal that it had been
these were historical layers but it
turns out this was um a a renewable re
resource until of course we exploited it
too much and then it be then the numbers
started to decline but that's just one
great example of how numerous animals
can make a big
difference not only on local ecosystems
but also in local
agriculture why does this matter I mean
I intuitively know why it matters but if
if is this a shifting Baseline sort of
situation that look at all the nutrient
flows today in 2024 things must be
working the Earth is this amazing
biological pump and things are moving
all around and yet you just said we're
at
10% of this nutrient cycling moving
around versus the past due to the
decimation of the meapa and and
biodiversity but to the lay person why
is this important sure all right let's
look at phosphorus all right so it's
non-renewable resource almost all the
phosphorus we're getting right now is
mind a lot of it around the Sahara so
we're taking this out of the ground
because it's it's so rare now now
animals used to move the this phosphorus
around think about a time and and Chris
has done the math on this they there you
can still see legacies of those large
pine fauna where they had Pathways why
does size matter in this case because
they have a long gut so when they eat
they move long distances and then they
defecate or they pee and they release
those nutrients far away if they're just
a small animal those nutrients don't
tend to travel far so size AB absolutely
matters for these they're also
moving distances either to feed or to
breed and then when they die there's
this enormous almost like a firework on
the landscape of um nutrients that are
going into that area we've replaced that
that natural system by intensive
Agriculture and you know that's why
we're always struggling and and we could
talk about nitrogen too the problem with
both of these is there's areas now that
are really depleted and areas where we
have too much right that's run off from
pollution so we're battling both of
those animals can help restore that
pathway so we would we have a higher
standard deviation of of those uh
nutrients today
because like many other things in our
economy instead of living off the
interest which uh historically would
have been the an
residue from uh healthy Global
ecosystems full of meapa we're now um
mining the principle uh the the where
the concentrated phosphorus stocks are
and and using hbos from natural gas uh
to make nitrogen fertilizer Etc so it's
another principle versus interest story
I I I agree and I think the Inca story
about the guano and South America is a
great one so the birds there the source
of that phosphorus and nitrogen were
protected it was illegal hunt you
couldn't bring anything onto those
islands and for them as far as we know
it was sustainable for for centuries
that they were taking they were never
deep mining it they were taking it off
the surface and bringing it to local
areas it's when it was globalized and
then miners from around the world
started were brought in in order to
extract that that then even though this
could have been several hundred feet
layers of guano
a few decades later and it was almost
completely gone one of the researchers
on guano claims perhaps controversially
that the anthropos scine started with
guano extraction that was the first sort
of global nutrient that had a clear
marker on Earth it it really did
revolutionize agriculture around the
world they claim that even places like
Australia and New Zealand before
phosphorus was brought in there wasn't
much farming going on there once they
brought that external source of
phosphorus then then they could raise
the cows and sheep that we know about
from that area when was that the the
guano Revolution 1800s yeah the 1800s it
would have been first discovered in the
early 1800s and then then mining would
have taken over by by let's say the 20th
century I hate to ask this question but
since we're on the topic do you have any
uh scientific data on the modern bat
population on Earth relative to times
past
oh that's a great question and by the
way I mean it's a natural link because
of course the the caves were also mined
for the guat for bad guano um so in
places like Cuba when I visited you
could still see the tracks from tires in
some of those caves with that they had
gone in there in order to extract guano
um bat populations I don't have a
specific number but of course the bat
populations have
declined severely in Europe and now with
the spread of white n um white nose
syndrome numbers are also declining here
these cave and this affects cave
dwelling bats in particular so there's
there's no question in my mind that this
would have some impact on the movement
of nutrients but we don't to my
knowledge no one's been measuring that
in bats at this point well the other
thing is is that the decline of insects
uh bats are largely insectivores I mean
most of the species um so that's got to
have a an impact on their populations as
well everything is so freaking connected
Joe I mean this is this is what um I've
intuitively felt for a long time and I
increasingly get angry and frustrated um
that people use uh technology politics
and money lens to look at the world when
we really should be thinking about the
interconnection the ecological basis of
how things really work um to think about
our time uh alive while we eat poop
before we die and what are the broader
implications of a more sustainable uh
Human Society I mean right now we're
using 30 to 40% of the net primary
productivity uh from the sunlight and
the soil and the rain on the entire
planet directing it towards humans and
we're using millions of years of fossil
sunlight uh stored as coal oil Natural
Gas and other minerals and and rare
Earths and things like that so
it's I love talking to Wildlife
biologists and ecologists because they
this is their work uh this is your work
and and uh it seems important to me
thank you and certainly I think you know
one way to think about this is so whales
dive deep to feed some of them more than
a mile down beneath the surface they're
feeding in the deep sea they come to the
surface where they rest th Digest and
they poop and they could be they
releasing phosphate and ammonium that
could have been locked in the deep sea
for hundreds of years that same nutrient
picked up by
phytoplankton consumed by by Herring and
then consumed by seabirds which can
bring that those nutrients onto land
salmon can also move those nutrients
into Mountain systems where it can be
moved by bears and other animals so you
can imagine that these nutrient Pathways
can go everywhere from the deep sea to
the mountains humans as you as we know
have interrupted
that it doesn't have to be that way
right you know I mean there there
there's ways we can be part of the
ecosystem instead of taking phosphorous
and taking nitrogen out those nutrients
can go back into the soil when we die we
don't have to bury our carcasses you
know they can be they can decompose as
all the other animals do and and one way
of restoring that pathway for humans is
that your plan that is my plan the
family still hasn't necessarily bought
on I I want to call the area beyond our
house in Vermont human Meadows and just
put B you know put bodies out there
we're not that far away we're GNA we
would have to bury it but but at this
point I really would plan on that and
and I also do PE cycle so I also try and
get the the pee back either to one of
the local um nonprofits that takes it
and then distributes it to Farms or of
course you can put it in your own garden
like again I get a little push back from
the family I pee unless I'm traveling I
I pee outside in the yard all the time
um and you know it wasn't that long ago
that the entire country of China uh used
night soil uh and they had you know Depo
repositories for that to put on their
Gardens Etc um so oh my gosh Joe so many
questions so in your work you give a
powerful example of how animals can turn
Barren land into a living thriving
environment with uh uh your work on cery
island which I believe is uh um by
Iceland can you tell us a little bit
about that island and and uh how you've
been involved with working uh on that
project sure so I mentioned that I
worked in Iceland and I would drive
along the Southeast coast and there's
this small island called cery which
emerged in 1963 so it's a very young
Island in fact several of the
researchers that I work on the island
are older than the island itself and
even cooler some of the birds that are
nesting there are also as old as the
island they have been nesting there you
mean the island was discovered 50 years
it
erupted exactly in 1963 volcanic
eruption about 400 feet beneath the
surface of the ocean emerged there was a
local fishing boat there they smelt some
sulf they got caught in a Whirlpool they
weren't sure what it was but then they
noticed by the end of the day there was
an enormous eruption column and over the
next year it was growing I think it was
something like 25 square yards per
second so the a Great Pyramid of Giza
every day was built into this island it
stopped being volcanically active about
five or six years later by that time um
it was just black lava right there was
no life there they hadn't even seen a
vascular plant yet the first one I think
was recorded a couple of years after
after the eruption the only plants that
could survive there in the beginning
were ones that floated in and why would
why could the only ones that float
because if you float you can carry your
nutrients with you so they can bring the
nitrogen with their seed and and then
settle and in those early days again
these researchers who were younger who
were older than the island knew every
plant on the island they had marked all
the plants there right so it was a lance
a Barren landscape for a long time for
maybe six or seven years occasionally a
bird would land a light fly off the
first breeding pair of gillams was in
the early 1970s and then hering gulls
came in blackback gulls Kitty wakes and
within a couple of years they were
feeding in the ocean they were breeding
on this Baron lava but they were
releasing nitrogen and phosphorus in
their poop and a typical seabird about 3
ounces of poop per day so they were
releasing about 60 pounds of nitrogen
per acre which is comparable to what a
farmer might put on a permanent
grassland right significant
amount within a couple of years you had
a meadow in this system the birds were
bringing in the nutrients they were also
bringing in in the seeds that were on
their on their feathers if they went on
to land and I went there in
2021 and if you still most of the island
is just craggy lava hard to walk on you
get to the breeding bird area and it's
like walking in a trampoline it's Lush
um as one researcher joked you could
have cows dairy cows on that island the
good news is what's what Iceland did
well is they decided to protect that
people can only go on their Island for
two weeks per year about 12 researchers
I was fortunate enough in 2021 to be one
of those um it is now a UNESCO world
heritage site because it's really the
only place on Earth where we can look at
an ecosystem how it builds from scratch
most of the seeds come from the birds
the birds bring a lot of the nutrients
and seals are also popping on the island
so you could see from space if you just
type in ceri there's one strip of green
to the north and that's where the seals
are pupping and then there's this big
area to the south of cery where um where
the seabirds Nest you know that this is
a cool thing for ecologists but even as
it turns out the US government was
interested in this island in the 1960s
and early 70s because they were doing
nuclear testing and they were interested
about in how life could recolonize after
a blast so they actually
funded the the Icelandic researchers for
about five or six years and some of the
money there's still a Hut there that
probably came from US government money
because they wanted to know what would
happen so what are the implications of
of your research and and cery Island for
other restoration initiatives for
example reintroducing uh Wildlife to
previously deforested areas or retired
mining sites I mean theoretically I've
read in the ocean that if we don't fish
in the ocean that other than the real
big fish the other fish would regenerate
within seven years um how fast does
nature regenerate and and what does this
imply with some of the regenerative
agriculture regenerative economic uh
ideas floating around today sure uh so
here here's the great thing about
animals is if you introduce a few that
population if you bring it to the right
area is going to grow you don't really
have to do much except release let's say
a few dozen animals let's say on an
island system or if it's bison in North
America or if it's going to be cougars
somewhere else um so there's not a lot
of input after that initial introduction
what can it do well we've seen evidence
of that um in one experiment people took
elephants from the zoo in Denmark and
released them into a nature reserve and
and in a very short time in in a matter
of months in fact um they were taking
out a lot of the Woody
vegetation and they were disturbing that
habitat in a way that was likely that's
how it would have been historically we
can talk about whether you want to move
elephants around that's a whole another
question for most conservation
biologists were comfortable with if
animals have disappeared within the past
few hundred years when we start thinking
about going back to the to scene then
then we're meddling in another way
nonetheless when we see these animals
restored whether it's these are
elephants which is a really long time
ago before since they were in Europe or
bison which is a better example right
bison only extinguished in the 19th
century there used to be more than 30
million they were down to fewer than a
thousand from tens of millions I don't
think anyone pushes the number down
there you can imagine what that did how
that changed the systems there were lots
of plants and animals that depended on
that migration when you took that out
the disturbance stopped we might we tend
to think of disturbance as maybe bad but
for ecosystems many of them are Dynamic
especially if you want biodiversity you
don't want too much nutrients you don't
want too little you know there's like a
Goldilocks one of the terms is
intermediate disturbance hypothesis
which means you want occasional
disturbance so that you would't just
have a few dominant species but not too
much disturbance where many of the
species can't survive at all that work
has been studied in largely in
rainforests as well as in intertial
areas animals kind of do that right
without the animals you you're just
going to get a more static system what
what about the
um we're never going to get to all my
questions Joe because I keep thinking of
new ones um what about the
the the standard deviation of number of
species like to have a lot of animals
like you mentioned elephants before or
bison so if you have big megap they can
transport a lot of nutrients but what
about um like a lot of people now are so
proud that Spain is regrowing its
forests uh for biomass production and
other things but they're all monoculture
it's all like one species and so what is
the importance of diversity of species
vertically and horizont Al within an
ecosystem to to do this nutrient cycling
and the health of the the ecosystem
that's right I mean so we often you
think of a forest and you think of trees
right which makes sense but it's also
the animals and the fungi that are in
that system that are just as important
they're essential to the to the
diversity and life in these areas so yes
a monoculture may serve your purpose if
I don't know you're trying to store
carbon or you want to grow wood to cut
down but if you're looking for diversity
obviously then it's the opposite of that
and the only way you're going to have a
dynamic system is by restoring several
different trees as well as bringing
those animals in and we see the
differences areas like the the Atlantic
forest and the Amazon um rainforest the
difference when you have animals and and
you don't it's a much different system
of trees because a lot of the trees and
a lot of the plants depend on animals
for pollination to eat those seeds and
to move them long distances as well as
to provide nutrients so it's a
restoration of the entire
system that we that we often focus on
this is going to benefit people as well
you know it's going to benefit the the
diversity of a system but also human
uses human well-being it won't have the
intense production that we have in
monoculture
but it provides other benefits like
resilience which is re and adaptation to
climate change and we can talk about
that when we have certain birds in a
particular area island systems are more
protected from climate change uh so in a
lot of ways these animals are going to
be our allies we just need them to be a
little bit more abundant again coming
back to the idea that they're just this
tiny sliver of the pie right now that's
why they don't that's why we don't
really think of animals as being that
important because they're so rare Here's
a thought um I'm sure you've seen the uh
the surveys on the decline in in animal
populations uh since 1970 it's it's
dropped about
70% and uh that's from a 2018 I would
imagine it's it's even more but the
standard deviation of that is wildly
different around the planet in the
United States and North America it's
only like 30% in Latin America and South
America it's over 90% in Asia is like 70
or 80% I just wonder everything else
being equal as we uh Crest the the peak
and start the Downs slope of the carbon
pulse where we're drawing down ancient
carbon and adding it to our economies
are those continents that
have a reasonable amount of animals
biodiversity insects birds everything
are generally going to be better off
because those are the organisms that are
in your book I think you mentioned um
that plants are the lungs of the Earth
but the the mammals birds insects are
acting as the heart and arteries of the
planet so do you have any thoughts on on
that speculation yeah I mean so I think
of it in almost like a cardiac arrest
when we took all those animals out of
the system right so we have them
historically moving nutrients vast
distances and and I study whales they
travel hundreds of miles every year from
high latitudes where they eat to low
latitudes where they breed and they're
moving and they're the largest animals
ever to have existed on the planet
they're moving nutrients either through
their pee um but also through their
carcasses and their
placentas I mentioned whales because
it's actually one of the few trends that
goes in the other direction 1970s many
whale species were on the brink of
Extinction
through negotiations
fights commercial whaling was almost
completely stopped by the
1980s and a lot of species like
humpbacks are back maybe off off
Australia to numbers that they were
before we started hunting them um
northern elephant seals another example
down to 20 individuals in the late 19th
century now
180,000 probably as abundant as they
ever were greine mammals are a case
where really we made the decision we're
not going to kill them anymore and in
fact we're going to try not to even kill
them indirectly that's been a bit more
of a challenge well I mean then there's
different layers of indirectly because
uh ocean food webs based on co2
absorption that's a that's a long-term
risk absolutely and and that's one that
we
well just the warming of the oceans I've
seen in during my career one of the
papers I published in 16 about nutrient
cycling by right whales in the Bay of
Fundy they had been there throughout my
career throughout people ahead of me
their career they're all of a sudden
around 2017 they disappeared they're not
they don't come back there anymore so
this whole system just
stopped probably almost certainly
because there was no food for them there
anymore they copap pods when the food
disappeared they went to a new area that
put them at risk because the protections
were in place there that wasn't the the
risks the new risk weren't necessarily
the people the local people's fault
because they never had whales there but
those systems are fragile in in a time
of climate change and I think that holds
true for almost any of these animals
we're
discussing um but they can be reversed
and you mentioned shifting baselines we
have a paper called lifting baselines
there are lots of species out there that
I have students who can imagine that you
used to be that Massachusetts there
weren't any seals and there weren't any
um whales there only 30 or 40 years ago
and now they're really abundant so
there're you know as baselines can shift
in in a positive way that can cause
conflict I mentioned the seals in
Massachusetts a lot of fishers are not
happy to have the gray seals back and
the and the seals have attracted great
white sharks so not every Surfer is
happy that sharks are back in the waters
either um but these things can change
over time and we can I I've can give you
success over success and I do not deny
that the overall trend is down that's
the bad news right you know there's
that's that's
undeniable but there are several trends
that are that are bucking up and if we
decide that this is really important to
us as a soet society we can turn a lot
of this around we're not going to win
everything but we can win a lot more for
all the other plant animals and plants
on Earth
I agree uh which is one of the reasons I
invited you on the show Joe um so you
just mentioned a specific area of your
research that you call a whale pump um
so that's pulling up nutrients from the
bottom and disseminating them on the top
uh and then there are other organisms
that get involved what was the
inspiration for your research on that
and how do you even begin to collect
feal samples of of of whales in the vast
ocean and how do you analyze the data
yeah uh great question so I mentioned
the B of fund I worked for the New
England Aquarium in the mid 1990s we
were going out doing photo ID of right
of North Atlantic right whales so taking
pictures of them knowing which
individuals where do they move where do
they
feed the first day I was on the water
though a male um right whale came to the
surface mud on his Bonnet because he had
been diving all the way to the bottom of
the Bay of funy to feed and just be he
breathes and then just before he Dove he
released this enormous fecal plume and
biologists get really excited often once
they see a bunch of poop in the water
because there's so much you can learn
from it at that point 1990s we were
basically just wanted to know what it
was
eating but even then I had a feeling
well okay there're only 350 right whales
on the planet what would it have been
like when there were 10,000 cuz you
stare at a lot of empty ocean when
you're on the water and the modern ocean
so that started my thinking about well
was there any ecological importance to
this I learned about this process called
the biological pump which you mentioned
and that's basically carbon
photosynthesis only occurs at the surf
surface of the ocean because that's
where the light is and when the
phytoplankton and the zooplankton that
eat it die they bring that carbon down
to the the bottom of the ocean to the
deep sea where it can be sequestered for
hundreds of years depending on where it
occurs when I learned about that system
I realized well actually whales are
doing the entirely opposite thing
they're diving and they're coming to the
surface and they're releasing carbon and
nitrogen and phosphorus at the surface I
I put together a model that with a
colleague of mine who Jim McCarthy
biological oceanographer often hard to
find oceanographers willing to entertain
the idea that whales really matter they
most of them look at phytoplankton they
look at the microscopic organisms as one
of my colleagues said you know Joe is
that ecologically important or is it a
fart in a hurricane so that's what we
did we looked at how much nutrient
exactly getting in to this system that I
mentioned as much nitrogen is brought up
to the surface by Wales as all the
rivers combined in the Gulf of Maine so
a large amount and almost similar to
what us what humans do obviously we've
changed the whole the Cycles here but it
it it has it has a large role now and
then you look historically when there
were five times more whales then they
would have been one of the dominant
influences in these areas so I don't
know if you watched the podcast that I
did with sir David King who was the
chief science adviser to the UK
government and one of the things he
mentioned was we have to go towards
global cooling and one of the strategies
that he's working on is to increase the
global whale population to do this uh
pump that you described as a way of um
pulling in carbon from the
atmosphere uh yes so I I did see that I
know we spoke about a friend and
colleague of M Victor smich who's been
at the front of this iron um artificial
iron fertilization as a way to mitigate
that's controversial in its own way
whales also move we've been talking
about nitrogen but in the southern
hemisphere it's iron that's limiting and
they can they also their poop is very
rich in iron so they can have an impact
and there have been several studies
suggesting that whale restoration
could increase the amount of carbon
that's
absorbed I have to say the data in my
view are not really there and I've seen
some numbers that I think are
Fantastical like each whale is worth $2
million in carbon sequestration schemes
and that all whales are worth a trillion
dollars a year the evidence is not there
I'm I'm sorry to say that I wish it was
but I you know I've had long many hours
of research we have papers out about
this I want whales to be our climate
Champions but they're they're going to
play a very small role and by the way I
want all the whales back and well let me
ask you a question there um you know
there are es and flows and voltera model
and Predator prey and overshoot and rnk
species and such is it possible that uh
I mean it was it's a future I would like
to imagine but is it possible that if
Wales come back that whal
it's because of us helping them or
whatever could go into an overshoot
situation or is that just Fantasy Land
yeah I mean whale animal populations
fluctuate right so I mean naturally
there wouldn't have been any time where
there would be a stable whale population
right right things change uh for
whatever reason maybe their prey or
there's a a natural climate
variation and now in a time of course
climate change that's human caused
almost certainly
sadly we're probably going to hit that
with whales not because the ocean the
current ocean doesn't have the carrying
capacity but because the ocean's
changing so quickly that it's hard to
imagine that a warming ocean is going to
be better for whales very maybe a few
but for the most part it's going to be a
tougher future for them but again I I
feel like we the overshoot I understand
in the context of humans um but for
Animals think about that the classic
lynx and Snowshoe hair studies that were
done where links popula Snowshoe hair
populations increase links increase
Snowshoe hair populations go down that
isn't that's just a natural state of
things and we see that in many times
that that these ecosystems are have
dynamic equilibrium so so yes you know
that was a long answer to say are some
whale populations going to overshoot
absolutely and in fact we've probably
seen that with both whales and humpback
whales in the North
Pacific the the problem is that we're
having climate change too so it's
possible their prey populations are
depressed because of rising temperatures
in fact in the case of humx it's very
likely that that it wasn't that there
were too many but that their prey
populations declined are whales uh I
don't know if you watched the podcast I
did with Daniel poy who had the Gill
oxygen uh limit Theory saying that fish
are swimming poleward uh both in the
Northern and the southern hemisphere
because warmer water holds less oxygen
so they have to uh swim further
northward is that also happening with
whales either because of that mechanism
well they don't have gills but um right
so the for whales are going to get one
work around and that they breathe the
air right so they're not limited by the
they they're prey might be so they might
be moving because their pre us to move
northward but directly they're still
enough oxygen in the air you know for
for whales to survive however as I
mentioned when prey population shift
whales have to eat two or 3% of their
body weight every day in the summertime
in order to fast during the winter and
have their offspring so they are very
dependent wait a minute when whales go
south in the winter they fast yes so
here's really what's a cool thing and
this opens up a lot of things so whales
can fast for about five or six months
and that might be hard enough for a male
but think about a female that is having
a calf lactating an enormous amount of
milk and swimming back and forth that
isn't true of all whales but I would say
the the majority of bailan whales fast a
few of them go to places where there's
actually some food so they get to work
around and and The evolutionary
adaptation of that is because the
advantage of surviving offspring bring
in the warmer Waters without Predators
outweighs the the nutrient benefit of
continuing to eat that's one hypothesis
as Predator avoidance killow whales in
particular Killa whales do feed on
calves on vulnerable calves so a lot of
the whales that right whales I mentioned
humpbacks I mentioned they go to shallow
Sandy Waters in order to have their
offspring that's possible that the sand
can help muff because they're
communicating with their with their
calves they don't want it to be a dinner
Bell for the for the killer whales so
they stay in Shallow Waters the killer
whales can't come and attack them from
below so it protects them from that and
it also might muffle some of the sound I
have to say there are a bunch of it's
science so there are a bunch of
hypothesis here about why that is that's
probably the dominant one one of my
colleagues thinks colleagues thinks it's
also to Slough skin whales are
constantly they they can algae can build
up on the skin and that can be like
fowling think about a boat when it's
fouling you know you can't you can't
operate a boat efficiently so they may
go to the Southern Hemisphere or rather
the lower latitudes where there's very
little growth think of how clear the
Waters of the Caribbean or Hawaii are in
order to get rid of those datom or it
could be both and and there are a couple
of other hypotheses as well one of them
is metabolism possibly because of the
warmer Waters as you had mentioned it's
metabolically advantageous for the
calves the M the moms probably don't
care but the calvs it might be better
since they they're that you know they're
at that point they're still vulnerable
and don't have the blubber layer that
the adults do so um we've talked about
whales uh and
midges uh are are there any other
species that are particularly powerful
nutrient spreaders um especially ones
you've personally worked on in the field
yeah so two answers to that one is
probably the classic example is salmon
is a nous fish and think of the Pacific
Northwest so
so um they spawn in river systems spend
most of their lives in the ocean feeding
come back as adults and they're somalis
they just breed once and they die right
so they you can think of the whole
carcass is staying up in that area as
well as they're releasing
some urine and feces into the water
column as well if you've ever seen
pictures or you've been to a place like
Alaska that's attracting Eagles it
attracts Bears it attracts all kinds of
carnivorous animals that are feeding on
that and bringing some of those
nutrients into the forests this is a
classic example again it's a bit science
so I have a colleague who I interviewed
for the book who questions how much of
the nutrients and how important it is
but it is a classic example of moving
between one ecosystem the oceans onto a
terrestrial or a freshwater system great
one and as a wildlife bi ologist I have
to say I went um to Alaska and it made
me think about when North when Europeans
first arrived in in New England or
something you really could walk on the
backs of the salmon crossing a stream I
didn't intend to do that but they were
so thick that you couldn't really avoid
them in that area so that that was
phenomenal so it's no surprise that a
lot of Organisms depend on these on
these animals that's a nutrient
we haven't really spoken about eating
all that much we were talking about
rewilding and I think probably the best
case of both of these is the
seaotter so sea otters were almost
completely extinguished due to hunting
and by the 19th and early 20th century
they were only found in one or two
remote islands in the
uans and one of those was going to be
used for the largest underground nuclear
test that the US ever conducted they had
done lots of tests in you know in in
Nevada but they were getting too big for
Nevada they the locals were not happy
that they kept getting bigger and bigger
bombs so they took this remote area this
is really the start of Green Piece by
the way this is the early 70s there's
protests against this and a local
biologist tells this is the atomic
energy commission I mentioned earlier
tells them you guys are going to have a
problem you're going to do this
underground explosion you have thousands
of otter here and their pressure waves
are going to kill them you're going to
have these bloody otter it's going to be
look terrible PR for you I've got a
solution we'll take your otters and
we'll bring them back to the historical
areas where they had been found for
thousands of years and had been
extrait they wanted to that this was
before Alaska had uh oil Alaska's a poor
State they didn't have the money to do
this they wanted to do it the atomic
energy Commission as you can
imagine is a that this kind of money
that they were talking about hundreds of
thousand wasn't even the smallest
rounding error to them you know he asked
for radios and they're like yeah we can
give you radios but we can also give you
planes you know I mean like you don't
think think a little bit bigger if
you've ever seen sea otter anywhere from
Washington State to to
Alaska they're almost certainly the
descendants of those animals that were
evacuated before that bomb
released and there are 50,000 so more
maybe half of all the seers in the world
are descendant of the those that move
there why this is relevant to the book
is it's a term we call trophic
rewilding the impact of their feeding is
in areas absent where sea otters are
absent there's lots of sea otters
herbivores they feed on kelp and they
create urchin baronss when there are't
any Predators around almost within a few
years of bringing those seaotter back
they love searin are like their top
favorite thing to eat the kelp forest
came back and fish nurse nurseries for
fish came back Eagles started hunting
differently you know so the whole system
changed and I think for me that's those
sea otters which is this is largely a
food thing but that's part of the you
know it's largely the impact of direct
eating um that's to me the inspiration
of how animals can transform ecosystems
if we restore them to those areas let's
be honest you know as economists there's
some C there are trade-offs in this
decision because they love benthic
invertebrates so not only do they eat
urchins but they also really like clams
and crabs and the Fishers who were there
had never seen a seot since they had
been gone for 100 years they were used
to a lot of SP invertebrates in those
areas those numbers went down so you
know we have to be mindful that there
there are trade-offs when you restore
these animals um many of us are all for
bringing them back but there's there
there probably needs to be a balance or
at least a good discussion my dream is
that we use the climate crisis in the
same way that we we think about animals
as being how can this crisis that we've
created help encourage us to restore
biodiversity around the planet
so so how is a warming climate and a
built-in already going to be further
warmer in coming decades how is that
going to disrupt animals ability to
spread these nutrients generally or
specifically yeah um probably a lot I
don't think you know it's it's too
early except for a few examples which
I've already mentioned North Atlantic
right whs for example studies looking at
Southern um elephant rather sorry whales
in the southern hemisphere
uh that their numbers are likely to
decline along with their prey as those
numbers go down it's going to have an
impact on all the other species that are
dependent on them and I'll give you I'll
stick with whales for one second before
we move on in the n in the 1990s people
were just starting to discover
hydrothermal vents and all these deep
sea ecosystems that no one had known had
been there before they also discovered
wall communities communities are
entirely dependent on dead whales in the
deep sea more than 100 species found
that we know of now and this probably
just scratching the surface they're
entirely dependent on these dead whales
and also there's some species that are
only getting out of the bone so you know
one of the first reactions to this paper
was well whales are so few that how
could they have an impact compared to
diatoms that's true in pure carbon
numbers but when you have this big
island of repulses and in this this area
one of my colleagues estimates about a
thousand years of carbon falling out
from datom or Marine snow comes in one
pulse and you have these species that
don't even don't even eat they're just
surviving animals that are surviving on
the sulfides and other compounds that
are coming out of out of the whalebone
when we took those habitats out through
commercial whaling probably some of the
first extinctions in the ocean occurred
in these deep sea commun ities that we
didn't even know existed at that point
right we're my point is we're just
learning what the impact is of
biodiversity loss as well as climate
change how long have we been looking at
new climate change you know a couple of
decades now so uh it's it's hard to tell
there are some concerning warning signs
it's hard to imagine most species are
going to improve or that this nutrient
transport is going to get better um but
it could help here we can talk about why
it matters it could help mitigate or at
least help us adapt to some of those
changes um from climate what about
Plastics and chemical pollutants um
they're increasingly in the news Posas
forever chemicals endocrine disrupting
chemicals is this part of the story also
affecting the uh the process of nutrient
cycling around the earth absolutely um
you know pretty much every animal we
look at has some this evidence of
microplastics I'm going to stick to
whales because it's what I know
best uh sad story so a new species was
described in 2018 the Gulf of Mexico
whale of the Rice's whale it's down to
about 50 individuals only found on the
Gulf of Mexico probably became
critically endangered as a result of oil
exploration in that area because it it
was mostly found off of Mississippi
where it's no longer found if you know
anything about that part there's lots of
oil rigs and
exploration this species really hit the
spotlight after deep water Horizon when
20% of the whales died and we think 20%
of them had reproductive failure as a
result of this one incident in that area
the plastic connection is the type
individual for the species the one that
we realized that this is a a new species
washed up in the
Everglades in I think it was
2019 and uh when they did the ne cropsy
they found a piece of plastic and it's
got about the size of a credit card and
that's what likely killed it think about
what we're facing when an if something
that small can kill an animal that large
you can imagine if it's sharp how it
could happen um but this is the warning
sign that we have to
and this is one I feel like Plastics out
of the ocean at least it's something we
can we can decide not to put any more in
if we wanted to getting it out is going
to biger be a bigger challenge but at
least restricting how much plastic we
put in the ocean that's the smaller
pieces larger pieces also cause
entanglements and and direct death as
well uh you know on terrestrial
systems again I'm look thinking more
towards seabirds lots of seabirds dying
their feed on you know they they feed on
whatever's floating in the oceans and
bring it back and and die and they can
even kill their chicks that way getting
a handle on this is is essential and
I've this is one that just across my
career I never when I started teaching
marine conservation I didn't talk about
plastic at all maybe we mentioned it now
it's like you know three lectures uh
it's a huge issue I no one knew I feel
like 25 years ago we didn't there were a
few biologists that were starting to put
up the warning sign so so huge issue not
only for direct impacts but also
concerns about oil production are there
enough well I know the answer is
unequivocally no but um it it seems like
this is yet another one of those David
and Goliath situations are there enough
Wildlife biologists and
resources um to look at the the full
monty on on these issues that you're
talking about it seems kind of
fascinating but esoteric and it's not
part of the profit system uh to
understand our our cousins nieces
nephews in nature and the eat poopa
dying that's contributing to a healthier
world doesn't seem to be prominent in
our cultural
aspirations uh how do you feel about
doing such important work but as a tiny
minority I agree it you know it's
if you don't have money it this is and I
don't I didn't when I started out this
is a hard field you know there's no
straight line in order to be a whale a
conservation biologist or a whale
biologist most of my colleagues have
noodled their way through in various
different ways it's not like going to
med school or law school where you have
a clear path and
also most of my colleagues and I we're
not making a lot of money on this we do
it for for other reasons most of us are
making a living though so we're we're
fine um so I do have long careful
Thoughts with young people if you want
to do this field please we need more of
you but be aware of the challenges it's
not for everyone I see burnout in in
some in young people uh or in among my
colleagues there's a certain point maybe
that you have your first 10 years where
you're doing fieldwork and it's really
fun and you're going to travel and then
there's comes like a sort of a part two
where there's a drop off point like some
people like okay well that was fun but I
got to get a real job um and then I feel
like if you can get through that
bottleneck then most of my colleagues
now are are St are like okay this is
this is who I am this is what I do and
we talk about it over beers like how how
to answer how to address this crisis all
the time how how do we address this
crisis so where're with the one that
we're we've been focused on again is is
returning to
Wales uh a lot of it is and we're doing
this now and the book does this is is
about storytelling it's about creating
metaphors because if I just give you a
number and I say okay 80 million tons of
nitrogen is moved around the world by
this there there are going to be a few
scientists that'll be interested in that
number but for people that are living
their lives that's hard to understand I
get it because it doesn't mean it it's
meaningless to me too so creating
whether it's circular system these
metaphors creating these stories about
individual animals as well as the
processes that they make can help I
think
expand the the tell the story to a wider
audience this is the work that you do as
well I mean whether we're talking about
economics or we're talking about ecology
it's not the answer there's probably no
single answer but but it's one approach
that I think is
important so the thinking there is
change awareness through education
awareness changes values values changes
um political advocacy uh and behavioral
choices and then we have a new cultural
conversation and and emergent efforts by
individuals and organizations working on
these issues I I'd like to believe that
it that sounds all too straightforward
like I feel like it's probably yes but
um to that one as I'm sure you know and
that uh like if I you know how did we
come to view certain animals as really
important and others not you know why is
it there are certain charismatic animals
that we're willing to spend a lot of
money and a lot of time to protect
whereas the vast majority by far the
vast vast majority of animals people
don't really care about at all and to me
they're just as important you know a
rare velvet worm in Brazil is as
important as a rare whale in in the
North Atlantic I just happen to work on
the so we chat about that a
lot um and it is you know it's a good
question how we expand that out from
let's say the whatever number hundred
the top hundred animals that people care
about right you know and probably if we
think about it you you could we've been
talking a lot about whales but lions
tigers you know and a couple of other
large charismatic species chimpanzees
and
apes H how much of how we care about
animals um is because of their scarcity
and
rareness um like I don't really care
that much about raccoons where I live
because they eat my chickens and Ducks
periodically and there's so many of them
and there's this one that's coming on my
porch at night and pulling out all the
soil in my bonsai plants I don't know
why but I'm kind of pissed off at the
raccoons here but in a broader sense how
is that different than a Messi Warrior
wanting to kill a lion that's
encroaching so I I wonder if
our appreciation for nature is novelty
scarcity and maybe with more education
and books like yours eat poop and die we
can appreciate animals partially because
we're related to them they're our kin
we're connected to everything on this
blue green earth but also partially
because of the benefits that they give
to the broader ecosystem which includes
humans and our economies
I I think that's a wonderful point we
should be celebrating when when animals
are abundant right we're often it it's
kind of uncomfortable for me that you
see a celebration when an animal is
listed on The Endangered Species Act and
often you'll see it like oh this is it's
like well yeah I'm glad it's on there
given its state but really the the you
know all of our work is to celebrate
when animals are abundant and by the way
we've been talking about
um why wild animals and how rare wild
mammals are any guess what's the most
abundant wild mammal on the planet the
Norwegian rat uh by biomass probably by
number uh white tail
deer well in North America no planet on
the planet white tail deer Finn Wales
second according to the same folks that
did the work on on biodiversity so there
there's 30 million white tailed deer in
in the United States CU I have actually
researched that um and 100 years ago
there used to be 1 million because they
are one of the species that benefits
from our our taking down of the forest
and putting up corn and soybeans
monoculture wow I didn't know that
that's the single by biomass it's the
large biomass it is that's right now
again it's not mice and and rats would
outweigh them if if we were talking
about numbers and individuals fin Wales
are number two second largest animal
ever to live on the
planet my point is
to follow up on your question is I spoke
to some Old-Timers here in Vermont who
can remember in the 50s or 60s going
with their parents to go deer watching
because deer it was so amazing because
white tell deer had basically been
eradicated from the state people would
go like people go whale watching like I
laugh he's like oh you know the thought
of like going out to doing that now uh
it seems you know I don't think many of
Vermont do it but we should value again
there's there's a there is a balance
here I don't but we should appreciate
animals when they are abundant and we
often there's a certain layer where
level where we're like oh really matters
rare okay here and then there's you know
a social carrying capacity it's like
well now there's too many and and so we
we need to Value the numbers because 30
million bison beavers are another good
example beavers have a huge impact on
the environment not when they're rare
but when they're abundant and there used
to be tens of millions of beavers as
well how can the things you've learned
about nature uh animals um nutrient
cycling be part of what many are talking
about I have John Fullerton coming on
here uh uh in the near future talking
about a regenerative economic system so
we've been drawing down uh the the the
fossil bank account adding that primary
productivity from the past to our
current economies that has an expiration
date our current um you know cultural
expectations based on non-renewable
inputs how can animals and the things
you've been studying play a role in a
more regenerative economic system uh in
a very direct way luckily so we've been
talking about nitrogen phosphorus and
when you look at the planetary
boundaries there are often two areas
where we've gone Way Beyond the plan
planetary boundaries right we've the we
may be at Peak phosphorus we can argue
when that occurs but some scientists
would argue we're already at Peak
phosphorus we've had huge impacts
because of habos and and the impacts of
the use for fossil fuels in order to
generate nitrogen from the
atmosphere we've looked at these Flows
In systems where we restore animals we
we've spoken about Vermont so let's move
away from the Marine system for a moment
anagist fish coming in from the lake so
we have a problem here in Vermont of
phosphorus pollution in the lake if we
restored the movement of fish going out
of the lake that would be one way of
getting night phosphorus out if we
restored beavers that's one way of
retaining phosphorus on the landscape
and making those river systems more
heterogeneous herbivores scavengers
carnivores can help distribute that so
disperse it and that's the work that
that christou has done is that's what
we've lost when we've taken out these
large animals is that we tend to have
areas that are very concentrated and
areas that have almost none what animals
can do in this regenerative sense is
help restore that balance they're not I
don't want to think of them as like our
Warriors or you know and that they're
not going to be able to do it that's up
to us but they can play an important
role in helping to move these nutrients
in a in a way that that has been done
historically where we're not losing it
all to the oceans and it's not only
animals right it's it's also insects
like you said the midges but that's a
much more local impact sorry to
interrupt it's cicas just recently
there's been this large cicada emergence
and there's been studies looking at so
they spend these 17year cicas seven 16
and a half more years feeding on sap
beneath the farest floor they come up to
breed once every 17 years an
enormous resource of nitrogen and
phosphorus going out into those Forest
also to the animals that are feeding it
the animals are changing the ones that
are preying on it but it's also supplied
it supplying those nutrients to the
forest system as well what what will it
take Joe for a young
human uh and I remember living in uh a
suburb of Chicago when I was 8 years old
and we had that cicada Bloom and I was
fascinated at 8 years old like look at
all
these you know bugs uh and they're so
colorful they're green and red eyes and
things like that and really noisy and
really noisy and you know what would it
take for humans to look at that and view
it as a part of of life and an ecosystem
and the Majesty of it and the 16 and A2
years of underground and now a release
rather than just some noisy pain in the
ass insects is it within our phenotype
as a species to have that Viewpoint yes
um here's the good news so I went down
to Maryland for the the 2021 emergence
of cicas this was another three species
coming out in the trillions probably
certainly many
billions
and the there have been a lot of people
scientists out in the media talking
about this you got a 17-year gap so it's
a long time between emergencies right a
lot of the kids have never all the kids
really if you're not 17 have never seen
one
before there was a lot of positive
messaging and if you went back in time
every 17 years they did look at least 17
years back so the last emergence where
the word plague was more common people
think of them as locusts I don't even
want to put bad on the Locust that's
another question but they're not
actually feeding when they're emerging
you know they've already they're they're
basically just breeding and dying so
they're not going to strip trees be or
anything like that having that message
out has been pretty good I mean so I
feel like we are making progress I don't
know that we ever win it you know we can
we can talk about political scenario um
but I feel like cicas have and the Midas
both have have gotten better story
better coverage in recent years when I
was in Maryland I I just sat down in a
park and listened like you know I didn't
ask anyone questions I just listen to
everyone who was walking by and many
people were talking about cicas and it
wasn't a negative you know it was pretty
positive response so I feel like maybe
if you go back to where you grew up for
the next emergence I'm hoping you'll
feel like there's more of a general
appreciation as my dad once called me uh
an environmental wacko uh which he then
used as a term of endear but since I've
become aware of these things over the
past decades I am a little strange in my
behaviors like I'll go on a bike ride
and there will be a Nightcrawler uh on a
a rainy um asphalt road that clearly is
going to die and sometimes I'll actually
stop and get off my bike and pick it up
and Chuck it into the the woods where
there's soil or things like that that I
never would have done uh 20 years ago
and it seems like a waste of energy it's
it's the sentiment
um that that matters so so let me ask
you this in one in one of my previous
Earth Day talks I had the idea of a life
Brigade or something
locally um this isn't your Forte you're
a scientist but what what could happen
if in every Watershed in every Community
across our country or maybe even Beyond
there was a Cadre of people who
understood and cared about the things
that you're discussing today what could
people locally do to expand the ability
of insects and animals to play a
productive role in the ecosystems of
their children and grandchildren where
they live having lived in ver in Vermont
for about over 20 years now one of the
big problems in the spring is there's
these large amphibian migrations they
Crossroads in the spring from Upland
habitats to um Vernal Palm
ephemeral
Springs and by the way they're bringing
nutrient people have measured there's a
large amount of nutrients that they're
bringing in when they releasing eggs
going from that
system in just 20 years there was some
concern in the beginning and a few of us
would go out on rainy cold nights and
move the salamanders and frogs from one
side of the road to the other that felt
good though it was also risk I mean
you're going on roads where there are
people driving
quickly
um we actually did a local fundraiser
and put two or three amphibian
underpasses that was endorsed by the
town and I see around Vermont now they
call it Big Night where when I go out
now it's rare on a rainy night in March
that I don't see other people with
flashlights looking and moving them and
that is
relatively yeah it is awesome and that's
happening in England too and the idea of
of amphib animal underpasses and
overpasses has become more popular that
is something that was funded I think it
was GoFundMe you know the feds put in
some money and the state put in some
money but local people had ownership in
that we got I've never heard of that
what what is an underpass what does that
like explain that right now looking out
the window you often see like two
ditches running along a road and if an
animal's coming down from the mountain
it's got to go into the ditch and over
and then back to the other side into the
pond incredibly risky move going both
directions so it's just putting what we
might call it a covert but a bigger one
putting an a large one you want to make
it big enough so that Bobcats and other
animals can do it too they're not big
enough for white tailed deer but they're
big enough for like small mammals as
well as amphibians and it's reduced it
by I don't have the number off the top
of my head but mortality is down by more
than
80% so so the the
animals prefer the underpass to going
over the road you have to you have to
make it what they want they they
probably would go over the road so
you're putting up you're putting either
a fence or in this case a concrete a low
wall you would't see it when you're
driving but something that's going to be
challenged for either a frog or an
amphibian to get up over there's a bit
of there's art and a science to doing
that of course but when it works it
works beautifully and that's something
that local people can get involved with
um what blew my mind I once took a class
down to Massachusetts and we went out on
the water and we were working every day
and like you guys can have the day off
today we gotten up early that day we
came across just by chance a stranding
of a couple of dolphins and I'm like or
we can just see what happens so it
attract Ed maybe hundred people
including police were there vets were
there um volunteers were there and just
people
curious taking those dolphins that have
been stranded and releasing them on the
beach side and it occurred to me that
this is part of the economy we don't
think about that the these people like a
lot of these people this is their job or
they're donating money and because they
care about it and I'll argue there is
not a thing no ecosystem service like
those dolphines aren't doing anything
for us except that we care about them
and they matter in the ocean don't put a
dollar value on it cuz I'm going to be
skeptical um but you can see clearly
that this is an important part of this
economy and we compared how much people
donated and volunteered and worked in in
this part on Coastal Massachusetts
comparable to commercial fishing it's a
lot of money that people pay and this is
coming up this is bottom up you know
what I mean this is this is Grassroots
this isn't people coming in making these
decisions for other
people let me ask you a personal
question Joe do you have children I do
my daughter just left she she's going
away for the
weekend um do your children um care
about animals and nature and whales uh
as much as you do well some of our
Fondest Memories Are amphibian C I just
mentioned the amphibian Crossing so this
year I was glad cuz she's 17 now she can
drive she wanted to go out on a rain on
a couple of rainy days and help cross
them so I'm happy to say that that
that's still sticking with her um my
wife is also a wildlife biologist so
there is a little bit of push back you
know what I mean she's like you know
animals like oh nature uh there can be
an eye roll part of it too but I
honestly I I know that she also heard
her F she and her friends care about
these things I don't know that that's
going well actually one of her friends
wants to be a marine biologist so so
that may carry on I I do believe that
they care in a way what I've seen the
shift in young people is and you would
know this in your careers more thinking
about the rights of the animals
themselves that's been a long fight
right and but I hear it more I think
even we have you know you know Josh
Farley I think he has a term I forget
something like the ecosystem Services of
of the animals we're often thinking of
the services that animals provide for
humans but of course the agency of the
individual plant or animal also they
need they need whatever it is the food
and the atmosphere and and all of those
so what I'm optimistic is expanding out
Beyond just thinking about people and
especially people like us but thinking
beyond that too what what are the rest
of creation you had mentioned earlier
our cousins in the ocean are real you
know that there there are cultures that
that acknowledge that I'm hoping we get
there as a culture too that we can be
comfortable using you did using that
terminology and not getting an eye roll
or some like H what F what you know what
cousins I might get eye rolls but I
can't see them because there are people
watching on YouTube so what projects are
you currently working on and what's next
for you Joe uh yeah po contribute and
die
maybe uh we are finally putting some
numbers on what I Des what we describe
as The Great Whale conveyor belt so this
is the those migrations of great whales
that they do every year we know they're
moving some nutrients and now we've got
an idea that that nitrogen that's going
from these high latitudes to these low
latitudes can be more than the amount of
nitrogen that's just coming in from
upwelling in these particular areas this
is external nutrients you know it's like
we mentioned the guano you know they're
bringing nutrients from an entirely
different part of the world to here to
to these lower latitudes why does that
matter if you've been to Hawaii or the
Caribbean the clear waters that many
people like and are important that's
also a sign that there aren't many
nutrients so the whales are bringing
nutrients into the system and that can
help the resilience of coral reef
systems and even as one of my colleagues
have noted when sea birds are bringing
nutrients to those islands they're
increasing the growth of the plants
around the island and that with a fish
eating in the sand can actually allow
the islands to grow more quickly than
the absence of those birds and those
fish being and making those islands more
resil resilient to climate change so
that's that's the direction we're taking
our work these
days excellent uh it it feels to me that
we're discovering all this stuff at the
11th hour and it's so fascinating and so
beautiful and so important but it's like
we had to almost destroy it before we
realized that we're going to miss it and
not only is it a sentiment but it's
actually the the biological underpinning
of of our ecosystems all these things
connecting I yeah I agree and you know
we've chatted about they can go in two
directions we talk about them like a
peration or we're doing these Global
experiments I don't recommend doing this
but we're doing them anyway um whether
it's climate change or adding more nitr
more phosphorus however so when we take
animals out of the system we we have a
pertubation we see the change but we
also see those changes when we store
them to areas right
so these
disturbances can have let's say positive
impacts for biodiversity if we're doing
in the right direction or four very
strong negative ones uh it's up to us to
decide which direction we going to take
it
in so this has been uh fascinating
discussion uh a lot of things I didn't
know and it just um strikes a nerve with
me to care about these things and it's
so fascinating You' followed my podcast
I'm sure you're aware of the closing
questions I ask all my guests but you're
aware of um the dwindling of nature but
also the the human predicament more
broadly do you have any personal advice
to the viewers of this program uh on
being alive at this time with all the
things that we
face yeah I I mean from from my view the
way I act I don't know if it's advice
I'll just be a give you one example of
an approach
is focusing on the local and observing
what you see around you and by the way
all the work that I'm talking about
today a lot of it just came from me
spending some time time outside on the
water allowing myself to be bored in
fact almost in a way I would say that
would be the biggest recommendation I'd
have for most people is go out and just
watch right you'll you'll be amazed
leave your leave your your social media
device at home exctly exactly if you can
and that was a benefit I've worked a lot
in Cuba and that there is no social
media you know was enforced I couldn't I
couldn't access the internet or or or a
cell phone by by having that I that and
deserving the natural world it for me
it's about science but I also think it's
an appreciation of Wonder and
understanding the world around you and
the his the environmental history and
just getting to know these animals so
that's on the simplest level and then
getting involved also though on a
societal level which is what you do and
what you talk about because it's not
enough like on an individual level if I
go across a couple of frogs I feel good
about it I'm glad I did it but the
crisis is much more about me and it's
much more than those frogs so it is
taking on whatever cause that that
resonates with you I I I wouldn't want
to prescribe what that cause might be
whether it's climate Equity or you know
biodiversity all incredible ones that
that can be tied together so for me I I
try to operate on both of th see the
importance of both of those levels that
policy change matters but so does being
outside and enjoying the day and you are
a professor now um at the U uh of
Vermont and what sort of advice do you
give to young people and how would you
change what you just said to a young 20
25y old yeah I'm I'm a fellow at UV at
at the Gund Institute right now I'm not
I'm not teaching um but the advice
I the conversations I have maybe I shy
away from advice but the conversations
that we have is as IID said if you're
interested in Wildlife get out in it in
whatever way you can that that's a
that's that's the first start and
then looking at whether you're going to
want to take on whatever the call let's
use biodiversity as an example if
biodiversity is what you really care
about that's what drives me as a
conservation
biologist there are two ways of going
about it one is dedicating yourself to
your through a career or volunteering
and you know and working with an
organization I have seen both of those
be incredibly effective the risks of a
job as we mentioned is there can be some
burnout there's there's not a lot of
there there's a bottleneck for a lot of
these the benefits to making it your
side job is that it it gives you it's a
maybe like the pressure valve is off
there and I feel like that's a
personality you know I would certainly
not prescribe everyone to go out and be
conservation biologist or that we don't
have any right but you know you you need
to I I think you want to think about
what direction you want to go in and I
just had lunch with one of my students
who just graduated and doesn't know and
that's okay I didn't know it I didn't
know at 21 or 22 either for her she was
used to like always having like
deadlines this is what I do next this is
what I do next not going to medical
school wanting to work as a coral
ecologist it's not clear what's next and
that that could work in your favor so
maybe on a personal level don't feel
like you have to you know make know
what's next for you because it it up the
world and and one's own decisions can
change what's next may change but what's
first is caring about and being
interested in the animals and the
ecosystems of which we are a part uh is
is how I see it so what do you care most
about in the world Joe uh I I could
probably guess but I'll ask just the
same uh so it's everything because it's
biodiversity right in a way biodiversity
includes all of us and and everything on
the planet so it's it's almost like
every living thing and then I would even
maybe want to expand it to non-living
things um but but let's go you know so
it's very Broad and and really what I
care
about though I I probably took me years
to realize it is is where the the angle
that we've been think discussing in that
that tree that I'm looking at across the
street right now or the the bird that's
that's you know running flying by that
they matter and understanding how they
live in the world and how we can protect
them is what drives me so biodiversity
you know is the single word but also a
thriving a planet where animals matter
where where all the other species in the
world you know on the planet matter well
to put in different words uh your work
uh and your career is in service to
life so if you could wave a magic wand
and there were no personal uh recourse
to your actions what is one thing you
would do to improve human and planetary
Futures the world we live in right now
has an Extinction rate that's probably a
thousand times higher than than it's
ever been or at least at the average
maybe or maybe even an order of
magnitude more so we're having many
extinctions every year and Extinction is
natural just like death is natural every
species out there is going to go extinct
at some point just like every person we
talk to is is going to die and sometimes
I think the role of a conservation
biologist is similar to being a doctor
right you want the you want a patient to
have a healthy long life good quality of
life but you also know that at some
point it's going to die so recognizing
that Extinction is
natural we have caused an incredibly
High unnatural Extinction rate right now
so my goal the thing the wand I would be
is getting it back to zero human caused
Extinction whether that's convincing
people to make that the priority or if
the wand is allowed me to do it I I
think that's a really special wand if
I'm going to but I think the real goal
is going to be humans decide like they
did with whales that this really matters
we're going to put our time effort into
this that would be my wand is you know
in in a way we're talking about how you
get people to care the wand would be
well people are already there and now
let's discuss how we get there thank you
and and thank you for all your Decades
of of curiosity and and work on these
issues do you have any closing comments
for our viewers Joe yeah I just similar
to what I've said get outside look at
this I mean
appreciate right now you could probably
go out and you know and go out in the
world and see an animal feeding pooping
and dying and think about it in a
different way you won't see it die a
corpse you probably won't see it die but
you might see a carcass and think about
how those
processes are influencing everything
around around you whether it's the River
or the forest or even your yard you know
the these processes are happening all
the time it doesn't have to be um a
white tailed diaro whale but it could be
something as simple as a
bumblebee I'm GNA go do it this
afternoon thanks so much Joe to be
continued my friend great I really
appreciate it thanks so much for the
chat the great questions if you enjoyed
or learned from this episode episod of
the great simplification please follow
us on your favorite podcast platform you
can also visit the greats simplification
Doom for references and show notes from
today's conversation and to connect with
fellow listeners of this podcast check
out our Discord Channel this show is
hosted by me Nate Hagin edited by no
troublemakers media and produced by
Misty stinet Leslie bat Lutz Brady hyen
and Liz serani
