and now the Mickey Mouse Club presents
today's episode the newcomer
well here's Ashford that's where the
McClouds live I'm their housekeeper and
in all the years I've been with them the
postman never brought us anything like
the letter that came this morning
that boy okay how long have we had that
paper boy about two years why two years
huh still doesn't know where the front
porch is huh he just doesn't care my
sister down yet you should be right down
breakfast is all ready
good morning Archie norine incites as a
weatherman did you sleep well world in a
nutshell two neat trick if you can do it
oh I'm sorry well that's okay it was my
fault I didn't see you that makes us
even I didn't see you either Oh could
you tell me where this is 149 Elm Street
well this is Elm 149 to be about six
blocks up that way thank you
I'll or I'll be right with you hi who's
your country cousin tell me she's a
kissing cousin oh don't be silly I never
saw her before she just wanted an
address yeah nothing but circulars and
Bill's gasps telephone water white
pretty dull where's my philosophical
review good oh they stopped publishing
there you were the last subscriber
that's right I paid for in advance to
five years
we know and Beaver Junction never hood
it where is it on Nebraska ten days if
not delivered or turned to mrs. Bonnie
Weems beaver Junction Nebraska who's
Bonnie Weems why don't you open it and
see hmm oh yes first Katie someone's at
the door you'll have to wait
can't make popovers and answer the door
at the same time it's probably the
cleaner you better give them your brace
you Pitt needs president hello hello you
must be uncle Archie I'm uncle Archie
whose uncle mine I'm your niece Annette
my knees well yours a nap LYLAS anything
wrong Archie you must be at Lila I'm a
net and net look your young lady there
must be some mistake
well this is 149 ounce Street isn't it
well yes of course it is but you're mr.
Archibald McCloud aren't you
I certainly am but we don't have a niece
isn't that so Lila but I'm an ethnic
cloud say you got Barney's letter didn't
you Bonnie who Bonnie Weems never heard
of her wait a minute Archie that letter
from Nebraska oh oh yes are you from
beaver Junction that's right my father
was Bryce McCloud Bryce's daughter well
well what do you know your brother's
little girl then this this Bonnie Weems
is your mother
oh no bonnie was Mama's nurse when I was
born she sort of took me in and raised
me with their own kids when mama died we
didn't even know Bryce was married oh
you must be tired after that long trip
now you come on upstairs you freshen up
well I'll have just a minute Katie it's
all right Archie we'll talk about it
later
take it to the room next to mine Katie
Thank You aunt Lila I can't believe it
Bryce's daughter what's she doing in
Ashford why did she come here to us
maybe we better read that letter oh yes
pretty room and so be nice give us your
grandmother's wrong you know her name
was Annette - really I guess it was kind
of a surprise my coming here all of a
sudden wasn't it surprise huh you
knocked us for a loop why didn't they
know about me miss Katie well your uncle
was so busy fussing at the paper boy in
the weather man in the world situation
in general that he never got around to
opening that letter I don't mean that
why didn't they know about me before oh
well your father never told them I
wonder why
well he and your uncle had a
misunderstanding it was a humdinger he
never wrote them after he left Ashford
that must have been a long time ago Oh
better than 18 years oh no come on that
now that's all in the past you had any
breakfast no I haven't Oh Bonnie made a
nice lunch for me fried chicken and
apple pie and cookies and everything but
I ate the last of it for supper
yesterday huh well do you like popovers
oh boy do I good now then you hurry and
wash up before they collapse there's the
bathroom thank you Katie
but I don't understand why this Bonnie
Weems waited till now to get in touch
with us I'm afraid that was Bryce's
fault Archie apparently he didn't want
us to know about the child why not well
you know how stubborn Bryce was he never
even wrote us then why does this woman
tell us at this late date well she says
she's done the best she could for a nap
and now that she's growing up she feels
that her place should be with her
kinfolk the child in this house it's
impossible but she's our brother's
daughter arch I know I know but
youngsters nowadays what do we know
about them but this mrs. Weems seems to
feel that she should have the advantages
that we can give of course of course but
we must do our duty buyer but how can I
work on my philosophical thesis with
children swarming all over the house
radios blaring television records yes
it's a difficult situation Archie we're
pretty set in our ways no I could let
her browse through my books and then
that new set of encyclopedias just came
that's what I mean Archie young people
don't want to spend all their time
reading books they want friends their
own age we have to send it to school
that's it of course we could send you to
a boarding school well you ought to be
ashamed of yourself huh that's a fine
way to treat your own flesh and blood
packing her off a minute she gets here
now see here Katie we don't know
anything about bringing up children
what's about time you learned
hmm well you know they eat when
breakfast is getting cold
you're right Katie set a place for her I
already did
something smells yummy is Katie's
popovers they are good come along
gee it's nice being with your own folks
yes pork next episode and that meets
Jett
