foreign
that you have a solid object say
a bar of Steel
this is quite solid I mean it's a it's a
piece of metal 5 8 thick uh you know
three foot long
can't bend it with my hands certainly
and it's sitting here on the table
surprising absolutely nobody if I were
to push on one end of the bar an
observer watching the other end of the
bar would be able to see it move right
away can confirm it's hot move but what
is right away to help think about this
let's scale up the bar from just under a
meter to about 300 000 kilometers or one
light second wait what yes 300 000
kilometers
foreign
let's assume that the person at the near
end of the bar is infinitely strong
because now the bar weighs almost a half
a million metric tons and we need to be
able to get it moving so now the
question is once you push on this end of
the bar how long before the Observer at
the other end of the bar sees their end
of the bar move does it happen instantly
because the metal bar is still a solid
object does it take the length of the
bar divided by the speed of light or one
second because the speed of light is the
fastest that objects can travel is it C
the length of the bar divided by the
speed of sound in the metal if the
material properties are most important
or D does the delay depend on how you
hit the bar along with some Choice
material properties
foreign
[Music]
did you leave a comment with your guests
for bonus points this is this is a
really fun question because it
completely depends on your choice of
model and almost every physics model
that we use is technically wrong but
it's a general rule the more correct a
physics model is the more painful it is
to use and Implement in the real world
one of the most common responses to my
last video about the speed of
electricity equated
a Wire full of electrons to a water pipe
full of water
I didn't even realize I had props
imagine that you have a water pipe like
this and it's full of water if you put
more water in one end of the pipe water
has to come out of the other end of the
pipe immediately because otherwise
you've got a full pipe and you're
packing more water into it than will fit
so it feels like something's breaking
there but when I did this with electrons
I pumped electrons into one end of the
wire from the battery and it was a good
long while before the electrons came out
the other end of the wire I could
measure the delay so what gives to make
a much more extreme version of this
experiment I decided to skip the liquid
and just go with a solid metal bar I
mean this thing feels quite solid I
can't I can't even come close to
deforming it like this
actually I think I might have whoops
okay yeah it's really hard to deform
but if I push on the end of this beam
the other end moves too right away and I
can use this to transmit Force long
distances like pushing on this switch
from across the table so now we need to
ask how fast that happens when I start
pushing on this end of the bar how long
does it take for the rod to exert Force
91 centimeters away and flip the switch
what we really need in order to start
answering this question is a valid
useful approximation for the physics
that describe this bar the only accurate
way to model the behavior of this bar
given our current state-of-the-art
understanding of physics is to create a
quantum mechanical wave function for
every subatomic particle in every atom
of this entire bar and then probably add
in the complicated things that we don't
really know how they fit in like gravity
and solve all of those equations
simultaneously so imagine how many atoms
there are in this bar are how many
particles there are in each atom that
many equations with you know a few
unknowns each and uh solve them all at
once easy right there's no way that
you're ever ever ever even going to come
close to solve that equation there's no
computer that we could build that could
model the behavior of a macroscopic
chunk of metal like this sitting on a
table there's just no way so how do we
ever actually do physics if we can't do
physics accurately well we approximate
so at the other end of the spectrum from
the really really complicated quantum
mechanical description we have the rigid
body approximation and Newton's loss of
motion and then it's really easy to say
this is one object this object has a
mass I apply a certain amount of force
which makes this object accelerate and
we can even model the force of gravity
as a single force on this object and we
can model the friction against the table
as a single force acting on this object
and with
math that is no more complicated than
pen and paper math you can with great
accuracy describe what's going to happen
to this bar when I push it across the
table and that's because all that
quantum mechanical stuff just sort of
averages out and doesn't matter in the
final result but that approximation also
says that the other end of the bar moves
instantaneously when I push on this end
of the bar and if you try to combine
that with other pieces of physics like
relativity and the fact that the speed
of light shouldn't really allow that to
happen it starts to be weird so
let's do the experiment now is your last
chance to update your guests is that
delay zero seconds if it's an ideal
solid object three nanoseconds if the
speed of light is relevant 180
microseconds if the speed of sound is
relevant or about three and a half
milliseconds if the speed of the hammer
and the yield strain of the steel are
relevant okay so of course this is
scaled down from the 300 000 kilometer
long beam but 91 centimeters is a little
easier to work with I have it sitting
here on the table pushed up against a
force sensor you can see that the the
yellow tray sort of freaks out when I
push it against this this backstop
and on the other side here I have a wire
clamped to it and this wire is actually
attached to a battery or resistor and a
hammer such that when I make contact
with the wire
there's actually a circuit completed
here
the moment that this Hammer actually
touches the metal bar if I hit the metal
bar here that's going to start our timer
of sorts and then as soon as this
pressure sensor detects that the bar is
actually pushing into it as in the whole
bar has moved a little bit and pushed
into the pressure sensor that's going to
stop our timer and we'll know exactly
how long it takes for motion or Force to
get from this end of the bar to that end
of the bar so without further ado
zero out the cursors
here we go first of all there is a delay
which is interesting in and of itself it
means that this metal bar is not an
ideal rigid body that you would use in
like freshman physics because this end
of the bar can move when this end of the
bar isn't moving so this end of the bar
starts to move when this blue Trace goes
from low to high right here and then you
can see that the yellow Trace is pretty
much flat and then all of a sudden it
spikes way up and that Spike up is when
the bar starts to push
into the backstop at the far end and if
I actually measure that out very first
bit of signal is at a hundred and
wow it is exactly
180 microseconds which I believe is the
answer that I put at the beginning of
the video script
that couldn't be more perfect so what's
the speed of sound in the bar
so you can see that the hammer itself
only actually makes contact for about
150 160 microseconds and then that
current falls off again but the yellow
line is what we care about in terms of
the actual Force at the far end of the
bar and if I zoom in on on the yellow
line I'll make the Blue Line go away
here we're basically plotting the force
that the bar exerts on that pressure
sensor versus time and as we go along
we're going along we're going along
there's no force on it whatsoever
and then here at about uh
uh what is this like 190 microseconds or
so it starts to tick up and we get this
positive force that says the sensor is
being really completely compressed and
that's when the bar has actually started
to move and it's pushing into the sensor
now you'll notice that I measured from
over here because this little negative
blip is an artifact of how Those sensors
actually measure and when you're only
compressing part of the sensor rather
than the whole thing it actually goes
negative for a minute I think it has to
do with the capacitance I'll talk about
that at the end but regardless uh this
is
starting to feel a force exactly 180
microseconds after the initial impulse
with the hammer so this is sort of like
the speed of motion in the bar and the
velocity of this bar is in homogeneous
the whole thing is not actually a solid
object so information about the velocity
of this bar is not transmitted
instantaneously to all of the atoms in
the bar at the same time so why was I so
excited to run this experiment and how
did I predict what the answer was going
to be at least
a close enough prediction that I knew
that I'd be able to physically measure
the answer uh given this setup before
going out and buying a whole bunch of
Steel and buying a bunch of pressure
transducers I wanted to know what was
possible and thankfully I have had way
too much practice at trying to find uh
useful and not too inaccurate physics
models for various situations in this
case because I wanted to do this with
something like a bar of Steel the first
thing that came to my mind as a material
scientist was the atomic structure of
Steel now steel is primarily made of
iron atoms and those iron atoms are
arranged in a structure a crystalline
structure called body centered cubic all
of the atoms in this structure have a
nucleus that we really don't care about
because we're not doing nuclear
reactions and they have electrons which
we do care about but only some of them a
good number of the electrons are free to
travel throughout the meta they may move
you know millimeters or centimeters away
from their original atoms if you could
even Define they had an original atom
the rest of the electrons actually most
of the electrons in a metal like this
are trapped they're stuck at or in
between adjacent Atomic nuclei and those
electrons sort of act as the glue that
hold the whole structure together if you
pull these nuclei apart with their cloud
of electrons in between they get pulled
back together but if you compress them
they are pushed back apart there's a
force that always restores the bond
length to some equilibrium value the
common approximation here the model that
most people use is that these electrons
act like Springs so this
is a more accurate BCC model this is
it's hilarious to hold one of these in
my hands I don't know about uh
physicists but to a material scientist
this is exactly how I picture you know
elastic deformation in a material it's
just a whole bunch of atoms connected by
Springs and the whole material sort of
Jiggles around
plastic deformation uh where the
material is permanently deformed is a
whole nother ball of wax I actually have
a separate video on that if you're
curious but elastic deformation looks
like this
so when I hit one end of a spring model
like this I'm applying a force to the
atoms right here but it's clear that the
other end of the material isn't going to
respond instantly there's a wave that
has to pass through the material a wave
of compressed bonds or in other words a
wave of pressure or in yet other words a
wave of sound at the risk or maybe at
the dream of this sounding like a three
blue one Brown video I want to take a
minute and appreciate how important of a
connection this is we don't even care
what material we're dealing with and we
were able to link the behavior of this
rather abstract question that is not by
any means a simple question two a
macroscopic quantity that you can go
look up in a textbook atoms are not
balls connected by Springs we've thrown
away everything about the nucleus we've
thrown away all of the information about
a lot of the atoms the free to move
atoms in this piece of metal and we've
really really dramatically simplified
the interaction of all the electrons
that are left if you want to get one end
of that material moving by pushing on
the other end then a compressive wave of
scrunched bonds has to pass through that
material just because it's made of
bonded atoms and because the speed of
sound the speed of a compressive wave
traveling through material is something
that's very well studied and well
documented I just got to this point in
my head and went to go look it up went
how fast can sounds travel through the
three foot piece of Steel that I can go
buy at Lowe's and figured out that it
was about 200 microseconds and that I
would be able to measure that with the
scope and then I started investigating
another cool thing is that for a Sharp
impulse like this once the hammer is no
longer applying Force to the bar the bar
is on average moving with its final
momentum but different parts of the bar
are moving at different speeds relative
to each other there are vibrations that
travel up and down the bar getting
damped out eliminating extra kinetic
energy is heat without changing the
momentum and therefore speed of the
entire bar on average this project came
about because I used the same balls on
Springs mental model for electrons than
a wire and this equivalence came up
while I was thinking about comments on
my last video I love it when the same
models can apply to completely different
physics and the underlying mathematical
Machinery can be recycled now as to the
actual physical test why the mess I
initially wanted to just set a
piezoelectric sensor at both ends of the
rod so the rod was sandwiched between
them and hit the stack compressing them
both at once it's cleaner to explain and
any delay of the sensor would be
replicated on both sides so it felt like
a great Simple Solution unfortunately it
was also really bad because every time I
hit the sensor I'd get this weird
negative signal before the disc actually
compressed also and more important the
time delay was widely varying my first
thought was that the sensors weren't
completely pushed up against the bar so
I actually super glued them to the ends
of the bar but that weirdly enough
didn't fix either problem the
measurements were still all over the
place and I ended up lasering out a
couple of little acrylic discs in
sandwiching the Piezo sensors between
them now the entire disc was securely
squished sort of at once the weird
negative pre-signal was a lot smaller
but the time delay is still all over the
place after the second day of this
trying different bars and different
sensor arrangements and whatnot I
finally gave up and then had a literal
shower thought the next morning that the
first sensor was probably squishing
inconsistently and therefore causing an
inconsistent delay between the hammer
and the bar so I took it out but I
needed a new way to get the start time
and decided that since the bar was metal
and the hammer was metal I might as well
just clip a battery across them and wait
for the electrons to flow and uh
although it made for a very messy
looking table it worked after messing
with some variations on the Piezo
placement experimenting with some really
cloogy foil and tape capacitor sensors
and running out of battery Clips I had a
consistent result but it was the wrong
result and I struggled with this for a
while it's like I'm getting the same
answer every time what could be wrong
well maybe it's the squish of the sensor
maybe it's just slower than I thought so
I tried a bunch of different length bars
I've got a three foot bar a two foot bar
and a one foot bar so I put all of these
in the exact same setup and they plotted
a perfect line down to zero and because
the intercept of that line was
approximately zero I think it was like
negative three microseconds that told me
that I didn't have any sensor Squish and
that the delay was actually proportional
to the length of the bar but it still
wasn't the correct delay I was getting
something in the vicinity of 5 000
meters per second for the speed of sound
but the velocity that I was looking up
the compressive longitudinal wave speed
through steel was something like six
thousand meters per second and 20
percent was too much I did not want to
be 20 off for an experiment like this
where I should be able to eliminate
almost everything because it's like
bench top my first instinct was that it
was just a weird formulation of Steel
and I looked the speed of sound does
vary in steel Alloys but that wasn't the
final answer the issue is that these
bars are very small as in the diameter
is very small relative to the wavelength
of the sound waves passing through the
bars in general the speed of sound if
you look at the Springs attached to
weights model is proportional to the
strength of the spring and the size of
the mass that is at each point along the
chain if you make all the masses heavier
then the wave propagates more slowly if
you make all the Springs stronger then
the sound wave propagates more rapidly
when you extend these Concepts to an
actual chunk of material like one of
these steel bars we can't look at the
mass of every atom and the spring
constant of Every Spring we have to sort
of average these across the material and
for an average spring constant you take
the Young's modulus which is basically
how squishy is it and for the average
weight of the atoms you take the density
the average mass per volume and when you
combine those together you can calculate
the speed of sound but there's an
important extra parameter in there the
poisson ratio which basically says when
you squish the bar end to end it
actually gets a little bit wider because
it those atoms have to go somewhere and
as it turns out that has a strong impact
on the velocity that a sound wave
travels through a material but
for a really thin bar like this it
actually doesn't matter because your
transmission of the sound wave is
completely one-dimensional the fact that
it spreads out just doesn't have an
impact so you get this simpler formula
where you basically just have the speed
of sound proportional to the square root
of the density and the poisson ratio and
when you do that math
for steel you get the exact same answer
that I did with this oscilloscope which
made me very happy once I figured it out
so I was getting the right answer I just
didn't think I was getting the right
answer and it made me question my
methods also you can just go look up
this one-dimensional speed of sound it
turns out it has a name it's the
extensional speed of sound as opposed to
the longitudinal speed which would have
been correct if I instead had a giant
cube of Steel that was a
three-dimensional object as opposed to
these thin cylinders that were basically
one-dimensional so that is why solid
objects aren't actually solid objects
and also why simple demonstrations can
sometimes turn into complicated messes
with
electrodes clipped onto hammers but all
of that included I hope that you enjoyed
this video and I'll see you next time
thanks for watching
foreign
[Music]
