so you probably heard about this whole
VIN thing people are doing these days
right this text editor that's been
around for a long time and somehow or
another it's dinosaur bones have
survived throughout the eons and people
still use it why is that
that's because vim is awesome and if you
use vim you'll be awesome to think about
it who uses COBOL anymore COBOL yeah
nobody uses COBOL anymore you know why
because COBOL got outdated because it
like most other software and programming
languages frameworks what ever has seen
its time and it's gone because other
better things have come out as long as
code is being written in text them will
be applicable and I dare say that being
the case learning how to program them is
probably the single best investment you
can make in terms of being a good
programmer them is all about taking the
amount of time it takes from getting
ideas in your brain through your fingers
into your computer screen as long as
you're able to do that efficiently you
will consistently code faster you will
consistently have more time really to
think about the things that are going on
because you're not spending it wasting
and trying to get things typed in right
into your computer because you'll just
be doing it already so that being the
case I think you should give this shot
you just might like it but anyway yeah
that's what it's all about this course
is to help you get over the first couple
of humps into getting into them and once
you get comfortable with it you're gonna
fall in love it'll be amazing try it out
