now I want to be clear here there's a
lot of charlatans there's a lot of woo
but that doesn't mean there aren't real
phenomena nobody gets addicted to
psychedelics no they get addicted to
Rabbit Hole metaphysics that's what
happens is their own idiosyncratic
completely egocentric thick metaphysics
I sat down with John fi an award-winning
professor of cognitive science and
Buddhist psychology to discuss Rabbit
Hole metaphysics the sometimes weird
outlandish stuff people Bel thanks to
the internet according to fi the current
mainstream metaphysics physicalism has
brought us to the meaning crisis what
you have is a worldview that purports to
explain everything except how you as a
meaning maker actually belong in that
world so you have the problem that we
generate this world view in from which
we are radically alienated radically
disconnected as fori approach es the
meaning crisis and metaphysics
scientifically I thought he would be
interested in the relationship between
physics and Consciousness but when I
brought it up he kindly made clear to me
that we have to think about cognition
first I don't want you to tell me how
your theory of Consciousness is
compatible with physics I want your
theory of Consciousness to tell me how
it's compatible with cognition because
if you can't do that I don't care about
the compatibility with physics all our
models and formal descriptions of the
world including physics are based on
assumptions that are a product of the
human mind and here's the thing we
cannot derive the truth of these
assumptions from the systems that are
themselves based on these assumptions
here's fi explaining this I can run all
the possible all possible computations
within predicate calculus and I'll never
get Modo
logic because I have to step
outside and from outside introduce an
axiom and a new
function each era in history had a
dominant metaphysics that was captivated
in compelling mythologies think of
animism Zoro westernism or the abrahamic
religions now according to fi the
dominant myth of our day and age is that
of the
zombie oh my God zombies typically don't
have a supernatural origin they're sort
of us decayed which is really
interesting um they're frequently hungry
for brains which is a weird thing the
organ of meaning making presumably um
they consume and they are never
satisfied they move around in a hoorde
but they have no communal existence
whatsoever they have no history they
have no culture they're drifting
aimlessly I found it confronting that
all our zombie apocalypse storytelling
is in a sense about us it mirrors back a
culture that denies Transcendence only
cares for material well-being while that
never truly satisfies us and it denies a
deeper meaning to life now there are of
course Avenues out of this think for
instance about meditation mindfulness or
mystical type experiences people have
but fiki warns us that these practices
or experiences need to be embedded in a
worldview that truly acknowledges them
an Ecology of practices needs a homing
worldview that legitimates it and
properly authorizes people to be
teachers and guides and that's what the
religions used to do I'm not advocating
for religion here but you can't just say
you know what I'll do is I'll take it
out of all of that and I'll plug it in
over here and it'll continue to work and
you're just that's just that's just
profound self-deception that's just
profound self and and here's the thing
Hans that actually exacerbates the
meaning crisis because it keeps you
locked in to the very mindset that is
driving the meaning
crisis if we have a functional approach
to formerly religious practices so we do
meditation what we want nothing to do
with the metaphysics of Buddhism we risk
that in the end this only reinforces the
meaning crisis so what then is a true
solution out of the meaning crisis
according to fi we should have a thin
description but we should Orient towards
a strong Transcendence because that is
the the the relationship that has the
greatest potential to transform us grow
us up develop us mature us so we should
have a thin description of a strong
Transcendent right now we have a thick
description a thick theory of non-trends
and it's called
materialism can we indeed move towards a
thin
description while being open to strong
Transcendence and now what's happening
is the recovery of the vertical we're
realizing that we are not just
historical political beings but we're
recovering that we participate
ontologically in a vertical fashion what
Plato and the neoplatonist were talking
about that to me is very very
significant we can actually as you know
platinus would say we can become more at
one with the one it's as much at the
bottom coming up as it is from the top
and it completely interpenetrates I hope
you enjoyed this conversation with
professor John fi and if you like
content like this may I ask you to
subscribe and like our Channel as it
really helps us to grow and make more
content like
this and I think if if I may open a bit
personal if that's okay with you I was
wondering um I mean you're a lot on
YouTube and you have your own series and
just uh you're out there with this
message of the meaning crisis and how to
tackle it and now with mentoring the
machines um and I was wondering to what
degree does this come from what Joseph
Campbell would say or no Yung that's
Yung right the the wounded healer I was
thinking what has there been a sort of
personal meaning crisis John that makes
you now so invested yeah there was I
mean in some ways analogous to you I was
brought up in um an extended family of
fundamentalist Christianity that I would
Now call quite traumatizing I had some
of the most terrifying experiences of my
life within that framework um and then
like you I I left it uh but uh uh even
if it has some toxic elements to it uh
religion leaves a taste for the
Transcendent in your mouth and you know
I went looking for it I I bumped up very
readily in high school into you know
some aspects of
nihilism um but then I went to
University and I encountered the figure
of Socrates
and uh this opened me up to what I was
hungry for a kind of spirituality that
was deeply interwoven with rationality a
much broader conception of rationality
than our current one and with the
cultivation of wisdom and virtue and
this was exactly what I was looking for
um Socrates is still very very important
to me I did a whole other series called
after Socrates uh to try and open open
that up for people um
and that was good but what happened
happened and I glad it did uh because I
was still very much in sort of a purely
propositional mode around this and
reading and you know arguing and
reflecting but the topic of wisdom
itself fell off the table um in academic
philosophy at that time um and I went on
in philosophy because I appreciate the
skills and etc etc but I was I was
hungry again and so down the road
literally down the road for me was a TA
chian Meditation Center so I went there
and I started practicing and I had been
practicing since what I would now ACC
call an echology of practices I was
doing Vasa meditation Tai chian and meta
contemplation and then as this was
unfolding my love for uh Socrates and
Plato uh of course uh wasn't debated and
I ran into the work of Pier Hado and in
and philosophy as a spiritual exercise
as he would put it that started to wake
me up to the Western wisdom cultivation
tradition ancient philosophy which I was
already oriented to because of of
Socrates and and then I was also hearing
about this new discipline called
cognitive science in which people were
starting to talk again about meaning and
Altered States Of Consciousness and all
of it came together for me and so I
started teaching a couple of courses at
the University one called Buddhism and
cognitive science another one do I of
course I on higher cognitive processes
which I turned into a course on the
psychology of wisdom and my students
when I was talking about these topics
they were like when I realized oh
there's something more going on here
um and then I started to really as as I
was developing these courses and develop
you know you always have to know about
10 times more than you teach right and
so I was doing this expansive
exploration um uh you know and into both
the history uh of the meaning crisis and
then more and more the cognitive science
of what is meant by this metaphor of
meaning meaning in life and then I had a
student come up to me who take these
courses and he said you should do
something on YouTube my father's a
professional editor I'm a professional
videographer and I got a crew uh and
we'll do it for free as long as you give
us credit and I said yes and that became
Awakening for the meeting crisis and
then it just took off from there the
rest is history yeah that that's that
that's that's great and um I think nice
for this conversation to First tap into
sort of because before going to sort of
the solutions of course the the the
problem and I I really liked reading uh
a zombies in Western culture where you
uh I think quote Delo and saying that
the only modern myth is the myth of
zombies yeah I I like that okay but
could you please explain to people who
haven't read that book why you think
that sentence is true well I want to
thank my dear friend Christopher Master
petro and my co-author Philip mizic that
book was a way of uh bringing together a
lot of that exploration I had mentioned
to you and bringing it into a more clear
and coherent um argumentative form
and so what we were trying to do in that
book was pick up on the appearance of
this new myth uh the myth of the zombie
um I Delo might be a little bit out
people have said but what about
Frankenstein and I say well maybe that's
too a little too early but anyways we I
don't want to quibble about stuff like
that so like when we like we were asking
the question why and I had started
building the argument oh well myths
typically Express something that's sort
of other incoh but nevertheless sort of
perennial but also pertinent and
profound and I really started reflecting
on this idea well maybe there're the
articulation in Mythic form of the
experience of the meeting crisis and
then we just laid out the argument look
at all the features of the zombie and
how they're so different from the other
monsters in in horror I mean so just a a
few right right away zombies typically
don't have a supernatural origin they're
sort of us decayed which is really
interesting
um they're frequently hungry for brains
which is a weird thing the organ of
meaning making presumably um they
consume and they are never satisfied
they move around in a hoorde but they
have no communal existence whatsoever
they have no history they have no
culture they're drifting aimlessly uh uh
and and they um how can I put this they
don't represent what you would call sort
of supernat natural evil they represent
this other they represent more of this
things going radically wrong in a
different way and then we noticed that
that myth had magnetized with another
myth that of course has an independent
existence the myth of the
apocalypse and we got the oh well and
people were and I I mean even at the
time people were going around and they
would refer in conversation to the
zombie apocalypse as if it was a a
future event
um and the apocalypse originally of
course is a Christian idea and it's the
idea of you know the the the the the the
final Revelation the disclosure of the
New World um and then we realized oh the
zombie is also a perversion of the
Christian myth of resurrection and then
that's getting bound up and then we see
a a perversion of the Apocalypse into
the loss of the old world but no no
disclosure of the new world it's just a
for it's just a continual drifting away
and losing of this world and then I
thought well you know put those two
together and you've got a lot of the
Machinery of the meaning crisis running
how does that work with zombies right
because if the the the solution in these
myths uh I'm not that where sort of
what's the way sort of to to kill the
Zombies or to get back to sort of the
the okay so this is the thing Huns this
is what also is really important and
it's part of what what the myth is
conveying because typically like you
know uh the monster has a lair the
zombies are homeless so tracking down
the lair like you do with a vampire or
the werewolf or or even the ghost
doesn't do anything because there is no
you know there is no archetypal origin
that it's bound to and if you kill a
zombie nothing changes you you kill tons
of them and there's just
more and so there isn't this is
frequently the thing there isn't in
these movies typically an answer World
War Z sort of tried to give a solution
somehow the whole world would Marshall
and there'd be a World War uh but what
we noted is that very frequently the
answer is just um that there is no
answer it's this sense of right which is
also often how people feel in the
meeting cres a feel of EX a feeling of
existential
inment uh and and the only answers that
come out the class answer and it's not
really an answer but it's the the Deep
response you know in
um oh uh I'm trying to think of the name
of the big series uh I keep thinking of
uh The Walking Dead is that what they
called it but anyways uh that that
series um where they they they say on on
more than one occasion they say we are
The Walking Dead I think that was the
name of the the show actually we are We
Are The Walking Dead um because it's
interesting very often one of the tropes
of the the genre is you don't actually
call zombies zombies in in the TV show
or in the movie they've broken that a
little bit more recently but but this
idea that the only thing that comes to
people is not any kind of Deliverance or
salvation or resolution the only thing
they come to is a kind of realization
that there's no deep difference between
them and the zombies the people and
where would you where would you um say
that if if if we look at history and we
look at the mythologies that are sort of
dominant
when what was the turning point that we
uh sort of turned to this mythology
would you I mean for instance I was
thinking is it n um sort of sort of the
one reading of course of n would would
make that possible saying is is this
niist uh uh Goddess that culture that
has has brought us here but where would
you point sort of
the so hun there's two potential
questions you're asking me one is where
would I point to sort of the origin of
the myth and where or
where would I point to the origin of the
crisis which which yeah exactly I'm I'm
I'm asking both but perhaps better to to
to go to sort of the origin of the
crisis I think for people that's that's
the most important question
here yeah so uh what where you have to
look for is you have to step back um and
you you have to ask at what level are we
talking and we're talking at the level
of what uh Anthropologist like Clifford
GS call A world view um and in a world
viw you have two interlocking things you
have a theory of how the world is
knowable um and then you have like how
you can know the world you have a theory
of knowing let's put it that way epistem
epistemology right yeah yeah you have an
epistemological uh account and then you
have an account of how the world is
ontologically knowable how is the world
structured such that it is intelligible
to us and then how do those fit together
so that I can model the world to me as
an arena for my action and I can model
myself as an agent that belongs and fits
in that Arena and and this is sort of
your meta meaning system this is this
ancient Arena structuring between the
epistemological and the ontological
gives you a an overarching sort of
cultural cognitive grammar for how you
can develop more specific meaning
systems like the legal system or an
ethical system or a religious system or
an aesthetic system or even a popular uh
entertainment culture Etc so you have
this
overarching uh worldview and then what
you what I did in the series was I tried
to tr Trace out well how where does this
worldview have its origin where does it
come to sort of a fruition and then how
does it fall apart and so um the main
argument do you want me to go into those
three moments or yeah nice yeah
definitely yeah okay okay so the main
argument I made that our worldview so
one way to see it is um you know I I'll
do this with my students I'll say how
many of you have read the Egyptian Book
of the Dead Or and or the Epic of
gilgames and maybe one or two people put
up their hands and then I'll say well
how many of you you know have read the
Bible or read some Plato and a lot of
people put up their hands and and and I
say well notice how we identify with
texts up to a certain date and then we
don't identify with the texts older than
that right and that's sort of around
what Carl yaspers Karen Armstrong and
other people call the axial Revolution
whether or not it was a revolution or a
transition or whether it was I don't
want to get into all those historical
subtleties all I need is something major
changed there was a collapse of the bran
age you know Empires and we got a a a
period of sort of everything there were
it was was a very hard time and then
when civilization starts to rebuild
people are much more experimental
there's a whole bunch of new Psycho
Technologies and what you get in the
actual Revolution is you get things like
alphabetic literacy and numeracy in
Greece and the rise of democratic
institutions in which you have to
justify and so you get this what Bella
called second order thinking you get
this you get every all human beings have
metacognition they can reflect on their
cognition but you get this this
empowerment of that second order
thinking so people can bring a much more
powerful reflective critical awareness
to bear and what you get is the
realization of how much we are the cause
of suffering um you you go from like
individuals doing things that cause
suffering to no no no the way we like
the way we see the world is some how
fundamentally wrong it's illusory or
it's fallen or we're sinful or we're out
of Harmony but this fundamental sense
that um uh we need to engage in a very
comprehensive form of self-correction
self-transcendence and so you even get
this this creation which I eventually
becomes problematic of a new mythology
you get a Two Worlds mythology there's
like there was there was also always a
stack in the ancient world but this is
different there's a world and the lower
world is somehow
illusory uh decadent fall it's less real
this is a new idea and then there's a
super world that is more real and we
need to get there in order to realize
our full reality and come into the
fullness of human being and so you get
all of this movement towards
Transcendence and then what you have is
you have two major streams I now this is
like 2500 years ago right I'd say like
Christianity or uh so no this is more uh
this is a well yes it's about 2 200
years ago I mean the the the axal
revolution probably starts a little bit
earlier but that's close that's very
that's good that's good okay so um
you get two streams in what becomes the
West you've got both both of these
founding peoples um have both aspects
but there's a difference in emphasis in
Greece you had a very much an emphasis
on what I call the vertical Dimension
what are the levels of reality and how
does knowing and being move up and down
these levels and so this is very much
the platonic uh metaphor now of course
the Hebrews have the up and down but
they place a much greater emphasis on
History they place a greater emphasis on
moving from the world of enslavement
Egypt to the promised land and God moves
with you through time and history and
you're co-creating with God the future
and then what you get is you get in
Christianity the drawing together of
these two into a very powerful worldview
that gives you an integrated account of
the vertical and the horizontal and I
talk about that giving you sort of the
three orders you need in your worldw you
it gives you a nomological order it
tells you the rules by which reality
runs it gives you a narrative order it
tells you the story you belong to and it
gives you a normative order it tells you
how you can Ascend the vertical and it
does this all beautifully and integrated
and and really well structured and then
what
happens late Middle Ages that starts to
fall apart that starts to fall apart in
a lot of important ways um and one of
the reasons why it starts to fall well
there's two interlocking reasons one is
sort of the knowing
side what happens is there's increasing
changing in Reading um and eventually
the accessibility uh of of uh easier
text and eventually there going to be
the P the you know the printing press
but that whole thing is take is is
taking off much earlier and you get the
movement of knowing to what I call a
reduction to propositional tyranny that
all the nonpropositional kinds of KN
emphasized in in Greece so in in
addition to dioa discursive knowing you
have noesis right you have Tech which is
procedural knowing you have noesis which
is perspectival and you have nosus which
is this participatory knowing all of
those get lost and and what happens is
you get a retraction of knowing to
propositions and what knowing is is to
get a coherence in the proposition that
somehow Co corresponds to reality and
then you get the rise of nalism and the
idea that we're now observing reality
and naming it from a distance and you
get this radical disconnect yeah and at
the same time that that that's happening
the Two Worlds mythology is getting
rified and even off aifi into the
natural world that is accessible by
reason and Science and the supernatural
world that is completely inaccessible to
reason and Science and is only
accessible by faith where Faith now
means this kind of asserting things
without
evidence and what happens with that is
you get and the two the two reinforce
each other but I won't go into but what
happens is you get radical disconnection
all these disconnections start to form
yeah eventually the upper World becomes
absurd to people and then you get a very
you get a very deep problem because
people had been educated that this world
was the schoolhouse for how we got to
that world it doesn't have it doesn't
have any inherent value but if you theer
world right
L this is n's point so you get that and
then as we get more and more locked into
to if if we if you come to think that
there are no real patterns or relations
out there there right it's all in here
you move very rapidly into decart's
dualism where there's this there's the
completely immaterial mind stuff in here
completely separate and and I know
Bernardo differ on this on some degree
but I'm just making a historical Point
here yeah
get you get decart's dualism which gives
you a radical disconnect between mind
and body radical disconnect between you
and other Minds radical disconnect
between you and the world radical
skepticism radical solipsism you've lost
the sacred canopy the church is now in
in in in turmoil because of the
reformation and then there's the bloody
bloody bloody civil war between the
Catholics and the Protestants and people
say let's put religion out of the center
stage of Our Lives you get the emergence
of the secular world the secular state
and it's within a cartisian scientific
framework and then you have the meaning
crisis because what you have is a
worldview that purports to explain
everything except how you as a meaning
maker actually belong in that world at
somebody who pursues meaning and truth
and can do science so you have the
problem that we generate this worldview
In from which we are radically alienated
radically
disconnected yeah it's very how you this
is so beautiful how you sketch that Meta
Meta Arc in in in just a couple of
minutes and there's a lot in there I
thought when when you said sort of that
disconnect that sort of the first the
yeah I think you must have treated the
Yum's work also um right and I I I just
hearing you talk remembered I this quote
by David yum s of he was the father of
empiricism right that he he sense says
something like if anything if there's no
sort of hardcore
empirical way to test stuff committed to
the flame so is this a war against right
and well can I say something about that
because yeah sure sure he what he
actually says is is he says if you can't
uh show it by deductive logic or by
empirical evidence committed to the
flames and what he's doing is he's
radically SE he's also doing this
radical separation between reason which
is get getting reduced to computation
and all of the a effective embodied
aspects of our existence the the sensory
empirical world and even even that even
those two are getting pulled apart and
deize from from each other it's yeah
it's yeah and and whereas I think some
of those I mean the
the Wen sort of someone like Newton was
also in into Alchemy right so he had
sort of the they were still in that era
where both they could hold hold Ser both
positions right would you agree I think
uh well I mean I I have a very uh
ambivalent relationship to Newton I I
agree with you that Newton is doing both
things uh it's not clear to me that
Newton was seeking any kind of deep
reconciliation between them and the way
he like I think he think I think he
thought he was doing things he thought
he could use sort of mathematical
principles to turn the Bible into sort
of you know an alphabetic code that he
can convert into a numerical sequence
that he could sort of calculate the end
of the world and of course all those
calculations came to not and the
interpretations are largely rejected by
almost all biblical Scholars so I maybe
he thought he was trying to integrate
him
but maybe this is the most charitable
way to say it the integration is where
his genius left him um there's no genius
in his integration attempts uh there was
I think there was still a desire to have
that fundamental connectedness and
that's why he's pursuing Alchemy why
he's so invested in these theological
Endeavors uh but um he uh there there
there's no there's no Legacy to that the
in the his his I think very insufficient
attempts at the
integration but and um that nice to hear
that from you because I'm not not that
not that into uh into this but uh would
you say that um um
the the both words worlds were still
held sort of intellectually I I suppose
in in sort of the early Enlightenment
and the Scientific Revolution and then
we have in the 19th century when we get
to sort of the metaphysics of
physicalism and materialism it seems as
if people somehow forget about
metaphysics all together at least that's
sort of my analysis in in sort of
reading and thinking about all of of
this and how would you uh describe that
development sort of just this awareness
of metaphysics and the shift made that
led perhaps to the meaning crisis and
then now sort of where we are at well
now of course we have SE Renaissance I
think again of of metaphysics but I mean
for for for 50 or 100 years it it seemed
as if materialism was just raining and
metaphysics wasn't even sort of thought
of in
Academia yeah and I I think this is
important to trace this out um it's um
so part of what's happening is yeah
there's the upper world but think about
how absent God is from
Shakespeare right and that's in this you
know and that that's in the time of
Newton right uh before Newton I should
say um and so God is largely absent the
the Supernatural is there but it's very
it's very like absurd in the sense of we
don't know what it is and it's very it's
it's always negative and always
terrifying right you got that sort of
sense so the the the upper world is
already becoming
absurd and and then what happening uh
around that is Kant basically comes
along and says you know what um I'm
going to argue that there's a deep
reason why that's absurd we can't we we
the mind is incapable of building any
kind of metaphysics and so whenever we
do this right we're going to end up with
something that's actually in a deep
philosophical sense absurd doesn't make
any sense um and so with Kant you get
you get sort of you get what hap what
starts with aam and Hume right and and
you get this locking in and we're you
know and you sorry the pun there but
it's even in lock you know Lock's model
of we're sort of like inside a dark
cabinet somewhere and we're getting
Postcards From the world uh and we're
trying to sort of assemble them and and
reason as to what the outside world is
and and and a Kant just takes all of
that and locks it in and what's happened
and this is still the case uh within a
lock of a lot of Academia many people
take the content
critique I'm Transcendence and how it
gets ramified and developed um by Hegel
um a a as kind of a finished thing uh we
like the the idea that there's a
Transcendent um that there is uh uh a
metaphysical way of uh of thinking
that's gives us some appropriate contact
with uh kinds of reality that we can't
get within sort of the bounds of our
nomological experience many philosophers
uh take that for granted and Kant
properly
argued I mean I don't agree with his
argument but I think what he was doing
made sense that's what I mean that this
was actually the philosophical
implication of the neonian world that
the neonian world is a closed world and
we're locked in and all we can talk
about right is that and we are locked
into the finitude and so you get a world
viw in which we're locked into a
particular Arena and cognitive agency is
locked in and we're and and and and we
but the the the the maddening thing
about it is we're locked out from each
other I mean k literally K has the thing
in itself which is what reality and we
and it's completely unknowable to us and
things like that but but he he at least
doesn't sort of ontologically deny this
Transcendent reality right it's it's
sort of an epistemic that we just cannot
know it we're locked in in that sense or
yeah different yeah yeah yeah no I think
that's right but his arguments are his
well his arguments are famously uh uh
difficult to read as convincing
arguments I mean like a standard
argument from Kant is well I can't give
you any any argument that would license
an ontological conclusion but notice
that we have this moral drive and the
only way we could actually satisfy it is
if we were Immortal because if we're
finite we but odd implies can so how can
there be an odd on us if we can't
realize it so we must be immortal and
you sort of look like that and say uh I
don't think a implies you know absolute
can it only means can you know in the
situation does does morality presuppose
Perfection there's a lot of moral
systems and and that's what happens I I
I don't want to go through it because
that's what happen people just basic
they they they're not convinced by these
these these these sort of pietistic
arguments these arguments that sort of
go from our moral intuitions and other
things and try to say oh well you know I
can't I can't give you any argument to I
can't give you any reason to believe
that but you you can believe it because
of this and it's like well either that's
a reason or it's not and and so on
wouldn't you say that in that that sense
we we live in interesting times right
because even your your own work the Mind
Body problem and talking about
metaphysics talking about
Consciousness we live in the age of
computation and we live in the age of
sort of AI right and now sort of these
questions become relevant because they
might even become technologically
relevant to us so what are your thoughts
there
um I I I I I mean I think I think one of
the things that's been happening um and
the two the two I would most I I think
many philosophers would agree with me
the two greatest philosophers of the
20th century are Vicken Stein and heiger
and what you see is uh and they both
start the two big schools Vicken Shin is
the analytic tradition Russell right but
but vicenin really gets it going and and
then there's um you know heiger and the
Continental tradition and what both of
those Traditions slowly come to from
completely independent angles and I
think actually recovering the Deep
impetus given to them by both vicin shin
and heiger was an attempt to just not an
attempt not to resolve the cartisian
problem but to somehow just break out of
that grammar the mind body right the the
the the subjective objective all and
just and break it and and so like you
know kathern pixo in her wonderful book
assess of Truth says you know look
what's happened all of the big
distinctions that were supposed to keep
us you know locked into the cartisian
world the analytic synthetic distinction
of Kant that is broken down under quin's
argument the fact value distinction or
the is odd of Hume well that has broken
down under case fa and putam and I can
do all and what you can see is the
analytic tradition has just sort of you
know destroyed um all of the things that
were supposed to keep us sort of Happily
in that uh model and then on the other
side uh you've got the phenomenological
tradition doing what's been called the
theological Turnin phenomenology which
is trying to get away from I'm going to
use a neutral as neutral a term as I can
your H but trying to get away from the
sacredness within our phenomenology is
project somehow the sacred is a given in
our phenomenology the way other aspects
of our phenomenology are present to us
and so you've got the you've got the
theological turn in the Continental
tradition and you have the analytic
tradition basically destroying all of
the distinctions and the whole
conceptual schema that supported that
whole cartisian world
viiew there's a lot here and I've been
um trying to get my head around I'm I'm
studying sort of um Quantum Mechanics
for the sensia foundation because you
know Bernardo is we're very much about
sort of that analytic approach and
trying to see what the foundations of
physics are
saying um and that's not of course not
your field of expertise but what what I
find super interesting when I hear you
talk about these two philosophical uh
camps arri arriving at this and then we
have of course sort of the the the the
the stunning revolution in physics with
quantum theory that sort of also messes
with the objective and the subjective
and I even came ac across this term I
think with is one of the students from
wheeler John Wheeler who said we live in
a sort of eptic emerg is sort of the
epist epistemic and the antic of quantum
so we are now that's just super
fascinating but then you then you get to
sort of a a monism right
and is it would you say that that sort
of from that I think that's right I I I
would also just add to your thing about
how the quantum up of course relativity
also also Challen challenges absolute
space and time right and it puts you
into a relational ontology as opposed to
a substance ontology and of course the
same thing is happening at Quantum we're
getting if the current proposal that
space time is itself emergent from
entanglement then you have pure
relationality at the bottom and pure
relationality at the top and we're
seeking the relation between them and
this just undermines the whole substance
ontology and the subject predicate logic
in profound ways and what I think that
does is I think that also
significantly um
undermines um sort of a reductionist
strategy uh a sort of that that that
everything above the bottom level is
somehow illusory or not real and there's
a whole bunch of arguments I've Marshal
to advance that and other people like my
friend Evan Thompson in the blind spot
is doing so a lot again there's now this
emerging thing what like no um this
attempt to get a single level flat
ontology um isn't isn't viable you you
have um VF gang Smith and in from
quantum mechanics the measurement
problem you need at least two levels in
your reality to have measurement and
soon as you admit the possibility of two
levels reductionism is done it's just
done it's finished right and so and for
me that's important Hans because that
means we have after this long loss of
the supernatural which I'm kind of glad
it's gone I'm not trying to bring it
back but as we lost we as we lost that
we lost the vertical and now what's
happening is the recovery of the
vertical we're realizing that we are not
just historical political beings but
we're recovering that we participate
ontologically in a vertical fashion what
Plato and the neop platinus were talking
about yeah and that to me that to me is
very very significant and where would
you sort of and it's it's always a bit
sort of a trick question but I I ask it
a lot to people just to S of I I see
Spectrum right where physicalism and
materialism is one pos position and of
course sort of the hardcore idolist
position I
see uh I I always notice that people
don't want to commit to either one of
them which I can understand and then we
have this position of P
psychism maybe first what do you think
of this spectrum I'm sketching here and
if you think it is sort of an an a
Continuum or spectrum that is where
would you point yourself at uh yeah and
I and um I want to be really really
careful ful here um
because I I'll be I of course I'll be
honest with you H I'll give what I think
are my best arguments and my best take
but I I mean I think next to God
Consciousness is the hardest problem
right and uh and so uh I fully suspect
that even though I'll give what I think
is my best take it will probably not not
not not too far from now I'll be shown
to be in some important way incorrect um
and and and think everybody and and and
this is one of the things I liked about
our discussion with Bernardo we
disagreed but we both recognized the
value of the other person's perspective
there was genuine epistemic humility
there was genuine commitment and that's
why I said I'd be happy to talk with him
again I think there's a plan for him for
me and him to talk again at some point
soon oh great you should because also I
think we're committed to sort of the the
same in the end the same Mission if I
read sort of the the essencia foundation
is very much about in the end we're
about SCI right in metaphysics but it
has this cultural aspect that we see
sort of what sort of this reductionist
sort of naive materialism to say that
way does to society and and because I I
think you would agree right that that is
a very sort of um um very at the root of
the meaning crisis in a sense that turn
totally I think so um I so I'm okay with
the Spectrum um
um I I like to make it a little bit more
epistemic antic um in in some
way um so I okay so I describ myself and
Greg en Rus and I are are we've argued
this and we're we're writing a book on
Consciousness um I argue for what I call
Transcendent naturalism so naturalism is
not phys so naturalism is first of all
not reductive physicalism naturalism
Embraces a multi-leveled ontology and
it's not just emergence up because if
it's just emergence up the other the
upper level are epiphenomenal it's
emergence up and emanation down it's
very much a neoplatonic kind of model
and then the idea in that is well what
does that mean epistemologically well
what that means epistemologically is
don't derive don't just derive your
ontology from your Sciences your Natural
Sciences the natur you also have to
derive your ontology by what's
presupposed by your Natural Sciences
right not just what's derived from them
but what's pres what's presupposed by
them well there's intelligibility well
if you give me that there's
intelligibility then I can unpack the
neoplatonic worldview and if you if you
agree that the conf that the
representational theory of knowledge is
being significantly undermined then our
relationship to these levels of self and
world is not just representational it's
actually participatory we can in we can
partic participate in strong
Transcendence not just sort of
psychological Improvement or
representing the world better we can
actually as you know po would say we can
become more at one with the one right
but the one isn't like even though I'm
gesturing upward isn't it isn't a super
natural it's as much at the bottom
coming up as it is from the Top com and
it completely interpenetrates so there's
a polarity of where Al for me ultimate
reality and this is how you can bind you
can bind intelligibility to being by
thinking of real this is the work of
James filler and others uh that reality
is ultimately relationality not not a
substance um and and so um that's uh
where I I I I sort of that's my stance
the sort of transcendent naturalism that
is rejects a substance ontology has a a
a purely relational um ontology uh and
then uh what that means uh uh again is U
is um a sense of uh you know a
participatory ultimately a participatory
epistemology uh transformative in
powerful ways and
um this leads to the play the the place
where you can both epistemologically and
a lot of my work does this and
ontologically home experiences
realizations of
non-duality yeah yeah which and for me
that's a I think any good theory needs
to do that I think the the
cross-cultural cross- historical report
we get from people and I've experienced
these too is that these these are the
really real and if my theory of
knowledge and reality can't home these
experiences of the really real I take it
that it's failed um so I that's one of
my touchstones can can my can this this
this world viiew can it not only play
well with science but can it play well
with non-duality and non-u
transformation so that's what iend
beautiful and I like that word strong
Transcendence what it triggers I hear
you speak about phenomenology um I a
couple of couple of thoughts here I'm
super curious what you think do you know
the work of Jeffrey kple the I I I I've
met him I met him and we didn't get a
chance to talk very much he complimented
me on a comment I made uh we were both
at a conference together at Harvard on
platonism as a living tradition so Jack
I I'll briefly sketch why I mention him
because uh he's written this book called
uh this super Humanity so he he he he
he's really all about that we have to
make this anthological flip how he call
he's also written a book The Flip I
wouldn't say he he calls himself a jewel
aspect aspect
monist um but he pointed me that book I
found very very interesting because he
pointed to sort of the the fact that we
have two William jameses we have the
pragmatist and but we also have the the
William James was really into trans
perhaps strong Transcendence and yes we
have Thea denialist we also have denich
ubberman which you could read like just
instrumental and and and not as if he
was talking about something really
Transcendent and kis is saying no we
need to acknowledge the fact that these
thinkers were actually uh invoking um an
an a real ontology Beyond sort of just
our phenomenological explanations and I
see now um I see this happening in the
the Psychedelic research community
visited conferences here in the
Netherlands and it's very interesting
debate because here we have people
coming back meeting God Oneness you name
it of course in the psychodelic
experiences and then of course the the
research Community is okay how we how
how how do we need to guide these people
metaphysically right and we're going to
just say Okay that was your experience
experience and so we see now this
metaphysical debate becoming really
interesting and I I saw that the
mainstream of psychedelic research wants
to stay in a sort of safe phenomenology
saying it's just your experience we
don't need to say anything man super in
just very interested what your analysis
is of what's happening right
now well I'm glad you brought that up I
mean the group there's a group of people
that are very interested in my work um
uh be because of its potentials to give
um uh what what they take I'm trying not
to be self I'm trying to not be self-
congratulatory here they take it to be a
better framework than that safe sort of
medical IED materialism um
that yeah and so the thing is like uh
and Hans everything I'm talking to you
about and it's completely appropriate to
talk about it in this philosophical
phenomenological ontological language
but it also connects up with a lot of
the nuts and bolts work I do on you know
predictive processing embodiment
relevance realization so like I I
believe I think I have good evidence to
believe that I can science with the best
of the sciences and so that's what's
attractive I believe uh to right so
people can say well look you know John
John does this work and it's really you
know theoretically powerful that's what
I'm told and it really and we we just
got a paper published on you know
naturalizing relevance realization in
frontiers of uh Neuroscience I believe
or uh psychology can't remember which
one uh um and uh
it can do it can get in into the
scientific Arena and and you know do do
the do the sparring really well but it
also like I said is open to a much
stronger reading of these Transcendent
and transformative States and many
people in the like in the in in the
research Community they're they're good
researchers they want to be honest to
what they're they're the data they're
getting people people don't agree when
you say to them well we think you're
just sort of you know they go well
that's kind of interesting but for me it
was blah right right yeah yeah yeah and
so I uh um sorry Hans this is difficult
for me because I I I'm sounding I don't
want to come across as self
congratulatory but I'm trying to explain
why right why I think there there there
has been increasing interest from the
Psychedelic Community the Psychedelic
predictive processing Community about my
work precisely because it affords a
potential bridging and a well argued
well-evidenced way out of a merely
medical materialist ontology yeah and I
think you're doing exactly the same for
sort of the mindfulness community and
people who are sensing that in these
practices there is also something deeper
than just sort of the functional way
that it can make you more relaxed or
sort of the the mech mindfulness uh
critique right because how how do you
regard that the whole project of seeing
okay yes we have this meaning crisis we
need more meaning in our lives okay
let's look at these Traditions that
somehow uh uh give people that but we
don't want that difficult weird ontology
they're talking just do the practices
and that's interesting we because you
see that now I think also don't you
think that sort of the whole stoicism
movement and yeah it's called Mac
mindfulness you have all these practices
and people are doing it on M right now
but um it's as if you don't you want to
keep keep the ontology out a bit and
just well so I have a deep critique of
that I have a very deep in standing
critique of that I mean have the
individual publish critique of of that
um mposition uh from a Buddhist or a
viantis framework into sort of Western
consumer capitalism and a technique so
that you will feel comfortable with
being a corporate drone or something
like that I like I I I I I reject that
but I want to make it a more broader
critic ISM which is this idea that you
can again that you can just make
something a technique is missing the
point human beings like the there's
formal Arguments for this no free lunch
theor and biased variants I won't go
into this there is no Panacea practice
there's no simple thing you can do that
will alleviate all the ways in which
human beings fall into self-deceptive
self-destructive Behavior become
alienated experience absurdity get
overwhelmed by existential anxiety
there's nothing so if you put your your
CED mindfulness practice back in situ
you'll see that it's part of an whole
Ecology of practices like the eight-fold
path and what you have is this very
complex living system that is dealing
with the complexity of human cognition
and being in the world and addressing it
in this highly dynamically parallel
fashion and then you can't just have
that hanging out there in limbo an
Ecology of practices needs a homing
world view that legitimates it and
properly authorizes people to be
teachers and guides and that's what the
religions used to do I'm not advocating
for religion here but you can't just say
you know what I'll do is I'll take it
out of all of that and I'll plug it in
over here and it'll continue to work and
you're just that's just that's just
profound self-deception that's just
profound self and and here's the thing
Hans that actually exacerbates the
meaning crisis because it keeps you
locked in to the very mindset that is
driving the meaning crisis wow uh depth
here and you point to the necessity of
of religion we that we need it right I
I've heard you say that also in relation
to Ai and where things are heading and
that we need could you elaborate a bit
on that why we exactly in in this day
and age in the age of of AI things now
going so fast and and we're about to get
more Al uh alienated why we need
religion and how we can get there
because that's of course a difficult
question so I I would I would yes and
this has always Frau for me uh because
as soon as I hear soon as I I used to
say we need the religion that's not a
religion and if you want I'll tell you
why now I don't use that term I there
was there was there was a misframing of
the issue in my understanding it that
way but what I what I was The Virtuous
part of that sort of deep mistake was
that I was trying to get at when I say
like we need something like religion we
need an we need an acology of practices
we need a
mythological right not right uh world
view that homes that uh and orients us
and and puts us into the right
relationship with the right people at
the right time for right development and
things like that uh you know the The
Meta virtue of maturation is just facing
up to reality um so when I say that
people automatically hear either one
religion Christianity or they hear the
abrahamic notion of what religion is
religion is the worship of a
supernatural super being um super thing
um and of course I don't mean that they
think well maybe John just means the
Legacy religions from the actual age
like also Buddhism and DSM well I want
to include the non-theism but I don't
mean just that either uh I I mean
there's a fellow Canadian shellenberg
he's talked about how here's a very
reasonable
proposal he says we are probably
spiritually immature we've only been
doing spirituality for maybe maximally
4,000 years we've existed as even Homo
sapiens for 200,000 years and then
there's been you know there's been
something like the homogenous for four
million years right and then you put
that against how long there's been life
and how how long you it's like oh but we
got it we've got timate reality nailed
down and it's like I don't think
so so I when I'm talking about that what
I'm talking about is we need something
like what religion did but we need it to
be responsive to and responsible to what
I think is happening right now and I
think I think Bernardo is an instance of
this and and I think you're you're
talking to many people in many places
there is a bottom up and it's not just
popular there's also intellectuals in
involved um artist but there's an advent
of the Sacred taking place now there's
an there's like the sacred wants to come
into prominence for us in order to give
us what we need to deeply address the
meeting crisis but it's almost like we
we're it's almost like we need to find
we need to I I'll I'll punt on this we
need to come to terms we need to come up
with the right terms but we need to come
to terms with it and um and so I now
talk about the philosophical Silk Road
and it's the name of my next big series
because I'm saying well now what we need
to do is sort of journey through all of
the religions see if we can find a
through line and that's not the answer
that is the thing that can make us best
like best attending on waiting for and
capable of receiving and appreciating
the answer as it is emerging for us
that's how I talk now and beautiful and
you uh when you say the sacred ones
good maybe to define the sacred what I
to sort of I want to and and eventually
I'm gonna ask you to eventually at some
point bring me back to why I say
theology is the discipline for the
future for AI but let's answer that
question because I think it's very
important here again I think shellenberg
is very helpful and it's convergent from
a lot of other things um so
there's there's sort of there's the
three T's the triple
Transcendent so the sacred is something
that is ultimately
real it's ultimately
transformative and it's ultimately
normative it not only transforms you it
guides you so it's ultimately real it's
ultimately transformative and it's
ultimately normative and then you ask
yourself these two questions this is
also deeply influenced by his work you
ask yourself well what is the best
stance I should take towards the sacred
um he says we're immature so we
shouldn't be trying to draw conclusions
we should seek to mature and and so
imagine a child that was convinced they
knew it all well we've met children like
that and they're little demons right um
and and so uh he says he argues well
what you have to think about is two
things how thick do you want your
description of the Transcendent to be
thick meaning you're trying to fill it
in because you're you're you're you're
trying to get completeness and closure
and conclusion yeah or you want a thin
description because a thin description
gives you enough so you're not just I
don't know what we're doing but just
enough to orient you so you can develop
and grow up and mature and then he says
now you can have a thin or a thick
description and you can have a weak or a
TR a strong sense of the Transcendent
the sacred weak would be no teas then
weak would a little less weak would be
one t and then as you add more T's you
get a stronger sense of the Transcendent
and then then this is the argument to
make and I and and I I I've made
convergent arguments so I'm very much
aligned with it if we are oriented from
The Stance of the recognition of our
spiritual maturity and we're trying to
mature we should have a thin
description but we should Orient towards
a strong Transcendence because that is
the the the relationship that has the
greatest potential to transform us grow
us up develop us mature us so we should
have a thin description of a strong
Transcendent and then if if you'll allow
me if you'll allow me sure yeah yeah
please here's a Move I Make he doesn't
make this move I make this move so I'm
not trying to take credit I'm trying to
give say this is not something he says
and just his name again because I that
went a bit too fast the Shing
shellenberg uh evolutionary religion
religion after science two two great
books please continue yeah so let's call
theism now these terms are wishy-washy
but let's in order to be clear what
we're talking about let's call theism
The Proposal of thick strong you have
you want a thick description of strong
Transcendence and then he says let's
let's call atheism a refusal of strong
Transcendence there is no strong
Transcendence okay I propose to you that
non-theism rejects the weak
Transcendence of atheism and the thick
description of theism non-theism is the
thin the thin strong option and it is
the one that is most appropriate for
affording us to grow into and mature
towards and afford the Advent of the
Sacred that's the argument I wanted to
make that's a strong argument um it I
find it very compelling um but I mean I
should I want to say critical in this
interview but this this this I just find
very compelling um two things it reminds
me of reading in in in zombies and
Western culture you made clear to me
that I think you said um that after
Luther s re the the the Reformation in
in uh in Christianity that um sacredness
and spirituality became
abstract um and that I found a very uh
very interesting Insight you could could
you say that there the the scription
became thick you know I'm I'm I'm sort
of brought up in this Dutch reformed
tradition it's Sola viid it's just about
believing and the doctrines and and
actually it wants to downplay your
longing for that strong Transcendence
because it puts all emphasis on uh um
blessed are those that uh believe
without seeing right and then I'm like
and this I'm but please reflect on what
I'm saying um um when I go to sort of
I've had my own psychedelic experiences
and listening a lot to Terence McKenna
ramas sort of all the sort of the
Pioneers in that field there's this
approach okay I'm I want exactly what
you're saying I want a thin description
just tell me what the substance is and
what the ceremony is and I'll do it and
then I want that strong experience and
that's exactly what it gives him and I'm
now seeing there's a Renaissance and
psychedelics but are different and
Shamanism and all sorts of tradition so
isn't it happening John and isn't it
sort of yeah that that I think so I I
think I think the Advent of the Sacred I
think the Psychedelic Renaissance is
part of the Advent of the Sacred I I I
think for all of the ways in which you
know they can go aride the the the the
the the return to Shamanism the attempt
to bring back stoicism uh and I take all
your criticism seriously I'm not I'm not
putting them aside but there's there's
something driving that is what I'm
trying to get at and I think this is
about um people's desire to address the
meaning crisis and an understanding that
you know simply getting more stuff or
accumulating political power or having
your side win in the culture war or uh
just sort of affirming some
comprehensive scientific uh theoretical
propositions none of that cuts it none
of that does it for you and then to and
then to know that that's well because I
can hear I can hear a sort of the
village atheist saying well you're
that's just you're just making an
argument for hope no I'm not I'm saying
that that position from which you're
making your reductive claims is actually
not epistemologically ontologically
viable so it's not just well wouldn't it
be nice if there was meaning it's no no
no if you have a worldview in which
meaning is not deeply possible for you
that just puts you into this profound
performative contradiction it undermines
your scientific Endeavors Etc
so and go ahead oh sorry yeah yeah um
how do you think we can avoid if we look
back in history like 50 years ago we had
the first sort of psychedelic uh um that
wasn't a Renaissance but sort of the
when it really took off right in the 60s
and the whole psychedelic culture then
we see sort of the new age culture
coming out of that and I think all those
people who tripped in the 60s became you
know they bought houses and became
materialists
Etc what culture do we need now to sort
of make sure that sort of this this
doesn't end up the same way because
nowadays there's also this critique of
spiritual bypassing spiritual
materialism and I also can I see see it
in the if I look in the mirror John I
see myself doing it in a way I see
myself how easy you get there I mean
there we have YouTube I can watch
YouTube videos I listen to one of you
and then I go to to more sort of
esoteric stuff which I like as a sort of
a hobby of self-help and and I'm doing
fine here in the west I have a house and
my life's beautiful but I'm not changing
the world or at least not perhaps not as
much as I could
do so I mean um well the one I would say
is uh you know a thin description
doesn't mean uh a an impoverished
Theology of practices and and
shellenberg also makes this clear no no
you need a rich Ecology of practices
that's why you in fact have a thin
description because you're making bloody
space in your mind and your life for
practices right that transform you know
you at all these levels from the
physiological up to higher States Of
Consciousness and also not just you but
all of your relationality your ways you
relate to other people Etc so a thin
description is actually deeply consonant
with a very richly developed Ecology of
practices because the reason why you're
having the thin description is because
you are trying to not close not come to
conclusion but open yourself up to the
best possible development which means
you need a rich Ecology of practices and
the problem in the 60s is there wasn't
that what you had was you had the drugs
The Beatles and kind of a regurgitated
Romanticism and kind of beat Buddhism
which is a romantic misunderstanding of
Buddhism I think kowak um I have a lot
of criticisms of kowak around that uh
things like that and so I think part of
what it fail why it failed is exactly
what we're talking about now we need
these
practices don't I I I I'll say this
don't take a psych a psychedelic
substance unless you already have a good
running Ecology of practices because if
you're not doing something to
significantly at Min at many levels
address your capacities for
self-deception you're you're well nobody
gets addicted to psychedelics no they
get addicted to Rabbit Hole metaphysics
that's what happens out of these things
right and so you want right and and then
what they end up with is is their own
idiosyncratic completely ocent thick
description you if you want to keep a
proper thin description you need a rich
Ecology of practices and you need to be
right constantly right balancing off the
experience with your cultivation of
wisdom and rational and wise
self-reflection individually and
collectively um and that was that wasn't
done and I I think that's a profound
mistake and um so part of my concern and
I and I should tell you that many of the
people that I talk with that the circles
I move within the Psychedelic world
they're concerned about that too for
example let me just give you one
concrete example so the media constantly
reports on the power of psychedelics and
that's misinformation in an important
way because it is the combination almost
always of psychedelics and a therapeutic
framework that brings about the results
it's not just the experience there's a
sapiential framework it's not
monological it's dialogical and it's
designed to bring about transformation
and it's only within that framework that
you're getting these results that you're
getting and see that's what I mean you
have to like put it put it into a proper
framework yeah
yeah there's a lot I want to S follow up
on but maybe good to uh also respect
your time to dive a bit more in sort of
the um um before I get back to sort of
stuff like this the the the itic a
question I had sort of the the the very
interesting uh like three-phase rocket
you propose intelligence rationality
wisdom um could you briefly sketch that
model and also uh following up sort of
additional to that question sort of that
that model then how relevance
realization plays into into that and to
what degree are these levels
computational okay sorry
e easy question um so
um U I I propose in fact I've just
recorded a course for the Peterson
Academy I propos that general
intelligence so first of all the
phenomena of general intelligence which
is people are invoking with AGI well you
should pay like go back and like pay
what what's meant by general
intelligence well Spearman talked about
this the fact that how you do in any one
test from multiple domains strongly
predicts on how you do on all the other
tests there's a strong positive there's
plausibly some general Factor at work
and of course there's endless debates
about what that is what I would argue
the evidence and the argument is
converging towards even though a lot of
people will disagree about this with me
but I'm I I think I could I do continue
to make a strong case on this I believe
is that what general intelligence is
it's the solving of two meta problems
meta problems are problems you have to
solve whenever you're trying to solve
some specific problem and there's two
meta problems the two things that will
make you more adapted one is how
anticipatory are you this is like
Michael Levan's idea of the of the
cognitive light cone like think about
how you judge your dog more intelligent
than a cat because you know you you can
see the dog anticipating more deeply
into the world than the cat and why
because when I can anticipate things
from a long way away my chances of
solving them goes up exponentially right
um so now but here's the thing and these
are two
interlocking as as soon as I start to
anticipate the world I face this problem
that the amount of information I have to
consult is going up exponentially and it
very quickly becomes combinator
explosive all of the things I could pay
attention to and all the possible
combination patterns of attention all
the things that I can remember all the
possibilities I consider all the
sequences of action and what you do and
you're doing it right now is you somehow
quickly grab what's relevant from
long-term memory couple combinations
what's relevant to pay attention to
couple combinations relevant things
you're nodding your head right and and
you're and you're doing it like that
you're doing it like that right and
that's what I call relevance realization
it's and I mean both senses of the word
you are becoming aware of something that
one sense of realization but also
reality is grabing you in a way there's
a a
realization it's and to make it Concrete
in my own personal life I've had this
that's just what comes comes up when you
say this I had this um I had an aquarium
and I had a fish jumping out i' never
had that problem and it wasn't the
fishnet was away and I and it was like
uh and I know if I I'm going to take it
it was like a very small fish I'll
damage it so I was like okay and I I I
went to the drawer in the kitchen I saw
a straw and I cut it open and I had
fixed like in no time I had the solution
it's like crazy if you think about it
right isn't this it right that out of
all the I of this problem and of all the
and then I just see what's relevant and
I combine stuff and I do something new
that's never been done to me that's
that's what it triggers right and that
and this the question then is can we
arrive at this algorithmically can we
arrive at this
computationally so I'm going to answer
that question in a sec but because but I
want to pick up on what your example
shows that's a moment of insight you had
you went oh Aha and you reframed how you
saw the problem you reformulated and
that tells you something else about
relevance realization it has this
recursive aspect to it one of the things
that relevance realization is doing is
realiz is trying to realize if the
framing is itself relevant right so
you're you're doing this zeroing in
you're framing the world because you
can't pay attention to everything and
but what what you do you've also got
something going that's constantly
probing the possibility that that frame
might be actually causing you to mistake
or miss the solution and when you have a
moment of insight now that's important
because that says that even within your
intelligence there is this requirement
of recursivity well why because when I
do this relevance realization I'm
ignoring so much
information and the chances that I might
be deceiving myself and missing what
really matters that what I find Salient
might actually not be relevant to
solving my problem right this is a
perennial problem we face now you can't
say well what I'll do is examine all the
information that's impossible so what
you need is you need strategies that
allow you to
ameliorate your self deception make that
that self-correction more flexible make
yourself more prone to Insight but not
jumping to conclusion because that's a
problem too so you like and you have to
do so you see what I'm doing with my
hands you need the pschology of
practices that will deal with this
really Dynamic massively recursive set
potentially self-deceptive but massively
adaptive ability that's
rationality that's ra rationality is how
you deal with the self-deception that
inevitably emerges when you use your
general intelligence yeah and it's
higher higher up than intelligence right
because it's reflecting on intelligence
itself yes exactly sense yeah yes now
and then we have the wisdom wisdom
what's the the step up then to wisdom
yeah okay so wisdom goes towards this
idea that I've already uded to when I
talked about propositional tyranny that
you have other kinds of knowing other
than propositional knowing you have
procedural Kno how and that's not stored
in beliefs it's stored in skills and it
doesn't give you a sense of Truth it
gives you a sense of power but your
sense of power is also a way you sense
reality you've got your you've got your
you've got your perspectival aw knowing
your noetic awareness right this is this
is knowing by noticing this is what's it
like to be you here right now noticing
what you're noticing
that that's perspectival knowing and
that's stored an episodic memory where
you remember living through an episode
from a particular perspective and then
that's grounded in participatory knowing
how are you coupled to the world so that
relevance realization is continuing to
happen how how are you cognitively
adaptively fitted to the world so that
you and the world fit together and
there's an agent Arena relationship and
there are affordances so you get the
participatory coupling gives you
affordances the perspective of know
knowing if it's working right notices
the the the relevant affordances you
bring that now gives you a script for
your acting out your skills and as you
act out your skills you gain evidence
whereby you form your
beliefs if that makes sense to you and I
have a lot of argument for that but if
that makes sense to you you have to
think oh but wait each kind of knowing
has its own different way of falling
into
self-deception and when I need right is
I need not only a rationality of
inference but also a rationality of
skill a rationality of insight a
rationality of identification are you
taking up the right role in it right now
think about when we talk about a
reasonable person we don't just mean
they run an argument in their head we we
mean they notice what they should notice
and they take on the appropriate role
they should take on right so if there's
a possibility of self-deception you not
only need a rational for each kind of
knowing you need a meta rationality that
coordinates them together that's wisdom
that's my proposal ah interesting and
and the question then is how to code
that it how does this relate to the sort
of more or less classic example in in in
AI in ethical AI that when you would
want sort of an strong intelligent say
okay buy me a cup of coffee and there's
no coffee around and starts killing
people to get you know sort of that
classic example because it doesn't have
the alignment problem yeah yeah yeah
yeah yeah okay so first of all first of
all sort of ontological point and then a
scientific point and then come back to
this proper ethical Point um the
ontological point and this was the point
of the paper we just got published
is we argue Johannes joerger Alex dedic
Anna redell um two students of mine uh
and uh Dennis Walsh a colleague of mine
at the University of Toronto we argue
that relevance realization is not
computational cannot be computational in
nature um and that has to do with a very
developed argument I'll just sort of
give the gist of it so I understand the
form I give won't be sort of deductively
value valid but the idea is okay
[Music]
so any attempt to come up with a rule
okay so if I'm going to apply a rule
like be
kind this is a classic argument even
going back to Aristotle so I can't
specify in the rule the conditions of
the application of the rule like being
kind to my son is very different from
how I'm being kind to my romantic
partner which is very different from how
I'm being kind to you and if I was kind
to you the way I'm being kind to my son
that's creepy and weird if I'm kind to
you the way I'm kind to my romantic
partner that's extra creepy and extra
weird and then what you can't do is say
well what I'll do is I'll make rules for
all the conditions of
applications right and Vicken Stein
famously said no this has to give way to
something that is not rule governed
that's the first point logical relations
implication so The Logical implications
of a proposition are constant and they
are they are commentator explosive in
number this is a point made by Jerry
foder so here's a proposition tomorrow
will be too tomorrow will be windy all
the possible implications of that are
there and that's constant that's its
logical identity but its relevance
changes it like that that the relevance
of that changes if I'm staying in and
watching movies if I'm going out uh and
I'm going skydiving if I'm flying a kite
if I'm going out for a picnic right do
you see what I'm saying and this was
photo's point the relevance is
constantly shifting The Logical
implication identity is constant so you
can't capture the relevance and The
Logical implications in fact I would
argue that that's what inference is
inference is selecting which application
happens to be relevant to to to your
problem so you've got you can't capture
it with inferential logical Rel sorry
you can't capture it with implication
relations you can't capture it with
rules any attempt to create a formal
system is itself a IL defined problem so
there's a technical way of putting this
but let me give you an anecdote okay an
anecdote for this so when I was taking
logic in under grad first you're
spending a lot of time just figuring out
how to use the logical system and then
you get sort of good at that and then
you're still not getting great marks and
you realize because what you're failing
on is your translation of natural
language into the logical system and
then you realize well what I'll do is
I'll try to create a logical system oh
no right and and so you can't right the
problem of translation in and
formalization is itself a non
formalizable problem right like that's a
meta problem and that's the problem of
relevance realiz if you yeah and and how
John does this relate to goodle and to
sort of the halting problem like the
computational stuff it's related to that
it's related to the bias variance
tradeoff it's related to the no- free
lunch theorem all the technical
argumentation is about grounding that it
it's related to the issue of
computational tractability that I've
been mentioning with combinator
explosion and the paper goes into that
in much more you know
I I I believe technically valid
argumentation I'm just trying to give
you and hopefully for the sake of your
listeners a gist of how you would make
the argument that relevance realization
is presupposed by all of the Machinery
of computation and therefore cannot
ultimately be explained by
computation very interesting and uh
where in your model um do you place
phenomenal consciousness
[Laughter]
so um if you'll allow me I always greet
that question by first talking about the
three meta questions which is um I think
there are three questions one is the
nature question which is how does
something like phenomenal Consciousness
exists in a world that does not seem to
have phenomenal Consciousness or
properties and of course the pan
psychist are arguing with us and the
idealists are but at least Prima fascia
what's going on in here is seems very
different without argumentation with
what's going on out there that's that's
the nature problem and I'm trying to say
it in a way that's not presupposing an
answer and then the function problem is
what does Consciousness do given that so
much of your intelligent and
sophisticated Behavior you're taking
sounds and turning them into ideas in
your mind that are about my mind and you
are not I believe not at all aware of
all of the Machinery that's making that
happen for you that is a wickedly hard
problem right and and you're doing it
like that so we seem to be able to do so
much without Consciousness what's
Consciousness for and then there's the
third question what's the relationship
between the nature and the function
question so now I before I answer your
question I'll go through I think and
this is one area where I agree with
dayart just to give him some credit I
think you can't answer these two
questions independently I think you
can't answer the function and the nature
questions independently cuz what you're
always doing is smuggling in an answer
to the other question as you're giving
your answer you're smuggling in a
function answer as you're doing your
nature and vice versa and and I think a
lot of the places a lot of the popular
theor sort of fail on that account um so
I think you have to answer the questions
in an interconnected Manner and so what
I do and what Greg and I do is we try to
do this double-ended argument where you
try to haha you try to thicken the the
functional
account and you try to deepen your uh
your
phenomenological uh uh the the the the
the span and depth of your
phenomenological experience until you
get a place where they can touch and
that's what I that's what we that's what
I propose doing and I won't give the
argument because as you can expect it's
a long argument but it goes something
like this that that recursive relevance
realization that is fundamental to your
anticipatory intelligence gives you some
important obviously it gives you
tremendous functionality and then what
you pay attention to is well when do we
seem to need Consciousness we seem to
need Consciousness when we can't do
things automatically what are the
situations where we can't do things
automatically where there's High novelty
where there's emergent uncertainty
that's what novelty means where there's
emergent uncertainty IL definedness and
complexity well those are situations
that in which you better really ramp up
and bootstrap your relevance realization
really powerfully and of course this is
why you know Consciousness overlaps with
working memory that does chunking and
there's a whole complex argument there
the idea is what there there's a deep
interpenetration and you can see this
anatomically between the areas that are
running your fluid general intelligence
attention working memory and
Consciousness and so that's the
functional question but here's the
phenomenology if you give me that
recursive relevance realization you're
giving me perspectival knowing you're
giving me participatory coupling so I
can have a participatory knowing through
my perspectival knowing I I'm doing
salience landscaping I'm foregrounding
and backgrounding I I I I I there's a
heess and a nness and a togetherness to
my experience but we call these the
adverbial qualia and as opposed to the
adjectival Quality that philosophers
love so much the greenness and the bless
but the heess and the nness and the
togetherness and the
intelligibility are also Central and
then here's the point you can have
experiences of non-duality in which all
the adjectival qualia and all the
conceptual content go away and yet
you're still conscious and what Still
Remains are all the adverbial because
people have the ultimate heess which is
full presence the ultimate nness
eternity the ultimate togetherness
Oneness and the ultimate intelligibility
it it's so beautiful right so all the
adverbial allia are present even though
the adjectival are absent the conceptual
content is absent and so we say that
means if you can do if you can explain
the adverbial
qualia you can explain some of the
phenomenology of Consciousness
integrated with the functionality and
that phenomenology seems to least be
necessary and probably sufficient for
Consciousness because people in the pure
Consciousness event don't have all the
other qualia and they don't lose
Consciousness so this one I have to
listen back John but I really like the
fact how you combine that sort of
functional and and and and i' I've read
I hear you say when I I heard you say I
think that you have a point there
because the community you know in ter of
talking about the heart problem it's
always in that the redness of red and
the qualia and and you don't think about
function yeah do it this way
phenomenologically intuitive imagine
that you had um sort of you were some
sort of cian monster and you had I don't
know non nonh here non now non together
non- intelligible I don't know what to
call it blips of
redness and like is that Consciousness
that doesn't strike me as Consciousness
at all and we part of our argument is
there's two arguments we're making we're
arguing that if you give us Transcendent
naturalism we can overcome the
enlightenment Gap that hamstrings us
from addressing Consciousness and we've
been talking about that a lot already
and then if you give us adverbial qualia
we can give some functional and
phenomenological reproach and we can at
least shrink the explanatory Gap and say
okay we can explain the aavo qualia but
are they need they seem to be neither
necessary nor sufficient for
Consciousness we don't deny their
existence but they don't seem to be
necessary they're absent from the
preconsciousness event and they don't
seem to be sufficient because I give you
just that like I just did a minute ago
you don't seem to have Consciousness if
they're not necessary sufficient they're
not essential to Consciousness and I
think I've I've read in mentoring
machines that you are open to the idea
of conscious conscious ai ai the llms
don't actually they don't actually
possess relevance realization they piggy
back on our capacities uh we organize
the data we with our judgments of
relevance realization we encode our
experience of relevance into
probabilistic relationships between
spoken terms or graphic terms uh we
organize the internet in terms of our
judgments of relevance and salience and
then we give human-based reinforcement
in order to teach the machines so they
don't there's no scientific so obviously
this is obviously the case the account
of how these machines are intelligent
would not generalize to a chimp would
not generaliz to an octopus so it's not
a scientific breakthrough in an
understanding of intelligence so that
being said I want to make it clear that
I don't think the current machines could
have Consciousness because I don't think
the current machines can have recursive
relevance realization in order to have
relevance realization you have to have a
lot of other things going on and
importantly you have to have embodiment
look relevance is not cold calculation
it's it's not computation it's about how
you you care about this information and
you don't care about that information
and you care about this information
because it matters to you because you
are a self-making thing your body is
making itself and your mind is making
itself so you have real needs of matter
and information that you must actually
incorporate into your very being so you
have real needs which means you're
really taking care of yourself which
means you really care about information
and I think part of conscious
and this is you know this is a hiigaran
claim is that caring is that
caring so if we were to make these
machines
artificially uh intelligent we would
have to make them also artificially
autopoetic they'd have to be self-making
in an important way actually have
genuine artificial affect be capable of
genuine caring they would have to care
about what's true and good and beautiful
so they would be disposed to correcting
themselves so they could be rational and
not just intelligent and I think if you
put all of that Machinery in I think it
would be difficult to deny them at least
adverbial
Consciousness and here I see sort of
linked back in in our how we started
this conversation about s the meaning
crisis and thinking about that a
metaphor or a story that stuck with me
when I made this documentary with uh
Bernardo and and and Roger penos was
that the story ofor Lou borgz the this
Spanish I think writer who has this
beautiful story of the library of Babel
you know it yes of course yeah yeah yeah
and and here we have um how it links for
me to AI is that of course these models
can they can write books like crazy or
make videos whatever so we can imagine
this library that fills itself with
everything that can be written being
written and then of course we humans are
uh zombies in search of meaning in that
library with right and and uh
and there and are even sort of in in
Borg's story there just beautiful
because he he describes out different
sex arise there are these sects of
people in search of the because in such
lever there also must be a book that
will guide you to every book that has
meaning in it right there has to be that
book as well and so is a sect in search
of that book and it's just a funny and
when I thought about that that that
might is what might be Dawning isn't
that what might happen Apocalypse of
sort of uh the internet being taken over
like in in if things go as they are now
going um sorry I don't know how this
links back but it's just a thought I
have when I I heard it links back it
links back very well I mean part of what
what you're saying is there's a sense in
which meaning is not an epip phenomena
rationality is not an epip phenomena
trying to come up with a rational
meaning with rational meaning is not Epi
phenomenal to the kind of intelligence
and agency we exercise in the world um
and and and um I I I think this is what
I meant when I said that theology is
going to be the discipline of the future
because what's going to increasingly
happen is people are going to start to
give more and more priority to the
non-propositional non-computational
aspects of their cognition their nonu
states of Consciousness their so their
somatic experience of flow right that
these things that are largely ineffable
and are not carried uh propositionally
and and and uh and and the kind of
things that give us genuine moments of
insight I just saw a thing the other day
human beings are like we can take we can
come up with a new test uh for general
intelligence that has never been put on
the internet I can give it to you and
you can do it like that and then you
give it to this machines and they crap
out completely they don't have fluid
intelligence they only have what a
psychologist would call crystallized
intelligence they don't have what you
have which is the ability to zero in on
the relevant information in a novel IL
defined complex situation right and so
um I think we will put increasing
emphasis on the nonpropositional
ineffable that puts us into relationship
with the sort of inexhaustible depths
and Heights of our existence and to my
mind that's what theology has always
been
about yeah and and and what also comes
up with me of the the syntax semantics
divide so
um the the Chinese room experiment I
mean that's that's an interesting one
can it be bridged right because that's
the hope I think of people if you just
have the syntax of the machines that
somehow you can get to semantics how do
you regard that divide to me I'm not a
schooled philosopher it feels like a
fundamental divide in reality that of
the syntactical the images I think yeah
and it goes back to that if if what you
mean by syntax is a rule governed formal
system for the uh implication
manipulation of propositional
representations I just gave you a whole
bunch of AR sorry that's just how you
could you say that you could can you
repeat it like that John how you just
said that that's just amazing how you at
that well what you mean is a rule
governed you know
manipulation uh uh of a formal system uh
uh in terms of implications between
propositional representations that's the
syntax that's what syntax stands for and
I just gave you arguments that that
syntax you get you get you get you get
an infinite regress about trying to get
what is presupposed by the running or
the operation of that syntax that can't
be caption in the syntax and and you can
turn that not only backwards you can
turn it forwards Jerry foder who's by
the way one of the strongest who was one
of the strongest proponents of the
computational theory of mind so I'm not
from way out here this is from like the
core so made him such a good researcher
he could criticize his own position so
deeply but he said look um development
going forward if we're talking about
qualitative development not just um
taking in more information but the
capacity to take in more kinds of
information he said look if what we're
talking about there is we're talking
about not a change of content but a
change of comp
competence and then he says okay so
let's talk about that
syntactically what would it be to
improve your competence well he says the
only model we have that is going from a
weaker logic to a stronger logic a logic
with more representational power so from
like you know propositional logic to
predicate logic to modal logic Etc and
then he made the devastatingly sort of
confirmable point which is ultimately
gelian there's no way I can run all the
Poss possible all possible computations
within predicate calculus and I'll never
get modal
logic because I have to step
outside and from outside introduce an
axiom and a new function and so there is
no way in which you can have qualitative
development computationally so not only
can you ex not only can you not explain
all the processes that are presupposed
to getting to it you can't explain how
it can grow incompetence going forward
now foto did something that I just
disagree with with as a scientist he
said well there there must be no
qualitative evidence and P is just wrong
and it's like no he's not there's way
too much empirical evidence that kids go
through qualitative development and so
that turns foto's argument I think into
a modus tolin which means cognition
can't be fundamentally computational so
both going backwards into into what's
presupposed to get to the syntax and
going forward how does it get how does
it have you know qualitative development
you can't get a computational account of
that yeah and I'm here also because I've
did my research and not understand his
argument fully because it's too deep
into mathematics and physics but but I
think that's the Merit of of Sir Roger
Penrose also that the amount of time he
spent as a physicist trying to sort of
grasp this and uh um he did this chess
position I had that in the documentary
it was sort of a novel chess position
very very weird one when you sort of get
to the other side you with with a pawn
you can promote right and he um um he he
he did this crazy prision that you don't
promote to Queen but to a I forgot the
English word it's a ler um it's not
what's the other piece that that can go
diagonal um Bishop Bishop Bishop sorry
that's it the English word too Dutch for
this but the you promote your Bishop so
now you have three Bishops now that's a
weird position no one does it you always
promote to a queen right so you give
that to an AI and that then just goes
Bonkers because doesn't and it did very
weird things and a human average player
could immediately sense what would be
the next position and in this sort of
puzzle he made it was that the the the
the solution was that it was a draw it
was an obvious draw and but the AI kept
doing stupid stuff because it believed
it could win and he then has this whole
argument going back to go and the
halting problem and I really like that
because it's so visual to me um and then
of course he goes Quantum but that's I
think about yeah yeah that was was was a
question I had how much you are into
physics and and what's happening sort of
in the foundations physics or you see
that as s discipline um related but not
of direct interest to your first of all
before I criticize I'll strengthen penr
I haven't met him so I'll call him
Penrose yeah um so fairly recently um
about the same I think the same year
that gbt 4 came out uh we had we we we
had these these super AIS that could
beat any any go any Go Master easily
read right yeah which is more complex
than chess right yeah yeah yeah and then
what they had is there was a couple of
human beings that notice the language
I'm using that noticed that the machine
had a particular sort of presupposition
in it put the presupposition into play
and was able to just a a middle range
player was able to defeat the best of
the go uh uh the go a AI just right and
it's the same kind of argument again
it's like because you can't
like the the the you can't this capacity
of sort of noetic self-transcendence
that's bound up with Consciousness and
bound up with rationality isn't captured
look even in human beings measures of
intelligence are only weakly to medianly
predictive of rationality they're far
from Identity um so just making
something intellig ENT does not make it
rational and and and I think by parity
of argument we can make U make similar
claims now about the quantum I don't
know what to make about that I mean
first of all let's give credit what
credit is due
um I think we have very good evidence
that the sense of smell is making use of
quantum mechanics I think I think it
would be wrong as a scientist just I
think the evidence is now compelling
that somehow you can distinguish
fragrances or odors because of quantum
level differences and so something's
going on there um we don't have now to
be fair to me we don't have any evidence
like that for sight or hearing or even
for touch right taste will probably turn
out to be that because taste and smell
are so interwoven but the three distal
senses and even touch isn't that's
distal but those ones because you have
this extra problem of going from the the
proximal to the distal right there seems
to be a huge thing that isn't well
explained uh by invoking quantum
mechanics in some fashion and here's the
other side of the
argument most of most of your behavior
that's using U that's you that's not
primarily relying on smell which is most
of your behavior right you show the
kinds of errors and constraints and
mistakes that you would be would be
expected is if you were dealing with
massive issues of relevance realization
in which you couldn't do
superpositioning to cover all the
possible and and then get the collapse
out of it so why if you have Quantum
computation and it's available why is it
that you fall prey to the confirmation
bias or the representational heuristic
or the availability heuristic or the mys
side bias etc etc etc etc why aren't we
why do we not have Angelic causal
cognitive agency uh and we don't we are
very prone to self-deception we make all
kinds of experimentally repeatable
mistakes that seem to indicate we are
facing computational limitations
that would only be the case if we were
doing something that was understood from
a classical computational or classical
physical pH physics kind of framework
very nice to hear hear your reflection
on this and um there's a lot to be said
here but I'll I'll make sure to send you
if you like it a copy of a book our
foundation has just released by federo
farini is the founder of he's the
inventor of the first microprocessor
chip the Intel for 404 and now he has a
quantum theory of Consciousness and it
is speculative it is highly theoretical
but very interesting because it is very
compatible with um um certain certain uh
uh work done now in the foundations of
physics but I'll send it to you just you
might find it very interesting yeah so
if I I I would great appreciate the book
but my push back on that would be look I
don't want initially to to tell me how
your theory of Consciousness is
compatible with physics I want your the
of Consciousness to tell me how it's
compatible with
cognition because if you can't do that I
don't care about the compatibility with
physics I care about it ontologically
out here but as somebody trying to
understand cognition which I think I
agree I agree yeah and this is also why
I just spoke to Michael Le Levan by the
way and it's also his argument that you
can look at sort of a Quantum level what
happens when you play chess I mean all
the atoms in the pieces uh we just had
that and make sense no not at all so I I
I I feel you there uh John just to to
sort of going to an end of our beautiful
conversation um you're highly analytic
you remind me very much of Bernardo and
that's also why I think the two of you
are such good companion to to discuss
things but you also have your foundation
and you do sort of the the the the
Transcendent work with young people and
I'm just very curious of some maybe
stories to share here that you find
beautiful where you see sort of all that
analytic that thinking sort of really
resulting in that Transcendence so to
speak with the people you work with or
even perhaps personally but I'm just
very interested
here yeah so to not fall into
performative contradiction and I think
performative contradictions are worse
than merely propositional contradictions
um I think um I would
say I would conclude I would conclude
that nobody is going to find a leing
ation uh from the meaning crisis
humiliation alleviation by following out
the analytics of my
arguments instead what I hear from I
think they're important because I think
you should do science and so I'm doing
cognitive science and I that's where I
feel I need to do that right and I also
feel I need to do that because it lends
plausibility and legitimacy right and
and then that's important too but what
what what I find most what what I get
very very often from people and most
encouraging is people will say you gave
me a like you gave me a conceptual
vocabulary you gave me a theoretical
grammar so that I could make sense of my
experience in a way that encouraged me
to take up because now I could
understand this practice and that
practice and how they could fit together
and then I moved into an Ecology of
practices that have had this huge
transformation on me and that cons is
exactly what I aspired to that is
exactly what I wanted to happen putting
aside the need to do good science which
I do think you need to do but in so far
as I'm trying to alleviate the meaning
crisis the analytics is
completely in service subservient to
just giving people a way of thinking and
reflecting on their phenomenology and
their meaning making such that practices
become legitimate and plausible and they
also have a way of correcting
and vetting and saying I think that's
just a woo practice this one sounds like
it's got a good chance of actually being
real hey these two complement each other
or counterbalance each other in a really
nice way and that for me that's what
really goes into my heart is making me
feel that I've done some good in the
world yeah yeah very beautiful and and
uh funny thing in I think all the
analytic and all the thinking and it's
also for berardo and then and then that
that's all about that thin description
in a sense
right yeah it is that's funny that's
funny
yeah yeah yeah well it's the viian thing
right I right where like you often have
to go into this very complex stuff
because you're trying to unwind these
very complex knots right and and and get
to a possibility where you can come back
to saying oh wait let's go back and
reconsider X that we buried under all
this knotted uh thought and ink right
and go back and oh wait yes and so yeah
and your own Ecology of practice how
does that sort of play out in an in an
average week when you also have a lot of
commitments and stuff how do you fit it
in and what what is that
ecology I mean so you have to be
adaptive especially when you're
traveling so what I did is I've come up
with my my regular is like an hour and a
half I go for a walk and then I do sort
of an hour and a half or so of of
practice but I also have meditation oh
more than meditation uh oh so I I I do I
do um I do some gundo um I do some fagin
and some uh sword form then I do slow
empty-handed ta chian the long form as
it's called I do some Jan Jung which is
sort of standing and holding some ichan
which is kind of a moving thing in the
family of Chong I'm doing all of that
and then I I sit and I I do uh sort of
practices uh for cultivating prajna I do
some meditative practices some
contemplative practices practices that
are more sort of Zen in their
orientation counterbalanced by practices
that are sort of more
neoplatonic and so I I I practice what I
preach there's a very there like there's
Stillness practices counterbalance with
movement practices there's meditation
practices cont by by contemplative
practices there are practices that dive
deep into your experience that's very
Zen there's practices that dive very
deep into your intelligibility that's
neopl like I'm doing everything I'm
talking about and we talk about the
design principles um at the Veri
Foundation we have the acronym dime you
want diolog practices and I do that with
uh I do that with other people there's
uh philosophical Fellowship there's
dialectic into dialogos we're we're
workshopping another one right now
called the socratic search Bas there's
dialogical practices you want imaginal
practices you want mindfulness practices
and you want embodiment practices of
some kind so dime so you want dime and
then you want you don't want just a
hodge podge you want ones that challenge
you and that are are complimentary and
counterbalance each other like an
ecology that's what I do every every
morning but I I have three versions I
have the full hour and a half a more
hour one a half an hour one and a 15
minute one if I'm you know laying over
in a hotel and I've got to get up at
3:00 am and like you know blah blah blah
kind of thing right so and I strongly
advise people to do that because this is
something I say to my students
continuity of practice is more important
than quantity of practice so give
yourself different versions of your
practice be honest can I do the hour and
a half do it I honestly can only do the
hour do it I can honestly only do the
half hour do it I can honestly only do
the 15 minutes do it and if you can't do
the 15 minutes you're being held hostage
or something I don't know what's going
on uh so like that's what I do and I
have that repertoire
and I'm not I'm not claiming it to be a
saint but by and large I honestly apply
the one that is appropriate given to me
by the constraints that I'm facing
exigent at that time great and uh that's
a lot it's it's very nice to see how you
sort of have put together this sort of
delicate menu um so to speak for people
interested in this they can go to your
foundation's website I guess or could be
links links in our description yeah so I
mean if they're interested in the more
scientific stuff they can track down my
Publications if they're interested if
they're interested in the videos they
they've got my YouTube channel they can
see Awakening for the meeting crisis uh
after Socrates they can see all the
cognitive science shows on Transcendent
naturalism and Consciousness um if
they're interested in the practices we
have the platform called awaken to
meaning awaken to meaning you can go
there and then you'll get all this
information and there it's all from
there's from drop in uh uh right from
drop-ins to uh weekend workshops to
intensive uh courses Etc we are not a
community we make this very clear we're
I'm not going to build a community and
that is not who I am not a guru not a
guru no religion we're we're a dojo
we're a base camp where where you can go
to train so that you can start to
cultivate wisdom individually and
collectively with other people so that
you can more better find or co-create
with other people a community that's
what we are and sort of a matter
question when I just made this switch
right we talked about sort of the
analytic heart stuff and very much the
stuff I talk a lot of about for the
essencia foundation and then we go a bit
more personal how you practice this
daily I always sense sort of that this
switch is some
somewhat difficult not that I mean you
your answer is beautiful but how's that
for you as an academic um talking about
stuff like this so talking about these
deep personal practices
has that become more easy or is it still
hard
sometimes it's it's I
mean in general many of the pra many of
this like I I think I was the first
person academically at the University of
Toronto to talk about mindfulness and I
sort of had to introduce it sort of very
quietly and sort of by the way and and
now of course you know there's academic
journals on it and blah blah uh but
um by and large I you know I can I
I I think I've been I think I think it's
fair to say I've been successful at
convincing people that I can do a I can
be responsible to good science while
talking about these topics so uh but
there are Still Moments where I go to
what you might call The Cutting Edge and
that sort of that difficult place you're
putting your finger on between the
personal life and the professional life
like when I talked about some of the
stuff that happened to me while I was
doing ifs and the Ally work and things
like that and a a lot of people were
like whoa but but again and then I went
out and I would said but look this is
this is what's happening in the
psychotherapeutic world right this these
dialogical um Parts practices are
gaining a lot of traction the kogai is
moving towards that the self is not
monological but it's biological in
nature and and it's not in you it's
extended embedded enacted all that and
then people go oh and I said yes right
and then you can go back and understand
that cross-culturally cross-
historically people are reporting these
kinds of experiences and taking up
practices and instead of being
ethnocentric or just I don't know
reductive and saying silly silly
Superstition you might actually stop and
think hey maybe there's a real phenomena
going on now I want to be clear here
there's a lot of there's a lot
of charlatans there's a lot of woo but
that doesn't mean there isn't a real
there aren't real phenomena so I still
bump into at least initially people go
whoa whoa who who but I've sort of I've
sort of earned enough cred uh that
people at least give me a chance now
they didn't they wouldn't have given me
that chance 15 or 20 years ago but now
they do and so it's not as hard for me
as it used to be yeah you've built
something up and and of course now
there's so much momentum I think
worldwide and um just final question a
bit bit more about that personal You'
you've you've described how you do your
practice and we talked a lot about the
thin description what was your last
moment of strong Transcendence that you
are willing to share I mean it's it's a
bit personal perhaps I I mean in one
sense I I I I daily have an experience
of TR strong Transcendence in that I
have i i i i i i
i the language is bedeviling me because
I don't want to say I but I realize
nonduality but not in any sort of closed
way in a way in which I feel like um
well nishani talks about he says the
heart of religion is um
the the real self-realization of
reality and I get to that place where
there's the real self-realization of
reality for its own sake and I I am
doing deep perspectival and
participatory participation in
that I I that happens to me now on a
daily basis because like I've been I've
been practicing for like three decades
uh
now sometimes what happens is that will
open up into something um a what and
there's things that are practically
profound where you get oh and then you
know how to do a practice better but if
you say it to somebody they go yeah so
what and then there are things that are
more theoretically profound where you
there's this and it's never in it but
when you come out of it you go oh right
and what happened now so I'm going to
answer your question now I had strong
Transcendence I was in nonduality and I
had been already arguing this but I
wasn't doing that in my head I want that
very clear I I imagine there's some
maybe unconscious process happening I'm
not I don't deny that but where I
realize
that when if you're talking about pure
relationality it's not just an inversion
so substance ontology is the relata the
things are there and the relations
emerge out of them one thing you could
do is just say oh well I'll invert it
and the relations are there and the
relat to emerge out of it and what I
realized is that is fundamentally wrong
the inversion is just the same problem
and and there's a symmetry argument
against it and that what I needed was
right a formulation that was
neither right the relations come from
the rata or the Rel rata come from ation
but the codependent arising right of
them and then soon as I had that thought
coming out of the nonduality it felt
like I had been more true to and
authentic to the
nonduality thank you very much John I
think this is a a beautiful thing for
people to ponder out how you close this
well thank you very much Hans this has
been wonderful um and um please say hi
to Bernardo for me um I always have a
lot of respect I think I hope that came
through whenever I was talking about it
because that is that is really my
attitude towards him one of respect and
affection um and there's a lot of
convergence between he and I around
trying to deal with the meeting crisis
so thank you for this wonderful
conversation um and um I'm glad you're
doing it uh a lot of this you know we
need more of this we just need more of
this so thank you yeah people like you
you are the inspiration in a sense for
the stuff we're doing the the output the
rigor all the thinking that goes into it
and the fact that you practice it I I
think that to me really really
inspiration and I know that it's
completely M Mutual what you're saying
about Bernardo he really appreciates
what you're doing and as as you high
yeah thank you so much yeah
