hello and welcome to factually I'm Adam
Conover thank you so much for joining me
on the show again you know the economic
system that we call capitalism has
gotten pretty weird think about the
capitalism that we started with you know
a 100 years ago when jerks in top hats
with monal built Untold wealth by making
things like coal steel and railroads and
colluding to protect their gains well
guess what the workers had to fight back
they had to rise up and make sure they
weren't being exploited the government
started regulating those businesses a
little bit things got a little bit
better we still had a lot of problems
but that was capitalism as we knew it
right well that form of capitalism seems
to be straight up gone instead we're
living under something extremely weird
the economic system that dominates the
world today is run by Massive tech
companies that have a thousand fingers
in a thousand pies online marketplaces
social media platforms artificial
intelligence even TV and film studios
these companies surveil Us in ways that
would make the CIA BL blush and then
they crunch all of our personal data
through algorithms that are so complex
that even they do not understand how
they work and they do it in order to
feed us manipulative advertisements and
control our behavior and here's the
weirdest part these monopolistic
polymorphous Mega entities increasingly
do not even make anything at all instead
they just sit there extracting rent from
us the consumers and the people who we
trying to buy things from the actual
producers in our economy even though
they don't do anything other than
connect us together so what we call
capitalism today increasingly seems to
be simply a different economic system
than it was at the beginning of the
century and it's worth asking whether
capitalism is even the best thing to
call it well our guest today argues that
no it is not and that in fact it has
evolved into something far worse he's
one of the foremost critics of our
economic system from the left and he's
someone with a truly deep and impressive
understanding of our global econom
economic system and you know that
because he once served as the Finance
Minister of Greece his most recent book
is called techn feudalism what killed
capitalism this was such a fascinating
conversation but before we get into it I
just want to remind you that if you want
to support this show you can do so on
patreon head to patreon.com adamc
Conover five bucks a month gets you
every episode of the show ad free we
have a community Discord and a lot of
other great features as well would love
to see you there and now please welcome
Greek Economist and politician Giannis
fakas Yannis thank you so much for being
on the show it's a thrill to have you my
great pleasure thank you for having me
so let's jump right into it you have a
new book out called techn feudalism you
argue that we have uh we have left
capitalism behind and that we've entered
into something worse uh what is that and
what do you mean by it well before
anyone can pronounce uh uh credibly the
end of capitalism one has to decide to
decide what capitalism is right so for
me capitalism is not just
a a world in which people buy and sell
stuff in markets capitalism is a very
specific system where uh there are two
pylons on which the whole soci economic
system rests one is
profit and not any kind of profit but
profit that comes out of ENT
entrepreneurial activity out of creating
things and selling and the second part
of course is markets because before
capitalism we had a world in which
markets were everywhere but they were
peripheral because come to thinking of
it during feudalism when peasants worked
at land that there was no labor market
they worked but they didn't sell their
labor they didn't receive a wage what
happened was at the end of the Harvest
the sheriff on behalf of the landlord
the baron the ear would come and collect
you know 60 70% of the produce and leave
the rest to the to to the farmer to the
peasant that so there was no labor
market there was no wage and indeed it
was not even profit in today's Palance
because all there was was loot
essentially you know rent exraction on
behalf of feudal Lords there may have
been a market in the center of town
where you could go buy and sell you know
shoes or boots or whatever but that
wasn't the central feature of the
economy the central feature of the
economy was basically forced labor where
you live on my land you have to give me
most of what you make you can keep a
little bit for yourself because I'm in
charge that's not anything close to a
market that's right there were always
markets ever since you know um humanoids
on trees started exchanging bananas for
apples there was a market but most of
what humans did until capitalism emerged
most of what we did did not go through
markets the markets were peripheral
exactly as you put it uh and the two
markets that were completely missing
until capitalism was one it was the
labor market and the other the other was
the market for land land either e you
inherited it if you were you know a
member of the landed gentry or the
aristocracy or maybe it was given to you
by um a lord or a king that owed you a
favor but you
couldn't you could buy land there was no
real estate section in the newspaper
where you could buy and sell land a land
you conquered you inherit it uh and if
you neither conquered or inherited it h
you never had it you were l forever
right so capitalism brought in markets
as the main domain where everything
happened and profits as opposed to rents
uh being the fuel that drove the system
the market system right my claim my
claim is that the Triumph of
capital capital of course being all
these produced means of production like
if you think of a steam engine or a
modern industrial robot it's a produced
means of production it's a machine that
we have created in order to create other
stuff not for its own sake uh if you
think of capital as having taken over as
the main source of wealth creation from
land so once upon a time all wealth came
from Land with capitalism it all came
from owning the Machinery of capitalism
owning steam engines owning the the
telegraph polls owning the electricity
grids owning owning the airlines all
this is Machinery Capital produced means
of produ of production uh Capital was so
triumphant it beat organized labor
trades unions the political system
effectively it took over the world yeah
and it became it certainly feels it
certainly feels as though Capital runs
the world right now certainly feels that
it runs the United States it is
everywhere not just the United States
Malaysia Indonesia everywhere you look
you see the Triumph of capital but my
hypothesis is that Capital because it
was so
successful it mutated and It produced a
mutant version of capital which are
called Cloud Capital which um remarkably
it is not a produced means of production
anymore it is a produced means of
Behavioral
modification so the the algorithm that
lives inside your iPhone or your phone
or whatever or your laptop uh is um
attached to Machinery so there are cell
towers and there are optic fiber cables
and server farms and there are pieces of
software this is all capital goods but
these goods are not created to produce
other stuff they are there to modify
your behavior and
mine and this kind Capital that's my
hypothesis has become so powerful at
modifying our behavior that the owners
of cloud Capital whom I call the cloud
lists no surprise there uh have aable
new power to make other people work for
them so if you're Jeff basis you own a
lot of cloud Capital it's called
amazon.com for instance as well as
server farms and all that and what do
you produce nothing but what it has
created for you this Cloud capital is a
fantastically large dig
Thief Cloud Thief I call it uh where
there's a lot of trading taking place
between consumers and
producers and Jeff bases manages to
charge the producers up to 40% of the
price that consumers pay while at the
same time it makes uni produce free
labor in order to replenish his Cloud
capital for instance every time you post
a review of a book on amazon.com time
you buy anything or you show your
interest in X as opposed to Y that
increases the Capital stock the cloud
Capital stock of Jeff bases which gives
him an even greater opportunity to
extract rents from Vel Capital selling
their wees on his Cloud Thief yes so the
moment enter amazon.com and this is my
this is why I'm going to end my
uh the moment you enter amazon.com you
exit capitalism welcome to techn
feudalism because Amazon itself is not a
market like it sort of looks like a
market you're buying and selling things
there are multiple buyers and sellers
are selling things but it sounds like
you'd argue that you are so firmly under
Jeff's boot when you are on amazon.com
as either a buyer or a seller that this
is not a free market certainly it's not
the market at all it's not only it's not
free it's not the market you see the way
I I visualize is this uh because you
know there's a lot of criticism of what
I'm saying by people who say come on Yan
you know it's still a market it's
monopolized a monopolistic Market it's
owned by one man man Jeff basos well I
beg to
differ think of a western movie a really
bad western movie where you and I are uh
riding into some town that is owned by
one person let's call that person Jeff
again right uh and we discover very soon
that uh in this uh Western setting every
shop in the town the post office The
Saloon bar the bank everything the
police station the sheriff is owned by
that one man Jeff right now that's a
monopolistic market right that but
that's not amazon.com amazon.com is far
worse because you see if you and I were
to ride into this town this imaginary
town somewhere in the far West
um when you and I looked to our left in
the same direction to a particular shop
window you and I will be seeing the same
thing but in
amazon.com we're not seeing the same
thing if you and I as we speak where to
type in
amazon.com electric bicycle or
binoculars or um you know whatever you
would get a different list to the one I
would get because the algorithm that
Jeff owns
knows me and you very very well they
have huge quantities of data on us so
they know our likes dislikes how much
money we are prepared to pay for
anything and it will match you and me to
different kind of
vendors uh vendors that the algorithm
knows just as well as it knows us with
one intention in mind to maximize the
capacity of just the statistical
probability that Jeff bases will extract
the maximum amount of rent from that
capitalist who will sell us the the
electric bicycle or binoculars so in a
sense there is a l algorithm that
matches every buyer to every
seller in ways that the buyer and the
seller cannot control buyers cannot talk
to one another they cannot talk sellers
accept any communication that the
algorithm permits in the interest of Max
maximizing the rents extracted by Jeff
bases now this is not a market a market
is a place which has to be decentralized
at least on one side even if you have a
monopolistic Market you know buyers can
talk to one another they can even you
know um ideally or in theory uh discuss
with one another a consumer boycott when
you are in amazon.com you can't do that
because the AL will never allow you to
communicate with anybody so a market
which is completely totally centralized
you know think of it this would be a
dream come true for the Soviet Soviet
economic planning agency because the
whole point about the Soviet unions I
really truly believe that you know
because i' I've studied
quite for quite a while the way in which
go plan the planning Ministry of the
Soviet Union worked and what they were
intending to do and I can tell you for
them I mean they had never imagined the
algorithm that Jeff basos has at at his
disposal but when I read you know what
it is that they wanted to do that's
exactly what they want they wanted to
know exactly what consumers wanted they
wanted to know exactly what producers
were capable of producing and they
wanted that to make the producers
produce stuff that then they would match
to particular
consumers in a way that was in the
interest of the system neither of The
produ Producers all of the consumers
that's what basis algorithm does so
that's why I insist this is not a market
it's a trading place it's a digital
trading place which operates like a a
kind of techno thief or fdom I call it
the cloud fief uh and so as not to give
the impression to our listeners to our
viewers that this is only pertinent to
amazon.com wherever you go in whichever
country you go you go to Malaysia Today
you go to uh India you go to Nigeria
you'll find that besides amazon.com
there are
such digital or Cloud fevs belonging to
local magnets and you've got this this
feudal system comprising many different
digital or Cloud FS uh
where about 30 or
40% 30 or 40 40% of all payments are in
the
end you know they end up in the pockets
of not the producers not the workers who
have helped produce on behalf of their
companies and their employers the
products that are being sold but they're
being confiscated in the form of cloud
rents by the cloud list the owners of
cloud capital I mean this is exactly the
fee that for instance Apple famously
takes off of almost every transaction
made on iPhone or at least every every
digital uh transaction of a certain sort
um which they go to Great Lengths to
protect and what I find really
interesting is that you are comparing
that sort of fee or the sort of fee that
Amazon takes to the rent taken by the
feudal landlord um like that that sort
of rent not rent that I might pay to a
landlord whose apartment I live in but
the sort of rent that is taken by uh you
know a feudal Lord simply because of the
power that they have they're not
producing anything they're not providing
anything to the transaction other than
saying because of my power I can take a
giant cut of what you have made um can
you talk a little bit more about that uh
comparison because that that's where the
connection to feudalism makes the most
sense to me is seeing Apple's uh pound
of Flesh Amazon's pound of Flesh as
similar to the feudal Lord taking the
the wool that the the poor peasant has
uh has made from their sheep absolutely
put it spectacularly accurately all I
need to add is that I'm not suggesting
that we've gone back to an earlier mode
of production my argument is not that we
have returned fism no we've moved
forward because there is a profound
difference between basos Zuckerberg all
those Cloud Elon Musk uh and the feudal
Lords of yesterday year the feudal Lords
of yesterday year did not need to invest
anything
in order to create that feudal power of
theirs their power to extract rent uh
it's simply the accident the lottery of
birth they were born into um feudal
society on the side of the aristocracy
they inherited the land and hey Presto
they could collect rent whereas people
like bases and zuk they you know they're
smart entrepreneurs and they put a lot
of work into it they did not they were
not born with a silver SPO spoon in
their mouths they invested huge
quantities of capital and they you know
they ended up with Majestic digital
Capital Cloud Capital uh and it is on
the basis of that huge
investment that now they have the power
to extract rents uh and it is of
course similar to the feudal kind of
rent in the sense that it is rent what
is rent rent is a payment uh courtesy of
what you own not of what you
do uh but of course in in order to
collect that cloud R they had to do a
lot of investment prior to that but and
here comes a very interesting little
twist to the
story most of the money that went into
the
investment that begot Cloud capital is
State money it's public money really if
you look at what happened after the how
so 90%
90% you will recall of course that in
2008 after Leman Brothers collapsed and
Wall Street went pair shaped along with
the Frankfurt Banks the Parisian Banks
the city of London and so on the G7
Central bankers and our great and good
leaders gathered together in April of
2009 in London and um in a state of
panic decided to Reflow
Finance since then they have
collectively all those G7 Central
Bankers they have printed around 35
trillion US 35 trillion us and they gave
it
to that's got nothing to do with techn
Fidelis right or big Tech or Cloud Cap
so far uh it's an entirely different
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up thing that
happened indeed you know this is how
history Works through coincidences and
overlapping forces that are developing
and
evolving so um you will recall also that
at the same time that they were printing
all this money that they were pumping
into the private Banks to refloat them
you will remember te Tim gner and uh um
the the gider um Summers plan that gave
13 trillion effective to refloat uh uh
the the mortgage derivative markets and
so on
yes the idea was that all this money
would go to the you know Bank of America
City Group JB Morgan Goldman Sachs and
those
Bankers uh would then lend the money on
to business and business with employee
people and the economy would start
running again uh through investment the
those Central Bank monies would become
investment well the problem was that at
the very same time that they were
printing these mountains of money they
they were practicing fiscal
austerity even under Obama even under
the so-called stimulus if you look at if
you add the federal government and the
state governments together where the
state governments were remember they
were in trenching left right and Center
they were in deepity because they were
impecunious
uh all governments together federal and
state in the United States practiced
austerity effectively they cut down on
public spending and in incre taxation if
you put it all together in the European
Union we were the champions of austerity
my country Greece will we broke every
world record when it came to austerity
Britain practice austerity now this is a
fantasttic fantast fantastically
interesting combination you have the
central bank is sprinting huge
quantities of money pumping them into
the system so there's a lot of money in
the system and at the very same time you
have the many the multitudes the ho pooy
with very little money so imagine you
are an industrialist an entrepreneur and
Bank of America calls you says I've got
a billion or you 200 million to give to
you um do you want it you are not going
to say no when the interest rate is
almost zero or sometimes negative in
Europe it was negative effectively you
were being paid to borrow money right
but you look outside your window or in
the window of your imagination and you
think who's going to buy the stuff I'm
going to be producing these people out
there the many uh the rra they don't
have any anything to you know they can't
they can't afford to buy expensive high
value added stuff so you take the 100
million or 200 million that the bank
gives you and you take it to Wall Street
and you buy back your own shares that
drives your share price up your bonus
goes up you're happy but that's not
investment of all the industrialists in
the United
States who actually received some of
that that was printed under what it was
was
socalled uh quantitative easing but
that's you know just money printing by
the FED of all these indust who got the
money from the banker who got it from
the Central Bank the American Central
Bank uh only the zergs the Elon musks
the people that I refer to in my book as
Cloud the owners of cloud Capital took
the money and invested it in capital and
it was Cloud
Cap my estimation and um I have this on
quite good authority from within
Facebook or meta uh 90% of the money
that went into building up meta came
from central bank money so this is very
interesting isn't it because youve got a
new variety of Fuda Lords I call them
cloud or techn Lords being
financed by the
state folks this is not
capitalism yeah uh and you also said by
the way that you know the these men were
not uh they were not hereditary rulers
they didn't inherit everything but these
are also people who happened to be in
the right place right time came from the
right backgrounds Zuckerberg went to
Harvard you know and and they had the
access to this L this large amount of
funds this is not a uh they did not
compete to get ahead in the way that you
know Capital we're told capitalists are
supposed to um there was a lot of uh
Advantage given here by the state and by
circumstance indeed so the state gives
them the
money it gives them the Technologies as
well because let us not forget if you
take your iPhone
apart every single technology in your
iPhone was developed by by some
government fund or research project
every single one the touch screen GPS y
from the Pentagon uh Wi-Fi from the
Australian CSI
everything came so society and
states in a collective way provided the
Technologies and the money to these very
smart people there's no doubt that these
people are extremely smart and worked
very hard to create Cloud thieves not to
create capitalist firms that compete
with one another on the basis of
products but to create Cloud thieves
that are engineered through
through algorithms that are primed to to
mod modify your behavior and mind to
extract rents from the actual producers
of
stuff you know I'm on an ongoing mission
to live healthier and for me that
doesn't just mean hitting the gym a
couple times a week it means being
mindful of the big things and the small
things down to making choices to bring
better quality groceries into my home
that's why I've been such a big fan of
Thrive Market Thrive Market is our go-to
on my house for all of our grocery and
household Essentials and the convenience
of getting everything online and then
quickly shipped to my doorstep is a huge
timesaver in our house we love that
thrive Market carries brands with the
highest quality ingredients and sourcing
methods they restrict hundreds of
ingredients across their food and
cleaning categories and I can use their
on-site filters to suit My Lifestyle
needs whether you're looking for organic
kids snacks low sugar Alternatives or
gluten-free Pantry Essentials you can
curate your own shopping experience with
just a few clicks and as a Thrive Market
member I save money on every single
grocer gr order on average I save over
30% every time they even have a deals
page that changes daily and always has
some of my favorite Brands you know my
girlfriend eats gluten-free and so we're
able to get bonsa pasta it's a really
good chickpea pasta that she loves I
think it tastes great and it's always
available on Thrive market and when you
join Thrive Market you're also helping a
family in need with their one forone
membership matching program you join
they give so join in on the savings with
Thrive market today and get 30% off your
first order plus a free $60 gift go to
thrivemarket.com
factly for 30% off your first grocery
order plus a free $60 gift that is a
huge savings that's
th
market.com factually thrivemarket.com
factually I I want to talk about how
much this trend has also coincided with
the privatization of the internet these
are primarily internet firms that you're
talking about although I'm sure there
are some examples of this that that go
beyond the internet
but when the internet was created it was
especially the first few Decades of its
existence believed to be a radically
decentralized place the most
decentralized possible anybody could you
know put up a website on their own
server and sell something to anybody who
came by and now you know we have all
experienced the shrinking of the
internet in a way to three or four
gigantic firms through which everything
runs um and that is such a radical
transformation in such a short period of
time for us to go from a place that felt
like a wild west town as you said you
know a true Wild West Frontier where
anybody can build anything hey look
here's my little shop buy from me to a
place where if you don't go through Mark
or Elon or Jeff or a few other small
number of people you can't sell anything
to anyone uh doesn't that strike you as
I mean that happened in 10 years 15
years something like that yeah uh
precisely it's I tell that story in my
book the story of how the internet
comments it wasn't just decentralized it
was decentralized but it was actually
more than that it was a capitalism free
zone yes a market Town an oldfashioned
Market Town Farmers Market is
decentralized you've got lots of
producers everyone is producing their
own Tomatoes or you know potatoes
whatever uh and they compete with one
another no one can control the price
because they're each one of them is a
small drop in a large portion of produce
and that's a decentralized capitalist
Market the internet was not even that it
was a it was a common yeah nobody got
paid for doing stuff to even
today our uh listeners audience viewers
uh when you go into Google Chrome or um
some kind of browser you will still see
those letters
HTTP column SL SL something you know
that is a language a computer code
developed Once Upon a Time in the early
1970s so that people can
actually visit each other's Pages you
know browse and we still use that the
people who actually created HTTP or SMTP
that you may have seen in your email uh
um app it's the protocol for sending
email SMTP HTTP all those protocols
which are still there inside the
internet today were developed by folks
scientists computer people who gave them
away they didn't make a single penny on
it not a single penny it was a common it
was a gift exchange economy that's what
the internet was people would stuff put
them out there completely open source
and just enjoy the fact that others used
their Wares yes that was the entire
culture of the internet was creating
things like that I remember when I was a
kid so I I joined the internet in the in
the 90s when it was still dominated by
that culture and I loved video games and
there was a whole culture of people
would write guides for video games long
long guides with art and you know jokes
in them and things like that and they
would just post them on the Internet
because I love this video game you love
it too and I want to share that with you
and that that was the culture was this
sort of free gift exchange and it really
strikes me how these companies have I
think you might be working your way to
this point perverted that culture so
that now we still Post in that way I
post to Instagram to Reddit to all these
places for free except now the reason
the fundamental reason for the post is
to line the pocket of the person who
owns the site um that they are profiting
off of it even though I am not uh which
is a really remarkable shift but but I I
worry I cut you off no no no no well
you're adding to what I said uh
um the delicious irony about the uh the
process which uh
began the privatization of the original
internet commment has to do with our
identity because when uh we started
playing around with the internet and I
joined the internet before it was called
the internet and I joined
an earlier version called
Janet standing for standing for joint
academic Network that
was um that reveals my age right uh and
I I tell you the thing that people won't
believe the first time I joined the
internet I didn't even have a screen I
had a teletype and all the output was
being printed on a dot matrix that's
amazing that's but that is that's so
cool I love that
so but that internet uh began to get
privatized for one simple reason because
governments did not help us become the
owners of our
identity because you know in that
internet everybody was Anonymous or we
had whatever name that we chose to have
uh you know through
aliases at some point when you wanted to
when you were given the opportunity of
buying stuff over the Internet or
hailing a taxi where it's Uber or
something else you had to have an
identity you had to make a payment at
that point something quite absurd
started because unlike the physical
world where you have an ID card a
driver's license a passport that is
issued by the state for a small fee to
every citizen c as you you know being a
citizen you're C citizen's right to have
an ID card of sorts to be able to
identify yourself if the police pull you
over or anything in on the
internet we if to this very day you have
to beg some bank or Google or Facebook
to testify to who you are before you can
transact with anyone and declare your
identity you're not the owner of your
identity so that's how the colonization
and privatization of the internet begun
because we do not we still do this day
there's no way you can identify yourself
unless some conglomerate says yeah okay
this is yanish I can certify for you
that this is yanish and every time you
need to to to you know to to transact
you have to beg some conglomerate to
testify to who you are which is quite
astonishing and it makes a very big
difference in the way you
conceptualize uh the digital trade so
for instance I mentioned before hailing
a cab okay now the only way to do it
today is you you have to have an account
Uber or LIF or one of those apps and the
way to do that is you use your Banker
you use your debit card your credit card
your essentially you you beg the Bank of
America to tell Uber that you are who
you say you are right use the codes that
Bank of America has given you for to
have the right to call an ubera right
now imagine if you and I were the owners
of our digital identity and I wanted to
go to work today I'm I'm here in Athens
today now you know I imagine I could
there was an app free for everyone you
know just a common kind of license where
I could say this is who I am I identify
myself because I own my identity this is
where I am I'm on the corner of such and
such streets and this is where and I
want go to the
airport who wants
to offer me you know bit for my fair
yeah can imagine if anybody
anybody could beid for my fair including
public transport who would send me a you
know a
smart little message saying you idiot
there is a tube station
there public bus and take you there for
you know much faster and you know a much
lower cost
we cannot do this now yeah and we cannot
do this because we do not own our
digital identity you know the cloud own
it for us I also think that you know
these companies worked so quickly to
decentralize and to privatize the the
internet um if you look at Amazon for
instance it not only Built a major SE
section of the pipes of the internet
with their web serice services that uh
so many companies are now uh you know
now use um but they also uh worked to
destroy their competitors to either buy
them out or to ruin them to underprice
them aggressively anti-competitive
policies um that the government did
nothing to protect against you know
these were classic sort of Amazon worked
to build a monopoly in classic fashion
um and it was able to do it because the
internet was a frontier uh and the
government who's the regulator who's you
know supposed to be the cop on the beat
didn't stop them from doing it and now
they are finally suing them and
Prosecuting them but you know probably
15 years too late yeah but you see I
think you're absolutely right there's no
doubt that anybody who has a lot of
power tries to enhance it by means of
destroying the competition destroying
anybody who threatens them that was the
case with Henry Ford you know and
General Motors they for this is the
1900 1900s 1910s 1920s they the bride
municipalities to rip out the the trumps
yeah and replace them with their
own petrol engine cars and
buses so there you there is a similarity
but that's where the similarity
ends if you look at uh Teddy ruselt
versus Rockefeller and standard
you know the the famous antitrust laws
and the trustbusters and so on of the
1920s yeah that was very impressive uh
but the argument of the
antitrust push Drive policy which is a
very good argument had to do with the
way in which those monopolists were
cornering markets in order to drive
prices
up because they were traditional
capitalist they were monopolists but
they were traditional capitalists in the
sense that they produced stuff and they
wanted to have a monopoly and to sell
you the stuff that they produced right
using you know oldfashioned terrestrial
Capital the clists that I refer
to they are not in the business of
driving prices up to exploit you they're
actually driving prices down it is
impossible to use the teddy rusel
mentality and antitrust legislation
against zerber because doesn't charge
you
anything the price is very radical zero
that's the price you pay to use
Instagram or to use so it our political
class was also not trained to see what
cloud Capital does differently to the
capital of of Henry Ford and
Westinghouse and over folks or Edison uh
the whole point about basis and these
people is that they use capital and free
services in order to capture both
consumers and producers
to extract rents from them not to sell
them stuff at higher prices right so
exploitation of society takes also the
form of pushing prices so
low that the environment suffers uh the
producers
suffer you know the the middle uh ground
the small and medium scale producers go
to the
wall so that's why I'm insisting on the
P us of understanding the difference
between Cloud Capital as a produced
means of Behavioral
modification from the traditional
Capital that um you know the Robert
Barons used 100 years ago yes I I mean
maybe there's a comparison you could
make between the railroads of the of a
100 years ago because they were you know
a means of transportation as you know a
A system that was extract trying to
extract rent from producers and
consumers but I take your point very
well that Jeff Bezos is not producing
anything um and he's not trying to raise
prices for consumers he tries to lower
the the price to a the the the lowest
possible floor but then extract unearned
money from everybody at every part of
the transaction and also I want to
return to this extract Free Labor from
everyone as well um I feel that
constantly in my use of the internet um
that every time again I post a story
just oh I want to communicate with my
friends I'm also providing value to Mark
Zuckerberg or whatever site I'm posting
the story to every time I write a review
if you look at um and also in my role as
a Content producer right I'm making this
show right now I'm doing labor right now
that benefits YouTube right that
benefits Google they will sell an ad
against this uh against this video
um and the only promise of income I have
is that this is going to go through
YouTube's algorithm and if it is
successful in the algorithm According to
some Metric that I don't know I have my
guess I'll I'll come up with a title
that I hope will make people click on
this or will make YouTube show it in the
right hand sidebar but I have no
guarantee of that because the
algorithm's always changing if the
algorithm bestows its favor upon this
video they will break me off a per
percentage a small percentage of the ad
Revenue that they earn off of it and
that percentage is up to their whim they
can change it at any time I just log
into my little panel and it said oh you
made 50 bucks oh you made 200 bucks and
I'm like oh thank you I'm so happy to
receive the blessing from YouTube this
this year that they didn't take too much
of the uh of the money I I earned uh you
know this is this is a bizarre way for
me to do labor and yet it is in fact my
only choice because uh this company
Google has uh via YouTube has replaced
so much of the media consumption in the
United States and there is literally
nowhere else to go if you want to make
or consume this sort of content and they
are you know despite the fact that they
they do not make the content uh they are
able to extract huge amounts of revenue
from it I couldn't have put it better
myself you are a cloud sir you are a
cloud godamn it
yeah let's go back 500 years to Europe
yeah where you had the actual surf in
the estate of some Lord in
Nottinghamshire let's say right in
England that's how they felt right they
they were glad to have access to the
land you know it was the same land they
lived in probably the same Hut or house
in which their parents and grandparents
lived they toiled on the land they loved
the land they loved the the area it was
they probably never left it all their
lives unless they went to war uh and you
know they they had the rituals they
married on that land they had their
children and grandchildren um they were
you know they were praying to God that
um they would have more time on that
some same land they would not be
expelled uh they put all their
resourceful into producing wheat or uh
you know barley or whatever it is that
they produced and they hoped like you
hoped in relation to YouTube that you
know the sheriff would live enough
produce for them to have a decent life
at the end of the Harvest after
extracting the ENT they hope they don't
get demonetized yeah yeah the same thing
they never knew exactly how much the
sheriff would take on behalf of the Lord
at the end of the Harvest that varied in
ways that reflected the mysteries in the
mind of the landlord or his own
calculations of how much he had to leave
The Peasants uh at the end of the
Harvest in order to minimize the chances
of a rebellion that would remove his
head from his shoulders
yeah you don't even get that opportunity
with Google you you would know where to
find him um so it it is a form of
feudalism but it is far more than that
because as you put it so
brilliantly you know this is the first
time in the history of humanity where
through our Leisure or Leisure as you
would say in America we
are contributing we are replenishing and
reproducing the Capital stock the cloud
Capital stock which
reinforces which reinforces the land the
the cloud land the digital land the fom
in which with
toil that is that is that is the new
element of it and also if I may add
something else the same algorithm the
same algorithm that um creates the fom
in which you labor for free or partly
for free is this algorithm which you
train to
train you to train it to train you to
give it an opportunity
to make good suggestions to you through
you know recommendations right in order
to press you so that the next time it
says to you you should buy that you want
to buy that and then it sells it to you
directly as well byp passing every
Market while you're also of the same
thing and the same algorithm if I just
and this is my conclusion you know in
the warehouse or the factory where some
proletarian or precariously employed
prian is producing the stuff either for
in in the factory or even in the Amazon
warehouse has a a device a digital
device strapped to their uh to their
hand using the same algorithm exactly
the same algorithm in order to speed up
their work and tell them which box to
take where and you know uh and monitors
the rate of their working and maybe
firing them
occasionally um detecting the
probability that the union will form in
that particular facility and therefore
it winds down the facility and opens a
warehouse or another Factory somewhere
else that's the same algorithm that does
all that at once that's science fiction
yeah I mean and if you compare that for
instance to an Uber driver or better yet
let's say let's say a gig delivery
driver because you know we we as
consumers often interact with Uber most
often but your packages are now
delivered via the same means um that's
again someone who is directly being paid
via algorithm doesn't know how much much
they'll be paid until the moment the job
appears um and you know is just going to
hope that oh the algorithm bestows them
enough work at a high enough a rate to
make a living um it's we're so much
under the heel of the algorithm that I I
think surf really the more you describe
it the more of an appropriate term it
becomes for how we all feel um on both
ends of the equation as consumers we
feel that way too that we're just like
all right we'll just watch whatever the
algorithm chooses to give us this is the
best that we can get might as well
accept it can I add another two elements
to the story because I we've done a good
job at putting this together but there
are two elements which I think are
essential and missing one is
finance I was completely Gob smacked
when I discovered that um in a country
which I know reasonably well from years
ago
Indonesia uh I remember remember the
first time I went to Indonesia many many
years ago I was struck by the so-called
WS the wuns are stalls on wheels that
you find along you know the the
countryside um at different townships or
out you know at at intersections and
they would sell everything from you know
cigarettes and uh um you know
various you small wees to uh to
telephone cards SIM cards and so this is
a bodega that's what they're called in
New York except it's a that's a store
this is a cart okay well let me tell you
this that's why was I go smacked because
I found out that three and a half
million of those have been taken over by
one of those digital foms really owned
by an Indonesian migrate and then Jeff
basos Jeff basos himself decided that he
wants a piece of the action and Jak Bas
Enterprises one of his companies went
over and purchased the other remaining
couple of million of those uh so when
you see the cloud Capital uh spreading
like wildfire in a place like Indonesia
and but and so the question is why did
they care about these WS yeah I mean
what kind of value added can they have
yeah that was the first question uh what
profit margin to the the sales lead
nothing until you realize the real
purpose of taking them over to use them
as mini Banks providing microloans to
their local area through app the same
app that the locals were using once
these were HS were taken over by Cloud
thief in order to buy telephone cards
and cigarettes right and so you have the
financialization process siipping
through Cloud Capital all the way to
those
Grassroots in China as we speak there is
an application called WeChat I'm sure
you've heard of americ heard of it
because it's not available in the United
States or not used in United States
WeChat is everything we know in the west
wrapped up in one application it it can
do everything that Netflix Uber Spotify
Google Facebook Instagram
does and in addition to that you can
make payments to any in China for
free now you don't have that application
in the United States we don't have it in
Europe why because wall streate won't
let you because wall wants to maintain
the uh the Monopoly of financial capital
and and and transactions and they will
do deals with Google but they will not
be for free right and and and with Apple
pay that's why Apple pay is not free
there is a huge cost involved in
transacting through Apple pay but WeChat
doesn't have that why am I talking about
that because firstly you see how through
the imperialist uh waves from Indonesia
to Korea to Kenya to Nigeria you have a
spread of cloud capital and also the way
in which the predominance of Wall Street
in the United
States is and that is my
hypothesis and and it's a hypothesis
that really worries me
Wall Street is the most powerful
agglomeration of Bankers in the world
yes who are really worried about big
Tech and Cloud capital and they do not
want to share the dollar payment system
which they control internationally not
just in the United States so it's a
global payment system because that's
what the dollar is it's the
global payment currency
uh they do not want to share this with
big Tech whereas the Chinese big Tech
and the Chinese fin aners have joined
forces together under WeChat on one hand
and the digital currency of the central
bank that contrast between what's
happening in the United States why you
don't have wichat and they have witchart
in China is for me the reason behind the
new cold war that Donald Trump
started remember against huwei initially
Z and Joe Biden turbocharge because you
know I was puzzled
for for quite a few years now why is the
United States starting a cold war
against China you know the answer that
was given to me about Taiwan and spy and
that's all rubbish as if Taiwan was not
the problem since 1950 yeah nothing
changed by Taiwan and the idea that you
know the Washington suddenly got pissed
off because the Chinese are spying on
them you know the country that produced
the NSA that's that's a joke and and a
half the reason my estimation is that
the the CL the the super cloud thief of
the United States is in direct class in
a direct class with the Chinese Cloud
thief
and policy makers in Washington who are
very smart people understand that they
have a disadvantage and the disadvantage
stems from wall Street's rivalry with
Silicon Valley which is a clash that the
Chinese do not suffer
from that is fascinating if that CL were
to end if they were able to uh you know
reach an agreement between themselves if
you know they were able to cut each
other in on the deals would that be that
probably be even worse from your
perspective what would the effect be
well you know I am in two minds about
that because uh the clash between the
the American and the Chinese Cloud
theves uh May jeopard our existence of
the planet if it ends up with nuclear
bombs blowing up uh so I fear I fear
that but I also fear what you said if uh
Wall Street and silicon rley strike a
truce between them find a way of of
sharing the spoils sharing the cloud
rench uh then they will become even more
powerful within the United States within
the West within Europe and they already
are so you know we we're damed if they
do and we're dumbed if they don't I'm
not sure which dation is worse I mean
okay so you're talking about uh a group
of people who the the feudal Lords our
new feudal Lords who are so powerful in
every respect they're not just
economically powerful they're
politically powerful beyond our wildest
imaginations because they I mean again
the comparison to feudal Lords these
were people who owned the land and could
have to often you know had the fate of
the king in the of their hands right
because of the amount of land and money
that they owned and like oh we don't
like the king Off With His Head let's
put a new King in um that was often the
case in many feudal societies and it
often feels that way today if uh you
know Jeff Bezos isn't a fan of the
president well the president might not
be around that long or you know he and
his friends right that that group um and
so to to bring us uh to sort of a
conclusion here what hope is there of
resisting this trend right when these
folks have that much power I I know the
EU is uh has been passing laws to uh
reign in the power of big Tech to to or
at least that's the that's the headline
you're shaking your head uh what do you
think of the the fate of that that
effort and you know is there any hope of
of fighting back against these folks are
the European Union is
hopeless perfectly hopeless I I know
them inside out I've dealt with them
when I was Finance Minister of Greece uh
they have no clue of what's going on and
and you know their their constant
concern is how to to to continue
pretending that they're following their
own rules while violating them uh it's
you can see that the European Union is
falling behind on every every level when
it comes AI we are nowhere near the
Chinese let alone the Americans green
technology gone finished either we
import it from China or we don't have it
uh when it comes to uh to the banking
sector still fragmented we don't have
something equivalent of the US treasury
bill think about it we don't have the
equivalent of the US Treasury we don't
have a common safe asset that we can
sell people so no I'm afraid that the
that I'm saying this as a europeanist
and the proud European you're saying
that you're saying that Europe overall
sucks I understand that but what about
what about in terms of reigning in the
you know the techn feudalists
they cannot since we are not we you see
only China has produced Cloud Capital
that can compete with the American
Capital the European Union has no Cloud
Capital we are completely at the mercy
of Google and Facebook and all those you
know Silicon Valley based big tech
companies um Jed basos last year made 44
billion euros something like 50
billion uh dollars in Europe only he
paid zero zero tax zero tax uh and the
Europeans were trying to tax him but
they couldn't you know so he's running
rings around them yeah so no uh we can
we can become protectionist yes we can
we we can raise our walls digital walls
but then we are not going to have access
to
YouTube and we don't have our own the
Chinese don't care because they have
their own YouTube they have their own
Amazon they have everything that America
has created
in the cloud Capital World they have
replicated and actually done it better
in many many ways so so Europe is not
the answer uh what can we do more
generally well look I do believe that it
is it the first step is to understand
what's going on so conversations like
the one you and I are having are very
very important because it is crucial
that people understand what's going on
it's without it it's it's a necessary
even if it is not a sufficient condition
beyond that I think that
you know I respect people who who are
trying to regulate Amazon and so on but
I don't believe that it is
realistic uh people call me utopic
because I try to imagine a world in
which we own our digital
identities a world where we uh amend
corporate law so that uh uh when it
comes to crucial Industries like this
one uh they operate on the basis of one
person one employee one share one vote
like big cooperatives as opposed to
companies that belong to some shadowy
figure who controls everything without
even working in those companies uh and
so they call me a utopian uh and they
are proposing instead regulation as if
this is the 1920s and Teddy Rosevelt
could come back I don't believe you can
regulate amazon.com I don't believe you
can regulate
Google the whole point of Facebook is
that is international you know breaking
it up like we once broke up standard oil
into origional companies doesn't make
any sense the whole point is that you
you know you go to Facebook to find your
friends from all over the world not from
your from your village or your
county so the answer the the short
answer to your question is that we need
to socialize the ownership of algorithms
that we are creating collectively it's
like our language it's like a language
what binstein said there can be no such
thing as a private Language by
definition similarly there can be no
such thing as a privately owned
algorithmic Capital that is consistent
with the interest of society yeah you
know I often think about the comparison
to the public Airwaves that in the early
days of broadcasting there was a
decision made that you know these these
signals are sent by vibrating the air
that nobody can own no one can own the
people can own the land but they can't
own the air and that since these are
public therefore the public gets to
exercise control over them um and you
know we can make laws you know simple
laws like no one no one person can own
every radio station in town that kind of
law um and I think we've reached a point
where you know when we look at the
algorithms that you know control what we
see if you just look at Instagram or any
of these others those algorithms so
dominate what we see that we have to see
them similarly as the air that we all
breathe and by the way the signal is
still traveling through the air because
that is what your cell phone signal
travels through so the principle also
still applies um so I agree with you and
I've made that argument myself in videos
that I've posted on YouTube's private
algorithm that we that we need to we
need to make these public goods that the
public has control over the these media
indeed indeed and and there are ways of
imagining that transition towards the
socialization of the means of
communication because this is what we're
talking about uh for instance imagine
that instead of saying that we need to
tax you know Zuckerberg more you know
Facebook or uh
Google I don't believe you can tax them
by the way because they can always they
have the better accountants who will
hide their profits by inflating their
costs right but imagine you had a
situation where you said look uh
we are producing part of your Capital so
we should own part of your
Capital
uh and let's say that in order to put
this into effect to operate in the
United States of America you will need
to deposit 10% of your shares in a
social Equity Fund which accumulates
dividends and then they can be paid back
to citizens in the form of a basic
income and then you know that 10% can
become 20% and the limit is of
course digital libertarian
communism that's the name of this system
digital digital libertarian communism I
just came up with that
now I love it but no I I I love the
principle that because it is our Free
Labor that is powering your uh the
engine that you have built or your your
rents we should receive a part of the
profit that the public is creating the
system that therefore the public needs
to profit from it is a very beautiful
simple argument that I think most people
would understand and agree with and and
let's emphasize this is not taxation
it's like saying if somebody has 20% of
the Capital stock of a company they
receive dividends they're not taxing the
company they are part owners so I don't
believe in taxing the cloud rents of the
cloud elas I believe
in grabbing let me put it in in no un
grabbing a chunk of their shares and
saying you know what this is ours mate
yeah this is ours yeah and they will
collect dividends and we will do
whatever we want the dividends and you
know the easiest thing to do and the
most fair thing to do is distribute it
to everyone yeah but in order to do that
we need to have power in the system
right um I I don't believe that look we
have a couple of regulators in the US
right now who are trying their best and
they are uh you know uh real ideologues
and believe that these tech companies
need to be reigned in but we're talking
about a few department heads here who
might be you know out on their ear next
January depending on what happens in the
election um that's the best we have
currently uh we have a labor movement
that is uh you know premised on workers
uh banding together and exerting their
power collectively but that only works
at certain times when you're able to get
you know the right movement of folks
together um what you're talking about is
it seems like it would require a mass
movement of the users of us the public
saying hold on a second Instagram cut me
in give me those shares right or else
I'm not going to use the app anymore so
how could we practically move ourselves
towards being able to execute a plan
like you're talking about how do you
envision that
happening creating a political movement
that makes this possible you're talking
to somebody who I look I was an I was an
academic living very happily in my
little academic cocoon writing esoteric
articles for you know another 20 people
around the world and then the 2008
crisis bankrupted my country and I
opened my big mouth and I was telling
the world what I thought should happen
what shouldn't happen and I got Eng
involved in politics yeah which I didn't
to I regret the fact that I lived in you
know part of the 21st century which made
that essential uh or possible for that
matter and now you know for eight years
now I'm in I'm a politician a very
reluctant not particularly
successful um that's how we like
political um I had found a p European
Democratic movement called de to5 in
2008 with Bernie Sanders in Vermont we
started what we call the progressive
International now we have 200 million
members around the world wow um we
started the make Amazon pay Campaign
which you may have heard of uh I hope
you have hashtag make Amazon pay every
Black Friday I have heard this it's a
strike that be yeah uh so that's the
answer the answer is we can no longer
afford to be bis intellectuals sitting
in our little offices or you know at our
desk writing books for each other we
have to engage the people out there
because there is a lot of suffering out
there and there is there are a lot of
wasted opportunities and there is so
much disinformation and you know those
those those algorithms are primed to
poison the debate and our democracies so
we have a duty to drop our legal
intellectual Gams and get our hands
dirty with real Democratic politics of
being out there and talking to people
listening understanding uh changing our
mind minds but not giving up that is uh
uh it's inspirational to see you put
that into practice honestly I talked to
a lot of uh experts on this show and I
often ask at the end what do we need to
do and they often say well I think
everybody needs to XYZ and people in
Washington need to ABC not many people
say we need a political revolution and
here's what I've done to start one uh
and I think that's incredible uh people
can pick up a copy of your book at
factually pod.com books but how can
people join the effort that you're
talking about and uh become part of this
movement that you're trying to build
well Google Progressive
International Google Progressive
International and join us if you're in
the United States if you're in Europe uh
Google dm25 org DM as in DM 25. org it's
amazing that when you when you tell
people to find it you still have to site
Google one of the techn feudalists that
you're railing against but hey that's
the world that we live in that's the air
we breathe in the land we walk upon
right it was always the game remember
the Gutenberg Press was created to to
print the Bible yeah uh yeah okay we PR
the Bible and then we started printing
subversive stuff as well
so I love it Giannis thank you so much
for being on the show uh I I really
can't thank you enough this has been a
wonderful conversation it was a great
great pleasure thank you for having me
well thank you once again to jannis Vera
fakas for coming on the show if you want
to pick up a copy of his book techn
feudalism you can get it at factually
pod.com books just a reminder when you
buy there it supports not just this show
but your local bookstore as well if you
want to support this show directly you
can do so on patreon head to patreon.com
adamc Conover five bucks a month gets
you every episode of the show ad free
for 15 bucks a month I will read your
name at the end of this podcast and put
it in the credits of every single one of
my video monologues this week I want to
thank Jasmine Andrade and April Nicole
thank you so much for your support of
the show once again patreon.com adamc
Conover I want to thank our producers
Sam rman and Tony Wilson everybody here
at headgum for making the show possible
you can find me online at adamc con.net
where you'll also find all of my tickets
and tour dates for the standup shows
that I do across the country please come
and see me and I'll see you next week on
factually that was a headgum
podcast
