okay you can probably see this right now
which isn't
good but uh awesome
so I
am yeah that's okay I guess if you can
see this that's fine um I don't think I
have anything secret
here uh I don't have a second monitor
currently but I meant anticipating this
is the first time obviously I've
streamed on anything ever so I'm uh if
there's sound issues let me know I'll
just see notifications pop up because
right now I'm only working on one
screen
So based on the title of the stream
you're probably thinking I'm going to
talk about section 230 which I am but
first I need to talk about Lord McAlpine
and the Kiwi farms and if you don't know
what those are that's totally okay Lord
McAlpine is a was a maybe still is I
don't know a British
politician who in 2012 there was a
documentary released by the
BBC that implied he was a uh predator of
some kind and uh he sued them of course
he sued the BBC and said you know that
they didn't say his name but they did
imply he was a predator of some kind and
so he was able to sue them and and get
some money out of them let me actually
I'm going to adjust my microphone sorry
for the noise if there is
any so anyway he sued them and won well
he settled outside of court I mean I I
consider that winning he got paid a lot
of money uh but he didn't technically
win a judgment he just settled outside
of Court anyway the damage had already
been done and a thousand people round
about on Twitter tweeted the accusation
that he was a predator and about 9,000
people retweeted the accusation so what
did Lord McAlpine do he sued all of
those people around all the ones he
could find anyway around 10,000 people
were sued by Lord
McAlpine uh how who you know whoever he
could find basically he settled with or
he won in court I don't think he lost
any of those cases the most famous one
is this gentleman over
here who what's his name uh Allan Davies
who paid him $115,000 so you can imagine
if he had sued all 10,000 people and
they paid this much exactly how much he
would have gotten it would have been
insane he had to delete the Tweet he
apologized he paid Lord McAlpine 15,000
pound not dollars and then he donated an
additional amount of money I don't think
they said how much to a local charity
and that was it all because this guy
tweeted and or retweeted an accusation
that wasn't
true now what's interesting about that
story is that Lord McAlpine sued the BBC
and he won all that money and then he
had to sue 10,000 people on Twitter to
get recompense for the accusation that
was seemingly not true but he didn't sue
Twitter directly and you might wonder
why like why would he sue the BBC which
is obviously much easier than suing
10,000 individuals but then on Twitter
Sue 10,000 individuals and there's a
reason for that and the reason for that
is basically section 230 part C part one
or I'm sure there's some legal way to
say this I just don't know but
anyway so uh that story aside I guess I
should say I know I said my next video
was going to be about WeChat obviously I
just wanted to do this real quick and I
I recorded this in my car like you'll
sometimes I post those videos and me
ranting in my car and I was so tired of
editing it and redoing it I was just
like screw it I'm just going to do it
live and then we'll we'll uh that'll be
that'll be it we will just uh see how it
goes so sorry if you're listening to
this later and you hear me uh stuttering
a lot stammering a lot it's because I'm
doing this live and I don't edit those
things out obviously live
anyway so section 230 is actually quite
long in the title of the video I
mentioned it was 26 words there's
there's a lot more to it than just that
the important part that everyone cares
about is this here though these are the
26 words I was referring to which say no
provider or user of an interactive
Computer Service which means things like
Twitter Facebook shall be treated as the
publisher or speaker of any information
provided by another information content
provider now if you're wondering what
information content provider means I
brought that up as well it means
information content provider the term
means any person or entity that is
responsible in whole or in part for the
creation or development of in
information provided through the
Internet Capital I internet or any other
interactive computer service so an
information content provider is someone
posting something online so if we go
back to the Lord macalpine example
Twitter can not be held liable based on
these 26 words for information posted on
their platform you cannot Sue Twitter if
someone on Twitter of their own valtion
accuses you of being a predator you have
to sue the person individually so why am
I talking about section
230 uh because right now in America as
the election's getting nearer it's an
issue that's coming up more and more and
being spoken about more and more which
is basically what should we do about
it both president candidates Donald
Trump and Joe Biden have expressed
interest in wanting to repeal it
entirely this entire thing just repeal
it the effect of that would mean that
someone like Lord McAlpine or anyone
could sue Twitter for defamation or
potential defamation posted on their
website and the lawsuits wouldn't be
thrown out immediately citing the
section 230
protection some people like Trump view
this as and Biden view this as a good
thing because basically what their
argument is is that these big platforms
I'm going to keep using Twitter as the
example to keep it simple but this works
for any of them patreon Facebook uh even
mypace or something you know all the big
names in U in
Tech uh they they enjoy this
protection um also to make it more clear
because as I'm speaking it's occurring
to me I don't think I made it entirely
clear section 230 if like the Washington
Post uh posts an article that accuses
Lord McAlpine of being a predator they
can be sued but if someone in the
comment section of of that article calls
him a predator The Washington Post can't
be sued he has to Sue that individual
and the reason for that is colloquially
they call it platforms versus Publishers
so in the artical sense of Washington
Post they publish and editorialize the
Articles they post but they don't
publish and editorialize the comments so
that's the main difference is that they
can't be held liable for the things said
in the comments there are some
exceptions to that but I won't go into
that now not no point
so let me check over here real quick
sorry o I'm definitely gonna have to get
another monitor that's going to be
really annoying I can't just keep on
checking back over there I got a uh a
size issue a resolution issue that I'm
not able to troubleshoot because it's on
the same screen I'm on anyway uh let me
continue so I'm I'm talking about I
don't really have a point in this video
I just kind of wanted to rant about this
a little bit because if you're a fan of
section 230 which I I am for reasons
I'll get to in a little bit uh you're in
a stressful situation which is currently
the president and the uh opposing
candidate the person who's the in not
the
incumbent uh they both want to do away
with Section 230 for different reasons
but to the same effect really the same
reason they just have different points
of view but it's the same reason why
they want to get rid of it which is
these companies have enjoyed so much
protection from this law and not given
anything in return
and now it's clear that these sites are
centralized locations for severe issues
in our country and around the world um
Facebook being able to censor not well I
guess I should say first that I don't
I'm I'm not really a fan of trump or
Biden so I'm not making these arguments
because I'm Pro or against either of
them but these are the arguments they
make from the Facebook point of
view uh they're able to block and censor
certain information based on well really
their own frivolous ideas but they can
do it based on where you live based on
how they they feel you should um they
feel you should feel there was that
article that came out like a so many
years ago whenever that uh analytica
stuff was was coming out where basically
there was an Insider who was saying if
you're a Facebook user who uses it more
than one hour per day the odds that
you've been involved in a social
experiment are between 99 and 100% and
those social experiments included things
like seeing if they could affect your
mood by showing you depressing updates
you know because you'll notice on
Facebook the updates they're not in
order they're not like in Timeline order
because that would make the most sense
they're like in keyword order that you
don't know because it's part of some
experiment you're being used in but
you're not privy
to anyway uh there's all that I used to
have rants about that online I took down
they weren't on YouTube but you know I I
have a lot of feelings on how these
companies utilize this well how they
mess with your brain in an attempt to
see if it gets you to use their platform
for longer periods anyway these
companies have pretty much been able to
work under the table do all this stuff
behind the scenes and they've been able
to have people whether they provoke the
responses or not post whatever they want
on their platforms and as long as
they're making a goodfaith effort to
keep illegal Material off of their
platforms people can say whatever they
want and the companies themselves are
not held liable from Trump's perspective
he's saying look this is being used to
censor right-wingers and right-wing
Politics on these massive massive
communication platforms and from Biden's
perspective he's saying these platforms
are being used to organize uh hate
groups and to spread hate speech in ways
we've never precedented before and it's
causing civil unrest globally and of
course domestically for us in America
something like that I've paraphrased
both those arguments but they're I think
the heart of them is there I think they
would both agree that that's a fair
characterization so they've talked about
repealing it Trump is currently pushing
this is on Trump's uh priority list way
higher than it is on Joe Biden's because
basically Trump is under the impression
well I mean he's actually right I mean
it doesn't matter if you like him or not
he is correct about this that Twitter is
unfairly targeting him and they're doing
that by whenever he posts a something
that
is factually incorrect they're flagging
his tweets and putting a little message
at the bottom saying here's a link to
some articles that counter the
information you know why it may or may
not be true what he's tweeting about but
they aren't doing that for Biden who the
BBC a assum assumedly ostensibly
unbiased Source in this election and
even if they were biased it almost like
it's almost like they would be biased in
favor of Biden and not
Trump
um they fact checked some of the claims
Biden made and he tweeted about on the
day of the first presidential debate and
they completely debunked them they're
like these are not true but Twitter
doesn't flag Biden's tweets and uh so
Trump is right they are unfairly
targeting him and his point is as it
gets closer to the election he's he's
basically threatening Twitter by saying
I'm going to repeal section 230 which
means any site that is just a forum for
communication like YouTube would survive
I think Facebook would survive but like
Reddit and Twitter would not anything
that's just a forum for communication
would be sued into Oblivion the moment
section 230 is repealed which brings me
on to what I mentioned earlier about the
Kiwi
Farms so one of the reasons why I like
section 230 I'm no fan of the Kiwi Farms
but I like small sites having the
ability to um basically come up and kiwi
Farms was an experiment I guess I won't
I won't just say kiwi Farms cuz kiwi
farms and achan were both an experiment
in the same way uh which was basically
they were going to be these very unique
online
forums that
uh I guess
attracted that attracted um people who
were interested in a certain certain
subsets of Internet culture ham was more
experimental than than kiwi Farms
because kiwi Farms was like specifically
let's let's talk about and document uh
weirdos on the internet and aan was I
want to see what happens if we create a
Reddit where
um the I mean basically users can create
their own basically it was like Reddit
it was basically a more Anonymous users
can create their own
subreddits or or sub Chans whatever it's
called I don't know uh so basically it
was a image board Reddit hybrid with
very little moderation um intentionally
and it was was kind of an experiment in
that way and so I like that idea I'm not
a fan of either of those places I've
talked about that before but the idea I
think is is great and those sites they
never would survive if it wasn't for
Section 230 because they do enjoy this
section 230 C1 protection this one I
just talked about uh as long as they're
doing good faith
moderation they don't
have any reason at all to be afraid of
starting a a site you right now don't
have any reason at all to be afraid of
starting a site like more experimental
than achan or kiwi farms for example you
don't have any reason at all to be
afraid of that uh because you would be
protected under this American
law assuming you were hosting it or the
business was was started in America or
based out of America um I think aan
famously the the creators didn't live in
America uh the administrators didn't but
it was it was hosted out of America
which is why actually I'm not I'm not
going to pretend like I'm a lawyer on
this I don't know what the rules are
surrounding that I'm not sure if you
have to just have like an LLC set up in
America for this to work and you can
host it anywhere I guess you would have
to because like digital
ocean uh operates under American law but
they obviously have servers all around
the world that's one of the things they
offer is that you can use you know
servers from from
anywhere so anyway sorry I went back to
check and see if I was still getting
that issue I still am so honestly you
know I guess I'll take this time to say
if anyone sees this in the in the future
uh I'm going to start taking streaming
and doing youtubing a little bit more
seriously uh there was a guy I met years
ago who was like super into fitness and
um I was always like what is it with you
like how do you do this like all he did
was like eat breathe and live fitness
and I thought that seems like such a
crazy thing like I've I've never felt
that way and I was like how do you stay
so inspired to do it cuz every day he
would spend like you know a jobs length
of amount of time like four to 6 hours
uh just focusing on meal prepping or
exercising or or whatever you know
whatever else he was doing and he said
every time I get demotivated I uh I buy
myself something related to it to like
kind of rekindle my interest and remind
myself it's a hobby I remember thinking
that's stupid that's one of the dumbest
things I've ever heard but I tried it
recently long story short after Corona I
kind of I had a lot more you know work
Emer genes come up things I had to work
on and I stopped doing music I used to
do electronic and and uh I guess analog
non-electronic music a lot and um I
haven't done it at all since Corona
started but I went out and I just I I
bought a new um interface and all of a
sudden I'm doing it again and I thought
you know what maybe that's a good idea
so I was thinking about taking this a
little more seriously and I thought I
should buy a new microphone cuz the one
I'm using now I've had for like 12 years
and uh if anyone has a suggestion that
was the whole reason I went off on that
entire tangent was just to say if anyone
has a suggestion for a microphone that's
not like you know I don't need to start
my own radio show I don't need something
crazy but it would be nice to have
something nicer than what I have now I
just have a USB blue microphone like
from before at Blue was a thing before
anyone knew what it was before every
streamer ever had a Blue Yeti um this is
before Yeti I think it's just blue it's
like S2 something I don't know anyway
it's really old
uh so anyway let me know okay tangent
didn't mean to say that
sorry overall the reason why and like I
said there wasn't really a point to this
video I'm going to wrap up here in a bit
but the reason why I kind of wanted to
rant about this and talk about it and
get back on to talking about 230 at all
is
because the internet after the repeal of
230 which again I don't think it'll be
repealed I think I think Biden and Trump
are both saying that to threaten these
companies into changing their Behavior I
think what they're going to do is
they're going to revise it or amend it
there have already been proposed
amendments I think actually one that
didn't have a huge impact was passed
recently I have to you have to fact
check me on that don't don't quote me
but I'm pretty sure there was an
amendment made to 230 recently that that
didn't affect this part C1 which I'm
looking at here I'm highlighting now on
the screen if you're looking um but it
did affect something so I think what
these guys want to do is they want to
amend it they want to change it they
want to make it so these companies don't
have insane amounts of power as far as
controlling or in some cases not
controlling from the Biden perspective
um powerful movements on their
sites uh but they also want to keep the
idea that some company can start some
small experiment and because remember
you guys have to remember I don't know
if anyone here is old enough or who
watches my channel is old enough to
remember when Twitter wasn't a thing
when it was a joke people laughed at
because it was back then it was like 120
characters I think or maybe it was even
60 and it was just laughable I mean it
was a silly goofy thing where people
posted like ha cus and like it was like
Vine for words for like witty
people and uh then all of a sudden news
started getting onto it like people
would say they would post links to news
articles and it was all of a sudden the
the place where news traveled fastest
like seconds after an event happened you
could find it on
Twitter and you could always verify it
was true and so Twitter was an
experiment and Twitter would have been
sued into dust and Ash if section 230
didn't exist when it was created so this
law has to exist in some way I don't
like how powerful these companies have
gotten either guys but this law has to
exist in some way for innovative ideas
like that to exist in the future of the
internet so anyway kind of want to just
get it out there let people know my
thoughts on it I'm a huge fan of section
230 uh especially C1 this part here here
I I agree that there's a problem with
how
free uh well free is the wrong word I
don't want to say we need to be less
free no there's
uh there was obviously no foresight
because how could there have been for
how quickly these companies grew to be
just massive giants that are playing
huge Parts in political games you guys
of course would remember in the last
election if you followed the American
election at all
uh from 2016 that Facebook was heavily
accused of of being a platform where
anti-trump and anti-clinton propaganda
was propagated uh Twitter was too there
was of course you still hear the meme
about Russian Bots Russian bots on
Twitter posting misinformation and fud
you still hear about that and these
companies never anticipated getting to
that point so I do agree there it's
almost like they're too powerful it's
almost like they're they're too
important uh for what they are which we
basically they all started as cute ways
to you know cute things to show your
grandma on the internet that's how they
all
started but now they've grown into this
thing where think about the fact that
Twitter if Twitter were to ban a uh one
of the presidential candidates accounts
in America while they were campaigning
just think of what that would do if
Trump's account got banned or deleted or
Biden's account got banned or deleted I
I think there that would actually
incite phys physical violence in in the
real world in meat space not cyers space
and I don't think they can do it if you
guys might remember that liberal who was
fired from Twitter in their last day
they deleted the president's account
which actually I thought was pretty
funny I mean it's obviously obviously
was a terrible idea and I think that
person actually faced legal charges but
you know it's pretty funny delete the
president's account uh but that
highlighted the whole issue which is
oh Jack dorsy the CEO of Twitter May is
he just the like CE in spirit or is he
actually still there let's say he is
because I don't want to fact check
myself uh right now Jack dorsy is the
owner of this company and he's incapable
of deleting certain accounts it doesn't
matter if the president says the most
dangerous thing in the world on Twitter
he while he's campaigning he is unable
to delete his account without inciting
some kind of very serious real world
backlash anyway it's all very
interesting and and section 230 allowed
them to get here so I understand the
complaints about it needing to be
revised but at the same time if we get
rid of it small experimental sites even
ones that I may not be a fan of like the
Kiwi Farms or aan I think that the
future of the internet is in allowing
those to exist and section 230 is unique
to American law it's nowhere else null
the owner of kiwi Farms has talked about
this extensively and again whether you
like him or not we disagree on certain
things we agree on others
but he said like he he's spent most of
his young life living in other countries
for very vious reasons and he spends a
lot of time reading the Free Speech laws
of other countries and he said he he's
read the the laws of Uruguay
Rwanda um Ukraine Poland and nowhere
nowhere where he thought it would be
safe to host his site is there a law as
powerful as section 230 protecting small
site owners um from the crazy things
their users might say so anyway that's
it I'm probably going to stop going live
now it's been about I guess 20 minutes
bit of a rough start there if you were
on uh I expect most people will see this
after it's published and not live um
recommendation for a microphone please
if you have one that would be cool if
you thought this was cool let me know uh
obviously I'm going to do the WeChat
video next I just after seeing some of
the things that just happened recently
on Twitter and and seeing Trump once
again pushing to repeal section 230 I
just wanted to talk about this and uh
that's pretty much all I got thanks
everybody
no now I got to figure out how to stop
streaming oh God
