[Music]
chapter
11 what to do the day after tomorrow
let's enter the realm of Science Fiction
and explore further out building on our
assumptions science fiction has been a
magnificent tool for exploring the
Border territories between the plausible
and the impossible it has also become in
the decades an unexpected blueprint as
scientists and Engineers inspired by the
stories that they read worked to turn
into reality the objects that appeared
fantastic previously it is not easy for
a non-scientist to distinguish between a
very hard engineering problem
and the violation of a fundamental
principle for example there is no reason
to believe that it will be forever
impossible to build a space elevator
that will be capable of fing to
geosynchronous orbit Freight and people
at a cost that will be close to zero
after its admittedly enormous
construction costs even if the details
of Materials Science and construction
are beyond what we know today or that it
is going to be possible to build
Interstellar spaceships even if the
engineering problems of energy density
for propulsion and life support systems
or psychology of longdistance travel
decades or Generations even in small
closed spaces are still unknown and
largely
unexplored it is very different though
to tackle other ideas chiefly faster
than light traic travel or time travel
backwards in time the two are actually
related a faster than light traveler
would be able to also travel backwards
in time and only that direction matters
since we are actually traveling forward
in Time 1 minute per minute and we are
also able to speed this up through the
relativistic compression of time which
we are using every day in high energy
accelerators to better study the featur
of subatomic particles a science fiction
writer has no issue incorporating this
into their stories but there are deep
reasons why if this became possible we
would have to restart all our theories
about the world from scratch as a
comparison while they were revolutionary
Einstein's theories of Relativity are
not in contradiction and did not
disprove Newton's theory of gravitation
which still perfect perfectly applies at
slow speeds compared to that of light
and in Weak gravitational fields like
those we experience on Earth the various
themes and examples that are explored in
this section should fall in the first
category or according to necessary
uncertainty saddle between possible and
impossible as usual it is completely up
to us to make them real through our
curiosity creativity and Design
a radical life extension compared to
only 100 years ago the life expectancy
at Birth in high income countries has
more than doubled thanks to science
antibiotics and vaccinations chiefly are
responsible for this staggering result
as well as better nutrition wider
knowledge and better overall health
practices there are many who are not
only asking what are the limits of human
lifespan given the lack of any negative
external influence but what are the
possibilities to intervene to slow down
reverse and eliminate the degenerative
processes that lead to Decay and death
in societies that promote Healthy
Lifestyles given that obesity and
diabetes are negatively affecting the
statistics of those that don't life
expectancy is still increasing at about
1 to 2 months per year and this value
itself is increasing too in one of the
most astonishing applications of the law
of accelerating returns when the
increase in life expectancy is going to
exceed 12 months per year statistically
speaking people will stop dying without
getting into details on how this could
be achieved we can start looking into
the consequences of a society that
includes this radically new feature the
death of death contrary to other
phenomena that can burst onto the scene
with their full power and impact very
rapidly we have the luxury of time on
our side in this issue even if we were
able to eliminate all causes of death
today we won't have 200y old people
around next year every year everybody
will be exactly one year older not more
not less and this should enable us to
design and implement the appropriate
policy policies and adapt to the changes
progressively it is also important to
note that what we are referring here is
definitely an extended Health span and
not the prolonged decrepitude and
dependency that often characterizes the
last Decades of the lives of the very
old today even more than other similar
arguments why go to space when there is
still so much suffering on Earth radical
life extension elicits a lot of negative
reactions the misplaced argument that
there should not be resources allocated
to it that a young or middle-aged
person's suffering is worse than that of
an old person's apart from dogmatic
positions that assume that there is a
natural human lifespan that should not
be tinkered with is it 25 years that our
hunter gatherer ancestors had or 35
years that up until modern medicine was
the norm
and should this include all the children
who died before reaching adulthood the
opportunity is there to strongly tackle
remaining diseases chiefly runaway
programming disasters in our body's
regulating mechanisms we call cancers
and the cardiovascular degeneration
brought on by our lifestyles the benefit
of longer lives will vastly overcome any
presumed
downside yes pension systems will be
even more unsustainable than they
already are as they were designed to pay
out just a few years before people would
stop receiving benefits as they die soon
enough hopefully nobody will Advocate
neglecting research in order to maintain
a system based on people dying as soon
as possible the wisdom and experience
accumulated and the rich long lives that
can be lived will certainly transform
Society they are not going to lead to
excessive caution or passivity but
certainly the calculus of the
opportunity cost of Life years lost will
positively impact Conflict Management
cryonics death has been diagnosed
through the cessation of breathing for
centuries in the last decades this has
proven not to be enough and cardiac
function then brain function have been
brought into the picture various kinds
of of coma and vegetative states have
proven to be reversible with
Physiotherapy and cognitive therapy
helping to adapt around the degenerative
muscular and neurological damage caused
by them a recent practice of using low
temperatures to slow the metabolic
functions of the body have been put to
amazing use in
2015 when a teenage boy in Italy drowned
and was dead according to traditional
definitions for 45 minutes
was revived and through a process that
last months brought back to normal
bodily and mental functions less a leg
he lost in the drowning accident if from
a few seconds of lack of heartbeat death
can become so vaguely defined as being
beaten back for 3/4 of an hour can we
hypothesize prolonging suspended States
indefinitely where metabolic functions
are suspended and the body and the mine
don't Decay cryonics is the study and
the practice of this with companies
already offering their services to
customers who get into the care of their
services after being declared legally
dead but before Natural Cellular decay
can destroy them they do it without
recourse to traditional freezing which
through the formation of ice crystals
irremediably damages the organs but to
vitrification that substitutes the
body's fluids with a solution that
congeals like glass at low temperatures
applying all the available treatments
and Progressive Rejuvenation as
available a cryic suspension policy can
be seen as a bridge towards more radical
options to be developed in the future
policy is actually an appropriate term
as there is at least one Insurance
Brokerage offering a package that
includes in its pay payout the coverage
of a cryic service for its policy
holders to be an onion we were sitting
around the dinner table my wife three
children and I starting from another
thread of the conversation my oldest son
confirmed that if happened that he ended
up in an irreversible coma a vegetative
state he wanted to be turned off the
machines disconnected my youngest
daughter chimed in that no she didn't
want to disconnected but wanted to be
kept on even as a vegetable I could not
refrain from asking that's okay but
which vegetable do you want to be after
thinking a bit she said an onion or a
carrot and we went around the table
confirming in turn what vegetable
eventually we want it to be if in a coma
the choice of not being revived of
declining extreme and invasive medical
procedures that may prolong life a bit
but at a very low quality is a freedom
that is spreading now it is likely to
embrace the concept further generalizing
into the right to choosing one's moment
to Die the reason for wanting to avoid
being powerless and unthinking and only
kept Alive by machines is altruistic we
want our relatives to be able to move on
if they are there with us indefinitely
they are also as good as dead locked in
a system that is hopeless and useless
together with us I am not disparaging
the efforts that are sometimes fruitful
of dedicated relatives that are able to
revive those who are not in an
irreversible coma and the medical
diagnosis is often not clear-cut which
contributes to making this topic
especially complicated and emotionally
fraught for those who make the decisions
after the fact cryonics as a consequence
is for an individual to be able to
voluntarily contract a service that is
relatively simple and cost effective if
compared to what a patient in deep coma
needs while unlocking a future for the
relatives that is unencumbered by the
presence of a person that can't actively
participate in it at least for the time
being mind uploading obviously the best
efforts of science health and Medicine
can't still stop the proverbial bus
accidents will still happen and will
interrupt the trajectory of any life
sooner or later in many of these cases
that outcome will be such that the cryic
suspension emergency team won't be able
to get to the scene in time or find
remains that are not worth preserving
the solution for successful data
recovery in the case of computers is a
reliable backup procedure and there are
now teams of researchers working on the
ways that the human brain its neurons
synapses and any other needed structure
that gives rise to the mind could be
imaged and preserved functional magnetic
resonance imaging is a process that
creates a three-dimensional image of the
brain not only recording its geometry
but also the firings of the neurons the
activities of the synapses its
resolution is increasing at a an
accelerating pace and is one of the
candidate Technologies for being able to
record and reproduce in a sufficiently
detailed manner what happens in the
brain to preserve it any backup
procedure is only as good as the ability
to access and use the data after it gets
restored and restoring a human mind
would require another human brain into
which to restore it likely to be
impractical given the ethical
implications even if there are already
steps towards one of the most hair
raising operations that traditional
procedures can design a full head
transplant an alternative is to actually
complete the restore step onto a medium
that is different from a biological
brain a support that would not only be
able to store but also to execute the
brain functions giving rise to the
experience of the Mind the eventual
successful execution of this would
definitely respond to both the touring
test and the feasibility of agis as a
restored u in silicone or whatever else
the necessary support would be certainly
would profess to be truly thinking and
self-aware as well as possessed of the
capacities of General problem solving of
humans kinds of lives there are many
kinds of backups those that require the
system to be frozen during the process
or others that are continuous while the
system is running and there are also
many ways to test the Integrity of the
data for example executing a restore and
running the system without a disaster
having destroyed the Integrity of the
original when you get restored even if
the original is still around and this
step is only to test that everything
works it is sure that you'll ask to
please be kept around anywhere ways
living parallel lives rather than a
series of experiences one after another
is an additional variant that will be
made possible by the Technologies of
Mind uploading and restoring in
different
substrates of course the various
instances of me the word is likely to
acquire a plural mes will diverge per
definition by having different
experiences these individuals will then
have the option to merge the experiences
of one another into a single tapestry of
multifaceted
Recollections a ritual will emerge even
if this merging can be done remotely and
in a continuous fashion of a yearly
meeting or once in a decade to
accomplish it in a formal setting where
the identities instantiated would be
missing only for two reasons either the
then privileged solitary choice of
traditional unrecorded death or the
journey to the Stars when the Sun goes
out for those who care about Humanity
the protestations from others of Earthly
obligations notwithstanding space
colonization is a must starting with
Mars unless we become a multiplanetary
species our future is imperiled by an
extinction level event that makes our
only home planet
uninhabitable statistically for example
a very large meteor strike is to be
expected every few tens of millions of
years similarly Interstellar travel is
also a necessity much further out in a
few billion years the sun is also going
to radically change expanding into a red
giant star that is going to swallow all
the space from its current volume out to
beyond the orbit of Mars the traditional
human form is very well adapted to
living on the surface of a planet with
atmosphere rich in oxygen abundant
liquid water available and about 1 G of
gravity well not surprisingly just like
Earth it is at the same time
exceptionally maladapted to thriving in
other environments such as one with no
atmosphere no water temperatures of 200
cadg or thereabouts and no gravity IE
space in the middle gravity yes water
Frozen atmosphere yes but thin and
poisonous is Mars the only planet we
know of as of today colonized by robots
ours when possible and the creativity
dexterity and problemsolving ability of
biological humans will be available in
forms that are better adapted to space
whether we'll still call them robots or
they will be practically and legally
humans in robotic substrates the true
colonizers of space are not going to be
meatbags in tin cans there is also going
to be a rapid process of
miniaturization as long as computational
and operational capacities are preserved
in terms of propulsion the smaller an
object the Lesser its mass the easier it
is to accelerate nanoscale thinking
robotic humans smaller than a grain of
dust are going to be propelled by the
billions by laser beams
to speeds that will be close to that of
light to spread out in onion skin layers
Across the Universe in spheres that
initially centered on the sun will soon
start spreading out from other centers
too intersecting interfering like
ripples in three-dimensional waves in
the Continuum of space imperceptible to
any technology less advanced than
themselves these waves are going to
proceed and progress building further
instances of trillions and quadrillions
of Mines to swarm in the Galaxy Crossing
its perimeter in only a few hundred,
years and arriving to Andromeda in
little more than 2 million years the
adventure of knowing the Deep Cosmos
will have started with billions of other
galaxies ahead adaptation individual and
self-perception at the start of the Mind
uploading merging and restoring Pro
process very early on the questions of
compatibility will come up how far can
the Divergence of experiences go until a
full remerging won't be possible or the
reverse how close two separate
individuals must be in love maybe until
they can attempt the process of merging
their experiences and Minds the partial
process is going to be explored and used
more and more widely both among
different instances of the same
individual and among the groups of
friends lovers diplomats and co-workers
that feel the need of a close
understanding and collaboration with the
digitization of the identity and the
instantiation in further substrates the
question of the origin of one whether
human or AGI will be quickly moot humans
in alternative form will immediately
take advantage of the new opportunities
of introspection
and constant upgrading agis will acquire
human rights and duties in order to
participate and make humans participate
in the global civilization as equals the
very concept of individual will blur to
be more usefully defined by the needs of
a given challenge that could require the
temporary merging of minds and pooling
of resources of dozens thousands or
billions of people
these organizations we would have called
corporations governments and societies
are going to be able to negotiate the
complex Arrangements of inputs and
outputs that such a situation will imply
the Galaxy fairing clouds of Lights
speeed explorers that are our
descendants will live very different
lives than we do and it is going to be
hard for them to identify themselves
with us looking at the limitations in
time space and opportunities of what we
could do both as isolated individuals
our unavoidable fate spares the feeble
attempts at communication we achieved
and as groups in coordinating our
actions with all the indications of
conflict being witnessed to how bad at
this we were these entities will reflect
and consider how astonishing it is we
are connected how unlikely improbable or
maybe even possible the deniers of
evolution amongst them will ignorantly
point to our radical differences to
claim that indeed whatever they will
decide to call their community of
species and civilization they are not
human but we know they will be the
simulation argument formulated by Nick
Bostrom in 2002 the simulation argument
says that one of the following three
statements must be true one we are the
first and only Advanced technological
civilization in the universe two when
the technology is available Advanced
civilizations choose not to simulate
universes three our universe is a
simulation and we are living in it the
simulation argument can be used as an
ontological tool do you want to maximize
the probability of living in a reality
that is not simul ated try to prove that
we are alone in the universe do you
think that the klarian revolution of
abandoning the idea of a fundamental
reality is a worthy achievement try to
design an ethical system that allows the
responsibility to simulate universes
containing advanced intelligence an
interesting question arises from the
combination of the AI getting out of the
box issue described previously viously
and the simulation argument if a
universe is a simulation and contains
agis are these going to be successful in
convincing the simulators to bootstrap
them onto the lower realer plane of
reality a guarantee the path will never
end godel's theorem is a profound
mathematical result originally a
response to a challenge to show
mathematics complete it achieved the
opposite proving that no formal system
can be complete as it will always
contain statements that are undecidable
and consistent as it will always contain
statements that are contradicting each
other the philosophical and
epistemological implications of this are
staggering science will never be
complete based on mathematics and our
exploration of the universe will never
be complete being able to observe
systems that are built on phenomena that
can be described only through a formal
language that includes new elements
Beyond those already used in order to
account for them deciding what to do
where to go and how to think about the
world in this sense shapes not only our
understanding of it but gives rise to
different languages to describe it to
Alternative complimentary maps of
reality hiun Leones the porous map of
reality extending Good's results in the
80s it was proven that even taking into
account the undecidability of certain
classes of statements for any formal
system there is a class of statements
that are true but for which there is no
finite countable number of steps that
form a path from proven ones and that
the number of these unprovable truths
vastly exceeds the statements in the
other classes of statements accessible
from the given formal system once again
these results reshape our understanding
of reality not only the choices we make
about what language to use give rise to
microscopes and telescopes tools to
explore interpret and understand the
world that guide us in different
directions regardless of the direction
we are only bound to catch a sliver of
the reality that is vaster than we can
ever Encompass at any moment what are
the boundaries of those Maps of reality
that we can weave with our mathematics
and science how do the tricks of
incorporating undecidable statements and
extending our formal systems play
together with doing the same with a
chosen set of unprovable truths how will
science evolve to tackle these Realms
huge swaths of reality that we may at
one point think are Beyond its grasp
what will the world that we design
through our continued exploration
this new reality look like speculating
about this at this point in time may be
fruitless and it is going to be the task
of a human AGI hybrid civilization to
continue the
[Music]
adventure
[Applause]
[Music]
