hello and harikrishna
it is Ryan here aka Ramananda das by
some and we were very fortunate
on today's chasing reality podcast to be
joined by professor Dennis noble from
the University of Oxford I very much
enjoyed his writings over the last few
years since I've come to know about him
taking great inspiration in a sense I
wish I'd only my only wishes I'd known
about his thoughts earlier in my
scientific career before I got out of
working in the lab we're looking forward
to hearing what he has to say today he's
he's the writer of two main books from
2006 the music of life and 2016 dance to
the tune of life biological relativity I
very much recommend you picking them up
because they're a great read very easy
to read and very very important books so
thank you very much professor Dennis
Noble for joining me today on this
chasing reality podcast actually very
honoured I've been following your work
closely over the last few years I've
read both of your books life in 2006 and
2016 and biological relativity dance to
the tune of life and I found them very
refreshing thank you
I noticed that you're you're part of a
group online called the third way of
evolution exactly so and I just wanted
you to tell me a little bit about this
maybe in terms of the history the
biology and why do we need what is it
and why do we need such a thing
we shouldn't need it at all okay that's
a short answer but there's a longer
answer obviously because there's a long
history to this and I'm afraid it goes
all the way back to 1883 Charles Darwin
died in 1882 so he would not have known
what happened
very soon after his death because in
1883 Auguste vice Minh
German geneticist well they described
him as a geneticist actually of course
genetics and certainly not DNA was not
known in the way that we know today
she had concerned with inheritance and
August Weismann took Darwin's ideas and
he was shocked by parts of Darwin's book
the Origin of Species his shock was the
Darwin in about twelve places in the
Origin of Species accepts Lamarck's
ideas on the inheritance of acquired
characteristics hmm August Weismann was
of the view that there is no way in
which the body the soma could influence
the germline that idea is what we now
called vice men's barrier okay now it's
often thought that Darwin must have
agreed with that he certainly did not
because not only in the Origin of
Species does he refer in twelve places
to accepting Lamarck's idea he also
developed a theory for how it could
happen it's in one of the later books
the domestication of animals and plants
what he said was I think there must be
tiny particles that go through the
fluids of the body and can influence the
germline he called in gemmules his
gemmules of what we now call EXO Sam's
we know that exercise go straight down
to the germline the DNA in them the RNA
in them can get incorporated into the
fused egg and sperm you can get
incorporated into the genome that's all
been demonstrated actually by one of the
Third Way scientist Corrado Spadafora in
Rome now why am i giving you this little
bit of history over what is it now 130
years old because his crew
vice ones idea was never debate to be
Darwin because after Darwin passed away
a year before he presented it in a great
lecture but it formed the cornerstone of
the main theory of evolutionary biology
today which is called the modern
synthesis sometimes also called
neo-darwinism and for those who don't
know very much about the academic
aspects of biology a good way to sum
that up is that it is what Richard
Dawkins describes in The Selfish Gene
now we've known actually for a long time
that many aspects of that idea must be
wrong seventy years ago at least Barbara
McClintock who was working on plants she
was actually working on Indian corn oh
that under stress the plant could
transfer bits of genetic material from
one chromosome to another the plant was
effectively saying of course I don't
mean consciously but he was effectively
saying I'm under stress let's see what
happens if I just shuffled my cards
let's see if I can get a different
solution to the problem of responding to
the stress okay I see and she she was
told in 1957 I think it was that her
discovery should not be referred to in
papers she was publishing because nobody
believed her 1983 I think it was at the
age of 81 she won the Nobel Prize for
what we now call mobile genetic elements
now the reason I'm saying all of this is
that actually we have known that there
are a major breaks in relation to the
vison barrier for a very long time so
why have people not admitted it you
won't find what I've just described in
most of the textbooks of evolutionary
biology you certainly won't find the way
in which DNA can pass from
two egg and indeed egg cells can also
pick up DNA from the fluids of the body
and RNAs which control the DMA the
reason why we formed the Third Way of
evolution website which now has
something like 60 or 70 senior people
all of them published books and major
articles on evolutionary biology is that
as a group we found it very strange to
be faced with this situation in which
it's been known for a long time that the
simple assumptions of neo-darwinism or
what's called a modern synthesis cannot
be sufficient on their own yet you don't
find this taught in schools you don't
find it in the textbooks and until
recently it was also quite dangerous
even to go public as I've done now for
more than 12 years with doubts and
serious doubts about the modern
synthesis and won't be now called
neo-darwinism so there was no other way
to make sure that other academics and
the public know that there's a very
substantial group of us who wish to see
research on evolutionary biology open up
to these new trends which are very
important but which are also old trends
because as I said they were found many
years ago they've been ignored thank you
that's a that's a very comprehensive
answer to my question it's it's
something that I've I feel very strongly
about because I was taught through those
textbooks which you're talking about and
nowhere did I see anything like this
that's right and bring that point out
because I actually think things will
only change when the textbooks change
well that's one of my questions actually
then it's hot how do textbooks change
I'm a bit naive too this process of how
academia interacts with the process of
in teaching outside in schools and
colleges and universities how does that
happen is there a particular process or
is it just whatever
seems in vogue gets picked up by yeah
that's a very good and very deep
question of course if what you're doing
is advancing science in what I might
call an incremental way it's not too
difficult for textbook writers to adjust
and edit their textbooks as they do
every five to ten years so if what
you're doing relates already to existing
well-established
ideas then I think it's gradual and it's
not too difficult it takes time of
course for the textbooks to catch up I
think that's reasonable because some of
the developments that a novel just peter
out but this certainly hasn't petered
out so that's not the explanation I
think the explanation is a social and
cultural one and it is this may be the
people who might listen to this podcast
will not know the nature of the
situation in the United States but let
me just briefly describe it because I
work in the United States as well as
here in the UK quite frequently okay I
collaborate with a lot of United States
people the debate over evolution over
there is hotly contested in a way that
we don't really see here in Europe it's
contestant of course by very strongly
fundamentalist Christians now I respect
their faith that no coral with that what
I find very difficult to understand is
their position in relation to science
because apart from strongly
fundamentalist groups here in the United
Kingdom and perhaps also in Europe
they're very thing
people now who seriously challenge the
general theory of evolution that is that
organisms are different from other
organisms yes and you don't find the
Archbishop of Canterbury questioning
that idea you don't find the leaders of
other churches and religious groups
challenging that idea in a serious way
the United States you do and I know
middle America as well as the East and
West Coast and you'll be surprised the
extent to which just talking with
ordinary people in relation to this
question of whether they think we have
or have not evolved from other animals
at very large numbers who think that
cannot possibly be true now I think that
puts the evolutionary biologist in the
United States in a very particular
social situation which we need to
understand yes it is that many of them
have also used evolutionary biology to
attack religion now that's that's their
right that's right again I've no
particular quarrel with that though I
wouldn't wish to be involved with that
myself but the consequence is that the
stakes are very high a very hot issue in
the United States it's not the hot issue
in the same way in Europe now it's not a
surprise therefore that when I organized
a meeting on new trends in evolution
apology at the Trop Academy of Science
here in the United Kingdom and the
Tropic Adam II of humanities and social
sciences here that is the Royal Society
in the British Academy three years ago
in 2016 I received the information that
evolution apologists in the United
Kingdom are worried about this meeting
because they had received messages from
colleagues in the United States saying
this is a disaster how can a meeting
like this be organized by somebody who
openly challenges neo-darwinism in his
lectures that's me
now this I think gives us an insight in
what is going on it is not just a matter
of the science this is a matter of a
very hot and lively debate that is still
occurring in the United States and which
I think has polarized the issue to the
points of which it seems to me the
writers of the textbook simply don't
risk if that's the right way to put it
putting those new trends out there's a
kind of community of people who defend
the fortress if I might put it that way
of neo-darwinism I've never in my long
career in science encountered anything
like it
I've had controversies in my own field
of physiological signs but I've never
encountered a situation where there's a
kind of dogmatism in Reverse the
dogmatism here is that the neo-darwinian
synthesis must be protected must be
regarded as absolute because we've told
the religious right in the United States
that is absolute in absolutely certain
now left my amateur sociological
analysis of what has gone on and I think
it's not therefore just a coincidence
that the major opposition to a meeting
here in the United Kingdom which
incidentally was very successful highly
attended and with a very good
publication that came out from yes not a
coincidence that the opposition came
from the United States there is a fear
there I think on the part of standard
evolutionary biologists that if they
admit that they were wrong the religious
right will be well to put a usual phrase
on it laughing down their beards now I
think they're wrong to think that a mere
science is science and he should advance
according to what the evidence shows but
there is my somewhat a mature
sociological analysis of what I think
has happened but I've direct experience
on it because as I said I I live and
work sometimes in the United States with
colleagues there I know middle America
where all of this is rampant and I there
or know that I'm partly right whether
it's the whole explanation I really
can't say thank you that's that's very
very helpful on and the way you looked
at that from the standpoint of the
European socio-political environment
versus the United States it raises a
question in me yes
which is which is that I can imagine
even in that kind of an environment
where you're holding on where someone's
holding on to the Neo Darwinist
viewpoint very strongly small changes
could be accepted perhaps yeah so my
question is what is what what is the
fear the fear must be coming from
something that seems like a radical
shift that's needed and so I was
wondering what it is that's being
proposed that could be put in place
instead of neo-darwinism or or maybe
something tagged on to it well these are
very good questions first of all it is
true to say that near Darwinists in the
united states have of course accepted
quite a lot of the developments and
changes that have occurred and we show
that the modern synthesis or
neo-darwinism is not itself sufficient
as it was formulated roughly seventy
years ago so you're quite right
there are many bulges in the United
States who would say okay we have
extended the theory isn't that
sufficient for you so your question was
a very good one why do I think it is not
sufficient I think that is best
explained by asking the question how has
neo-darwinism been presented to the
public I'm not talking now about
academics talking at academic meetings
well what I just said would be readily
accepted yes we've extended the theory
we've added this if I did that no
problem I'm
talking about how it is perceived by the
general public and sadly the books that
have the great influence there are
Richard Dawkins The Selfish Gene and
down the nets
Darwin's dangerous idea both of which
give no hint whatsoever that these
changes have occurred and these
developments have occurred that is the
problem so I found that when I discuss
with particularly no longer among
scientists among scientists much of what
I say is just so they say well what's
the problem Dennis you know all of this
is obvious but with the the general
public there's a very different
situation and not only the general
public incidentally with people working
in the social sciences like economics
and sociology who are now using genomics
incidentally in order to study sociology
I mean what they do of course is very
close to the dangerous idea of can we
characterize people by their genomes and
can we then start asking the dangerous
question are there good genomes and bad
genomes and how do you correct the bad
ones I mean listen it is highly
dangerous and we've seen that with the
outrage of of course they came from
experiments in China on children young
babies to actually change the genome in
the embryonic stage or in the earlier in
the embryonic stage which of course
nearly all scientists around the world
condemned as far too dangerous because
of course it would affect generations to
come now the point I think I'm making
here is that the change needs to be in
the popular presentation of evolutionary
biology moreover I'd go further and say
that the view that I'm expressing which
is that the language of neo-darwinism is
part of the problem would produce a view
of evolutionary biology which is much
softer much more nuanced instead of for
example jeans created as body and mind
that's a direct quote from The Selfish
Gene I would say we control our genes we
are the medium through which our culture
our environment our into relations with
other people with other organisms
influenced through that well no longer
doubted control of the genome the genome
is controlled by the organism itself
outside a cell a DNA sequence can do
nothing whatsoever
that's why virus is a lot of life
they've got to go into a cell in order
to use the cells machinery to reproduce
so just taking that one example genes
created this body and mind well it's
simply wrong it's not a matter of
nuancing it it's incorrect
moreover and I'm sure Richard Dawkins
would agree with this point to attribute
selfishness to a piece of a molecule it
is very odd you and I could be selfish
wish I have that inclination my poor DNA
can't be selfish and indeed a few years
ago I published an article showing that
it's actually an empty hypothesis the
only way you could test selfishness for
a sequence in a bit of DNA is to find
out whether it succeeds in reproducing
better than its competitors in future
generations so the very term Selfish
Gene the only way to sort of ask the
question you know can we show that this
gene is selfish is to find out whether
its frequency in the subsequent
generations increases now that may seem
obvious and of course the readers of The
Selfish Gene it does seem obvious
mmm-hmm but actually it's
philosophically speaking an empty
statement because what is the experiment
you could
to test that idea you first define a
selfish gene perhaps as the genes that
are successful in the future generations
increasing their numbers but what's the
test for that it is do they increase
their numbers you can't have a
hypothesis whose main definition of it
key component in the hypothesis is the
very thing that would enable you to make
a prediction the prediction can't itself
be the definition and there's a
philosophical point but it's an obvious
one so I think the difficulty lies and
this is why I think we need a revolution
in our thinking about I think the
problem lies in the language that has
been used it's metaphorical people
sometimes criticized me for using
metaphors I openly done that with the
music of life and the the new one dance
to the tune of life the fact is that if
you read them carefully and you go
towards the end of my book the music of
life what I said the end is this the
reason fringe using that metaphor is to
compare it with the alternative metaphor
that is jeans created as body in mind
what I'm demonstrating is you can let go
of your metaphors you don't have to be
taken in by them you don't have to
believe them you can use them metaphors
are there to be used what I'm really
saying therefore is not believe my
metaphor rather than somebody else's it
is
remember that metaphors are just
metaphors and you've got to then ask the
question what do they do
what do they make you think the best
move then is to say okay give up the
metaphors and just look at what the
facts are the facts are why the third
way of evolution was formed because all
the people on that website are very
concerned about people ignoring the
facts that have been discovered over
quite a long period of time but which
are now accumulating in a very rapid way
yes and that what I'm picking up as
you're speaking is the
there's a real resurgence of the idea of
organisms the return of the organism is
the way that I understand it and instead
of the organism is in control yes yes
and not only not in time so because
obviously you know somebody's got cystic
fibrosis that is a genetic disorder no
question about it there are certain
forms of genetic change that you can do
nothing about other than about have a
drug that helps you with coping with it
possibly also some degree of gene
therapy obviously I don't disagree with
that but generally the interesting thing
is that most changes in the genome don't
have much effect the the genome-wide
Association studies have shown that the
correlations between particular genes
and function is not extremely strong in
those cases you have to accumulate the
correlations with a large number of
genes before you arrive at a good
possible genetic component let me just
take one example of that look at
athletes and ask what is it that makes a
really good athlete and you might think
okay they've got to have the genes for
being good athletes and I agree with
that don't disagree with that if you got
a cystic fibrosis problem you certainly
won't be a terribly good athlete yeah in
certain respects it must be true is
obviously true but when you do the
analysis do you find a few genes that
can be able to explain why you've got a
top athlete rather than something you
couldn't even run a mile the answer is
no what you find is hundreds are
correlated in each of them with a fairly
small degree of correlation what's that
tell us it tells us that we're not as it
were fully determined in that kind of
way and you can demonstrate that they're
lovely studies now looking at identical
twins why do that because they've got
the same genome more or less though
there can be a bit of change of genome
following the fusion of a conspiracy and
say that identical twins of course
similar genomes I I'm just about to
publish a paper reproducing a beautiful
picture that was made oh goodness me I
think at least 60 years ago now of two
identical twins one of whom trained as a
weightlifter
the other trained as a runner their body
physique is totally different has got
fantastic leg muscles and he's very
staying at the top because he doesn't
need to carry a big weight
he's running that's how he can go fast
because he's that he's not loaded up too
much the weight lifted my goodness his
arms are so strong his chest by
comparison
his legs of course they've got to be
moderately strong but the real strength
is is up here of course that the fact is
that what we found there is that when
you study the difference this is modern
studies now rather than that particular
one that was done about 60 years ago
modern studies of identical twins in
relation to athletic performance
exercise related performers show right
down at the level of the rnase that
control the genome the RNAs are
different now that's because somebody
decided to become an athlete yes that's
not because his genes made him decide
that the genes they say are the same
again what I'm describing here is facts
or when you think about it fairly
obvious so again I'm puzzled by the
apart from my sociological analysis of
the big debates in the United States
over evolution
I'm very puzzled by why it is there has
been so much resistance to these very
obvious facts now I come to a very
interesting fact but it's a sociological
fact they're not a scientific fact that
was true up to about the time of the
Royal Society meet
in 2016 that there was a huge amount of
public resistance yes gone completely
silent for the last three years I've
been lecturing all over the place in the
United States in Europe in East Asia
almost everywhere I was for a number of
years president of the International
Union of my subject physiological
sciences and I find that all the
opposition's disappeared I don't get
seriously difficult questions anymore
what I get is ok what experiment should
I be doing Wow that's very nice lovely
isn't it
you see I just give one example it was
from an experimental biology meeting in
the United States it's huge this is the
grand Jamboree of maybe 10,000 it's a
huge number of people from all the
biological sciences and one of the
plenary lecturers gave a lovely lecture
on what biochemical changes occurring
muscle during exercise and he was
training rats see the the rats were
either trained to run on treadmills or
they were not so he could then look
again because these were cloned ok
similar genomes he could look at the
extent to which the biochemical changes
including of course RNAs could change as
a consequence of exercise in those that
were exercising compared to those that
were not and he found many changes many
biochemical changes that face what I
said earlier on about the other modern
studies of of twins in the case of
humans but these are rats or mice I
can't remember which now so I went up to
him afterwards I said you've got a
colony which is identical genetically
with another colony but the difference
is simply the exercise have you thought
of breeding from them now in this
leave the penny didn't drop he couldn't
see I was asking that question and then
he suddenly said my god do you think
that's really worth doing of course this
is landmark ISM this is the idea that if
you you know the poor blacksmith
you know uses his arms all the time to
hammer they just not make it his his
iron bits and pieces and wood that pass
on to his children I don't know I still
don't know the answer to that question
but that person could do it it could
find out whether in animals it works now
why doesn't he first we didn't even
think of it you see my god is that even
worth doing oh my goodness is worth
doing yes there are many examples now of
paternal and maternal effects that
passed down the generations most
physiologist that's not even questioned
anymore is established fact that there
are great transgenerational passings of
the lifestyle effecting of the parent
affecting the propensity to disease and
health of the offspring and we now know
some of the mechanisms of course we know
to go back to Darwin his gemmules idea
and we know that there are little
packets there's so tiny you can't see
them under the light microscope you need
electron microscopes to see them that
carry information from the soma to the
germline so we know that the vitamin
barrier which is the idea of the
germline is sacrosanct and not in any
way influenced by the soma is clearly
broken that the vison barrier is no
longer a barrier so we've no longer any
difficulty in explaining why all of
those maternal and and and paternal
effects get passed down through the
generations what's still no an
interesting fact is that I think if you
put a research grant proposal in to do
the experiment I suggested to that
American scientist
- then electrically experimental biology
the chances are the people say oh that's
a way out experiment it's not worth
doing anyway we know that their mark is
them is a lot of rubbish you see so
don't even do it very well so it is that
there is no there are fashions in
science of course there's no doubt about
that and committees are influenced by
that as much as of course by the science
itself so I this comes back to another
reason why we formed the third way we
thought it was very important to give
the message particularly young
scientists that it is worth doing these
experiments of course they may not work
of course we don't know the answer
that's why you do them ya know whether
it will upset slag and evolutionary
biology but what do you do with there is
you you you test them to destruction
that's the way science works and I'm
intrigued by the fact that younger
people I talk to now are looking at
doing precisely such experiments that's
greatly encouraging for me it's very
exciting for me as well i I wish I'm out
of the lab now I've been out for a
number of years of studying in a
different career but I wish I had had
your your influence while I was I was
there I was I wasn't explosion echoing
what I find amongst young people now you
see where where I go as I lecture around
the world is that I find that I get
young people and not so young but Fila
still with active laboratories coming up
to me and saying well what is worth
doing you know is what I'm doing a way
of trying to test the the ideas and test
them to destruction
the key message from the Third Way I
think is this that nature is more
wonderful than we imagined using
processes that we didn't even think
could happen and so there's huge amounts
of great work there to be done it'll be
Nobel prize-winning work if people can
do it so that's my main message to the
young
and it's what I find as a reaction
around the world as I lecture I get
people asking me you know what exactly
is now worth doing
thank you very much Genesis it's been a
pleasure speaking with you because and I
think that's a good note to end on it's
a very encouraging I like trail or
encouraging notes because I have
sometimes present that's it any old well
I am old incidentally hey miss gruntled
chap I'm not really I'm actually very
positive and I've been I've been very
positive throughout my career but I've
been very very surprised by the
reactions that occurred in the early
part of the thousands when I first
started publishing openly my dissent but
I think first of all the reactions which
were essentially here's the latest
moronic attempt to discredit
neo-darwinism but I know very encouraged
indeed by the fact that the reaction
from young people is what are the good
experiments to do and there are many I
appreciate your your inspiration and and
the fact you persisted it's it's you
know hopefully I'm sure it will inspire
a whole new generation of scientists who
consider like you said made nature as a
wonderful thing and something worth
really trying to get to grips on whether
or not I mean if the idea of
reductionism obviously in itself or
producing things isn't isn't necessarily
an issue when you study things in
isolation but as a philosophy that you
have to look at life that way now it is
the studying things in isolation that is
the problem you've also then got to go
back reductionism is fine if you do that
that's great but you've also got to go
back and ask how does it work in the
real organism exactly yeah well thank
you very much professor Dennis Noblet
and I hope we can speak again sometime
in the future okay I've been delighted
to come back in the year or two when
you've got some reactions thank you
thank you very much okay bye bye for now
then see you Dennis
okay so thank you for tuning in and hope
you enjoyed the podcasts episode today
with Professor Denis noble as much as I
did and very thankful to him for giving
such a lively exciting and memorable
account of the history of evolutionary
theory and how what I take away is the
main message which is that organisms
aren't reducible to their parts
ultimately organisms are in control of
their own genetic material and it seems
to me as if their desires the desire of
the organism manifests in the use of the
various different molecular toolkit that
the body consists of and obviously
there's many layers of this down from
cells up to organs and the organism so
it seems to me that Dennis is saying
that organisms based on what they want
to do they ultimately use their bodies
in that way so that they can try and
fulfill their aims now it doesn't always
work out because there are restrictions
just like if you got a motorbike you can
drive 100 miles an hour but if you've
got a restrictor on it you can only
maybe go 60 miles an hour if you're
learning or something similarly certain
genetic mutations can cause restrictions
on how much we can use or enjoy our body
in certain ways however generally the
rule is the organisms are in control and
our molecular toolkit follows sweet so
I'm looking forward to asking some more
questions Dennis and hopefully others in
the Third Way of evolution in the future
and please stay tuned harikrishna
[Music]
