Chris Langan is an autodidact who's
known for having the highest recorded IQ
in America and he's conceived of an
extremely inventive Theory of Everything
called the cognitive theoretic model of
the universe or the ctmu for short this
introduction will be fairly lengthy so
feel free to skip to the timestamp here
if you're uninterested and want to get
straight to the podcast my name is Kurt
jongle and I'm a filmmaker with a
background in math and physics who is
investigating the topic of theories of
everything as usual this isn't meant as
an introduction to the guests but rather
where one goes after they've done some
research in fact the first hour can be
rather technical most interviews with
Chris are somewhat superficial and talk
about his days as a bouncer his
experiences what it's like to have a
high IQ but we're interested in the
topic of theories of everything and
you're not afraid to get your hands
dirty I don't often like to give my
opinion on the variegated theories that
exist but in Chris's case I have to say
that if I was to say that I'm impressed
that would be an extreme understatement
his theory is unfairly criticized by
critics who have read his theory for
approximately a day at most and who
point to its supposed incoherence but I
found that critics tend to do this with
virtually every Theory that's self-
proposed like Eric weinsteins or Steven
wols though from my investigation of
these these theories are far from
erroneous casuistry it just takes plenty
of difficult work to understand it's far
from nonsense and the easiest way to
tell is to ask the critic can you
explain their Theory back to them in a
manner that they would agree another way
to think of this is that one Field's
technical achievement is word Salah to
someone who's outside that field what we
have in the case of Weinstein Wolfram
and Chris Langan is that in their own
way they're inventing their own field
thus it's understandable that it's
difficult to penetrate because it
doesn't have a team of people over the
course of years decocting the essence
but difficult to penetrate is not a
synonym for this work is gibberish I
highly recommend you check out ctmu
radio.com and
cmu.sio
often illuminate what was previously
obscured now a word on myself preparing
ing for this particular podcast took
weeks and weeks usually I'm able to prep
for multiple guests simultaneously but
this one was so involved that it
consumed me and took a physical toll I
went through virtually each one of
Chris's papers and even spoke to someone
who's conversant in the ctmu just so
that I can make sure I'm understanding
these Concepts correctly that person's
name is Sam Thompson and he's a
brilliant mathematically gifted humble
Soul who I dedicate this entire episode
to since he put up with my naive
pestering questions on a daily basis in
fact it got to the point where I had to
ask him if I could add him on WhatsApp
because texting takes far too long and
it's much easier for me to send voice
notes so almost every hour I would send
him a voice note and then he would send
me back and then I would ask him
follow-up questions thank you Sam thank
you because of this physical toll like I
mentioned the pressure of releasing
another podcast soon with the same
quality as this one and the same quality
as the others is a bit too much for me
and I'm going to have to take a couple
weeks off soon I'll be interviewed by zg
the simulation podcast Coast to Coast
a.m. and I'll be on someone else's
podcast whose name is a fairly large
name but I can't announce right now like
I mentioned those aren't my podcasts
I'll be interviewed instead so I'll post
the links to those on Twitter as they
occur as well as perhaps put them on the
iTunes Spotify audio version if you're
interested if you'd like to hear more
conversations like these then please do
consider going to patreon.com slkt jongo
it may sound silly but literally every
dollar helps and this is now thankfully
what I get to do full-time it's
absolutely encouraging to see that
people care and often the notes that I
get when people donate are of the form
this is so that you don't have to worry
so much about finances and you could
spend time with your wife thank you so
much I've recently opened up a crypto
address and PayPal is also an option the
plan is to have more conversations like
this of the same quality approximately
once per for week at least at some point
toward the end of the year I also plan
on interviewing some of the audience
members who have sent me their well
articulated PDFs people such as Steve
agnu Tyler Goldstein Steve Scully and
Jennifer sharf links to their remarkable
work are in the description again I feel
a bit icky saying this as I'm not a
self-promoter but I've been told by some
people who have donated that I need to
be saying this a bit more as they
wouldn't have donated if they didn't
hear it to begin with please please do
consider donating or supporting it in
any way that you can at
patreon.com/crashcourse
of the podcast from its early days the
second sponsor is brilliant brilliant
illuminates the soul of math science and
engineering through bite-sized
Interactive Learning experiences
Brilliance courses explore the laws that
shape our world elevating Math and
Science from something to be feared to a
delightful experience of guided
Discovery more on them later thank you
and enjoy one of the longest most
in-depth interviews with one of the
brightest people on the planet
Chris Langan if I look down or look
angry that's my thinking face you're
familiar with that but if I look down
I'm making notes so please don't think
I'm not paying attention I have you my
have a resting face
right apparently I do people told me
that I just look angry all the time well
well it's it's those eyebrows you're
you're a good-look guy but you know oh
that means a lot thank you I tend to get
that
compliment primarily from guys
okay how long does it take the average
person to get through your theory such
that they can grock it it's intuitive to
them uh well you know I really can't say
that's their subjective criteria would
determine the answer to that I don't
have access to anybody else's mind uh if
it were me I I think I would catch on
fairly quickly um but some
people I don't know you know I have a
couple of groups and we occasionally
hold conferences and they get to ask
questions and I think that I bring a lot
of them up to speed on the theory fairly
quickly the ones who have read the
theory there are people that read the
2002 paper for example many of them and
they're they're quite expert on it and
they've done a lot of thinking about it
and they know what it's about um other
people they'll read a couple of
paragraphs and oh you know I I hate this
and then they sto and then they go
online and do some trolling or whatever
and uh that's the end of that why don't
you give an overview of your theory for
those who are uninitiated a broad
Strokes
view well the ctmu is a theory of
everything there are two kinds of Theory
of Everything one of them is a physical
Theory usually it's related to a unified
field theory in some way which means the
forces of nature is supposed to be
unified into one General Force um but of
course that's only part of reality my
theory is a theory of everything in the
metaphysical sense it actually has to
conform to certain logical criteria
which in philosophy and metaphysics
govern what a what a Theory of
Everything has to be so I like to
characterize it as the language that
reality speaks to itself about itself it
is a language a language is an algebraic
structure this is a particular kind of
language that reality actually uses to
communicate with itself and to make
decisions regarding how it models itself
which is another way to say how it
evolves right and it's uh it can be
modeled in in many ways you can actually
look at it as an operator algebra a as a
quantization a new kind of quantization
of
reality or oper reality self- simulation
you can look at it from from the
perspective of quantum mechanics as
quantum metame mechanics I believe you
must have read that paper or you
mentioned having read anyway uh and uh
once again as a metaph formal system
which is like a formal system but it's a
generalization of the formal system that
that that goes deeply into the nature of
language and what it takes to here's
another way to describe the
ctm basically you've got a system you've
got this metaphor system and it relates
intelligence and
intelligibility reality has to be on
ontology and epistemology are coupled in
this the so reality reality actually has
to recognize itself and process itself
it has to do both so that's that's what
it does it relates intelligibility and
intelligence which are dual quantities
in the ctmu thusly defining both of them
in the recursive sense it's a mutual
recursive definition of those two terms
within this ctmu structure so uh I know
can even be regarded as a theory of
Consciousness for example it says what
Consciousness is because the way it
quantizes real so is that enough yeah
let's start from what's most fundamental
and then how you work your way up from
there to derive your
theory okay
the theory is developed by a means
called logical induction you start with
uh you've heard of
uh darts you know
Kum right
Kum which is I think therefore I am and
you heard of Berkeley's uh uh SC pppi
okay which is basically to be is to be
perceived or to perceive right you start
with perception and cognition then you
develop the minimal model of how
cognition and perception work then you
induce an overall system that works by
those
processes okay and that's the way you
get to the ctmu it's called logical
induction been using that terminology
for
years it's Superior to empirical
induction by the way most scientists use
empirical induction which means that
they just kind of guesstimate
inductively guess what the proper theory
is and sort of AIX that you know sort of
glue it on to the observations that they
make that's how science usually works
this logical induction thing is a more
precise process more General
process let's get into some of the more
technical questions and for those who
are listening as a first pass you don't
have to understand all of the
terminology it's much better I think
wheeler said this or vigner I'm not sure
which one he said that people are trying
to drink from the fire holes but the
point is to just get wet and then
another another quote that I like is
from noyman Von noyman who
said you're not supposed to understand
math you get used to it so that's in a
similar vein don't worry if you don't
understand all the terms or Follow The
Logical steps in the first pass of this
podcast it's more about rewatching and
then recontextualizing for me one of the
greatest Pleasures in life is being is
that feeling after you're so
confused and then all of a sudden you
start to glean what you're supposed to
and different connections are made and
you comprehend and you push through that
confusion okay so push through the
confusion eventually some parts of it at
least will make
sense is there a duality between syntax
and
semantics yes sorry is The Duality
between syntax and semantics a
generalization of stone
Duality yes well all these dualities are
related you know there there there are
all kinds of dualities out there you
know where Duality the the the idea of
Duality originally comes from right two
points deter a line two lines determine
a point where the lines intersect you've
got a point you know whereas if you draw
two points put two points on a piece of
paper you can draw a line between that's
a duality basically you permute your uh
your terms uh and you still have an
invariant truth what the original form
of the relation remains true so that's
that's what a duality is anytime you can
do that anytime there is an invariant
and you can switch things around within
that invariant and the invariant stays
true that's a duality there are many
kinds of duality in the
CT so how are syntax and semantics
related well syntax is intrinsic if you
take a look at a language that that are
those are the absolute invariant that
every every intelligible statement is
made for all right you know about
grammar and non-terminals and how
non-terminals are substituted
cumulatively until they result in
terminal Expressions right that's uh
that's basically what it is if human
cognitive syntax is syntactically
covered by reality syntax how can one
meaningfully describe reality as
humans well as a language when you talk
about syntax and semantics you are
talking about a language and as I say
syntax is the intrinsic structure of the
language whereas semantics is that
involves things like definitions and
interpretations you have to Define terms
all the terms syntactic terms are
supposed to be primitive terminals are
cognitively primitive whereas when you
get into semantics now you're combining
those Primitives to get defined terms to
get definitions then you're combining
those in certain ways and then once you
form your expression now you have to
interpret it or form a model of it in
some other structure that you've got
right and so it's a it's a big process
language is as I say the most General
algebraic structure there is and to see
that any other algebraic structure you
can name is a language when you write it
down you are writing it down in the form
of language so automatically you know
language is the most General algebra
excript
right I heard you say that many people
think that mathematics is extremely
precise has High Fidelity it's
unequivocal whereas language natural
language is considered to be indistinct
opag
dubious volutin at the edges so how
that's just that most people use it
sloppily that's all in reality it is not
there's nothing dubious about every
mathematical language every mathematical
theory is by definition
language so you have to decide how
precise you want to be how precisely you
want to formulate things and then you
make your judgment about you know what's
what's loosen and and what's tight is
there a relationship between the inner
expansive domain where syntactic
operators are entangled and mutually
absorbing and so this inner expansion
and love is there a relationship between
those
two yes there is there's at least an
analogy between the two because when
when uh when things combine in the
non-terminal domain via inner expansion
when they overly each other that they
are more or less merging their
identities and that's what love is love
is also a combination a merger of
identities that enhances the
self-actualization or self-expression of
the combined entity in other words it's
synergistic the it's more than the sum
of these
parts now of course you know that that
that the merging the syntactic merging
that occurs due to Inner expansion that
has to be actualized and that
actualization is
semantical the first is a syntactic
process the second is a semantic process
and that's what causes what you as a
physicist would call Quantum wave
function
collapse or measurement of that's why is
there no such thing as a literal
interpretation is it because you
mentioned before we move between models
and to look at the symbols one must
apply an interpretation on it and so to
say literal interpretation is like
saying uninterpreted interpretation and
so it's
oxymoronic uh the meaning is very simple
and that is that if I hand you a book
written and say Sanskrit unless you
understand understand Sanskrit all
you're going to see is little geometric
shapes on the page and it is going to
have no meaning whatsoever to extract
any meaning whatsoever from those
symbols you first have to know the
alphabet the signature of the language
then you've got to know the the grammar
and the syntax of the language and then
you've got to actually put things
together you know put all the terms and
the Expressions together and then you've
got to interpret those or model those in
some framework that allows you to
actually make sense of them right all of
those steps are necessary these are
absolutely necessary steps of language
and as a matter of fact in the way we
deal with reality you can look at
reality external reality as a language
you're looking at it all of those steps
yeah they they all have to be solved for
they all have to be deciphered before
you can actually make sense of your
environment as a preface to this I
thought it would be instructive to go
through some of the sentences that are
seemingly inscrutable to the person to
someone at the at first glance there
there are then we break it down term by
term so that someone they can read this
Sanskrit essentially not understand it
and then all of a sudden be able to so
let's take one of them standard physics
is largely confined to the linear
ectomorphic semi model which is
retroscope so firstly what is
retrosic that means that means Looking
Backward that means you're seeing the
past you're looking at it in the past
rather than in the in what of course
you're you're actually the what your
reading operation is performed in the
present but what you're looking at is in
the past takes time to get from there to
your eyes Okay and the so the speed of
light dictates that it has to be in the
pet the referent of the expression have
to be has to be in the past so that's
what retroscope means okay what's a semi
model uh the ctmu consists of two semi
models because it consists of two semi
languages those semi- languages have to
be coupled with each other or
transformed into each other and so there
are two semi models one in each
Direction there's the advanced semi
model that goes backward in time and the
the basically from future to past and
then there's the semi model
which goes from past to
Future Okay and linear why do you say
that standard physics is linear with
respect to being a semi model because
because particles and objects follow
linear trajectories and of course there
are a number of other reasons that
they're linear as well those are
algebraic Reasons I'm sure you're
familiar with most of those but
basically when I use that terminology
I'm referring to the fact that things
follow line through space and what does
ectomorphic mean ectomorphic means
basically when something is moving it is
projected to a point outside of itself
that's the Ecto that's the outside so in
other words when a particle is moving
it's moving from here to there and the
there is outside of the here right
whereas if if the if the there was
inside the here then it would be
endomorphic right right special kind of
of end orphism called a distributed
endomorphism in the ctm okay now how
does this ectomorph relate to your
issues with xenos Paradox or with his
motion as standardly defined well it
relates to the fact that the real
manifold as we understand it is really
kind of a paradoxical
construct okay you can't really where is
if you take two adjacent points
obviously something has to move you
realize that a manifold consists of
limit points or zero points or Cuts dant
cuts
and they have zero extent now no matter
how many times you add zero what are you
going to get as a
sum zero so how does a manifold have any
extent if it consists of Zero
Dimensional points when you add all
those points up it's nothing but zero
itself so you start with nothing and you
get nothing okay so it's a paradoxical
construct right you've actually got to
construct a manifold in a different way
so that things actually so that no point
leaves its predecessor so there's no
jump that it has to make through some
kind of hyperspace to get from one point
to another that's basically what I mean
that okay telic recursion I imagine is
the process by which a point makes some
Evolution uh yes yes but it's a feed
it's a feedback between past and future
you've heard all about you've heard all
about you know retrocausation is a very
big term in physics to you've already
mentioned it right but this idea of
there was somebody named Costa De
borgard who came up with these zigzags
you know which are basically you know
there's there if let's just try to
simplify here if you have a trajectory
through SpaceTime it's going from the
past to the Future right but it's a
correspondence and correspondence is
symmetrics so there's got to be some
kind of a of a symmetry thing going on
between the cause and the effect where a
certain particle is at one minute and
where it is at a later time there's got
to be some kind of symmetry there not
just a temporal symmetry but a caal
symmetry as well and so that's what
we're talking about cons spansive
manifold is a term that'll likely come
up plenty so we should Define
that cons spensive manifold is a
manifold that is self-dual in the sense
that it is both it has both distributed
endomorphic and ectomorphic linear
ectomorphic
aspects simple as that and those two
things are are are absolutely dual
totally equivalent if you can explain
something adequately in in in in the
linear world in the ectomorphic world of
of physics for example automatically it
is guaranteed to have a duel in the
distributed endomorphic uh semi model
I'm going to call it a semi model here
that's a bit of a liberty because I'm
using the term now in a different sense
than I used it before but uh you know I
have only so much terminology to go
around so I'm going to reuse it okay we
have this telic recursive process which
is associated with meta time and meta
time as far as I understand from your
theory has a preferred
Arrow whereas our time doesn't but our
experience is of unidirectionality so
what I'm wondering is is there a way to
take the preferred Arrow from this meta
space and pull it back or push forward
to our
experience yes and basically meta time
and and time are orthogonal the reason
they have to be orthogonal is because
meta time distri attributes programming
over time you can think it as being like
program okay it's actually grammar I
call it scpl grammar but it's actually
like Distributing programmer over over
an entire timeline okay so they have to
be orthogonal for that reason but you
can actually restrict meta time so that
it lies along the
timeline right in other words you people
tend to talk you know about time is is a
before and after thing it involves
prepositions meta time always termin
Ates at An
Origin okay and that origin is not
temporal in nature right it has to
contain both past and future meta
simultaneously right I don't know if
you're familiar with that do you mean
when you say meta things are
simultaneous things are meta
simultaneity it's just you know
simultaneity with a meta in front of it
but but basically things are
simultaneous when you look at them and
they're both in space and you're looking
at them at the same time Meta simultan
Meta simultaneity means that they're not
only you can not only see them at the
same time in space you can also see them
at the same time in time in other words
you can consider a past event and a
future event to be simultaneous even
though they're separated by a time one
this is something that you have to do to
use the concept of metaton because
things that if you write a computer
program you schedule events in the
program you see schedule one event has
to happen here then there's a sequence
of other events and then finally there's
going to be event B it's going that Happ
right but when you've got that program
in front of you both of those events are
present programmed at the same in the
same time and you're looking at it
simultaneously okay that's meta
simultaneity you see they're separated
in time when they're act when the
program is run okay those two events are
at different times but when you're
looking at the program itself they're
they're virtually simultaneous or meta
simultaneous what's the assertion that
what generates our experience or
generates our world this terminal world
is this meta time world this
non-terminal world right where there's
meta simultaneousness right right yeah
that's the well that's basically it yes
the the universe is closed right there's
nothing outside of reality that is real
enough to be you know real enough to
affect it if it's real enough to affect
reality it's got to be real and it's got
to be inside reality all right so that's
closure all right so everything has to
be closed everything has to be
formulated in a respect in a in a
reflexive way
in ctmu set theory there's descriptive
inclusion and I'm wondering if there's
an analog of the AXA Foundation which
states that elements of a non-empty set
must be subsets thereof so is there an
analog of the axom of foundation in the
set theory that CMU
has sure well actually when you're
dealing with set theory you're dealing
with something called topological
inclusion topological space is a point
set it's a set of points that relate to
each other in certain areas uh whereas
uh when you're looking at there is a
duel to that and it's because sets have
intentions right there's usually if you
take any given set and you say Okay
consider the set of all red appli red
apples is your intention it's actually a
property and you just choose Elements
which instantiate that property okay the
intention requires you can't talk about
topological inclusion with respect to
the intention you've instead got to talk
about descriptive inclusion in other
words you've got to talk about more
specific properties that are included in
the main overall intention of the set so
you've got two kinds of inclusion
topological inclusion which applies to
sets and you've got descriptive
inclusion which applies to property in
set theory the way that we understand it
as mathematicians would be
axiomatic and
yours how would you describe it if not
axiomatic it's not Based On A first
order language well first of all it's
not just a set theory right it's not
even just category Theory it's it's both
it's it the the metaphor system is a
foundational language it it's presented
as a foundational language for
mathematics physics The Sciences pretty
much everything okay set theory can't
pull that off and neither can category
Theory but on the other hand if you once
you've defined the metaphor system you
get to make use of both of those other
languages as you see fit you can pull
anything out of them you want right the
important thing is that you have the
metaphor system which is the the very
outside item potent metal language that
spans between these two so-called
fundamental languages set theory and
category Theory and of course they they
say there's already a blend between set
theory and category Theory called topos
Theory but that too leaves something to
be desired there's a lot of missing
structure there it doesn't qualify as a
foundation language so how does your
metaphor system defer like what is it
describe it simply for people who are
unacquainted sure the metap formal
system is simply a language that that is
quantized not in terms of signs but in
terms of synta syntact and
identification events right syntor is an
active sign it's something that actually
has two data types a syntactic data type
and an input data type it can accept
things from the external World process
them internally which gives it an
internal State and then you know release
its processing back into the real
world's output okay that's a syntor it's
fundamentally different from a sign
usually when a person looks at a sign or
a word or something like that they do
all the processing inside their head
they and they forget the fact that wait
a minute you know this processing
whatever it is it requires me I'm
actually having to do this
mathematicians don't usually reason that
way okay if you're a mathematician you
you you you kind of forget about
yourself and you look at things as
though they're totally objective that is
not how reality is quantized in the ctmu
it has both a subjective and objective
aspect that's what syntact and tors or
syntactic identification operators
intellic identif identification
operators are in the ctmq and we would
be an example of a teller
yes and what are some other examples I
heard God or God is the ultimate teller
then we're almost Global operator desri
and then fundamental Fons let's say are
a tertiary level so is that correct okay
and explain tertiary syntactics so
explain that that there are three levels
of syntactic operators or tellers okay
so why first of all why do you split
them up into three and then explain what
it means again once more to be a
syntactic operator they're just scale
there scales of coherence in in
causation in structure and causation
just basically you've got to you have
the universe the universe is closed it
is one un entity that's your primary
Quantum okay but now everything it's got
to be self-composed because there's
nothing external of which it can be
composed it has to use itself as its
primary comp as its secondary and
tertiary components so it has to map
itself internally by descriptive
endomorphism or or de endomorphism to
tertiary syntact and then those tertiary
syntact can can agglomerate can come
together in organisms which then
nucleate secondary Quant or tellers
which are necessary to complete
causation ex ordinary Quantum particles
don't have what it what it takes to
actually decide on events and emerge in
events that takes tesis you've got to
have this this other kind of of quantum
of causation this secondary Quantum of
causation called Telesis and that means
that Tes Telesis is bound that's the
monic substrate of the universe it must
be bound by these things called tors we
are ters we actually bind Telesis in
this way so that causation can be
completed so that events can actually
occur all of this nonsense about well
Quantum Randomness and Quantum
indeterminacy if something is totally
random and it deterministic there is no
reason for it to occur and it won't
occur all right it's not just the
principle of insufficient reason that
I'm talking about here I'm talking about
something has to be distinguished from
its logical complement right and that
basically that that act of Distinction
it takes a certain amount of information
to complete that so we are the ones who
provide that information either directly
or indirectly what is meant when you say
that tell us is bound that we bind it
well basically we're we're quantifying
it we're logically binding it using uh
using something analogous to to quantify
as in predicate logic so that events
occur in other words we're binding it
into events we're taking something that
is basically cons spansive that is self-
potentializing it consists of potentials
and actualities and actually giving
those potentials and actualities
something to connect them they we
actually selecting many possible futures
or from many possible Futures which is a
potential we're then selecting specific
events that combine that are related in
tons which are these quantitive
causation I'm talking secondary Quant
intell recursion one of the ways I've
heard it explained is
that for an evolution of the system it
looks back at all possible at all the
states that it previously has in its
memory to make a decision about the
future and it makes a decision about the
future based on a generalized utility
function when we are exercising Free
Will first of all does Free Will exist
we can talk about that okay secondly
let's assume Free Will exists because
you're it exists yes right how when
we're operating with our Free Will how
are we looking back at all the decisions
so for example right now if I make a
decision I don't have Perfect Memory but
at the same time int recursion it seems
like all of the states are being
considered so am I only conscious of a
few but unconscious you're locked into
terminal Consciousness now you have a
form of Consciousness that is
appropriate to life in the terminal
domain okay what I'm talking about telec
recursion occurs in the non-terminal
domain it involves a different form of
Consciousness and in the conspan of
manifold it it it it's its own memory it
consists of layer upon layer upon layer
of events that never disappear and never
go away they're right there nothing you
don't even have to reach into storage
and pull this information out it's right
there all right that's one of the
advantages of having a manifold
structured in the way that ctmu is
structured everything is right there as
it is needed and of course tons are
adaptive okay Tel recursion is adaptive
when things happen that are not
necessarily in accord with a certain
telon the telon adapts to the new set of
resources at its disposal and comes
together again approaching the same
final outcome does one have to be
adaptive if one is let's say incoherent
which I heard you equate evil
to is that a possibility I didn't I
didn't equate evil to incoherence I said
evil is
incoherent okay so okay basically it's
incoherent because evil is antiexistence
all right basically it wants it it hates
existence and it wants to go out of
existence right but when you put when
you take a bunch of evil and and it
won't recognize its own existence and it
won't recognize the existence of
anything else it's very hard to
coordinate it can't be coordinated so it
becomes incoherent the only way that
evil actually achieves any sort of uh
reality is it uses physical systems to
do it the nucleates physical systems and
uses their structure their power
structures their hierarchies in order to
be
realized but it has no coherence of its
own it's anti-
coherent in the ctmu there's this
hierarchy of meta languages
and what I'm wondering is is it possible
for two sublanguages to be incomparable
under ordering in other words can
languages be arranged in a in a
partially ordered set totally
incomparable no that's a violation of
CIS in the ctmu there's a universal
relational structure called synesis it
means that syntax something CTIC is
being distributed over different relat
or Reland right things that are related
okay and the syntax distributes over
them and makes them comparable makes
them things are never totally
incomparable never totally out of order
I mean things can be partially ordered
you know there's a there's a there's a
lattice structure called a partial order
you know where things are actually
moving it can't necessarily be related
to each other with any definite form of
simultaneity right but uh that's
basically what I mean okay so this gets
into separate objects which you would
argue doesn't exist so let's say we have
an apple then we have a cup they're in
your terms dionic reins but then by the
fact that I can point them out I'm using
a cognitive structure and that cognitive
structure distributes over both of them
which relates them and so by even by
pointing out that there are two separate
objects I'm also pointing out how these
objects are the same so by pointing out
difference I'm pointing out sameness is
that correct you don't have to point
anything out basically you're just
Distributing your awareness over both
your awareness being the focus of your
awareness is a logical property which
you are Distributing over both of those
objects that's
Sy a conscious Universe has to have that
it's the only possible relational
structure it can have okay so we have
this cons spansive manifold and it has
an intrinsic background or I assume
that's related to what physicists may
call Background fre it is its own
background that's closure it's autic
closure all operation all real
operations real relevant valid
operations basically start with reality
and end with reality it's complete
closure nothing unreal ever really comes
into for obvious reasons this background
free place does it consist of
non-terminal
symbols it consists of Telesis it it
consists of Telesis the whole idea here
is we need a a theory of multi-aspect
monism the monism refers to one
underlying substance it's actually a
meta substance because it's both self-
attributive and self-composed
okay it it does all of that stuff for
itself it makes attributions to itself
and it is composed of
itself in this monic structure how does
one get differentiation from monism from
Unity that's what tesus does tesus
differentiates itself
synthonic all right there are utility
deficits you you have secondary tors
utility deficits arise you know what
utility is it's value okay things that
okay when you don't have any food now
you have a severe utility deficit
because you place value on food there's
a hole in your value structure that's a
utility deficit you automatically react
to that by forming a telon designed to
remove that
deficit can the ctmu explain
leptogenesis excuse me can the ctmu
explain leptogenesis so leptogenesis
yeah you got me on that one there's a
disparity between matter and antimatter
and one of the propositions is there's
something called leptogenesis which
accounts for this
asymmetry
right yeah uh can can ctm well let's
just put it this way if it cannot be
explained within the ctmu then it cannot
be explained the ctmu is called a toe
for a reason okay it's comprehensive all
right so if this distinction is valid
and it is because we know that both
matter and antimatter exist then it has
to be explicable in the
ctmu would you consider the ctmu to be
more of a definition than a
theory it's both a definition and a
theory okay it's the self-de of reality
reality must Define itself okay but it
does that in the form of a language the
metaphor language we were speaking about
earlier and it takes the form of a
theory okay in other words every theor
every Theory you know technically it's
not just a theory it's a theoretical
language that's what a that's what a
logician or
or model theorist would call it it's a
kind of language so it has that
structure getting back to this
background independent
place there's a question here about if
this coincides with Einstein and mock
Einstein and moach had this idea
of sorry I'm sure you've heard of Mock's
principle yes okay what does the ctmu
have to say about Mock's principle and
is it related to this intrinsic
background all right maybe I better ask
what your formulation of MOX princip
sure sure
sure it's strange that we can feel
rotation when we do so and it seems as
if it's related by the distribution of
matter far away like there's an actual
background so now if there's an
intrinsic background in the
ctmu does that serve as some basis for
Mock's
principle yes well the you're actually
coupled with your background that's one
thing that you see in the theory of
relativity basically the medium is given
some kind of separate structure separate
from the content of the medium but you
actually have to couple those two things
relatively would make no sense at all if
you didn't so you know as far as being
able inertia and being able to feel and
you're talking about angular momentum
and and you know inertia uh basically
those two things are a function of that
coupling the way you are the way you are
coupled to your environment like I said
this is how the ctm quantizes things in
these uses these dual couplings to do
that and of but that's all intrinsic I
mean keep in mind that's all intrinsic
there's nothing external to the universe
so if you're going to talk about the
universe rotating in some external
medium that's not valid okay the
rotation for all rotation is intrinsic
and the way it can be intrinsic is
because you're formulating it as a
coupling of it and its content and
you're actually making you're actually
introducing some kind of angular
momentum between them that's intrinsic
and of course as you know the theory of
relativity is is our major intrinsic
Theory of physics right it's intrinsic
based on intrinsic geometry and so
forth I also heard you talk about the
fact that the universe is expanding is
it's a strange concept because what is
it expanding into however I think that
physicists do a disservice by saying
that the universe is expanding it's more
about the metric is changing so now
let's imagine that that's what the
statement is the metric is changing so
what's the problem with that statement
and why does it need the CT muu to solve
it because it's cons
spanding it's basically the when you say
the metric is changing you mean that the
scale of the whole and its parts are
changing with respect to each other
they're they're changing contravariantly
as the universe gets bigger the the
parts the the little uh particles and
objects embedded in it get smaller
relative to the universe
this you know everything is relative
right and the size of objects is defined
relative to the size of the universe and
vice versa so you've got this
relativistic relationship between the
whole and its parts and this
contravariance is called cons
spansion I'm not understanding how the
ctmu solves like firstly I'm not sure
what the problem is so explain to me
once more what is the problem with
saying that the metric is expanding I
understand that there's a problem with
saying that the universe is expanding
because it implies that it's embedded in
something higher the metric isn't
expanding the metric is the metric is
actually Contracting you're getting you
know you know what co-moving coordinates
are basically you start out if the as
the universe expands co-moving
coordinates actually Cove with the
universe itself right that in that sense
the metric is expanding with co-moving
coordinates but our metric is
Contracting relative to the size of the
versus Po so you got to make this
distinction our metric meaning as
tellers as syntactic operators me means
it means the metric that we is the scale
of distance that we use in the everyday
World okay that exists between us and
the objects that
surise you understand right that comes
from Arthur Edington you know he talked
about a cosmic Observer you know things
getting smaller and smaller faster and
faster from the point of view of this
Cosmic Observer that's what it is you
know I got to give credit to Arthur
Edington for that he got to it before I
did with this Cosmic Observer thing they
had you know who Edington was right he
original tested Einstein's G relativity
right you know I'm going to be jumping
around quite a bit now that we're on the
topic of how you thought of your theory
and how you came up with it quite some
time ago I'm
curious what does the process of coming
up with the ctmu look like practically
speaking do you have a whiteboard do you
just sit alone with a pipe do you bounce
it off your wife do you go for walks how
are you coming up with the
theory just sort of comes to you
sometimes you know you start thinking
okay I'm very good at recognizing
paradoxes and inconsistencies it's just
a little thing that I'm good at and I
noticed a lot of paradoxes and
inconsistencies from an early age onward
in the way people explain things right I
i' ask them for
explanations they wouldn't be able to
explain things to my satisfaction and I
i' you know ask myself why why doesn't
this appear to make sense and I would
find out there were certain things that
didn't make sense then armed with those
paradoxes I would work on resolving them
and from those resolutions came the
ctmu let's give an example of a paradox
that's been resolved by the ctmu so
newcom's Paradox is one do you mind
explaining the Paradox of newom and then
also Your solution to it well so that's
kind of a long Paradox but basically
it's you've got this uh this predictor
who has never been wrong before and he's
got this game that he plays where he
show where he shows you a box with uh
with ,000 in it and tells you that you
can take either you know one of these
boxes the opaque box so you can take
both boxes but if you do not take this
transparent box with $1,000 in it I've
put a million dollar I already know what
you're going to do i' put a million
dollars in the OPEC box right but if you
try to take both boxes and make that
extra, that you can see right in front
of your face here if you've done that
I've left this opaque box empty so
you're going to get scuffed you're going
to get your you know you're going to get
your thousand bucks and you know you're
going to have a nice dinner someplace
and then that's going to be it for you
all right that's nukem's Paradox okay
but unfortunately the the the subject
the one who is he's running this game on
okay has
two strategies that he has to that from
which he has to choose one of them is of
course that well this predictor has you
know never been wrong you know and and
so therefore you know I'd better do that
the other one says well wait a minute
nobody can actually predict the future
this is some kind of Lucky run that this
guy is at and uh you know I have nothing
to lose because that money that he says
he's he's he's acting as though he's
going to he's predicted whatever that
money is already in that box one or
another because I'm looking at it he
can't tamper with that box at all it's
already there so I've got nothing to
lose by taking both boxes so instead of
just winning a million dollars if that's
what he put in that box I'm going to win
you know one point you know million plus
1,00 right one point you know 001
million and so that's enough you know
the $1,000 has enough value that he's
going to take that instead he's going to
enrich himself more and thusly increase
his utility and of course increasing
your utility is the is the the whole Ron
Detro of Economics right an economic
theory that's what you're always
supposed to do increase your utility so
this is It's considered an important
Paradox because of its applicability to
to economics and causation in general is
it possible to predict the future well
nukem's demon which is what I call him
is analogous to the programmer of a
simulation he's already run this
simulation in which you think you have
free will but he basically knows what
you're Free Will is in advance right so
he has you know that is what has allowed
him to do this with the
boxes okay so that's the Paradox now how
does the solution resolution come in the
resolution is nobody ever placed it in a
simulation before I was the only person
to ever place it in a simulation back in
1989 by saying okay well basically now
we have to use the idea that reality may
be a simulation and that nukem's demon
is somehow a programmer of this
simulation this was the first
application of the simulation hypothesis
everybody talks about it now but you'll
never see my name mentioned in
connection with it but I was the first
person to apply it at least as far as I
know there could have been somebody else
that did so but I've actually looked and
I can't find anything there as far as I
you were the first pH self
simulation well that too absolutely
self- simulation appears you know that
that terminology appears in in a paper I
wrote 20 years ago so yeah that
basically I'm Mr
simulation okay unfortunately nobody
ever comes to me they always ask Elon
Musk why the hell they ask Elon Musk but
I don't know you know okay Mr Moneybags
Elon Musk and then there there's another
fellow named Nick Boston I guess is it
Oxford or someplace he's got something
called the simulation
argument which you know is basically a
little bit extraneous than simulation
hypothesis is How likely the simulation
hypothesis is to be true on the basis of
how Humanity has evolved how how certain
how how should we say these the species
that is
simulating reality for Humanity has
evolved do they have the technology to
do it don't they have the technology to
do it that's what
Boston now how does posing new comes
Paradox in a frame of simulation help
it it basically tells you that you you
might be in a simulation so you better
take a very close look at what nukem's
demon has actually succeeded in doing
it's got a long arbitrarily long
sequence of sequence of correct
predictions you'd better give the demon
its due and you'd better take just the
opaque box that's the only way you're
getting your
mil does that mean that the person being
simulated doesn't have free
will no it does not why would it just
because the demon knows what he's going
to choose that somehow deprives of Free
Will well see this is this is the
problem that I had to solve by
integrating this into the ctmu okay you
actually have a pre geometric or
non-terminal domain in which nukem's
demon actually exists and in which he
actually makes his
predictions you see so that's that's
what it amounts to you see how does
being in the non-terminal domain and
being able to discern what's this
person's decision is going to be not
violate Free Will for that person for
that person from their perspective are
you saying they have free will but from
another perspective they don't have free
will or no matter what they have free
will from both Vantage
points well you have free will period to
the extent that the Universe has free
will as I said the universe is
self-composed all right you are a
component of the universe therefore you
have inherited Free Will from the
universe itself so you know everything
even a Quantum particle to some extent
has free will or Freedom has degrees of
freedom right it's not totally
determined now as far as whether from
God's point of view however God knows
let's just put it this way let's forget
about n Nukem stean for a second to
talked about God okay God can see
reality as a whole you know what
Einstein's block universe is right God
sees the universe not as a block he sees
the universe Through The Eyes of its
secondary tellings okay that's how he's
seeing that's how he's looking and
seeing the universe through our eyes
where God's sensor controls right which
puts a whole different complexion on he
waits for us to make up our minds before
he knows what he's seeing in other words
what we see is what we've decided on
okay so God is automatically allowing
for our
decisions automatically making room for
we see what we decide can you explain
everything we decide you know when we
decide
to uh commit an event or commit an act
okay automatically we know we can see
ourselves committing the ACT that's
that's what I mean that doesn't mean
that we determine everything that's
going on around us right but God sees
that too through
our so it doesn't mean that we can see
whatever we like that for ex like if I
wished that there was no wall here then
I would see no wall does that mean that
or are there limitations on my
perception well of course there are okay
there is a state of affairs an external
State of Affairs that has been created
by other tors it's not entirely up to
you okay so you are constrained in what
you can see by the state of the external
world when one does psychedelics are
they operating now in this geometric
pre- info cognition
plane well what the psychedelics do is
they introduce a gap between the
terminal and non-terminal Realms and
kind of uh allow you to see things that
aren't really in the terminal realm and
that's what those hallucinations are
okay you still got one foot in the
terminal realm but the Psychedelic is
kind of you know opened up a gap there
and you're sort of in that Gap so you're
there is a certain there are degrees of
freedom in which you can actually uh
perceive or should I say hallucinate you
see you have things that you think are
perceptions that seem like perceptions
but actually there's this this Gap that
has opened up and and you're inhabiting
that Gap and that's why that's what the
psychedelics are doing you know
they're they've been finding out that
there you know basically all chemistry
is quantum and they know for example
that quantum mechanics
is involved in how opiates and morphine
heroin things like that affect
psychology this is basically what we're
what we're talking about psychedelics
are doing a little bit of the same thing
when one says hallucinations usually
they mean we're seeing apparitions that
aren't actually there that's not real
now I know that you have a qualm with
saying that anything is not real well
what we well it it is it's mentally real
I mean what I'm saying is reality is a
coupling of mind and and and physical
reality with non-terminal and
non-terminal non-terminal and terminal
reality so
therefore there is such a thing as
subjective existence syntax exists for
example any combination of syntax you
can put it together however you want to
and that has mental existence is it
realized in the terminal realm not
necessarily you know find me a
unicorn there are un and/ Nery
relations they have two levels CTIC and
defic do you mind explaining
that well all relations are
synic right when when you see two
different things or even when you see
yourself right you're Distributing your
own cognition over yourself therefore
you've got that cesis dianis you've got
you've got basically a property and
something instantiating a
property that's what that
means you mentioned that there are three
ways in which the Sy fic relationship is
selfdual there are three ways now does
it have to be three ways does it just
happen to be that there are three ways
or is that necessary component for them
to exist somehow I'm talking about
General symmetries of of the cionic
relationship you know what I mean Kowski
diagram he around it's got a space axis
horizontal space axis and then temporal
axes that that that are orthogonal to it
that go up you know into the future and
past uh and just imagine that you could
rotate manowski space right well you can
rotate a synip onic relation in the same
way
right and and because the time axis is
ordinal whereas the the the space axis
is all about arity or the number of
things that you're seeing in parallel
out in the real world you're actually
making Transformations between
ordinality and erity in in the relation
and there are other kinds of Duality as
well I could probably find more than
three if I look very so CTIC is ordinal
dionic is arity no the the thing the
line meta time axis that relates one to
the other okay that's
or okay because you've got levels you
got you know the property level and then
you've got the instance level you also
mentioned that they're dual because they
have an active and a passive
interpretation so what do you mean by
that an active and passive
interpretation okay well well well we
recognize things but have you ever heard
of John Wheeler's Observer participation
thesis no okay John Wheeler had this
idea called The Observer participation
thesis that when we see a Quantum event
when we look at a far away star and a
photon from that star hits our eye we
are somehow participating in that event
okay so that's what we're talking
basically you cannot just watch
something without actively
participating okay you're actually
agreeing to it in some way you're
actually actively putting yourself by
perceiving it you are contributing your
perception to it and because of the
nature of tesis it's impossible for you
to stop yourself from becoming actively
entangled with it okay you can't just
passively perceive things okay those
things also have you you and the thing
that you're observing both have an
impact on each other that's the way it
has to work because all of these you've
got this causal symmetry in the ctmu and
in other theories as well how would that
work on a more mundane level where
there's a wall let's say whether I look
at the wall or not does that have any
bearing to the
wall does it exist or not exist when I
look does it erode more when I look for
example yes you are participating in the
existence of the
wall right can the wall not self-
perceive can it not perceive itself the
the tertiary contactors in the wall can
and do receive each other in a limited
way yes but in terms of the in terms of
the secondary utility of the wall you
know what it's actually doing you know
in the world you're participating in
that as a matter of fact you know human
constructed walls wouldn't exist unless
they were they were useful to Tor like
you right you can't you can't look at
anything without participating in its
existence okay that's what a measurement
event is when you when you measure the
spin of a particle up or down you are
participating in that determination okay
that measurement is yours you're the one
who set up the measurement device you're
asking a yes or no question and your
question is being answered you impose
the question on reality and reality is
answering the question for you so
there's this active passive symmetry in
everything let's get to one more of
these abstr sentences the maximal
generality in bracket
universality comprehensiveness Criterion
of a reality theoretic Identity or
ontologically necessary and sufficient
Theory of Everything means that a fully
General formal structure must be
selected as the skeletal identity of a
toll framework okay so let's break down
some of these terms term by
term maximal
generality
comprehensive okay reality theoretic
identity that mean when you know
identity is that's something as which
that thing exists okay basically that's
its identity you exist as a secondary
tellor that's part of your identity any
property that you can assign to yourself
that's part of your
identity fully General formal structure
is that related to the metap formal
structure you mentioned
earlier uh yes sometimes I use formal
for metap formal because the metap
formal system is you know intrinsically
a metap formal system but by virtue of
it
description but I have to write that
description down in a formal way okay
it's SC ought to be written on a piece
of paper and you kind of add the metap
formality to it with your own by
understanding what it's saying but it's
written down on a sheet of paper and
that makes it formal okay it's a form as
opposed to the content of the
form all right and then skeletal
identity skeletal mean yeah skeletal
means that it's it's just a set of
invariants in which you know without
interfering with those invariant a lot
there's a lot of variability reality can
vary it can change it can adapt okay
without disturbing its essential
invariance so those essential invariant
are skeletal
reality you flush it out must a Theory
of Everything explain mental
activity
yes exent to a certain extent it's not
going to determine mental activity okay
there is no such thing as a
deterministic theory of reality right
but you know it has to explain the
wherewithal of metal
activity I'm trying to find out what
ingredients see some people have
different definitions of theories of
everything you mentioned this before a
grand unified one which is more of a
physics term for gravity and so on or or
one that explains Consciousness or one
that explains the explanations
themselves The Theory of Everything has
to explain all of those things
everything
it's to be taken literally anybody who
doesn't take it literally is making a
mistake do you have any thoughts as to
the biological origins of
life sure life originated biologically
but it also originated metaphysically
okay it comes from the origin it's part
of the structure of the universe it was
inevitable to say that well there there
could have been a universe with no life
where life just never got started and
never formed that's hogwash okay there
is no basically no reason for such a
universe to exist even for
itself right it's it's that is that's an
absurdity it's a little bit like the the
anthropic principle but there's got to
be it's the anthropic principle with
utility right part of the reason the
universe exists is because there are
secondary tors that derive utility from
it otherwise what is its reason to
exist the universe just simply exists
and it has baked within it some T some
purpose and one of those purposes is to
observe itself through secondary
tellers that's its structure in order to
exist the universe must have certain
aspects of structure one of it must be
completely self-explanatory and
self-justified all right because it's
closed it has to provide all of these
things for itself all right and if it
can't provide those things for itself
then its structure is inadequate to
support exist
and it will not exist why is that
inconsistent with the anthropic
principle why can't it just be that
there are multiple universes and we can
call that all the collection of
universes one meta universe or one large
universe and call that the true Universe
let's say well that's what the ctmu does
the ctmu incorporates something called a
syntactic metaverse but in terms of how
do all those universes that you're
talking you're talking about putting
them all together and collecting them
into a set how do they come into
existence why it's the reason you need
to justify it otherwise it it's
pointless to to uh hypothecate their
existence what are your thoughts on many
worlds
generally you know many worlds is is
basically a you know if it if it can
exist it does exist but it's got things
the matter of it it's it's Everett's
theory of course his idea was well this
the the uh uh scer equation is
deterministic you know and uh and uh
everything that you know all of those
possibilities that exist in the in in
that equation should continue to exist
without Quantum collapse and so he
converted Quantum collapse events into a
Divergence of universes in order for
this to work you need certain you need
to have certain things certain
assumptions have to be in place for
example you need a fixed array in order
to parameterize all the events and
identify all your particles and events
in the universe so that you know just
exactly how the eventualities are
splitting
okay uh it turns out that that these
these assumptions are not autologic
viable so although Everett had Everett
was correct in that there is a metaverse
he sort of mischaracterized it it's not
you know Infinity upon Infinity of
pointless universes that are pointlessly
diverging in every tiny little Quantum
event that's ridiculous okay but the
idea of a of a metaverse of this this
Earth universe that exists prior to in
some sense the reality that we inhabit
that's a valid idea so he sort of you
know he he sort of hit the nail on the
head and then he kind of went off on a
tangent in order to make his theory work
you know in order to get his
interpretation of you know all of these
you know to interpret the the Multiverse
of the metaverse as being this
collection this vast collection of
pointlessly diverging universes
because we have telic recursion the way
that I understand that is that at each
cons spansion point in the manifold over
time somehow the points are evolving and
including their neighbors and I recall
you saying at the speed of light forget
about at the speed of light because that
can take us down another route
regardless there the speed of cons the
rate of cons spansion is usually the way
I refer Okay cool so they're absorbing
and then that translates to a positive
cosmological constant because the
universe seems as if it's Contracting
from one point of view or expanding from
another
okay do you happen to have a prediction
for I know that your theory says there
should be a positive cosmological
constant does it have a calculation as
to what range it should look
like yes I've made calculations I'm not
going to announce them here I I'll
publish them first and then we can talk
about
them you're watching this channel
because you're interested in theoretical
physics Consciousness and the ostensible
connection between the two what's
required to follow some of these
arguments is facility with mathematics
as well as discernment of the underlying
physical laws and you may think that
this is beyond you but that's false
brilliant provides pcid explanations of
abstruse phenomenons such as Quantum
Computing general relativity and even
group Theory when you hear that the
standard model is based on U1 cross su2
cross su3 that's group theory for
example now this isn't just for Neo
fites either for example I have a degree
in math and physics and I still found
some of the intuitions given in these
lessons to vastly Aid my penetration
into these subjects for example
electricity and magnetism sign up today
at brilliant.org to that is to OE for
free you'll also get 20% off the annual
premium subscription try four of the
lessons at least don't stop before four
and I think you'll be greatly surprised
at the ease at which you comprehend
subjects you previously had trouble
grocking links are in the description
okay let's get to some philosophy
all right what's meant by existence is
everywhere the choice to
exist well that's that active passive
Duality that we were talking about
before okay you you in in the ctmu tors
are basically secondary Quantum and
they've got to nucleate physical bodies
all right so they actually have to
actively participate in their own birth
do they do so of some Proto will or is
it happenstance
that they inherit the will of the
universe the will of the universe is to
exist therefore these therefore you know
any part of the universe in the
non-terminal domain you've got things
everywhere that are seeking to exist you
know the the terminal domain provides
them with resources that they can use to
actualize themselves and this is what
happens and you mean that they want to
exist at the dionic level at this
terminal level or you mean to say that
they want to exist at all because to me
as I hear that when someone says this
entity wants to exist it implies it
already exists you need a physic in
order to truly exist in the sense that
most people mean you actually need this
this form content feedback okay so in
order to fully exist things do require
some kind of a terminal body where
people get confused is they think that
their terminal body can only be of a
certain kind in a certain world all
right that's not necessarily true there
can be many different kinds of terminal
realization all right for example there
can be an afterlife a heaven or a hell
for example in which you can exist and
have another kind of terminal body which
was generated just for that world or
just for that heaven or hell you see it
doesn't necessarily have to be right
here one way or another you need those
resources in order to fully instantiate
Your Existence otherwise your existence
never achieves full resolution it is
never fully actualized the universe
wants to actualize itself everywhere it
can that's why we have this profusion of
life right that's why we have all these
different species all these different
organisms Telesis wants to actualize
itself it wants to exist and this world
provides it with the resources to do
so so is it akin to God wanting to exist
God wanting there to be more God the
reason why I say yes that's exactly
right that's that's why that's why I say
you know reality is closed it has to be
totally self-justified right existence
is the will to
exist all right and you've also heard me
possibly use a term called triality
right as the identity of reality This
Global operator descriptor is not
only an object and a relationship it's
also a process or an operator right in
other words you can imagine that the
universe is not just an object it's an
event it's a creation event that's what
the universe it's a self-creation event
or
self-identification
event you see and everywhere in the
universe these self-creation or self
identification events are seeking to
occur they're trying to occur particles
are you know are being created and
annihilated everywhere in the
universe all right because they're
inheriting this will to exist from the
universe itself and this is a Criterion
of existence without it existence is
impossible right you can't just exist
for a second and there not be an
operation that that that maintains Your
Existence that because that second is
meaningless okay it there's it's got to
be a permanent existence it's got to be
in some sense atemporal or Eternal
that's what God is in C basically God is
being equated to Ultimate Reality so God
is eternal in this sense and to get
Vicken steinan when you say Eternal do
you
mean infinite temporal length or
timelessness basically we're not talking
about we're talking about atemporality
which is timelessness is in put okay in
other words it's prior to time it's
pretemporal in a way okay it just exists
as a
canus exists as as an Impulse as an
imperative but it is not fully
actualized without existence and all it
goes into it and there these existential
criteria are what most physicists and
other people leave out of their
understanding of reality but these
criteria are logically necessary and
they do in fact before we get further
some people may be turned off by the use
of the word God so I'd like you to
Define how you use it because you have a
well it comports with the general
definition of God but it's more specific
well I've done everybody the favor of of
making an acronym out of it Global
operator descriptor the identity of
reality or Ultimate Reality
okay as far as personifying it is
concerned anthropomorphizing it or
whatever you want to call it um that
follows from the properties of the
god of the global operator descriptor we
find out that it has certain properties
ordinarily attributed to God by people
who have religious
beliefs usually monotheistic beliefs
that's the correct way to look at so
that's what that's what I mean when I
say God I'm not saying well you I'm not
you know necessarily the Christian God
the Muslim God the Jewish god whatever
kind of God right I mean the global
operator descriptor and it does have
sentience it it is all of the criteria
that go into the basic religious
definition of God creating the universe
all the rest of that stuff these are
actually can actually be validly
interpreted in the ctm the ctmu models
those properties therefore God
exists now these ter tellers come into
existence because of their will to exist
at least from my understanding but at
the same time at the secondary the
universe's will to
exist at our level it seems like not
everyone has a will to exist which you
also
mentioned is equivalent to evil or at
least cognate with it is it possible for
a particle to have an anti- will to
exist most people who commit commit
suicide basically have no will to exist
they're not antiexistence okay so
suicide is not necessarily evil in the
sense of uh of a mass murderer who tries
to destroy civilization in the human
species they're not quite the same
thing can a particle commit suicide in a
sense can a particle have a suicide
particle does not have sufficient
self-modeling capacity to make that
decision for itself that's why we
require secondary tells they have the
self-modeling the advanced self-modeling
capacity to be able to make decisions of
that complexity and only they can do it
it's why they're necessary it's why we
have to be Quant coherent Quant in this
universe can you talk about what good is
defined as and what evil is defined
as well basically good is what reality
as a whole wants teleology the will of
God people have many terms for it okay
and evil is its opposite the negation of
it simple is that and good
wants good wants self-actualization and
self-identification that is what the
universe is doing it is one huge massive
self-identification event everything in
it all of the events are
self-identification events that go into
its
self-actualization what's meant by
self-actualization that's a term that
some new AG people use let's delineate
it well okay well as physicists would
call it a Quantum wave function
collapse okay the quantum wave function
you know something is according to the
the SC your equation you've got a
Quantum wave function it's expands you
know it's it's radiating out into space
and then suddenly poof it collapses
that's inner expansion and collapse okay
that's a cons spansive meta event all
right this is what the universe is made
out of in the ctmu you're no longer just
looking at particles you're looking at
more advanced kinds of qu that are much
much easier to tie together in the con
exp I tend to get bogged down in words
so I'm going to press you sometimes and
it may seem unduly personnic but when
you say self-actualize isn't it is it
not the case that there's only
self-actualization not just
actualization because the
universe is itself that's correct that
is correct everything is self
actualization of the universe if not
necessarily of you can you explain your
thoughts on this on the human
Singularity versus the theological sorry
versus is the technological singularity
the tech Singularity right well the
human singular it's all about how uh
it's all about human Destiny and how
responsibility for human Destiny is
distributed all right if there's a Tex
singular if there's a human Singularity
we all get to participate in the
decision about our destiny and where
it's going and how to realize it all
right that distributes the the whole
thing over Humanity as a whole and no
one gets left out if we have a text
Singularity everything will be
controlled by the people who who own the
technology those are Mega
corporations okay run by people who are
not typically very nice or public
spirited people they're highly
acquisitive okay they they they tend to
be narcissistic Naki aelian sadistic
sometimes basically these are not all
good people I are exceptions there's
some people you know that that that have
a lot of money or are in charge of
various kinds ofch technological
Enterprise that aren't totally bad
people but when you put too many of them
together they start getting the idea
that they're Elite and they should be in
charge and they start deciding that
people are useless eaters there are too
many of them and for the good of the
planet and really because they're a
nuisance we have to get rid of them
right the this kind of talk has been
going on for centuries all right people
are a lot of people aren't aware of it
but the elite tend to form these gations
when left to their own devices okay so
if there is a technological singularity
with them owning all of the technology
that technology will be used against the
human
species it's almost certain and that is
called a parasitic Divergence where they
become a parasitic subspecies of the
human race and the rest of us become
their
hosts now the human Singularity it's one
that you advocate for something that we
should have instead of the technological
singularity what is the human
Singularity well it's been it's been
laid out by others for for instance Tad
shardan you're probably familiar with
him he was a he was a Jesuit priest who
came up with this idea of the Omega
Point okay we're approaching this
quickening of Consciousness where we're
going to realize what we are who we are
our relationship with God in reality and
fulfill our destiny and this is going to
be this huge worldwide Global event and
it's going to save us and allow us to
pass through the great filter and
realize our destiny that's what it is he
used that term great filter or did you
just come up with that great filter no
great filter is a term that's been
around for a while it's basically every
species you know as it develops
technology and starts killing itself
with pollution and overpopulation all
the rest of it every species comes to a
point where it it either has to grow up
and live sanely and and uh and
sustainably in its environment or it
dies part of the technological
singularity one of the reasons why
people are venerating it is because
there's the potential for Minds to be
uploaded into classical really really
and whose theory is that right right
this is what I want to this is what I
want to ask you about there is no Theory
it has why do you laugh why is it absurd
and let's imagine that it's not
classical computers that one uploads
their minds to but some other maybe
quantum computer why is that
outrageous because that's not the way
reality is structure okay reality exists
it exists on other terms entirely you're
not going to build a machine it is not
mechanical it is it is metame mechanical
or protome mechanical you might be able
to call it that but you're not going to
be able to use a universal touring
machine or for that matter a Quantum
touring machine to simulated it can't be
done all right it does not satisfy the
requirements for existence there is no
Theory there is no theory of
transhumanism how this whole thing is
going to occur all right unless you can
point me to a theory now if you can do
that I'll change my mind I'm an
open-minded person I don't think there
is such a theory you just mentioned
mechanical um is this because there's a
difference between mechanical causation
and telic causation or is this unrelated
to that I have causation is far more
primitive and generative than mechanical
causation is mechanical causation is
incoherent you have a machine with a
bunch of parts that happen to be bolted
together in the right way the Machine
Works perform a function the way it's
supposed to but they don't work
coherently in the sense of quantum me
mechanics Tel recursion is coherent in
the sense of quantum
mechanics all right so it's you know
everything is superposed on each other
all of the possibilities interfere
Within These Quant of causation called
Telos which are just configurations of
tors like
you do you have any thoughts as to
entanglement speed so what I mean mean
by that is some theories predict that
there's a maximum speed of entanglement
right now as far as we can tell there's
no speed to it it's just instantaneous
I'm curious if in your models it
necessarily has to be the case that
entanglement happens everywhere
simultaneously or if there is also a
speed associated with it well you're
just talking about some kind of terminal
lag in reality entanglement occurs in
the non-terminal domain where things are
meta simultaneous it is not appropriate
to try to schedule them the same way
things are scheduled in the terminal
domain but there could be a little bit
of a lag where yes there is some
measurable amount of time that it takes
for things to become entangled once
their wave functions hit each other that
is a calculation I have not yet
performed how does one solve the Liar's
Paradox in your
model the EP amenities Paradox the one
that says this sentence is
false right well you simply exclude that
kind of sentence from reality you say or
that is a pathological construction that
is not instantiated in the terminal
domain unless you can find me an
instantiation and I don't think you can
because it's paradoxical so it's akin to
naive set theories move to zfc where
they say we can't construct sets that
aren't elements of them set of all sets
that aren't elements of themselves it's
akin to that you just negate it you say
that's not a
possibility it is a possibility you just
can't involve the negation part you
can't involve the self- ne ation product
you can have sets that are self-
inclusive we've got self-inclusion all
over the place fractal geometry there
are all kinds of things Consciousness
itself all kinds of things that that are
self- inclusive but you can't allow this
misuse of the of the negation functor
okay you can't allow that to intrude on
them and render them paradoxical that's
what I'm
saying is there a realm say the pre-
info cognitive realm this primordial
place unbounded to's place where as far
as I understand Paradox ring it's fine
it's just in our experience our world of
the terminal right right it can exist it
can exist as a syntactically
inconsistent form which is sufficiently
well formed that you can apprehend it or
think you apprehend it but in reality it
is incapable of instantiation you can
formulate it right and then you can you
can Envision it in the non-terminal
realm you cannot however achieve an
instantiation an actualization of it
because it violates the terms of
existence in the terminal realm physical
existence right what happens after
death so there's a couple ways to
interpret that what I mean is what let's
let's talk about what is
death what does it mean to die that's
the that's the termination of your
relationship with your particular
physical body that you have at this
present time when you when you are
retracted from this reality okay you you
you go you you go back up toward the
origin of reality
you can be provided with a substitute
body another terminal another kind of
terminal body that allows you to keep on
existing with the same memories is what
religions excuse me with a modom of your
memories before or a complete
eraser uh you can have the these
memories can be ret nothing goes out of
existence in the conspan of manifold
your memories can always be pulled back
out if that's
but there's no reason to do that usually
okay why cling to memories of a world in
which you are no longer instantiated so
there are certain automatic
psychological things that happen on
death at the moment of death and also
you mentioned you mentioned what happens
after death that's not quite appropriate
of course because that's a temporal
preposition and when you're extracted
from the terminal domain you're no
longer Tim likee now you're basically
medit
see everything
changes however you exist that way right
now arguably all of your lifetimes if
you were to be reincarnated again and
again and again all of those
reincarnations are meta
simultaneous there is a sense in which
they all occur at once in the
non-terminal so when people talk about
heaven which I know you have your own
views a specific differentiated view I
haven't heard before as to what heaven
is and even hell when people talk about
heaven usually what
they mean is something like uh
reinstantiate of this body with probably
a better hairline than I have
andine man is you should see Bernardo
castr who I should put you in touch with
have you heard of Bernardo castr I've
heard of Bernardo yeah as a fact I think
I think he was on email distribution I
was saw think one of Jack SAR Fat's
email distributions so who's that Jack
who Jack sarfatti yeah Jack Jack
sarfatti is one of the hippies who saved
physics uhuh you related to UFOs does he
study UFOs yeah as a matter of fact I
think he's working on right now he's
working on meta materials that uh that
will uh allow us to build spacecraft
that emulate Tic Tacs one of those
tictacs that the we're gonna talk about
that
man I mean yeah he's a gono physicist
right but he's been around since the you
know 1960s and and he and there a bunch
of other guys you know like sag and Nick
Herbert and uh and uh Fred Allen wolf
and other people like this who uh David
there's a guy named David Kaiser I think
he's in MIT he wrote a book called How
the hippies saved physics and these were
the guys these were you know non
locality and all the quantum woo you
hear about sometimes came from these
guys but in reality they had a lot of
very productive thoughts and in a way
the world we're living in now is an
outgrowth of some of what they were
thinking and doing in those
days some of these guys are still around
I mean not just Jack zaretti but you've
also got other guys like you know I know
Nick Herbert is still there you know and
I know that that wolf is still there sag
is still there these guys are on email
distributions that that uh that you know
Jack sometimes puts me on one of his
distributions I want to talk to Jack at
some point I heard that I should talk to
Jack what I've been exploring recently
is the topic of UFOs because like you
know this podcast is about theoretical
physics Consciousness Free Will and God
and it's it seems like
UFOs from our observations of them break
the laws of physics as we know so a
simple one is angular sorry a simple one
is conservation of momentum how can you
move back and forth if you're we have to
assume a certain mass is associated with
the
craft well yes and of course Mass
amounts to inertia and that's a
violation of inertia you can't just
suddenly turn on
the right so that's what I've been
exploring unless unless you're dealing
with a projection right right right
that's also called spoofing I believe
have you heard that term yeah I have
heard the ter the term spoofing but you
need a a better theater of reality in
order to explain what this kind of
projection would be okay while we're
here man let's talk about this what are
your thoughts on UFOs in general as well
as the recent disclosure movements is
there anything about about UFOs that you
find convincing that they are in fact
maybe us from the future maybe
associated with God or demons or Angels
or just an advanced civilization
visiting us in the same way that we
House people at zoos I mean animals
there could be any or all of those
things there could be different kinds
that some kinds that come from the
future sometime some kinds that come
from another planet elsewhere in the
universe right um but they definitely
you've got too much reportage on them
there are too many people people who are
coming up with heartfelt stories about
them they're they can't possibly all be
fake right people aren't Liars if
someone's going to risk his reputation
and be called a nut by coming out and
saying I saw a UFO you have to take that
person a little bit seriously sure there
are scammers out there and people who
are going to lie about it but I don't
think we could have this much uh
reportage without actually having
something to it right so I think a lot
of people are telling truth about UFOs
that means they have to be explained and
there are a number of possible
explanations corresponding to different
kinds of
UFO you mentioned the word woo about
five minutes ago what I'm wondering is
did you used to have a conception of
what you thought was woo so for example
telekinesis or psychic phenomenon maybe
when you were in your teens that now
because of your development of the ctmu
you no longer regard it as incoherent
mysticism
well I mean I have had a number of
paranormal experiences um and began
having them at a rather young age and
that's one of the reasons I had to
develop the CTN to develop an extended
picture of reality that would actually
accommodate alternate states of being
alternate states of mind and so that is
uh rather than dismissing the
experiences that I had in the past I've
actually become more comfortable with it
what are some of these paranormal
experiences
well you
know
psychokinesis
telepathy lots of precognition in my
case
um out of body experiences you know
there's Pro I don't know I I don't I
don't know the single kind of paranormal
event that I haven't spontaneously
experienced at one point or another have
you witnessed any UFOs on your
own well yes I have
all right and I was basically up near I
was working for the US Forest Service
and I was up near in Central Montana
near mstom Air Force bace by the way
where there nobody have shown up but uh
I saw something in the sky and actually
stood and watched it for 30 minutes
until I got bored and drove
away and I was driving a US Forest
Service pickup T but literally stood
there leaning against the back of the
truck looking directly at it for a long
long time okay it was perfectly it did
not change shape it did not change
position it was right up there in the
sky over they were called the little
Snowy Mountains so I was in charge kind
of in charge of this mountain range uh
in Montana and uh that's where it was
and it was huge it was Titanic I mean
there was no missing I don't know if
anybody else saw it or not but yeah was
up there what do you was however excuse
me sorry what do you estimate it size to
be you see it's very very difficult to
tell because getting a distance fix on
something like that is very very hard
could have been anywhere
from 500 yards to 5 miles in diameter so
I don't know but it was
huge was it one of the
Triangular UFOs or was it more
dislike it was uh oblate it was it
looked to me like an oblate spheroid and
one of the first things I thought was
well this must be a lenticular cloud and
so I kept on looking at it to find out
if it was you know to see okay if it's a
lenticular cloud I'm going to see some
sign of movement there's going to be
something there it was nothing like that
this thing was totally solid metallic
and it did not change I kep I'm staring
directly at it to see if it would change
you know I change change you know do
something but it wouldn't so as a I I
stayed there for you know until I was
quite sure that uh there was no doubt
about it and then I just drove away can
you give me an example of another
paranormal experience of yours a
specific
one um there are just simply all kinds
well the first time I had an outof body
experience I was lying down and uh I
exper you ever hear of nocturnal
paralysis yeah Bally I was lying down
and I I woke up but I you know thought
you I better you know maybe I'll get up
and go to the bathroom or something so I
tried to move and I couldn't immediately
I started to panic there was a wall next
to me so you know I figured what's going
on I look over there's a bookshelf next
to me on the wall right next to my head
that bookshelf was 4T above the ground
okay in other words somehow I must have
risen above my body I couldn't figure
out how this did
happen but anyway I thought oh my God am
I dead what time is it how long have I
you know if I'm dead how long have I
been dead suddenly I I floated I began
to move I floated in from the room that
I was on into the kitchen of the house
that I was in turned a corner and looked
directly at a clock that was on the
stove there and saw the time and at that
point I realized you know this is you
know basically the middle of the night
and I woke up back up in my body I mean
it took me a little bit and I got
control of my my muscles and I walked
back in and it was one minute later than
it was when I looked at the clock so of
course now some people are very good at
gauging time and and you know figuring
out what time it is but that was an
exact an exact estimate of the time
after I'd been asleep for some period of
time so you know that was something of
course it was terrifying because the
first time you experienced this
nocturnal paralysis you are going to
be um uh but then many many of these
experiences after
that have you had any intimations of God
speaking to
you well now you're getting a little bit
yes I have had religious caliber
Visions okay now I'm getting a little
bit what now you're getting a little bit
person no no you're asking me to reveal
some of the most personal details right
right right if you want you can I have I
have I have too much experience with
these iable creatures called trolls that
have been specializing in my case for D
you admit that you had a paranormal
experience and suddenly these creatures
looking for any reason to dis crawling
all over the internet right saying nasty
things about you and unfortunately you
know is I don't know if you know
anything about me but I've been canceled
me and my ideas have been canceled
despite the fact that they're totally
provable been canceled for a long time
because of the God thing and also
because people don't like IQ
differentials okay and and so if there's
an IQ differential it's Politically
Incorrect and if you're talking about
God and say God is mathematically
provable on top of that the trolls come
out of the woodwork on here okay and
pretty soon people are reading the
internet and they see all this troll
nonsense and they somehow get the idea
oh wow well there's smoke there's fire
so this guy must be like totally off
the- wall and then they don't pay
attention to you or they think that it's
somehow your ideas are somehow tainted
and so this leads to what is called
cancellation or cancel culture which in
my case has been going on for over 30
years but somewhere between 30 and 40
years and let me tell you I'm sick of it
okay there is not an academic alive that
can do a thing about anything that I
have ever said or done nevertheless I'm
not invited to you know conferences or
symposia I'm not invited to do media
appearances I mean these are you know
things that I should have been able to
there ways that I should have been able
to spread the word uh about you know my
work and actually get it out there so
that people could look at it they were
denied me right and so I'm a little bit
I don't like trolls I don't like people
that talk out of turn about things they
don't understand and there are a lot of
those people out there and unfortunately
it would be it would be fine I guess if
most people were able to distinguish
between a troll and someone who actually
knows what he's talking about most
people can't if the troll uses a little
bit of language well I work at a un
University and here's my opinion it's
all nonsense okay then you know people
think well he says he's from a
university maybe he really is all right
and this is you know the problem people
can't distinguish between truth and
falsehood especially when it's you know
when it takes the form of Internet noise
what I find is that people don't go
intoy can you give me something to drink
please yeah yeah can pardon me c that's
okay my mouth is getting dry here yeah
no problem no problem
what I find is that people dismiss
intellectuals like Steven wol from Eric
Weinstein yourself without delving into
the papers maybe they'll watch they'll
do a
cursory glance at their work quote some
of it so that if they want
to look like they've read they'll quote
a few paragraphs here and there I've
seen criticisms of yours but they're
not they're not they haven't see I'll
tell you my my is when I'm going into
your theories or anyone else's it takes
sometimes weeks and I try to put myself
in the position where not only am I
understanding it at an intellectual
level but I'm realizing it and what I
mean by realizing
is is I'm trying to see how what you're
saying how can I model it such that I
see it completely obvious that's how I
know I've internalized a theory and I
don't see anyone who criticizes you as
as attempting that
oh that that's correct yeah and
basically
Well they claimed it's so abstract and
abstruse that they can't visualize it
and that it's impossible to visualize
that's the usual line I visualize all
it's not hard for me but you know for
for some reason I think it's
intellectual laziness I think it's the
idea that they don't want to become
involved with something that might prove
them wrong or mistaken about something
there are a number of psychological
factors that that go into it but are
these two guys you mentioned uh wolf and
Weinstein yeah those they may have
somewhat the same problem although
they're in a better position than I am
because they've got you know lots of
money and they've got University degrees
I have neither of those things well
Chris if I can do something about
getting you more notoriety I will man if
I can uncan you I do plan on having you
on again at some once I've
I'm going to go through your theories
more which will take some months because
I don't have only your theory now I've
only been studying yours for the past
couple weeks but now I have to move on
to some mine's the best one right right
we're gonna talk about that we're gonna
talk about that at the end because I I I
can get to that question right now what
I'm wondering is I I want to make sure
that what I'm doing is honest and open
and for the good and I I I wouldn't make
a claim that I that I'm trying trying to
do that because that would to me mean
that I'm trying to be good which means
I'm good and I don't I don't know if I
if I am I'm a bit hesitant to say that
but I'll say I'm I'm trying to try to be
good let's say that you haven't done
anything especially bad yet in my
side thank you however here's where it
gets
bad you mentioned that your theory is
the only one of God that is correct and
then what I'm wondering is does that
mean when I'm inter in other people on
their ideas of God and so on it's
incorrect which means I'm promulgating
evil in some way and promulgating in if
only if they claim they've got a true
theory of everything that's totally
comprehensive otherwise the possibility
exists that their theories or their
viewpoints can be interpreted in such a
theory in a true theory of everything
you see for example these other guys
that that you mention you know and you
ask me you know questions about about uh
other thinkers if to the extent that
their ideas can be interpreted in mind
of course they're not correct but my
idea is called a super topology it
cannot be broken okay the conditions for
intelligibility are realized by it which
means that if you try to come up with a
counter example it will be
unintelligible and inadmissible my
theory cannot be broken so you know
although these other guys don't have I'm
the only person with a super tautology
but all of these people have valuable
Insight so I don't think you've ever
you've ever interviewed a dummy these
people actually see things they've got
insights as long as those insights can
be interpreted in the ctmu super
tautology that's okay another way for
people to understand what you've just
said is that think of set theory as the
basis by which physics comes up with
their theories and that's not exactly
true they don't aati from set theory
onward but no it's empirical induction
think of it like that what Chris is
saying is that under underneath first
order languages there's a meta language
a super topological language such that
other theories are interpretable almost
like with physics whatever the equation
is that governs the grand unification
let's imagine it's just a single
equation well that's based in axiomatic
set theory okay then you can take it a
step back and say what would a theory of
everything at all have to look like in
all of its in it's outline is the is the
probably the best way to look at that
the important thing is that it be
comprehensive and not exclude
anything that's true all right nobody
can present a complete you know Theory
of Everything that explains every detail
of the universe right up front universe
doesn't work that way it is not
deterministic so there is no such Theory
what you need is you need the outline
the very generic form in which anything
that is true that actually occurs in the
universe or is relevant to the universe
can be expressed if you've got that then
you've got a toe I'm the only person
that has a toe with that
description so even though it's not yet
a unified field theory in the sense that
most physicists would make you know
unifying general relativity and gauge
Theory and quantum mechanics although it
it comes pretty close actually um you
know once I I started getting into it
you know if I were to give all the
detail it does come close in some
respects to something like that but
that's not the way I present it I'm
presenting it as a super tautology as
The Logical form of a theory of ever
everything that cannot be broken you
can't get out of there is no Escape
nobody gets
over I'm actually writing a book maybe
it's just for myself for now on theories
of everything I have a chapter on yours
so as I've
been as I've been studying for yours I'm
writing it that's partly how I
understand it I one point I'll send it
to you thank you I would love to take a
look at your chat yeah for sure it'll be
maybe six pages long so I have to
condense what is about 300 Pages down to
five as well as what I'm trying to do is
relate different theories of everything
and the reason I'm doing that is you
yourself you notice I'm sure you've gone
through this where you start to make
connections between what you say let's
take an example what you conceive of as
God and then other religions that
normally would be thought of as
contradictory that not two of these
could be correct because they make
opposite propositions but you see well
actually there is a way in which there's
an overlap and that's probably what
they're referring to is is this over
exactly exactly there are ways if you
have a general framework that is super
toau logical and you know it's a fact
all you have to do is worry about
interpreting these different religions
in so that they are consistent within
this framework so that's what the C
that's why I call it a meta religion
take all of these other religions you
know that that are usually at each
other's throats because they don't know
how to interpret their their their
doctrines and and uh you know what what
they pull out of scriptural documents
they don't know how to interpret that so
they end up imagining these conflicts
those conflicts usually don't have to
exist if you have an overall framework
in which the the scripture and Doctrine
can be interpreted they can be avoided
why is it that intellect is associated
with atheism now you may disagree but
what I mean is in Academia there's
obviously an association with intellect
there that's a danger zone
phenomenally just assume that
proposition is correct you know what
what I'm referring to why is it that
most smart people now think that it's
smart or it's intellectual to S
God they're dummies they think they're a
lot smarter than they actually are
that's the problem the the the Geniuses
throughout history if you want to look
at the real geniuses throughout history
most of them believed in God most of
them admitted that there was a higher
power that there had to be a higher
power the people who occupy universities
I'd say your average Harvard instructor
Harvard is a very good University of
course I'd say your average Harvard
instructor might go 13 35 140 Max in
terms of IQ that's just not smart enough
to be laughing at people who believe in
God especially when you've got people
like like Isaac Newton okay that that
you're looking at you know people like
uh people like they're just thousands of
them great Geniuses that have believed
in God counter would be obviously that
if we go back far enough in time let's
say 100 years in thei or 250 years in
Prior almost everyone believed in God
both what you call dummy quote unquote
and intellectual so to say that the
higher end of the IQ Spectrum believed
in God previous to 250 years ago well
almost everyone did so then we have to
look at modern thinkers now you're
obviously someone who has someone who's
extremely bright as an understatement is
there a correlation between those on the
extreme end of the IQ Spectrum who
believe in God but then those who are of
higher intelligence that don't so almost
like a Dunning Krueger where the middle
doesn't believe you're that smart alic
teenager
but then if you gain a bit more insight
there's this false quote I'm sure you've
heard it that says something like the
first sip of science makes you an
atheist but it's that bottom gulp that
makes you a believer in God it's a false
quote attributed to I think schinger or
Heisenberg it's false but regardless
it's true even if it's false it's it's
actually there's there's something to it
you've got to have depth you the
intelligence has to have a lot of
penetration and you've got to get the
big picture before you understand that
there there must be a god out there
right and a lot of people don't have
that you mentioned the Dunning Krueger
effect all right people imagining that
they're much smarter and more competent
than they are okay there is a it's
usually associated with stupid people
you know stupid people tend to be tend
to have Dunning crueger right but there
is a higher IQ version of that it's
called The Danger Zone effect we've been
talking about it for years people who
range an IQ between you know like 130
and 150 you would ordinarily think well
it's extremely high IQ almost up to
genius range so these people must
actually actually have something going
for them well well basically it works
against them because they're right so
often compared to the ordinary person
they almost always turn out to be
smarter they actually this gives them
the idea that they're intellectually
infallible they start to get to lose
sight of their own intellectual
limitations and believe that they're
really what they've cracked themselves
up to be and they become insufferable at
this point this is the danger zone
phenomenon people would tend to have
tend to exhibit this when they're
between within a certain IQ rate that we
call the danger zone like I said that's
it's like you know a two standard you
know two standard deviation range right
around where I said it was you know
maybe I said 130 maybe it's like
122 15 whatever what you're saying is
that some people because they're so
smart they and let's just say it's two
standard deviations they're above their
peer group when they grow up and then
they think they're the smartest in the
room so then they extrapolate that and
say I'm the smartest in in the world at
150 exactly there was smartest in the
room but they were in a small room okay
then they get out there in the real
world where there are people smarter and
you know Suddenly It's like they were
scalded okay oh you know I I must still
be the smartest person so they start
belittling and denigrating people who
are smarter than they are and this
describes a lot of people who are
regarded as very intelligent especially
in Academia they regard each other as
intelligence it's kind of a club you
know well you know anybody who's not in
our club has no intelligence
whatsoever right this is what they
believe it's what they they calm
themselves into Bel it's not true but
they come to believe it anym it's their
reason it's gives them a license to
exclude and belittle people who are
actually smarter than
that speaking on intellect I'm sure
you've heard of Steph J Gould he has
some criticisms of the concept of IQ and
I took a nonoverlapping magisteria
meaning meaning basically he thought
that science and religion were
nonoverlapping magistery and one had
nothing to say about the other he's a
complete dualist and his his ideas his
conceptions of IQ are totally hogwash I
mean he the the guy
was he was obviously a smart guy but he
had certain maybe he was a danger Z own
person who decided that all those people
who scored better than he did on IQ test
must be really a bunch of ninka boops
compared to him and that's where he got
his ideas from but he seemed to be
largely motivated by ego I got the
impression that Stephen J G was a guy
who thought very highly of himself and
his own perspective but couldn't really
justify in other words I saw him as a
danger zone kind of person right it's
largely where you know a lot of this
stuff you know and it's not that IQ is
all that special IQ is by no means the
whole of intelligence people like are
right about that but it is it does
correlate with intelligence to a certain
extent it's an aspect of intelligence so
you can't just totally you know totally
dismiss it and say well you know this
person despite the fact that he's got a
measur measured IQ of 65 is just as
smart as this guy with the 150 IQ over
here you can't make a statement like
that but that's what these people want
to do everybody's equal you know even
intellectually equal they don't really
believe that because they believe
they're super smart but when it comes to
you you can't be any smarter it's
ridiculous what I wonder people who
dislike the concept of IQ mainly they
dislike it because it has connotations
with respect to race and then they think
Eugenics is going to come out from
conversations about it or that they're
not happy with their IQ or they're
afraid to find out their own IQ because
it may be lower than they think and they
actually unconsciously attribute plenty
to it so they there's this great quote
which is we Mortals scorn what we
valiantly strive for but don't
obtain it's from eso's fables I put that
in this movie that I was directing
called better left unset it's about
you've heard of the radical left I'm
sure you've you're familiar with them so
it's about what makes extremism unfor
it's obvious what extremism is on the
right when it comes to ethn nationalism
and so on it's easy to identify but it's
not easy to identify what extremism is
on the left because it's couched in
terms of diversity and compassion and so
on so I made a film usually these days
though it's also couch in terms of
Marxism which is a very flawed
philosophy it just doesn't make a hell
of a lot of sense so it's getting easier
to to uh identify the people on the
extreme left what I would like is for
someone who doesn't think the concept of
IQ is important at all to say okay well
I give them a pool of people here's a
pool that
has people who are measured of IQ 80 to
90 and then people who have 150 to 160
okay are you telling me if you're
running a company you would choose
equally from them okay then take the 80s
take the take the 9s I don't think that
they actually would do so I don't think
when push comes to sub they would put
their money where their mouth is unless
they're practicing some form of
affirmative action or have to abide by
some kind of racial quota system all
right then all bets are off I mean I
remember when I was in New York uh you
know and I needed money in New York the
rent was the rents were pretty high so I
was constantly looking for what job the
civil service exam at the time that I
was in New York which was during the
1980s 1990s they spotted uh racial
minorities certain racial minorities 30
points on our test in other words
someone like could go in and score a 100
but if you belong to one of these
privileged minorities you could score a
70 and get the job right and that's
because of a basically affirmative
action raci racial quot system right
obviously not very good for our society
because you get a lot of people that
really can't handle the jobs that
they're given and because of that
Society deter rights I mean I feel for
people that that are denied work for
example because they have a low IQ but
you know that's
not that is not a reason to destroy a
society you can't pretend that you're
being compassionate and pretend oh we
can't hurt anybody else's feelings and
then ask them to do things to be you
know uh doctors Airline Pirates the
pilots physicists you can't expect them
to perform functions like that because
you feel compassionate toward them or
because you don't want to hurt their
feelings right I mean there has to be a
point at which reality Cuts in right so
that's what we have to remember it's not
that these people are bad people or that
they're they're not as good as other
people they certainly can be as good as
other people okay but you got to sort of
some people are capable are better at
certain things than others and and IQ is
a is a good measure for some of those
things so you know there there should be
you know employers should be able to
give put a certain amount of weight on
IQ they don't because the the the
academic system Academia Incorporated
has more or less shoved the IQ off the
stage and replaced it with having a
college degree so now what they're
looking at is does this person have a
college degree if he has a college
degree he's smart and if he doesn't he's
a dummy he's one of those High School
dropouts you know forget about him
because he's a bump all right it's that
that is a disservice to the world that
kind of thing because anybody at this
point can get a college education right
it doesn't make any sometime you know
sometimes I think that you know I have a
dog who if I you know let if I paid the
money and and put this dog in a class
the dog would end up with a degree right
I mean he can't write or spell his own
name but then again it seems to me that
some of the people who are graduating
from college these days can't do that
either so you see where it's getting
it's it's not very good we we need we
need to properly use our intelle
intellectual resources and that means we
pay a little bit of attention to who's
good at what kind of task I see it from
both sides because there is like you
mentioned there is it's it's a
correlation IQ is a correlation which is
important it's one of the highest
correlates with success in terms of
money in terms of even happiness and
health of well up to a certain point
okay that doesn't extend into this into
the genius or Super Genius range but it
it it it goes up to a certain level it
also correlates very highly with
academic success right which of course
correlates with materal but it does not
correlate with morality so for example
there's something called the there's a
psychometric I think it's a dark Triad
is the only is the closest to a
moralistic
behavior it's not correlated with IQ you
may think well the you are the more you
can take advantage of people and You'
actually be more harmful to society it
turns out there's zero correlation which
is great because that means that the
smarter you are doesn't make you a good
person and people tend to associate
intellect
with with with moral Worth or with even
human worth I'm not sure if you do that
I see that as a dangerous game and I
also understand
that if one belongs to a like I
understand the controversy with IQ and
race because if you belong to a race
that has been demonstrated to have a low
IQ or supposedly demonstrated to have a
low IQ that's debilitating to be part of
that group it's it's not a fun feeling
to go that's because you're identifying
with the group you know everybody has a
right to be taken you know as an
individual if you have a high IQ I don't
care what color you are what race you
belong to you deserve to be recognized
for that but if you feel that well but
I'm not really me I'm a member of this
group okay and because this group has a
low mean IQ because it has that
statistic that statistic must apply to
me no that's not true never was true
okay but the the whole identity politics
thing that we've fallen into leads
people to take that attitude and once
again it's it's counterproductive and we
we have to stop it I mean we've got to
break out of that that's one of my
questions was with regard to IQ and race
or just IQ in general if you're told
that you have a low IQ what let's
imagine that you're an individual who
has taken an I test I forget that you're
inferring by membership of a group and
you're you have an IQ of 100 or 90 or
whatever it may be how do you avoid
crushing someone's
Spirits by
that well you just tell them you you you
tell them the truth about intelligence
there's a lot more to intelligence than
just IQ I mean that we have examples you
take Richard fan one of the best
physicists of the 20th century had an i
Q of approximately 125 which isn't that
sure isn't high enough to be a genius
physicist in the in the estimate of most
people but it was high enough for him uh
intelligence is it comes from another
place the IQ is being able to focus all
of your mental energy on specifically
well-defined tasks within a certain time
period okay that's what it is
intelligence need not be focused that
way intelligence is something that can
be spread out over much larger areas of
space and time people that produce works
of Genius don't necessarily have to
produce a work of Genius every time they
take an IQ
test okay so intelligence is much more
than IQ and this is something that I
think if people understood this and I'll
try to help them understand this if they
understood it they wouldn't feel so bad
about you know some kid who scores you
know better on an IQ test than they do
they wouldn't even necessarily feel bad
about belonging to a group that has a
low mean ey
Q you see I mean people are there are
differences you know between people
we're all good at certain things we're
all bad at certain things okay and
everybody's different as long as we
learn to accommodate those
differences uh but you know also
allowing for the the way those
differences affect our performance at
certain tasks in real life when we can
do that we'll be much
better sometimes I do this thought
experiment with myself imagine that
morality could also be placed on a
spectrum much like IQ is would you take
a decrement to your IQ for an increment
in Morality I call it moral intelligence
I actually conflate the two all right
you mentioned the the the dark tetrad
the the the
pical tetrad of sociopathy narcissism
machanism sadism okay now a lot of the
elite have those they have that that
dark tetrad too they've also got a lot
of them have danger zone intelligence
and I'm not entirely convinced that they
might not be a little bit of a
correlation in that range between those
two things
right hello can you hear me hear me yes
this looks like The Blair Witch Project
do you have another do you have
a what who thinks this looks like The
Blair Witch Project what the light you
have you have more powerful light uh
well we this is a more powerful light
it's got several
adjustments uh I have a Genie could you
could you put this on just one more
light one more light people need to see
your beautiful face man with your on no
no no I don't have a beautiful face
hairline matter matter of fact I would
like I would like less of my face to be
you like
Darkness what we have this or it's fine
it's fine that or that no that that
looks awful that looks F okay do you
want me to try opening the garage door
Missouri is big on fgs what do you want
me to try opening the door to see if
that helps with the backlight
uh I don't think it will honey just it's
fine don't worry about it let her know
it's fine also can you thank her for me
because she's she's extremely assiduous
she put so much energy and effort into
Kur wants to thank you honey for your
for your punctious attention to all the
details
here yeah and she's a sweetheart she
told me that you're a pussycat and to
not be afraid of you when I first
emailed her when I'm good mood yeah
well cuz from what I've seen you were
probably being interviewed by people who
either you didn't like or or they
conveyed that they didn't like you and
so you disagreeable mood with me or not
I'm happy the the Errol Morris video I
don't remember well are you talking
about the well no I don't know which one
I don't know which one but I'm just
saying that I I thought that you'd be a
combative person she assured me you
weren't and I'm happy that you're not no
I'm actually a very easy to get along
with person although I think you know
Malcolm Gladwell wrote wrote a book uh
in which I was one of the the people it
was called outliers and he attributed to
me zero social
intelligence so that may be where a lot
of people get that impression I'm
actually I'm actually rather easy to get
along with but you know I was a bar
bouncer for 25 years my background even
before that was such that I don't suffer
fools gladly so if someone wants to be
an idiot if rapidly changes my
mood and perhaps I'm not so easy to get
along with what you don't have the ask I
don't I there's no ass kissing Gene
inside of me I mean I I love to be nice
to people and make people feel good but
once it becomes evident to me that
someone expects to get his ass kissed
then there's a problem is there a
personal story about that that stands
out to you like you have one in mind
well they're just they're just there's
all there's all kinds of you know it
lasted from when I was about 5 years old
to when I was uh well out of high school
uh you know having to constantly I was
other you know we came from a
disciplinarian household shall we say
where there was a certain amount of
where physical abuse was the norm uh to
a certain extent and uh and that sort of
you know got me got me going along a
certain trajectory and then we were
usually the poorest folks in town the
poorest family in town which caused us
to get into fights with uh with other
kids so you know I had to learn how to
fight at at a young age and I didn't
necessarily want to be bothered with
that but it's it's just the way things
went for us so that's what I had to
do and uh then uh you know when I went
to get a you know I started working at
working for the forest service working
construction things like that ultimately
I figured out that it was there was a
better way to make a living paid almost
as much but wasn't so grinding and I
could actually
think about my work and things that I
was interested in while I was doing it
was bar bouncer I worked in about
50 said about 50 nightclubs over the
course of 25 years or so in the greater
New York area and you know it's probably
the best not bar bouncer in denor for a
long time and so you know physical
altercation was more or less a a way of
life and you meet a lot of people and
you know U but some of them are are not
especially easy to get along with
especially when they get drunk so you
know there's a altercations arise and
you that I'm sure that affects your
personality once you recognize that
somebody is a bad drunk whether or not
he's had anything to drink uh you react
to him in a certain
way I'm improving you know I'm not
likely to punch anybody these
days how did you choose your wife how
did you know she was the one
well uh she was actually a member of the
super high IQ Community such as it was
back in the 1980s and uh and 90s and uh
so I met her through one of those groups
and uh we you know gradually you know we
corresponded a little bit and I things
just grew from there so I got myself a
very intelligent woman beautiful
too was there something about her that
stood out to you compared to the other
women of the high IQ range I've always
been attracted to uh intelligent women
to me uh intelligence is sexy it makes a
woman makes a woman more of a woman you
know not that you know a woman who who
is you know not so intelligent can't be
sexy I mean that's far from the case but
it's always something to which I was
attracted in a female so that's one of
the reasons that uh that I held out for
for her I mean I was single for most of
my life up until I was about
uh nearly 50 years
old what are your vices what do you do
that's dissolutive that you think you
shouldn't but you gain some satisfaction
from it and you engage with it
anyway um my temper gets a little bit
short sometimes I that's always
something that I'm trying to improve uh
uh I have a uh weakness for certain
kinds of uh snacks or candies like
liquor is shining I just love stuff
can't stop eating it you know I
literally have to hide it for myself
after a certain point because other you
know I just eat bag after bag I'm the
same way man yeah I know it may not look
like it but trust me I'm 200 lb greater
than I
am no I'm serious my wife I pig out like
you wouldn't I expand my it hurts and
I'm like okay that's the that's the
beginning
let me keep eating and then I have to
fast for a day or two days so alternate
between extreme I don't know if it's
great for my liver I talked to my doctor
about it she said your liver seems to be
fine but I go yeah but it's it's just it
takes sometimes days to let your
digestive system catch up to everything
that you put in your mouth you know
that's that's uh you know if you just
keep on eating I I find myself getting
into trouble if I just keep on stuffing
myself for a week or two at a time then
you know I got to stop eating almost
entirely for the same amount of time
before I'm back to normal I I see the
workout the weights behind you I see the
gym set oh you're you're anytime if you
ever make it to this area definitely
you're welcome to enjoy the gym as much
as you want to I I like working out it
uh helps keep you young you know I mean
after a certain point you've got to have
resistance exercise your muscles
deteriorate you start losing muscle mass
and that's something that fortunately I
haven't lost any muscle mass at all and
uh I'm probably you know as strong as as
an athletic
20-year-old you know I can I can still I
do military press with over 200 lb for
reps which is very good for someone how
old are you age I'm
69 good job man so you don't work out
because you want to keep your IQ you
work out for other
reasons the IQ too believe you me there
are a lot of reasons to work out okay
you just keep yourself young you keep
your mind sharp you keep up your
motivation your level of testosterone
doesn't decrease so you m you you
maintain the amount of mental aggression
you need to attack difficult problems
these things are important to me so I
work out okay I wanted to get your
thoughts on some other thinkers one of
the reasons I factiously call it theom
Maki which is like the Battle of the
Gods and the reason is that these are
intellectual Giants and I'm not sure
about you but for me I glean plenty from
seeing these Giants disagree with one
another it's as if I pick up nuggets
from the damage of their their fight
from The Fallout so what are your
thoughts on new atheists like Sam Harris
so new Atheism in general you don't have
to attack Sam Harris although you're
more than welcome to I
don't look there was a you know back in
the they started publicizing me they I
had a chance to get heavily publicized I
was asked to appear on TV shows as early
as the late 1980s I
refused so I simply didn't want to be
involved then in the late 19 it was
around 1998 when I started uh getting
publicized and after that you know I
was I got a few media appearances uh you
know of one sort or another um uh but
then I started you know because I
mentioned during some of these
appearances that uh there was a
mathematical way to prove the existence
of God I began getting trolled uh by
atheists and for a while I was on a few
sites that were supposedly religious
sites that were dominated by by
Christians people calling themselves
Christians uh and noticed that you know
they weren't protecting me from these
atheistic trolls and these a these
atheistic trolls were saying an awful
lot of bad things and there were some
that actually attacked me personally
named brand atheists who were nothing at
the time but have since become you know
sinisters of the uh of the new atheist
movement I'm not going to mention their
names because that would be publicizing
them but they were they were nasty and
uh and uh I didn't get along with them
at all and uh then uh as I was trying to
nevertheless get purchased for my theory
I found myself getting
cancelled and there were several people
among them Richie Dawkins Daniel Dennett
and uh who the hell was it not Chris
Hitchens but one of the I don't know if
it was Sam Harris or not but they came
up with this new policy of how to deal
with people who believe in God theists
you cancelled them they must be
cancelled refuse to talk to them right
refuse to to give them any sort of
respect whatsoever and pretty soon
nobody will pay attention to the medical
and so this is what they pulled on me
and my theory and uh they pretty much
managed to stop me dead for a long time
I'm not happy about it and I don't like
those people I think they're
intellectually dishonest look the
scumbags are they um
although I'm not saying that they're
stupid people denned I mean his theory
is easy to pick apart Richie Dawkins
there's nothing there I mean they're
they're you know they're intelligent in
a way but on the other hand they're not
really they don't have much penetration
they can't understand the
inconsistencies in their own work
um I just don't respect them very much I
mean I was on a I was I've been on a
couple of sites they're just awful you
know the things they say about you the
things that they do they apparently have
no moral grounding they don't believe in
God so they don't believe there's any
sort of moral identity in the universe
that can that that can make them act or
behave in any particular way that others
find acceptable so all bets are off they
can they think they can do whatever they
want say whatever they want about you
and uh and get away with it and that's
what they have done repeatedly they've
been deplatformed you know people will
say things you know and I will you know
politely refute them but you know
politely but succinctly very turly
refute them and eventually I get
deplatformed because the people running
the platforms are also
atheistic okay and these people don't
hesitate to cancel you they're not
they're just a very poor excuse you you
can't run intellectual Commerce under
the watchful eyes of such people who are
who are cancelling you you know all you
have to do is mentioned the GW and
they've got a problem with you right and
so this is the this is where we've
gotten to today and uh as far as I'm
concerned that policy of theirs where
they where they simply refuse to
converse with you that is intellectual
cowardice you know I mean you take
people like Richie Dawkins Daniel D
easily crushed by by someone like me I
mean they wouldn't last they wouldn't
last a minute but you know they if they
still won't talk they you be it's a
reason it's an excuse for them to flee
oh well he believes in God you know what
a dunce so he's beneath our dignity we
won't you know cast any of our shed any
of our glory on him so this entitles us
to run away and they hide in the shadows
you know you'll see them I mean they get
out there in public but not where they
can really be dealt with by anybody
who's smarter than they are and that's
not a very tall order at all there are
plenty of people smarter than they are
speaking of hiding in the shadows you
look like Russell Crow
is there another light I I want to
prevent you from making the same mistake
that people do toward you so for example
they'll make ad hominin now I don't
think Daniel Dennett or Dawkins have a
low IQ I think they're extremely
intelligent people they may not have as
high IQ as have you ever been personally
insulted by them or their
friends because until you have been you
know you haven't walked in my shoes
don't worry man I'm on your side and
I'll defend you well that's good thank
you I'm just saying that I think your
animosity toward them is from being
attacked and if they were kinder to you
I don't think that you would denigrate
their intelligence it's been going on
for 20 years certainly I would have been
willing you know if they had just said
oh well you know let's let's let's get
together and all have a conversation
these people don't give an inch they're
haters okay they hate God Richie Dawkins
if you listen to what he says becomes
very evident that he doesn't really have
an argument against God he just hates
God okay and this has been going on for
20 years in my case and I've had it with
the guy so I I don't you know he's
misled a lot of people and this is
something that you can go to hell for
Richie Dawkins thinks that he's able to
deal with somebody like me and he's he's
got another thing coming I mean I'll
just pluck his wings like those of a
fly let's speak about the concept of
hell can you Define it can you tell us
how it's necessary be where Richie
Dawkins is
going I'm just
joking yeah so let's talk about the
concept of hell what is it so some
religions say that hell doesn't exist
some interpretations of Christianity is
that hell doesn't exist some
interpretations is that it does exist or
there's a Purgatory place a purgatory
and or and then there's that hell is a
place where you'll be tortured for a
finite amount of time and then you'll be
brought back versus and then there's
some where it's an infinite amount of
times what is your idea of Hell derived
from the
ctmu hell is simply the process of
ceasing to exist of being tally Unbound
and having your identity destroyed
because it is unacceptable to God see
God in the ctm there's something called
a stratified identity and God can be
defined as the highest level of the
stratified identity the level that we
all share with each other we're all
United in God but God is good and he
must exclude evil in order to preserve
the Integrity of his identity this is
what he does so if you deny God and you
cut your basically you're cutting your
line of communication with God because
you hate him so badly then God can no
longer see you no longer wants to see
you and can no longer accept you into
himself because he's totally consistent
God is is totally completely
self-consistent and will not
tolerate his denial it's just not
something that God can afford to
tolerate because something that is
perfect cannot tolerate cannot absorb or
assimilate imperfection into himself he
can tolerate it for a while but then
after a while he's got to exclude it all
right so this is what hell is basically
your own highest level of identity is
telling you you can no longer exist
because you're no longer in touch with
me you've cut your own identity in half
you've severed
it it's called the soul the human soul
that's what this these levels of
stratified identity are they're your
soul and once you you interdict that
once you sever it okay you're cut off
from God that way your own highest level
of identity cannot communicate with you
anymore it can't see you so when you die
and you beg on the deathbed please take
me back in God can't hear you
anymore that's a terrible thing and I
don't wish it on anybody but if people
understand this and they understand this
stratified identity they understand what
God is namely their own highest level of
identity they won't punish themselves
with unbinding and destruction now
because that's a very unpleasant
experience everybody wants to cling to
their identity in the end it's hellish
people create their own
Hell by rejecting their own highest
level of
unde there's this phrase I don't know
where I got it from but it says that
hell is a prison locked from the
inside that's correct well that that
that is that's a very good very opposite
quote is it a place of torture is it a
place of Torment is it a place of
infinite heat oh well you feel tortured
and tormented that's for sure and if
your conception of hell is a place where
there's a great deal of heat then you're
going to feel that too so you bring with
it your own ideas of what hell is that's
correct and where else would they come
from for someone like Dawkins who
doesn't believe in the concept of Hell
either would he then experience
nothingness okay well you know you're
right I probably shouldn't pick on
Richie Dawkins he is what he is but
Richie Dawkins will create his own kind
of hell all right because he rejects he
he rejects he will create his own kind
of hell and that is probably going to be
a hell where nobody pays any attention
to him okay he's no no longer a big shot
at Oxford University he can no longer
run around telling people how much he
hates God nobody wants to listen to him
anymore that's what will happen to
Richie that's his hell and then finally
in the end he'll just be melted down to
nothingness and the Telesis of which he
consists will be redistributed to the
rest of the
EMP you mentioned God can't absorb
what's imperfect because God is perfect
and he needs to stay consistent however
none of us at least I'm not perfect and
no one that I've met is perfect so does
that mean that none of us are going to
heaven none of us will be ultimately
reabsorbed back into unbounded
tesis the world throws too much at you
for you to be perfect okay nobody can be
perfect in this world to live in the
physical world is to be assaulted by
imperfection all the time things that
that don't suit you and cause you to
react sometimes poorly all right so this
is it's it's an oxymoron to think that
God holds
this against you we all have to adapt we
all have to do what it takes to survive
and God doesn't hate us for that all
right he doesn't that doesn't that isn't
what makes a person evil what makes a
person evil is total denial and negation
of his of of Ultimate Reality and his
own highest level of identity which is
God all right it's wanting to undo to
unbind reality to say the name of
reality
backwards that's what evil is and that's
that's what you get punished and that's
unfortunately what a lot of these new
atheists are doing there's someone like
Peterson who would come out and say that
Sam Harris you say that you're an
atheist but you say that with your words
but you don't act like that with your
body because you treat people with
Humanity you are concerned with the
world living and not dying
flourishing do you agree with Peterson
saying that you can say that you're
atheistic but not act it and thus does
someone get saved even though they
profess
atheism yes basically the problem
however is that once you professed
atheism now you've got to get God's
attention again okay once you've severed
your soul once you you put a cut in your
soul and you've actually cut God off now
you've got to heal that Severance before
God can see you again it takes a long
time it's not going to have oh well I've
changed my mind I've de decided not to
hate God anymore that's not good enough
okay it needs to go on for a long long
time and you've really got to try and
you've got to cry like a babe in the
woods until God finally hears you again
okay so it's not easy these people are
are hurting themselves by cutting
themselves off like that hey honey is
there a is there a light over there you
know one of those lights those food
lights over there F on that clamp light
I want to see how that influences the
this thing is getting in my eyes what
I'm getting at is almost the opposite of
not all those who cry Lord Lord will be
saved so on the one end even if you
claim to be a Christian or you claim to
believe in God that's not enough you
have to also act it and on the other end
one can say that even if one says that
they're against God but one acts kindly
one acts lovingly then does that mean
that they still can be saved Peterson
would say now he doesn't talk about
heaven hell but he would say that you
believe in god with your body you don't
with your mind but the ultimate test is
your actions and what I'm wondering is
for their deeds shall you know them
right right right so then does that mean
to pick on Sam Harris who I may be
interviewing at some point so Sam if you
watch this well this is just for fun to
pick on Sam Harris would you say that he
in your model will be going to heaven or
hell assuming that Sam Harris is a good
person with his actions but professes
atheism vehemently with his
mouth unfortunately your your
relationship with God cannot be Fain
when somebody is is doing good acts it
could be only because they want to be
recognized by others as someone who does
good acts they want the moral approval
of other human beings that's not good
enough okay they're actually has to be
the acceptance of your own highest level
of identity by the way we have a
rainstorm going on here he man can you
still hear
me completely fine can't hear a thing of
the storm okay
good um pardon me c go ahead let's take
a quote from someone who criticized you
you said if someone denies the existence
of God then God will exclude them from
reality and then this person said well
okay how does Langan explain the
continued existence of militant atheists
Like Richard
Dawkins well they have a physical B
they're basically coh ing to their
physical body and that's what's
providing them with a Convent identity
they've reduced themselves however to
your physicality there's not much left
any they have actually cut off their
highest level of identity and that will
affect them when they are retracted from
the Mortal plan when we no longer have a
body here that holds them together then
that's it for
it if God could not have been otherwise
like with your model there are these
metal laws that govern the universe so
it sounds to me like there is a bound to
God
God is his own bound God is his own
boundary he his own origin and his own
boundary and both of those things are
distributed this is part of the logical
structure of the
C okay both of those things are
distributed everywhere because God is
self-composed he consists of himself
everywhere he is unbounded therefore
reality itself is unbounded in every
part that's why we have free will among
other things
who is or was
Jesus
Jus we cannot possibly know what Jesus
was because historical methodology
prevents us from validating everything
that was written about in the Bible but
we know what Jesus is now Jesus is the
ideal of human Perfection someone who
was willing to lay down everything and
sacrifice himself for man God
all right that's what Jesus is he is the
image of human Perfection it is through
a Jesus shaped Gateway that we can
approach God all right we have to become
perfect in order to unify with the
Perfection of God so that's the way
Jesus functions in in the Christian
religion and the way he can function in
every religion because Jesus is our two
and far between if you know what I mean
in in in Buddhism of course Buddhism has
another central figure who is Buddha
gatama Buddha sidharta he's basically
another kind of cat en TI he didn't talk
much about God right you can infer sort
of infer a conscious higher reality from
some of the things that that Buddha said
but he didn't actually acknowledge the
existence of God he was also a rich
individual that was born into privilege
and then you know went around traveling
and and meditating and and uh
ministering to the masses and so forth
um but in several ways he doesn't quite
measure up to the image of Jesus Jesus
was born forth he didn't start out with
any advantages at all he lived like a
normal man like an ordinary human being
you know absorbing the slings and arrows
of Outrageous Fortune at every turn
which is what we have to do that's what
we're expected to do therefore Jesus is
an Exemplar for us whereas Buddha Tech
technically is an examp is is an
Exemplar to people who are born with
privilege and then want to withdraw from
reality and have a meditative existence
and uh you know never mention God so
there is a little bit of a difference
between the two
now in the ctmu we don't discriminate
against Buddha because he lacks Jesus
likee characteristics instead we
recognize him for his strengths what he
was which is considerable Jesus is for
Buddha is not a is not a lightweight in
terms of religious figures uh so he
doesn't suffer at all for his non-
resemblance to Jesus but if we want the
ideal of human Perfection that's
Jesus let's get to some other
intellectuals like I mentioned for me I
love hearing academics speak about other
academics or intellectuals speak for
example if Russell commented on
Aristotle it illuminates not only how
Russell thinks but it gives me a new
perspective on Aristotle at the same
time so I'm going to bring up a few
different Giants intellectual Giants
even though you may not consider them to
be so and we'll see what you think of
them have you heard of CLE
Irwin yes are you presenting CLE is an
intellectual
giant yes I'm wondering what you think
of CLE Irwin's theories CLE Irwin has
theories on quantum gravity I'm unsure
if you've taken a look and as well as
Consciousness so what do you think about
them well CLE seems like a smart person
I don't want to say anything bad about
Clee but I will say that CLE has a lot
of ideas that are are very ctmu like and
the problem with that is that I got to
these ideas a long time before plea did
and I actually had to force plea to site
me in his most recent it wasn't it
wasn't any paper reality self-
simulation
hypothesis okay um anyway CLE has a he
has a theory it's got a number of
ingredients some of which are
questionable some of which aren't it's
based on Garrett Le's E8 uh Theory right
it's a certain symmetry group that use
but there are other aspects that are
straight pure
ctmu okay and I was simply not mention
now you know I understand sometimes
people don't know any better um but at
you know at one time I was on on every
major News Network in the country there
are probably relatively few people who
are above a certain age who never heard
of me a lot of them have forgotten that
they heard of me but you know
nevertheless I was still there I think
that a reasonable literature search
should should turn up something about
the CTN if you if you undertake it
you're actually doing your job and
looking for you know other ideas that
are comparable to you you're probably
going to bump into so uh
theory is to the extent that it
resembles the ctmu it's great okay other
parts of it are questionable but here's
the the key part
is Cle is missing essential structure
that you need to have a working reality
self- simulation hypothesis and and and
a reasonable toe Theory of Everything
he's missing certain key ingredients
that are built into ctmu structure his
theory is not a super tautology it has
to be a super tautology in order to be a
true theory of everything right he he
mentions language in his theory um you
know and coding um you know he mentions
a lot of things that that that I
introduced with the
ctmu which was the first language likee
theory of reality he mentions a lot of
things but then he they're kind of
halfhazard glued together and it looks
like he kind of made a snowball out of
them and you know I threw it up in the
air to see what would happen and uh let
me if if he ever realizes this there he
is going to realize that he has a ctmu
clone that doesn't just differ from the
ctmu but is the ctmu in different
language okay that is where CLE is
headed I don't want to detract from CLE
I think he probably yeah probably thinks
he's doing a good I do know that forcing
him to sight me was not easy I had long
string of of correspond it originally
happened he introduced his his paper his
new paper he put it up on rxe I guess um
in this it was one of it was a an email
distribution that I was on with 60 or 70
pretty well-known
people and and he introduced it there as
though it was just entirely his the
reality self- simulation hypothesis and
I'm like what the hell you know what is
this because these people know me they
know who I am so I said you know wait a
minute you know C I've been talking
about reality of self- simulation for
years you know you're going to have to
site me I've looked at your paper I
don't see you mentioning me here you
know you've got some of the same ideas
in there went back you know quoted a lot
of self- simulation quotes for me the
problem was that he was trying to
present it as a completely new idea for
which he was responsible it
wasn't and in my estimation he in some
ways he's got it right but in some ways
he's laughing it up okay and I don't
want people confusing his idea of what a
reality self simulation would look like
from what it really looks like which is
the way I describe and have been
describing for the last you know two or
three
decades so uh I guess the the the final
analysis is flee seems to be you know on
the right track but he's got some
problems what about yosha Bach and his
ideas of conscious
Yosh shabach uh like Daniel denn is a
physicalist you cannot explain
Consciousness with physics or in a
computational system okay the ctmu makes
use of a of a concept called protoc
computation which is even more General
than Quantum computation I mean there's
there's a universal touring machine
there's a Quantum touring machine the
ctmu actually quantizes reality in terms
of what might be called a protoc
computer except that it's the entire
ctmu all of that structure has to go
into this
quantisation okay and then the universe
is self- similar on that basis every
part of it mirrors the whole okay so you
can't I mean it's a metaphysical system
you cannot explain Consciousness using
physics because it doesn't have the
coherence that it would need okay your
Consciousness is coherent you are a
unary unified entity when you perceive
reality around you and when you have
thoughts you feel the unity of your
Consciousness that's what I mean by
coherence a machine is not coherent it
doesn't have that coherence all right
you got to figure out some way of
getting that coherence in there and
that's a tall order okay Josh abach
doesn't have it Daniel Dennett never had
that I mean there's one of the new
atheists that I mentioned um these guys
are they have some good ideas I mean I
don't want to totally dismiss what
they've done everybody has remarkable
insights uh writes well I mean but he
writes like a philosopher which is
almost opaquely at times he reads some
of his stuff people think I'm opaque I
think I'm a a Marvel of clarity compared
to Daniel Dennis sometimes he talks
around things like a lot of philosophers
do I mean that's a skill that they
develop in
Academia Josh Bach is better than that
he actually tries makes an effort to
explain what he's doing better than
Daniel Dennard ever did but still you
know still he's not not really getting
to the root of what Consciousness is in
my opinion and even if they're wrong
they're extremely inventive both yoshiok
and Daniel
denet I'm sure that they definitely have
their strong points I'm not trying to
you know these these are not stupid
people by any stretch of the imagination
it's just that they are trying to solve
problems without having properly
recognized the problem and their
non-recognition of certain aspects of
the problem has caused their solutions
to go aride
can we talk about this Proto computer
this Proto computation you mentioned so
there's touring machines as we or
classical machines as we ordinarily
think of them and then there's Quantum
computation and then you're saying
there's an even more General notion
where different states of an infinite
type are able to be used in the
calculations simultaneously I'm unsure
can you please explain that some more
because I haven't encountered that in
your work well it means that the
basically a protoc computer is
generative which neither a universal
touring machine nor a Quantum touring
machine up you know the universal
touring machine is you know that's
that's touring's original invention then
you've got the quantum touring machine
which I think was introduced by David
gch um you know they both resemble each
other in certain respects uh they're
different the nature of the tape is
different the nature of the of the
storage module is different you know the
the quantum touring machine is more
General and more powerful than the
universal touring machine but
what a theory of reality actually needs
is
generativity all right in other words at
the same time as new states are
created okay new medium has to be
created to go with those States the
medium is constantly being generated
SpaceTime is constantly being generated
these people imagine that the medium of
reality is some kind of fixed array
almost like a like a computer display
like the one I'm looking at right now
and seeing your face of okay that's what
they think reality is they think it's a
kind of like a display screen with
little pixels in and that's speaking
once again about CLE Irwin CLE Irwin
thinks that he's actually stated that
reality has little tetrahedral pixels in
it okay that meaning it's discretized
huh it's discretized right right right
it's discretized and basically that
doesn't work okay it doesn't work for a
number of reasons one of which is
relativity you know you don't have the
proper kind of
of uh of covariance and contravariance
it's very hard to make that work if
you've got discreete eyes pixels
okay the the you know Lorent
contractions and things like that would
actually have to influence the number of
pixels that are activated at any one
time and that causes inconsistencies but
apparently these people don't realize
there are also certain inconsistencies
with with quantum mechanics but this
idea of a discretized scint den it has
the same damn thing he's got
well I'll I'll I'll withhold basically D
it talks about a cartisian
theater as I will call and the cartisian
theater is something that he attempts to
depart from nevertheless he is a
physicalist and the physicalists do have
to have something like a a a discretized
pixelated display even if they describe
it in terms of quantum mechanics which
is arous you can't do it that way really
uh nevertheless what reality actually
needs is something that is generative
and generates new space and time even as
as new states of matter are gener that's
one of it's one of the implications of
triality the medium has to change along
it's it's even an implication of
Einstein's equation you've got a stress
energy tensor on one side and then
you've got the the metric tensor on the
other you see the the metric tensor
being the medium and the stress energy
tensor being the matter distribution
okay those two things actually have to
be in sync they've got to be coupled in
a certain way and these people are just
not doing it you know they're not
they're not you know approaching it in
the correct way Einstein by the way I
can make a pretty good argument that
that relativity makes no sense outside
of the CTN at all the entire you know
the entire scenario the way things are
done there the way things are coupled
the way space is coupled with time for
example uh and then you know the way he
couples objects with SpaceTime in
Einstein's equation these things
actually don't work outside of the
CT so we need that we need that
generativity we need we need Telesis to
be factored from the top down into space
and time and that's what neither of
these other touring machine neither the
UTM nor the qtm does the ctmu does do
this however and it uses the entire
structure of the metap formal system to
make that Proto
computer so there are other models of of
discret space not they wouldn't call it
SpaceTime SpaceTime would emerge such
as spin foam networks and loop Quantum
that still have the properties of being
background free and Laurence and variant
and so on so what about those would you
say that those are also
doomed you you've got to be a you've got
to have a representation you've got to
have an observer immersed in a medium of
representation uh and I don't see right
now how you can
Salvage any of those viewpoints I think
that they all need to be interpreted in
the ctmu in order to in order for their
good points to actually be validated I
think that as it stands right now
excessive claims are being made for I
don't think they live up to those claims
I don't think that I think that if I
were questioning any of these people I
don't think that they would be able to
justify their claims um there's just no
damn way to you can have a
non-generative
display okay so that's once again we're
referring to the reality self simulation
which can be likened to a computer there
is an analogy it's a little bit more
involved than you might suspect but
nevertheless you can separate the
display from the processor okay and
these people are all making assumptions
about the nature of the display and the
nature of the processor and usually what
they're trying to do is confine
everything to the
display okay and for various reasons
this is not allow this cannot be you
can't pull that off all these guys are
trying to do it bless their hearts you
know they've got a certain amount of
good Insight but they're just not
pulling it
off let's get to the next one how about
Eric Weinstein's geometric
Unity what are your thoughts on
that Eric Weinstein okay geometric Unity
that's where he's got that's where he's
got a triangle that has uh that has U
the equation Spinners and uh and spin
one a half matter particles on one
vertex on another vertex he's got
general relativity and on the other
vertex he's got the standard model with
uh su3 * su2 trans1 Gage did it right
okay I think that Eric is actually he
seems like a very bright guy I remember
when he had his his I think isn't he the
guy who had the mathematics encyclopedia
up for a long time on on the web I think
it was Eric ju some guy named Eric juon
had a math encyclopedia um up on the web
and uh you know it was pretty
impenetrable I mean if you didn't
already know the map you wer going to
get anything out of this encyclopedia
this but nevertheless it was it was uh
good but anyway here's the strength of
of of his approach this geometric Unity
basically he he seems to be saying it
sort of occurs to me that what he's
saying as well we're having a hard time
putting together a toe you know a purely
analytic algebraic toe so let's look at
the geometry of these theories of the
derac equation and and uh and the
standard model and and general
relativity and let's see if we can put
those geometries together and if we can
merge those geometries then guess what
we're going to automatically just be
able to match it with a global formal
Theory coupled with the
geometry okay and this is this is it's
really kind of a kind of inovative way
to to approach it however it's the way
I've been approaching it for decades uh
the G the ctmu is logico geometric it's
a coupling of of logic and geometry but
it's generative geometry okay which is a
which is a fundamentally different kind
than what I think Eric onstein is
dealing with Steven wolfram's Theory of
Everything the Wolfram project what are
your opinions on that have you taken a
look Steven wolver he he's obviously a
very
bright guy he's knows a lot about
mathematics um you know he's he's a he
kind of an adorable character the way he
what what he's done what it seems to me
that he's done is he's tried to identify
certain basic elements and and rules of
assembly and then like a bunch of Tinker
Toys he's trying to assemble those into
the overall structure of reality um and
and I appreciate that and it's it's
entertaining to read Steven's writing
about it and there's a lot of insight
there but it doesn't work because if
you're going to have a theory of
everything you need to start with
everything all right you're not going to
take a subset of everything and then and
then put it together and and get
something which is reality which is more
than the sum of its parts you're not
going to do that you've got to start
with everything which means you've got
to start with cognition and perception
in general you got to logically induce
your theory from
that okay and that's the way to build a
theory um but as far as as far as
Stephen's writing is concerned and the
other aspects of what Stephen does uh I
think he's a very bright guy I get a big
kick out of out of reading what he
writes but this is more or less right up
front for me the fact that he's going
about it in the wrong way he hasn't seen
the big picture he doesn't understand
all of the criteria that have to be
satisfed
in order to have a toe that's where you
got to start you got to start with
everything nothing can be excluded
either implicitly or ex are explicitly
you've got to have everything you've got
to have everything condensed or
encapsulated somehow in some kind of
process and for us human beings the
process is cognition and perception you
start with those and then you build your
reality out of
that what about Donald Hoffman have you
taken a look at at his theories on
Consciousness and conscious agents
interacting and so
on well no yes I did uh I did I think I
watched a video with him and deac chop
and uh and uh at one time and I found
him interesting he he's saying he's
saying that basically cognition is
deceptive he's a cognitive scientist is
call he's saying that some aspects of
how we see the world is actually quite
deceptive but at adapted other it's help
it helps us adapt and survive to the
world if we actually don't see it
correctly he's got this idea of a kind
of a graphic user interface uh that that
that actually allows us to have
cognition that is deceptive uh but never
the less adaptive and basically what
Donald needs is he needs an overall
framework in which to insert his guey
his graphic user interface he needs the
actual reality self simulation principle
to make that work he's a guy who is very
much in need of the CTN of course he's
an academic so he probably would insist
that it come from another academic but
if that were to happened it would be
called plagiarism so I doubt that he's
ever going to get to the True Heart of
things uh get really where he's trying
to go simply because I'm not a member of
the club to which he belongs and which
all of this
stuff comes to life okay how about David
B so how your theory Compares and
contrast with David Bow's theories which
I would like you to explain implicate
order to me because I haven't had the
chance to look it up and then there's
someone named Henry burkson which is
related to boam now I'm not sure how
they
differ but you can elucidate me and the
audience at the same time I B bergon is
a he's a great philosopher so he one of
the best and uh as a matter of fact some
of what he had to say about manifolds I
find quite interesting because it very
closely parallels what has to be done in
the what had to be done in the ctmu with
creating the the medium of
reality um as far as David bom is
concerned his reputation for seeds him
there was a you know there was an early
bom and a late bom the early bom was bom
and mechanics and then later on he came
up with something called the Holo
movements the holographic Universe I
think he wrote a book on the holographic
Universe with vassel Hy yeah it's vasel
Hy anyway
he uh has this uh this thing that he
calls the Holo movement that basically
takes an implicate order and kicks out
an
ex that is pure
ctm okay this is this is that that
process is what the ctmu calls
involution it's one of you know just one
aspect of the ctmu but that aspect he
actually captured very well with that
Hol movement implicate and explicate
order thing that he's doing with later
bone as far as the earlier boming
mechanics is concerned um that's a
little bit let's dice it hard to make
that
look would the implicate order be
associated with descriptive containment
and then the explicit is topological
containment or there's no
relation explicit order is the display
the terminal display or the ctmu semi
language
L and the the other part is the ctm sem
language LS which corresponds to the
processor instead of the display that's
the implicate P okay it's implicated
it's in implicate form there in a
processor where things are actually
getting non-locally combined and
entangled and and tons are working to
actually determine overall caic patterns
that's where that's occur um you know
it's all extremely it's very very
interesting Bo actually matured as a
thinker a very great deal in the course
of as
well there a couple of things I don't
like you know I mean I think B was a
communist wasn't
name right and that may be one of the
reasons why Boman
mechanics came out of favor because it
was as if you were supporting communism
right well you know let's communism is a
very Marxism is a very
bad theory of philosophy it's got a lot
of holes in it it's it's it's just awful
in certain respects
so when you see a brilliant thinker like
David B grabbing a hold of it and
embracing this can't help his reputation
you see and I think it I think bom
suffered a great deal because of that
but uh you can certainly understand why
it happened yeah as far as Boman
mechanics is concerned he's basically
trying to cotize everything he's got a
he's got a pilot field you know that is
actually he's got the the scer equation
but he's also got this uh the the pilot
field is actually guiding the particle
to its destination but what is guiding
the pilot field
itself I mean there are a number of
philosophical questions that could be
asked about bom's theory that that
reveal that it is indelibly associated
with the
terminal side of the reality of self-
simulation so in other words it's
terminally confined in ctm terminology
which means it's not really any kind of
complete interpretation of quantum
mechanics I've been told I need to learn
more about Boman mechanics and Burks and
if I'm going to be investigating
theories of everything a lot of a lot of
people really like buium mechanics
because of it's strong points um and it
does have strong PS uh but uh it won't
really do in a Theory of Everything The
Theory of Everything relies on bonum
mechanics it's toasted there there's
just not enough there to to pull it off
um as far as bergson is concerned it's
like I A A Fine philosophy
okay how about Douglas Hoffer's strange
Loop idea of Consciousness you know
girdle eer Bach I'm sure you've heard of
that book yes yeah I think it was
probably in my early 20s when I got a
copy of that book the uh the
strange strange loops and the pushing
and the popping and all that stuff uh
quite a quite an intriguing book very
much in very much in fashion for a long
time sort of a precursor to the reality
self- simulation uh in in in some ways
but yeah that was hste was definitely an
intellect worthy of respect people ask
me who do I want to interview most
Douglas Hofer is up there Penrose is up
there and even Eminem Roger Penrose is
brilliant brilliant where do you see
Douglas Hoffer's Theory lacking and what
do you like most about it so what
dislikes and then likes Pros then
cons well you know he relies a lot on
computational principles and I I think
he might be you know nevertheless even
though he's relying on a lot of advanced
logic and you know powers of metal
languages and levels of computation and
so forth he shows no sign of being
anything but a physicalist in the sense
that it's all computational and
computation is a mechanical process so
it looks to me like it might be like his
Outlook may be basically mechanistic
right um right which uh you know I can't
agree with because that's not what
reality is CTN
now Penrose seems to agree with you in
saying that there are many paradoxes
associated with thinking that
Consciousness comes from something
that's computational have you heard much
about pen Rose's theory of orchestrated
objective reduction and so on with
hammer off yeah yeah yeah Hammer off is
on a lot of these dist or at least was
on one time on a lot of these
distributions that I find myself on a
and uh you know there is something to
and I mean you know Hammer off
identified microtubules cyos skelet
as being a place where Quantum coherence
might actually be able to function in
the brain um and there are other ways
that quantum mechanics can ass itself in
the neural processes as well um but of
course he he he relies on on Penrose for
most of the physics and actually you
know figuring out where it's all coming
from Penrose has this idea of a platonic
realm or you know this platonic form of
reality it's a triar Ty form of reality
this these mathematical truths that
exist as you know these fully formed
mathematical objects in platonic realm
and
uh
he you know he he doesn't have the ctmu
Roger Roger Penrose doesn't have a fully
formed theory of reality but he's he's
just very hard not to appreciate because
he's so brilliant I mean the guy can you
know it's just
His Brilliant SW as Flor you sometimes
when you read some of the things that he
writes um mathematically he's a
brilliant mathematician he's a brilliant
physicist uh and you know this idea of
his that that
basically it's not just computation that
there is something that is undecidable
going on in in human thought but
basically you know what what what gell
Theory implies he says there's no you've
got a system you know there's certain
you know a system that actually is
capable of transfinite induction and is
truly interesting um can actually there
are truths that cannot be derived from
any finite set of axium in such a system
okay so basically what Enos is saying
he's saying that human thought somehow
generates undecidable theorems that are
true on a metamathematical level but
cannot be derived from any Theory this
is exactly what the CTN says I started
publishing in the same year I I think he
came out with a book I think his his his
biggest theoretical statement was the
emperor's new mind recognize that title
that's correct okay that was 1989 which
is when I wrote the resolution of new's
parado so we started publishing it about
the same time he got a hell of a lot
farther than my did in that amount of
time then again he wasn't cancer you
know teaching in Oxford you know does a
very great great deal for you when it
comes to disseminating your
work how about Thomas Campbell and his
my big toe have you heard of
that um I've heard of my big toe but uh
let me refer to you you probably know
more about it than I do what does it say
exactly it's a strange Theory
essentially that there's another realm
when you mentioned that there are
thoughts and sorry that there are data
points that come to us
instantaneously in this non-terminal
realm Thomas Campbell also says that
that's the mechanism by which psychic
phenomenon work that it occurs to
instantaneously we think that it has to
travel some distance in the same way
that it would have to travel in our
SpaceTime and there's a finite speed he
says no that this other realm where
Consciousness operates
is well that sounds very he also has a
he calls it a which you call unbounded
tesis he has a unbounded absolute
Oneness or or absolute unbounded Oneness
is is that supposed to sound like all
no it just well as far as I know it's a
coincidence anyway he says that that's
the
fundamental constituent this place of
complete
potential yes that's that's that's
that's cdmu consistent yes although he
says this which I disagree he says that
unrealized potential is trying to do is
to create order and to decrease its
entropy and I quibbled with them because
I don't think that order and entropy are
what people claim in common parland
entropy and Order and disorder are not
actually High entropy doesn't mean low
order in the way that most people think
and it's obvious because if you look at
a coffee cup with some milk and you
create some turbulence that looks
completely disordered and then when you
stir it then it looks uniform it looks
ordered but that actually has the
highest entropy you see You' seen those
little machines where you turn the crank
and these two you know this these chaot
seemingly chaotic patterns are created
between two different two differently
colored gelatinous liquids but then when
you turn it in the other the crank in
the other direction it's restored to a
complete state of Separation it sounds
like Maxwell's demon it's it's amazing
to watch that's Thomas
Campbell okay reminds me of yours though
yours is more
rigorous yeah I mean I mean mine
actually has structure mathematical
structure to it but but uh it sounds
like what he's sounds like he's coming
up with some good ideas that are on the
right track and can be successfully
interpreted in a true theory of
he also had out outof body experiences
and he would suggest that people who are
younger are more in tune or more
naturally in tune Like You Get Out Of
Tune as you get older with this other
realm and so you can go and what you
think of as thought space is actually a
real
space but it's another space it's it's I
wouldn't use the word Dimension but it's
another realm let's say a primordial
realm right it's another terminal realm
like like I say that's always a
possibility you can create you terminal
Realms that are not identical to
physical reality and that may be related
more or less tenuously to it but on
dependent okay how about Nome Chomsky
what do you agree with him about and
then disagree with him about well you
know I back when I was first developing
the ctmu Chomsky was one of the people I
had a correspondence with him it was
very brief a couple you know maybe three
or four emails and uh he didn't
understand what I said even though I was
using you know his his theory of uh of
grammar generative grammar right
generative grammar hierarchy
nevertheless actually making a
metaphysic out of that was something
that n couldn't wrap his mind around I
don't know whether it was because I was
just explaining myself poorly or
whatever but I I you know gnome was a
big nothing burger for me I couldn't you
know even get a conversation started it
seemed to be you know he has a certain
perspective on language and it's all
about you know where does it come from
you know how do we get it and uh uh you
know that's his focus and when you try
to you know broaden the the focus um I
think that sometimes uh gnome just
doesn't pick up on it you know what I'm
saying that's and he's a brilliant guy
um but you know that was my experience
with him the other guy was John Wheeler
who pretty much loved the ctmu oh wanted
to meet with me he wanted to meet with
me we asked to meet with me at Princeton
but I had a couple of jobs and I
couldn't I couldn't get away so I just
was a mistake I should have you know
given up the damn jobs and just gone to
se wheeler anyway but it's not the way
it worked out with regard to chsky not
understanding your theories I think that
you overestimate the intelligence of the
average person trying to understand your
theories and or you're too close to it
and that leads to frustration on your
part and the people trying to understand
it because they feel you you think I
overestimate their intelligence or
underestimate I think you overestimate
by thinking that it's simple and the
reason I say that is Eric Weinstein also
does something similar with how he
explains his theory he doesn't seem to
get that the way that he explains it is
esoteric and I wouldn't call it oppos
it's almost like obscurantism though
he's not trying to be and I'm not
accusing you of that please don't take
this as any slight I'm just just saying
that I think you may be too close to it
to understand the frustration of people
who actually want they're not trolls
there some of them are but they
genuinely want to understand and they
feel like it's impenetrable the reason I
say this is because it's hard for me to
understand too and I actually have a
contact on your side speaking to him on
a daily basis so I'm glean I'm lucky
that I have some physics and math
background so it's it's easier for me
than the average person but I still had
a difficult time with it and uh what is
the name of the person with whom you've
been communicating his name is Sam
Thompson ah yes Sam is a is a
mathematics student he's actually pretty
smart yeah I love Sam me and his Sam
have been speaking almost each day I
actually had to get him on WhatsApp so I
could speak he's a big tall kid with red
hair I don't know if he's tall I only
spoke to him through a webcam and then
but he's a he's such a nervous person
but he's a sweetheart and he's extremely
insightful and he understands your
theories almost inside of he a
mathematician I mean you
he smartness K okay we'll get on to the
next one Jordan Peterson where do you
agree disagree so it could be with
either his biblical interpretations his
psychological book called maps of
meaning order versus chaos and so on
well you know Jordan is a I think he's
managed to do some good I think that a
lot of people get a lot of of insight
out of Jordan and uh so I think that
he's you know he's he's actually doing
some good things um but as far as toe is
concern he doesn't have one he's not
even in the running to have a toe um as
I recall his position on the existence
of God is well you know I'm not going to
say whether he exists or whether he
doesn't but I will say this it would be
better if we all believed he
did all right which is not which is kind
of a copout but I don't think that he
has the kind of
philosophical um uh understanding that
would enable him to put together a a
basic theory that actually serves as a
foundation
for morality for example and and Jordan
is a he's really kind of a moral
philosopher so he needs that kind of
foundation I don't think he has it um he
probably knows who I am I mean he's a
psychologist right he's a canadi he's a
North American psychologist he has
certainly heard of me but I've never
heard from him as a matter of fact I
think there was some guy some agent who
was trying to set up a meeting between
between Jordan and me but Jordan you
know never responded or something or ni
to or something I don't know you know
but anyway he had a chance to meet with
me but did not so remember we were going
through this exercise of stating a
seemingly complicated sentence with
terminology we didn't that wasn't
articulated to the audience and then
articulating them specifically so let's
do that once more metac causation and
other metaphysical criteria require the
standard physical conception of
SpaceTime be superseded by a more
advanced physical conceptualization that
is logical geometric dual to the
linguistic structure of the triolic
identity okay so before I move on to the
next sentence metac causation let's
define
that metac causation is it's a basically
the the there's another dimension of
time called meta time that leads from
the display to the processor of the
reality self- simulation and that is
what we mean by meta time and cause
causation is pre real prec
causation that occurs in the
processing section of the realtive self
simulation other words metac causation
is really what causes things to happen
okay it's the real processing that is
going on in causality and by the way
that can be mathematically demonstrated
um causality doesn't have much to it the
reason is the structure of the manifold
the ordinary fixed real manifold that
physics uses or even the Le Lex manifold
or any ectomorphic manifold uh that
doesn't that doesn't do the
trick you just said that it goes from
the screen to the process that's meta
time does it not go from the process to
screen let me just put it like this
causation is distinct from the concept
of
origination right you know when
something is originated it's originated
from scratch causation there always has
to be a prior cause right so you can go
back in an infinite sequence origination
means actually being able to originate
something that is what metac causation
is it's what what Ordinary People would
call
origination and this happens in a
specific way in the ctmu there's
something called a distributed origin
which exists everywhere in the
non-terminal realm and that is where
metac causation occurs and how it occurs
is through cons spansion and telec
recursion this sounds like Free Will is
associated here somewhere
yes it certainly
is because it's the starting of a loop
well it's a loop but it's not a loop
that is fully resolved by physical law
there are there are gaps and holes in
the causation that's why there's
something called Quantum uncertainty or
Quantum indeterminacy the laws of
physics are not sufficient to determine
how a Quantum wave function collapses
more is required okay that's metac
causation there's a process called IC
recursion that is actually a non-local
feedback among the resources available
in the semi language Lo which allows
causation to occur it actually refines
causation and res resolves the holes and
gaps in physical causation and this
allows it to
occur okay then the next word is logical
geometric Duo okay when I hear that I
can't help but think of stone Duality
like some generalization of it basically
Bas basically it's the same thing it's
in intention extension Duality between
predicates and sets Okay it's it's
logico geometric it's right there in the
name logic is being coupled with
geometry they are dual to each other
okay therefore you've got a a self
Duality when you couple those two things
in every Quantum of reality all right in
other words where you view reality in
terms of identification events involving
syntact this is what you
get you get logico geometric Duality
between the sides between the syntactic
data type and the input data type that
you're accepting from the external
environment physical input and then
internal processing with internal metal
states that go
into your
behavior okay the last word is triolic
identity so what's meant by
that the identity of reality is
triolic uh the identity of reality of
course we've been through that that is
called the global operator descriptor
okay it has Bas it has syntactic
structure okay it's a give me that term
again trial identity okay it's trial
which means that it serves as its own
object its own relation relational
structure and its own operational
structure okay it is at once an object a
relation and an operator that's what
triality is okay it's as it's as simple
as that you can also phrase it as you
can triality can be looked at in a
couple of other ways as well as
basically The Coincidence of space time
and object all of those things are
everywhere combined can also be looked
at as the combination of language
universe and
model all right which is and that is
implicit in the title of the ctmu
cognitive theory is a language OKAY
model is a model and universe is a
universe okay so triality is inherent in
the very title of the
ctm triality another way to understand
it is that there's dualities which
people can understand two Notions that
are dual to one another now you're
saying that there's three is it as
simple as extending two to three oh yeah
all you have to do is put space and time
together and now you've got two things
you've got one medium and one object so
your triality has become Duality right
there there no there's no mystery about
it I mean you basically you've got space
time and object right or object relation
and operation right or or Universe model
and language okay you've got those three
things and those three things all have
to be combined in every identity in
reality and every identity in reality is
a coherent image of the global identity
which is a global operator
descriptor okay is that also related to
hology the concept of hology well here's
here here's here's here's the thing with
in the generative Universe you've got
syntax you've got a universal
distributed form that is in every syntor
that means that every point of reality
is automatically covered by the UDF or
by syntax as it is created in other
words the UDF or the universal syntax of
reality is invariant with respect to
rescaling you can re arbitrarily rescale
reality because it's generative because
it's constantly being generated because
the universe is
expanding right and syntax doesn't
change under under that rescaling oper
consp passive rescaling operation let's
get
to some audience questions and then
we'll wrap up we have we have an
audience there's no one here watching
right now but I've asked for questions
well then where did the audience oh I
posted your face before on my theories
of everything commity tab said hey I'm
interviewing Chris Langan in a few weeks
let me know what questions you have for
him oh okay okay so this
person his name is DAV he
actually translated your publication to
French writes a question here DAV says I
made a French translation of your two
Publications ctmu and the introduction
to ctmu I plan to release I plan to
continue what's the best way to stay in
touch with you on this
matter well obvious ly that would be you
know through the mega
Foundation what is what is our email
address at the mega Foundation
honey what's that info
Megacenter info@ Megacenter do
org okay so DAV you can email at info
info@ meac center.org info meac
center.org okay DAV thank you Dev I
appreciate your translation efforts of
translation and please do stay in touch
DAV has questions here he says in the
context of the afterlife processing the
sum of information of an individual's
Consciousness in your opinion to what
extent could the continuity or syntactic
relationship between several iterations
of existence be
established could it be that there are
Pathways over several lifetimes for
identifiable units of individual
Consciousness so I assume what he's
referring to is do we carry with us our
memories but in the language of the ctm
is that
possible yes but you've got to have
something that encodes your memories and
will actually instantiate them you got
to have something like a brain that
serves as an antenna for the Tor and
actually realizes cognition that is
determined by Tel recursion okay so yes
the answer to your question is yes but
basically goes back to what I was saying
about always having to have aside from
the Tor something approximate
a terminal body that you use which is
you know while these religions talk
about an afterlife and having a new body
a resurrection body uh Etc you know
reincarnation you always have some kind
of terminal body for your dellic aspect
of your existence for the for the purely
metaphor aspect of your existence to be
instantiated in okay then you can have
specific memories and things otherwise
you you are a syntactic entity you're a
group of impulses and and uh and desires
and canus
instincts you're all of those things and
you're an ID okay but you don't
necessarily have specific memories
unless you create a site for them and
unless a site in which they can be coded
so that's why this uh this Duality
between your soul and your body
exists I haven't gotten to any questions
on Consciousness but your theory how is
consciousness defined and where does it
fit in every Quantum of the universe is
conscious because it's a syntactic a
synor is a generalization of a
computational acceptor it's a protoc
computational gener generalization of
what in computation theory is called an
acceptor okay an acceptor is just a a a
a processing unit that accepts input
from the external environment applies a
kind of syntactic filter in it to decide
what gets through and in what form
and then you know processes it and
returns it to the
environment that's basically what it
what it comes down to and if you took a
take a look at the in the structure of
the syntor because it's performing that
recognition function okay it has to be
conscious every Quantum of the universe
is conscious okay but it's a generic
form of Consciousness that it inherits
from the global operator descriptor
right we have a more complex form of
Consciousness because we have more
inherent complexity in our terminal
embodiments and more self-modeling
capacity because of that we have a very
complex brain that encodes all of our
memories and thoughts and everything
else and allows us to separate and
resolve
them okay so that's how that works DAV
also wants to know have you heard of the
work of Jonathan M in particular
tractatus logical cionic
which proposes an exploration of ctmu in
the matter of in the manner of viin well
I I've never met Jonathan but I know who
he is and I know he's done some writing
on the ctmu he's an intelligent fellow
and uh he's you know he's actually
written a book or two and uh as far as I
know he's still a member of our of our
groups but it's like I said I've never
met him we've had a few conferences I
would have liked Jonathan to come to a
couple of them but he did send me a copy
of his
book DAV again has another okay would
you be willing to have a discussion with
Kurt so theories of everything with Kurt
with personalities like Bernardo castrop
Thomas Campbell or Eric
Weinstein uh yeah I'm open to uh to
whatever you might have in mind but
there are you
know there a couple of people that are
probably on your list of interviewees
with whom I have had you know peripheral
reactions or interactions in the past
and some of these people have I I think
as I recall Bernard castri was pretty
darn for snicky he was on I think he was
on one of Jack sarfatti's lists and
there was a kind of a an antagonism
going on there and uh I made a couple of
comments and uh got a couple of what I
regarded as pretty pricity responses at
Bernard and uh I remember being slightly
rubbed the wrong way by it but you know
that's water under the bridge so sure I
participated in a discussion that
bernado was in yeah he didn't he start
running for Scientific American or
something that atheistic rag I don't
know but I do know that he's a
sweetheart and I don't think I think if
he was picking a fight with you then
it's I think you may be thinking of the
wrong person I don't think do that no
I'm
not okay I'll look for the I'll look for
a copy of the email if you want to see
it but but but anyway when I when I say
picity I'm not saying that he was
insulting or that he was especially
nasty I'm just saying that he was a
little bit disagreeable that's all I see
I see oh well that's what you want in an
adversary I think it's because he'
become you know embroiled in some kind
of argument with with Jack or somebody
else in the distribution Steven
molik asks I've taken the view that
information and logical rule set are the
only necessary ontological components
and operate equally regardless of
substrate that is whether it's material
or Consciousness essentially idealism
materialism is a false dichotomy okay
that's not a question question read the
first part read the first part of that
comment I've taken the view that
information and logical rule set are the
only necessary information and logical
what rule set oh logical rule set okay
okay so I've taken the view that
information and logical rule set are the
only necessary ontological components
and they operate equally regardless of
the substrate so whether it's
Consciousness or
material information and logical rule
set are primary so then he's saying that
even so he's saying essentially that
idealism materialism is a false
dichotomy so what are your thoughts on
that it's not a question I just want to
hear what occurs to
you well you know it is a false
dichotomy in the sense that all of those
things are coupled you know uh
information and logic there is no
information without a logical rule set
language is the medium of information
and language has syntax and that's a
logical rule set especially where your
language includes the language of logic
itself so those two things are are very
closely coupled you can't separate them
dualistically and put one on one side
one on the other and say we've got a
complete dichotomy here in that sense
he's right about their there being a
false dichotomy um as far as reducing
all of reality to just information and
logical rule Set uh that emits a lot of
structure that probably deserves mention
but it could just be that he didn't have
the time to write it all down what would
be an example of a structure that's not
captured in information or logical rule
set well You' got all kinds of read the
CTN there are many many pages of
structure that are missing from that
characterization um but one thing that
can be said for it is that that
information mappings are also captured
in these little quat these these these
State transition events of syntact of
syntactic operators and telic operators
uh it can all be be captured there uh
and so it's not really
admitted
okay Karan Dudley says great choice of
guests number one so he's referring to
she or he is referring to you number one
in your opinion which of the major
philosophers came the closest to
discovering and expressing the true
nature of
reality came the closest
okay uh well there were a number of very
very good ones I mean if you look back
uh just so many Pythagoras came up with
something that looked a little bit a
little bit like cesis and and uh
Aristotle followed up on that and uh
liet also had there was much to be said
for what he did um Whitehead with his
process philosophy also uh very good
bergson had some good ideas is you've
got uh there are just a number of
philosophers out there that uh you know
plotinus had some good things going for
him Plato of
course uh just all kinds of them I mean
heraclitis s and Dudley same person
number two as you know girdles and
completeness Theorem say that they apply
to all sufficiently expressive formal
system so why should one think girdles
theorems don't apply to the ctmu
they do apply to the
ctmu that's that's why the ctmu is
formulated the way it is okay to get
around that's why it's generative you
can generate new axim in the
ctmu okay you don't need to derive uh
everything in the ctmu from some finite
set of AXS it's exactly what Goodell's
theorem say so there seems to be a bit
of misunderstanding about what the ctmu
actually says can the generative grammar
introduce an uncountably infinite amount
of
axioms yeah it can it can introduce an
infinite set of axioms if that's what
you're asking and uncountably infinite
is what I'm wondering anything anything
in which the elements can be
distinguished is countable you can count
them one by one count count count okay
the fact of the matter is real numbers
are uncountable because you never have
to complete one of them you never have
to write out all the little decimal
spaces if you want to be able to
distinguish things they're countable
okay just like you know counting you
know peanuts okay 1 2 3 4 5 all right
that's the that's the respect in which
the accountable uncountable distinction
is actually mathematically valid and if
you've got separate axioms that are
distinguishable obviously they are
countable and if you have an infinite
potentially infinite or unlimited number
of them then they are countably
infinite Timothy O'Brien asks please ask
him how live nids is moned all ol
relates to the
ctmu
well
mon you know monads are it's an old
Greek concept that goes back quite a
ways and and uh livets um you know he
had a he had a
good there's actually some logical
complexity to laus's monadology that I
should you know I could actually write a
paper about it but let's just put it
this way it is it is well it's excellent
philosophy I'm actually you know modad
liet is one of the philosophers for
which I have uh the most respect let's
just
say Ike freden says Kurt this may be a
useful question what role do the
requirements of the existence of
difference relations play in the
metaphor reasoning of the
ctmu the metaphysical requirements of
difference relations did you say yeah
okay he has a bracket which says well
that would be synip anesis would be the
metaphysical requirement of difference
relationship that would be that it be
that the difference relationship be
defined within a cionic
relation okay which means that you need
you know basically the ctmu to to make
sense Stephen olis has a great question
that's more General are there any Arenas
where Chris feels dumb or average
you know it all depends on there
sometimes I roll out a bed for feeling
pretty stupid about nearly
everything um my mind is not always you
know functioning in Peak efficiency so
there are times when I feel pretty much
incompetent no matter what I do but
there are times when uh all the mirrors
are you know cocked at the right angles
and all the lights are on then I
sometimes feel as though I can pretty
much handle anything so it just varies
with the time of day I guess you'd have
to say have you done any meditation or
Tak New Tropics like fenel
not that nootropics are all drugs I mean
they're just neutraceuticals or whatever
you want to call them but uh I usually
haven't I haven't really experimented
with how about
psychedelics well you know I spent time
on an Indian Reservation when I was a
kid it was the Wind River Reservation
and we were when we stayed there it was
usually in proximity to friends of the
family uh the big road family there was
a guy named Mark big road he was a
shaman
uh arapo I think but he could have been
SE Shon I don't rightly recall but he
was a shaman and there would be uh you
know meetings prayer meetings um the the
North American church we Wei and uh one
other kind of religion but anyway Mark's
prayer meetings were such that you took
uh the the attendees took
musculin at these prayer meetings so uh
you know I suppose that it probably got
some of that although
certainly I don't you know I mean I
don't do drugs uh have I ever done drugs
yeah I've experimented a little bit with
drugs but I'm the kind of person who
doesn't like to mess with drugs too much
because it interferes with what's going
on up here and I don't like that it's
generally a feeling that that bothers me
in some respects um the the psychedelics
I think that they have great potential
for being being beneficial
psychologically beneficial if they're
used in the right way under the right
circumstances however it's easy for them
to get out of control you can have a
psychotic break on
psychedelics right this is something
that you always have to be careful of
right there was a lot of this stuff
going on I me my you my family was
involved in the counterculture both in
the in the Beat Generation the beat
Nicks you know that thing when the whole
thing started the whole counterculture
mve M got started and then with the
hippie generation we were the ones who
actually there was a Tepe it was a big
deal there was an Indian Tepe erected in
Berkeley by a guy named Charlie Hartman
your stepfather coined the term beaten
it correct that's correct yes he someone
from the New York or New York Times
stole it Langan was a journalist
parttime journalist he was also a
Stringer for API AP and UPI but he
worked for both The Examiner and the
chronicle in California and herc worked
for the chronicle Jack was running a bar
called the place in North Beach and uh
herb used to come in there because
that's where you could rub elbows with
Jack kowak and and uh and uh Neil
Cassidy and and uh Alan Ginsburg lawence
filling Getty and all the rest of these
these beats these beat figures and Herb
liked to do that it was a columnist you
know he was staying urant he was
actually you know rubbing elbows with
the right people and uh Jack told a a
joke
you know about how you know in the
something said you know Russia seems to
be you sending up satellites look
they've got Sputnik while we seem to be
able to produce his beat
Nick well herb occurred that it appeared
like the next day in the in the
chronicle under herbs by line and I can
remember my stepfather was Furious over
was not the kind of guy he wanted to get
furious around but I remember it was a
big deal so that really pissed him off
but you know the place was
the center of beat you know culture in
San Francisco there was something called
blabber mouth night that was invented by
by Langan there was something called
there was a guy named Barney Google who
wanted to have a beer geyser coming out
of K tower that was Lang and it was a
genius of promotion more or less getting
back to psychedelics you were mentioning
I was wondering personally did your
experimentation with psychedelics give
you any insight that you then took to
the ctmu
what I can remember from my days on the
reservation are a feeling of great
affinity for the planet I thought it was
alive I could look at it and I could see
it
living that's the thing that hit me that
becoming aware of the life of the earth
they talk about the the uh G hypothesis
and they talk about Mother
Earth it hit me
viscerally that the Earth needed to be
saved
do you still carry that with you to this
day
yes how do you feel about the
environmental degradation destruction
that we
do I feel pretty poorly about it I think
that a lot of is unnecessary a lot of it
is very poorly done but on the other
hand people have to live the Earth is
overpopulated we should not have so many
people on it we're encountering all
kinds of problems because of it already
we're going to encounter many many more
if it continues and we've got to start
regulating our numbers and living
coherently living in in in consistently
with the environmental limitations of
the planet the planet is finite the
resources are finite but human uh
population is exponential Le it's
exponential it's left socially governed
by a logistic equation but when we get
to the peak of that equation okay that
can be influenced now it's being pushed
way ahead so that when we have a
collapse it's going to be a doozy we
need to get out of that right away that
being said the way the elite the the the
oligarchs the people who run the world
who have all the money and power the way
they're handling this problem the way
they seem to be handling it sometimes is
not the right way we've got to put this
in front of the human race and we've got
to appeal to what is best in mankind to
make mankind voluntarily and responsibly
limit their their own reproduction
that's what we've got to do we've got to
think about future Generations we've got
to watch about about transmitting
genetic diseases or disabilities to them
okay people say oh that's horrible
because now you're talking about
Eugenics guess what it's horrible to be
born with a genetic disability how can
you sentence a child to that we've got
to do something about the reproductive
situation it is too easy for us to live
too long on this planet at at this point
to be reproducing indiscriminately I
don't have any children I probably have
one of the world's highest IQs yet I
have no children because I couldn't
afford any any children then you've got
these filthy rich Elites that have all
of this money and all of this power why
are they doing that it's idiocy that is
not the way to help Humanity regulate
its population it's evil it has to
stop okay this person named snord
grimstead is a huge fan of yours it
looks like this person has
read plenty of your work do you have any
views I'm going to paraphrase this
question basically he or she wants to
know if the ctmu can concretely help
someone who's going through a
psychological disorder like
schizophrenia or
depersonalization
or he just mentions those
two yes it certainly can as a matter of
fact we're going to be setting up a
program for uh for people that can
actually help them do this the whole
idea of stratified identity and and
knowing the structure of reality is we
do we can uh make inroads in terms of
psychological and sociological
integration and that is something that
we're going to be concentrating on we
already have plans for does the concept
of sin def fanis necessarily connect to
a self-distributing top- down model of
reality okay so there's that necessarily
yes everything NE necessarily connects
to a top- down distributed model of
reality namely the ctmu which is the
structure of reality okay no ctmu no
reality and the universal relational
structure of the ctmu is synesis so the
answer is yes this question is there a
sense in which one still has to
understand reality in an experiential
sense even after one understands the
ctmu
absolutely AB abolute you've got to
understand Reality by actually living in
it that's what's so dangerous about the
predicament we're in today the people
who are running the world are filthy
rich people that live in bubbles these
people have never worked an honest day
in their lives they don't know what it's
like to miss a meal you understand we
can't have the world run by people who
don't understand it and who don't
understand what it feels like to
actually live in it on the ground
floor absorbing its slings and arrows at
all times
the people who are running the world are
pampered coddled Elites that live in
their own champagne colored rose-colored
bubble of privilege this has to stop
these people don't know what the world
is not only don't they know what it is
intellectually they don't know what it's
like to live at and this is creating
terrible terrible problems for
us so what can we do as the general
population besides understanding the
ctmu let's just take that out of the bag
is one of the potential Solutions what
can we do to ameliorate this problem
given to us by or inherited to us from
the rich Elite as you put
it well we have to utilize something
called we have to engage in the
political process to try to to try to
stop the Elites from basically
destroying our freedom destroying
freedom and human dignity and uh and
everything else that makes us human
we've got to stop that by engaging in
the political process we have to
exercise Civil Disobedience where
necessary okay
and aside from that if that fails we
have to go back to the
Constitution and the Constitution
contains a certain Amendment which says
that we have to defend we are entitled
and have the duty to defend the United
States against all enemies foreign and
domestic if they're going to take human
freedom and human dignity and inv
validate the Constitution they have no
right to be here if they want to go live
someplace else let them go live
there something that strikes me about
your theory is it's derived logically
that what that made me
wonder in keeping with this question
where he was asking is there an
experiential element to reality that's
not captured in the cmtu what I'm
wondering is do you consider the ctmu to
be or even yourself to be rationalist or
you have problems with the
rationalists I have no problems with
rationalists as long as they're
competent which a lot of them are um a
lot of people criticize me because well
you know basically you're like those old
Med medieval philosophers who used to
you know pontificate on the number of
angels that could dance on the head of a
pin you're trying to derive everything
from logic but really The World Isn't
experiential it is the logic of
experience to derive the ctmu you start
with EXP experience you start with with
kogo and Essie okay you start with with
deart and Berkeley you take those you
you
take cognition and experience
interesting you logically induce the
minimum model the bare minimum that you
need to make cognition and percept
perception work then you form an
identity incorporating that potential
and you have the ctmu if you do it right
okay a true rationalist knows how to do
that that right okay but there aren't
very many of I love what you said the
logic of experience I don't think I've
heard that phrase before did you just
come up with that on the spot or have
you heard that before first time I ever
said that I've never heard phrase what
I'd like to know is how is science as
it's currently formulated
limited well it's limited by the lack of
an understanding of what a metal
language is back in the uh 19th century
for example uh they thought there was
something physical Theory contained
something called The luminiferous Ether
and uh that was basically uh mapped into
physical reality as a kind of a space
filling substance or perhaps as space
itself um then when Einstein Einstein
came along with the theory of relativity
he changed physical Theory so that
luminous luminiferous ether disappeared
it totally disappeared from the scene so
the truth value of their of luminiferous
ether exists had to be changed from true
in the 19th century to false in the 20th
century that involves the use of
something called a metal language where
you attach truth values to physical
attributions physicists did not
understand and still do not understand
the structure of the metal language that
they need to do things like that and
it's called metaphysics in other words
physicists actually need metaphysics
they need a metap physical metal
language to actually make changes like
this to to pass to to AIX truth values
to physical attributions to change their
theories to correct their theories and
things like that the amazing thing is
they don't realize this they still don't
realize it they don't realize that that
physics has actually absorbed
metaphysics of necessity it needs
metaphysical functionality in order to
do this but most most physicists thinks
think that that metaphysics is some kind
of woo or some kind of quackery that and
it's just what it is is this logical
ignorance they're not trained properly
in what a metal language is or what an
object language is or for that matter
how a universe relates to it they don't
know anything about model theory in
other words some of them may have taken
a course in model Theory but they don't
really know anything about it because of
that now the ctmu is a is an advanced
meta language for science okay it's a
metaphysical metall language and it's
absolutely logically necessary you can't
get bu without it so this is what's the
matter with science it doesn't
understand the language in terms of
which its theories are formulated or how
they relate to the physical Universe
it's kind of a hid and Miss Thing where
we're following the scientific method
where we're empirically inducing
theories and we're sort of affixing them
or gluing them onto observations in
physical reality but we don't know how
or why that is happening it's some kind
of Lucky break that we're getting right
it's it's the the the uh the unexpected
efficiency of mathematics of of of being
able to actually use mathematical models
on reality all right they don't have a
metal language whose structure actually
tells them why that's occurring so this
is uh this is bad news for science
remains bad news I'm trying to help them
fix
it some other ways people would say that
are on the more Eastern end they may say
that it doesn't incorporate enough
experiential elements or that it's too
mathematically defined
that's part of the problem yes they
don't understand that there is that
there is actually a subjective as well
as an objective aspect to reality okay
they need a metal language to actually
put those two things together that's the
coupling metal language provides the
coup the coupling for a subject of an
object of reality and the lack of such a
metal language means that they can't
actually put those two things together
that's what we're trying to help fix
with the ctmu and we're getting a lot of
bonuses you know there are a lot of
things that you can do with the ctm for
example businesss are trying to explain
Dark Energy they're never going to do it
until they have the ctmu the ctmu is the
offers the only viable explanation for
dark energy and there are other things
Consciousness there are all kinds of
things that cannot be explained without
this metal language this metaphysical
metal language and the admission on the
parts of scientists and physicists in
particular that metaphysics is already
built into their
discipline how they could still be
ignorant of it I'm not quite
sure I recall you saying that the
universe is not simply a sum of its
parts I'd like you to explain why well
it's synergistic basically okay if you
if you if you put things together you're
basically doing so you're you're it's
like bolting a machine together you're
putting the parts together you're
putting in the little screws and they're
all in the right place and then you turn
the crank and the Machine Works but if
you take one of those little pieces out
well the machine doesn't work anymore
okay it just sort of falls apart and and
there is no coherence to it all right
when you think you know the things that
are going on in your mind they're all
connected to each other you notice
there's no division there's no there's
no one thing is you know missing or
anything like that it's all there
everything is coherent and machines
don't function that way machines have a
kind of mechanical coherence but that's
not sufficient so what we need is higher
order coherence that's what ctmu also
brings to bear as it has higher order
Quantum coherence actually meta quantum
coherence and this is something else
that we need to make a viable theory of
reality yeah you know this this idea
that everything is just happening at
random and it's just sort of all popping
up at random and things sort of emerge
at random this is nonsense total
nonsense you can't build a theory of
reality that way you're just you're just
trying to glue Parts together and you
will never get more than their sum and a
sum of Parts is just a pile of parts
that's it everything has to work
together as a matter of fact it has to
work synergistically and that is more
than the sum of the
parts why can't it be somewhat simple in
wolfram's theories he has or in his
classical theories he had those cellular
automaton with simple rules adjacent
neighbors signify whether you live or
die and then seemingly complex behaviors
emerge from that why can't it be like
that emerge well let's let's let's have
a definition let's have Steven's
definition of emergence and how it
occurs
Stephen doesn't have one nor does
anybody else so if you you have to have
a theory of self-organization it's one
of the reasons I had to come up with it
is because there are a lot of deficits
and holes for all of the inroads and
advances that science has made it's
still full of holes okay we' have to try
to patch
some what would you have done
differently in the development of your
theory so for example you would have
spent more time writing with a pen and a
paper instead of going for walks I'm
speaking practically here or you would
have taken more time off or taken less
time
off time off I've never had a vacation
in my
life you know and I don't quite know
what time off means I think about the
ctmu every day you know I get up I think
about mistakes that I've made in the
past I'm constantly questioning myself
did I screw this up did I screw that up
if so what can I do to fix it and I find
you know to be very honest with you I
find that I have very seldom made
serious mistakes it has happened but I
always catching um most of the time I
don't make
mistakes so what would you have done
differently if you could advise yourself
let's say 30 years
younger I had the ctmu in in in in full
form decades ago okay basically if I had
to advise myself for something it would
be would be how to present it and how to
actually get people to pay attention to
it I'd advise myself to have actually
tried to go to Princeton and meet with
John Wheeler as I was invited to do for
example that could have changed
everything all right but when you're
raised like I am you know like I was my
family got kicked out of houses when we
were kids you know we found ourselves in
the street and when I was in New York
and I had these jobs and I you know I
simply was afraid to lose it felt that I
was going to be in the street again so I
didn't go and visit John Wheeler you
know people thinkwell you know that's
ridiculous there's always a job and
there's always a source of money not for
all of us there isn't and the way I was
raised there wasn't there wasn't
anything there was no one who was going
to help you no government agency was
going to step in on your behalf nobody
was going to give you a house when you
needed one nobody was even going to give
you food when you needed I don't know
where people get the idea that we're all
privileged and we all have all these
privileges save it for somebody who
actually got the Privileges we didn't so
so I'm I you know anyway if I had if I
had it to do all over again I would meet
with John
weer there are people who are watching
this who are developing their own
theories and so it's almost like when I
ask you what would you have done
differently it's also couched in well
what would you have done differently
such that they can apply it so when you
say speak to John Wheeler that's so
that's extremely specific first they
can't apply it second of all not
everyone was invited so given that now
what is your answer what would you have
done differently would you advise your
30-year younger self to do or not to do
basically I would
be you're kind of okay I've already
succeeded in finding what I wanted to
find all right so basically what I would
try to do is make sure that I was not
distracted and taken off the track all
right one thing that you must bear in
mind if you are a young person who's
trying to figure reality out is that you
cannot serve God and M God is is reality
and reality is God if you don't like God
you're sunk you're not going to get a
true theory of reality you can learn a
lot of math you can learn how to kind of
put things together and Tack one
mathematical Theory onto another but
you're not really going to get to the
identity of reality and that's how we
Define the god that's what I was telling
you about okay anyway you can't serve
the godod and Mammon you want to be a
big shot you want to go out and be a
hedge fund manager go ahead and do it
but you can forget about your
aspirations to reality Theory there are
all kinds of of people out there uh
Elites you know money bags of various
kinds who think well first of all what
I'm going to do is I'm going to get out
there and I'm going to make a billion
dollars I'm G to make a lot of money and
then armed with that money I'm G to save
the world no you're not because you
spent all your Capital it's hard to get
money okay it actually you really it
really does kind of knock you out you've
got to have the right connections you've
got to have the lucky breaks if you
immerse yourself in that goose chase
okay if you if you totally if if that's
what you live for by the time you get
your money and you're sitting there and
now you're a big billionaire and you're
going to do this and you're going to do
that there's nothing left all you can do
is put on a show this has been proven
time and time and time again you point
me out a billionaire who's actually got
some kind of big Insight or or or or you
know some big idea about the nature of
reality and that's nonsense okay I
just anyway go ahead try it you know of
any billionaires that really have any
good ideas about reality well anyway
that's what I would remind myself of
don't chase money okay don't there is a
cost for that you sell your people sell
their soul for it and that has a very
literal interpretation in the ctmu okay
you're actually you're subscribing to a
telon that is designed to get you money
and that ton Now controls your thoughts
it's not going to let any distractions
through by way way of reality Theory
you're not going to you're not going to
be able to keep those things in mind
anymore because it's all about getting
money furthering the interests of the
corporation right not falling running a
foul of corporate culture all of these
things are going to occupy your
attention and you're not going to be the
big genius that you thought you were
going to be all right you can you you
make up your mind you're either going to
be a genius or you're going to be a
money Banks now most people give that
choice will choose money bags all right
but don't turn on the TV and see you
know a billionaire who's saving the
world and think that that's going to
lead to anything for you because it
won't okay if you sell your soul to
Mammon you're not going to be the big
reality theoretic genius that you
thought they
were what if someone says I want to be a
philanthropist like Bill
Gates so you think Bill's a yeah that
think think Bill's a philanthropist do
you I spent a large amount of time okay
when I was a
kid you know one would think well you
know why wasn't Langan if he's a big
genius why wasn't he involved in the
computer Revolution and why didn't why
wasn't he Bill Gates well it was very
easy you know I can explain that
basically there was a there was one
there was a a computer at Montana State
University and I think it was called the
sigma 7 it was uh I don't know if it was
an IBM 360 or what the hell it was but
uh but uh anyway it uh was you know a
Marvel of the time you know in the 60s
here in the in the in the mid 60s
they've actually got a computer up there
that people can program so they offered
to have a Cooperative you know class you
know in high school you know where they
could let high school kids program this
computer I believe I mentioned that my
family wasn't very popular in town well
as it happened when when I was when I
went to this computer class to actually
you know sign up and learn how to
program using Fortran you to program
this this this University Computer the
uh the I was recognized by Mr Chandler
who taught the course as someone that he
didn't particularly like he said well he
said I count 31 students I only have 30
textbooks so I I'll just hand them out
and then when I run out well then that
person will have to double up with
somebody
else I was the person who didn't get he
walks around the classroom you know
following this trajectory and I'm the
person the last person and he looks down
at me and says what I'm sorry you'll
have to double up with somebody else but
when you're the least popular kid in
class nobody wants to double up with you
I just got up and walked out of his
class all right so this is what can
happen you get a couple of bad breaks no
all right then you know I got or
eventually bought a computer an Atari
computer and started programming in
basic okay but that was a problem
because then Atari went out of business
and I needed you know an IBM type you
know Bill Gates computer they were all
$2,000 for me that was four months rent
I could not afford it so by the time it
got around to where I could afford you
know to get all the equipment that I
needed to be a big computer Hotshot was
too late I'm not going to waste my time
on it now there are too many kids out
there there you know apps this and apps
and programs that and I'm going to be in
the next big shot they have connections
you know the their families have money
I'm not Bill Gates whose father was a
millionaire and got you know his own
little computer and uh you know was able
to do it he had everything handed to him
and most of these people do show me the
billionaire who's self-made and I'll
show you a BS artist there's simply no
doubt about it is there such a thing as
philanthropy yes of course there is
unfortunately most of these people you
to be a philanthropist you not only got
to have a lot of money you've got to
know to whom you should give that money
you know who who should be the object of
your charity these people would you say
is a good philanthropist I don't know
anything I mean when I you know there
there are there are organizations that
give grants uh the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation the Templeton
Foundation other people that give grants
that someone like me should be eligible
for well every time I have gone to fill
out the application for one of these uh
uh charitable
organizations the first thing on the the
you fill out an application and they
want to know what institution you're
affiliated with namely what university
you're affiliated with so if you're not
a professional academic you're just out
okay that's it they ignore you this is
not philanthropy this is a circle
jerk okay and it's an unbroken Circle
everybody links their arms and nobody
gets in from the side okay so that's
what it is and that is that is what
these philanthropists are all about the
the only people they will give to are
people that come out of their own
indoctrination Mills right that's that's
it nobody else is eligible for their
charity and basically what they're doing
is they're just choosing the people you
know that are going to tell them what
they want to hear and they're doing it
in such a way that they get maximum
credit for that they look especially
good for example the American Cancer
Society donate to the American Cancer
Society and you look good for doing that
Bill Gates has done a lot of that kind
of donating but now we find out that
Bill Gates has parlayed that into an
amazing amount of control over the world
health system so it's not as though it
was just charity is it okay bill has now
got himself you know has wangled a
leading position in the you know the I
mean you know what this amounts this
entire vaccine thing was more or less
previewed by Bill Bill gateson what was
that event 201 was that what it was
called I mean this guy has known what
was happening all along it's as though
it was planned previewed rehearsed in
advance and Bill Gates is right in the
middle of that now I can't point the
finger at Bill and say he's definitely
guilty he definitely did this he
definitely did that but he's connected
to too many people who are involved in
this thing all right and you know of
course about what happened with Bill in
India and Africa right with his vaccine
trials there right of course you do the
last question is from
me what advice do you have for me
basically I'm on this mission to
understand different theories of
everything it's autodidactic for various
reasons so it's similar to yourself in
that manner and I making sure that I'm
not closing my doors I'm trying to be
open to non I used to be like as you
would understand the standard academic
who was materialistic and despised
everything that even resembled mysticism
but now I'm opening myself up to what
people would ordinarily call woo like
Free Will Consciousness God even uaps
so what advice do you have for me as I
go on this Mission other than Kurt just
read the
ctmu you've got to stick with it and you
can't become discouraged obviously I'm
going to tell you you have to read the
ctmu and you have to try to you have to
try to grock it you have to try to
deeply understand it remain open-minded
but don't allow yourself to be unduly
influenced by people just because they
are persuasive there are a lot of very
persuasive people out there who will try
to convince you that they have the
correct perspective on reality when in
reality they do not but a lot of people
you know say well this person is so
intelligent and they seem so confident
what they're telling me about reality
there's got to be something to it it
must be true and meanwhile they're
talking out of the other side of their
mouths disparity
okay you don't want to let that happen
maintain a certain amount of skepticism
regarding whatever anyone is telling you
I think that what I've succeeded and
doing during this interview is actually
answering questions and actually making
sense of some of this for you I don't
know how successful I've been but at
least I've tried okay there is I don't
know of anyone who can actually you can
actually push to ground you can actually
tree like this and get straight answers
about the overall structure of reality
from as far as I know I'm the only
person like that so just don't listen to
anybody who disparages me or my work
that's my main piece of advice and also
just stick with it man you need to know
remember when you study reality when
you're looking at when you're looking at
the structure of reality you're looking
at for the structure of your own
ultimate
identity that's what you get at the top
that's what it all boils down to in the
end if you correctly understand that
then you can be
salvaged I the the Universal identity
will keep you alive
forever all right but you need to find
it you need to come to grips with it and
you need to keep on traveling up that
ladder as far as you can get all right
most people become discouraged I'm tired
of this I'm so tired I can't do this
anymore my mind just won't handle it
this
is well it's death for a person like you
someone who really needs to know who
really wants to look in it's a lifelong
thing Kurt got to stick with it no
matter thank you man you know when I
asked that question I'm actually also
asking on behalf of the audience because
many of them are on a similar journey of
explicating toes that's the whole point
of this channel so I from what I
understand read the ctmu okay I have and
I will continue to do so second don't
listen to people who appear to have
cogency or persuasive relevance but the
criteria that you listed was if they
dispar you so I'm going to ask you so
what is an alternate criteria not just
that because some people have made no
comment about you and also someone could
just be simply mistaken so for the
people who are listening who are also on
a similar journey of self-exploration
trying to understand the universe which
seems to be intimately tied to
understanding oneself they're on this
journey what other advice do you have
for them besides reading the ctmu which
I advise everyone who's listening or
watching to do make an attempt to do so
at least once per week which is a a
cintilla of time okay so there's ctmu
and then number two was to not listen to
people who disparage you even though
they have even though they
sound even though they they're
captivating in some manner okay besides
disparaging you like what else should
people be on the lookout for what advice
do you have for people on a
civil sometimes Clues come from the most
remarkable places I find that when I'm
trying to understand the structure of
reality things are given to me are put
in my proximity that would be very easy
to ignore or to miss you must be attuned
to them you must be aware at all times
of how reality may give you clues about
what you're looking
for that is a piece of advice that I
think is very important for everybody to
understand remain in a state of aw guard
your awareness all right then you know
life is very distractive it's easy to
get distracted and just you know Bumble
from one mental state to another don't
do that maintain persevere maintain
Focus maintain awareness remember
reality is always trying to show you
things let it show you things pay
attention to it all right and I'm not
just talking about paying attention to
the spectacular things or the things
that interest you or guzzling a beer and
watching a football ball game I'm not
talking about that kind of awareness and
perception I'm talking about subtlety
yeah give an example if you don't
mind
well for
example in the morning when I wake up
I'm thinking about something I might
reach over and I might grab my my pad
you know iPad or whatever kind of pad it
is I might you know take it look at it
and there might be a page there and I
might go to my email and without even
pressing the email thing I'll see under
the under the page I'll see a bunch of
stories that are listed there by some
mainstream Outlet like Google or
something and then I'll look down the
list of stories and there's something
that catches my eye and I know there's
something in there that I should pay
attention to so I click it invariably I
find that it's there it's a gut instinct
I have all right I can tell when there's
something there that I can use I know
when reality wants to show me something
and I can follow those little bread
Trails those little Trails of crumbs
that leads for me with great uh accuracy
okay this is a special this is a skill
you need to develop it okay and it's not
something that everybody knows how to do
right away but it's definitely there if
you're looking for understanding this is
what you've got to do this is your state
of mind you're like an antenna and you
are in you are attuned to what reality
is trying to show
you okay this is a it's a whole
different it's a whole new way of life
now that being said we have we're
entering very troubling times and you've
got to be willing to get in there you
know roll up your sleeves and you know
develop some mental and physical muscle
and deal with the problems we have all
right we've got some terrible problems
and it's they're they're very
distracting too it's going to be tearing
our minds away from what reality is but
there's one something you have to know
about reality and that is that existing
in reality means that you're free you're
an individual you cannot allow yourself
to be enslaved you can't allow yourself
to be mechanized and programmed okay and
when someone attempts to do that to you
you must resist no matter what the cost
you actually have to maintain your
individuality if you don't they will
control your cognition and you will
never know the true nature of reality so
you must remain willing and able to
actually get in and fight for what you
are Chris man thank you so
much you're very welcome Kur it's been a
pleasure I think that you there should
be enough there that you can get some uh
get a good I don't know how long are
most of your interviews when you get
done this one's going to be four
hours how long have we been sitting here
four hours been a
while okay four and a half doesn't seem
like that and yeah actually you made it
very pleasurable so I thank you for
that man Chris honestly I was nervous
going into this like I mentioned because
firstly I've been looking you up for a
little while for at least a few weeks
and I've known about you for years
though I haven't researched you for
years and I heard that you were a
cat but at the same time from my from
hearing that's from your wife and then I
thought that you may be combative
irritable cheric but from my experience
with you it's you been such a pleasure
man well thank you so much g i I'm glad
that I haven't disappointed you in that
respect you did an excellent job you are
trying your your best I've seen you know
Snippets of a couple of your other
interviews and I think this was this was
one of your very best ones so thank you
for giving me the opportunity to to
answer these questions and I hope you
understand that there is a difference
between me and some other interviewees
in the sense that I don't Dodge your
questions I try to answer them in a
direct way
and I can usually do that with a great
deal of integration but where it appears
to fall apart when you listen to this
tape there's anything you don't
understand please just ask get in touch
with me and I'll do my best to fill you
in Chris have a great night eat some
food get some rest drink some beer
whatever you got do I sure will
