[Music]
dogs learn fast just from observing
their surroundings at the diversified
Technical Education Institute of
Monterrey casanare in Colombia
one such pup has showcased his
intelligence in an adorable and
incredible way this big black dog is
named negro and he's become the
unofficial mascot of the Institute as
well as a guard dog of sorts watching
over students as they come and go
it all started many years ago when the
pup took up residence on the grounds and
staff decided to give him food in water
allowing him to spend his days there
soon it became his home watching the
activities of the students around him
Negro learned fast and he began to learn
by example one thing that this very
smart pup noticed was that the kids
often went up to a store on campus and
would pay money in order to receive
goods being a dog who loves cookies it
wasn't long before he began to
understand the system so the pup decided
to create his own form of currency one
day he picked up a leaf in his mouth and
walked over to the store counter wagging
his tail and clearly asking for a cookie
there was no way the staff could resist
that cute display now five years later
the pup continues to use this his new
form of money every day to buy biscuits
of course staff always make sure he's
only eating dog safe treats and they
limit his consumption so he doesn't get
overweight but it's safe to say that
Negro has learned what it is to be a
consumer share away people
[Music]
you
[Music]
