if you put a colorful image into
Photoshop or Instagram and blur it
you'll see a weird dark boundary between
adjacent bright colors gross in the real
world outof Focus colors blend smoothly
going from red to Yellow to Green not
red to Brown to Green this color
blending problem isn't limited to
digital photo blurring either pretty
much anytime a computer blurs an image
or tries to use transparent edges you'll
see the same hideous sludge there's a
very simple explanation for this
ugliness and a simple way to fix it it
all starts with how we perceive
brightness human Vision like our hearing
works on a relative and roughly
logarithmic scale this means that
flipping from one light to two changes
the perceived brightness a ton more than
going from 101 to 102 despite adding the
same physical amount of light our eyes
and brains are simply better at
detecting small differences in the
absolute brightness of dark scenes and
bad at detecting the same differences in
bright scenes computers and digital
image sensors on the other hand detect
brightness is purely based on the number
of photons hitting a photo detector so
additional photons register the same
increase in brightness regardless of the
surrounding scene when a digital image
is stored the computer just records a
brightness value for each color red
green and blue at each point of the
image typically zero represents zero
brightness and one represents 100%
brightness so 0. five is half as bright
as one right nope this color might look
like it's halfway between black and
white but that's because of our
logarithmic Vision in terms of absolute
physical bright brightness it's only 1/5
as many photons as white even more crazy
an image brightness value of a quarter
has just 12th the photons of white
Digital Imaging does have a good reason
for being designed in this darker than
the numbers suggest way remember human
vision is better at detecting small
differences in the brightness of dark
scenes which software Engineers took
advantage of as a way of saving disk
space in the early days of digital
imaging the trick is simple when a
digital camera captures an image instead
of storing the brightness values it
gives store their Square Roots this
samples the gradations of dark colors
with more data points and bright colors
with fewer data points roughly imitating
the characteristics of human Vision when
you need to display the image on a
monitor just Square the brightness back
to present the colors properly this is
all well and good until you decide to
modify the image file blurring for
example is achieved by replacing each
pixel with an average of the colors of
nearby pixels simple enough but
depending on whether you take the
average before or after the square
rooting you'll get different results and
unfortunately the vast majority of
computer software does this incorrectly
like if you want to blur a red and green
boundary you'd expect the middle to be
half red and half green and most
computers attempt that by lazily
averaging the brightness values of the
image file forgetting that the actual
brightness values were square rooted by
the camera for better data storage so
the average ends up being too dark
precisely because an average of two
square roots is less than the square
root of an average to correctly blend
the red and green and avoid the ugly
dark sludge the computer should have
first squared each of the brightnesses
to undo the camera's Square rooting then
averaged them and then square rooted it
back look how much nicer it is there's
actually yellow there unfortunately the
vast majority of software ranging from
IOS to Instagram to the standard
settings in Adobe Photoshop takes the
lazy ugly and wrong approach to image
brightness and while there are advanced
settings in Photoshop and other
professional Graphics software that let
you use the mathematically and
physically correct blending shouldn't
Beauty just be the default
this minute physics video is brought to
you in part by audible.com the leading
provider of audiobooks across all types
of literature including fiction
non-fiction and periodicals if you go to
audible.com Minit physics you can try
audible out by downloading a free audio
book of your choice I highly recommend
the humans a novel by Matt heg which is
a hilarious and fun story of an alien
who comes to Earth on a mission of
Intergalactic importance and ends up
noticing all sorts of quirks in human
society and technology and Mathematics
you can download this Audi book or a
free audiobook of your choice at
audible.com Minit physics and I'd like
to thank Audible for helping me continue
to make these videos
[Music]
