[Music]
welcome to today's second most important
telecast I'm Gilbert E Jones general
manager of IBM's
data processing division it is my
pleasure to welcome you to this most
unusual occasion this private telecast
is reaching over 100 meetings across the
nation and it is also being carried to
our good neighbor Canada electronic data
processing as a field is relatively new
just over ten years old it's come far in
this last decade we have seen many new
companies come into the computer
industry bringing that experience
incentives that strong and intelligent
competition always creates the October
issue of Fortune magazine highlights
some of this activity all of us in the
computer field are still in that buoyant
stage of development with a pace of new
discoveries new advances and your trip
comes in a steady stream from our
laboratories the purpose of this meeting
is to demonstrate a number of new IBM
products and a business and to discuss
their applications to your business
problem our theme today is balanced data
process balanced in terms of product and
service balanced data processing means
the synchronization of input processing
and output units for optimum production
it means the balancing of machine
installations with superior service it
means measuring the value of data
processing
terms of net results rather than the
speed of an individual unit one of the
natural expressions of IBM's concept of
balance data processing is the
geographic structure of our company
wherever you are we are 200 IBM branch
offices and 33 IBM federal systems
offices located in every major
industrial community these offices are
staffed with over 10,000 specialists
sales analysts customer engineers sales
representatives all of whom are
constantly bringing you our equipment
services and supplies balancing this IBM
service at the local level on national
facilities serving the entire country
three regional offices in New York
Chicago and Los Angeles manufacturing
plants and laboratories in for Kip see
Endicott Yorktown Heights Burlington
Vermont Rochester Minnesota and San Jose
California supply installations at
Concord Massachusetts Dayton New Jersey
Washington DC Greencastle Indiana and
Sherman Texas and military products
installations at Kingston and a wig on
New York and from one end of the country
to the other
r22 IBM educational centers fortunately
IBM's 23,000 customers are also balanced
geographically we are extremely proud of
the relationship we have had with these
customers over the last 44 years our
product development people depend to a
large measure on a knowledge of customer
needs developed by you in the field
actually product developments most
difficult job is not the creation of a
new equipment
this is usually a technical problem and
solvable much more challenging is the
problem of bringing the new equipment in
at a realistic price price must equal
function or the equipment will find no
market today we wanted
show you just such a breakthrough a
major IBM product development that will
mean much more value for your data
processing dollars for this we go to
Endicott New York and Dan Hilliard for
data processing that requires speed or
data processing that requires power for
data processing that requires job
economy IBM brings you a new concept in
general-purpose accounting the all new
IBM 1401 data processing system
it's fast it's powerful its compact its
versatile and it gives you much more
value for your data processing dollar
never before has so much powerful
processing ability been built into such
a low-cost system the IBM 1401 system is
comprised of these three units the 1401
processing unit which houses the
arithmetic 'el logical and input/output
functions and controls the entire system
through stored programming the 1402 card
read punch which utilizes proven
components of other IBM machines and
delivers the fastest combined card input
and output in IBM history the 1403
printer a new milestone in high speed
printing with increased document
throughput the true measure of printing
production this is the 1401 a complete
data processing system with all the
advantages of stored programming
balanced with high speed input and
output the IBM 1401 processing unit is a
completely solid state machine with 1400
positions of core storage this may be
increased to 2,000 or 4,000 positions
the 1401 system is completely alpha
Merak
it accepts both letters and numbers it's
variable link data and instructions
permit full use of core storage
positions its add to storage
capabilities make separate locations for
accumulators unnecessary so storage
requirements are reduced to a minimum
numbers and sizes of totals are
restricted only by the number of
available storage positions in addition
the 1401
features a unique print editing ability
it presents a completely edited line to
the printer inserting dollar signs
decimal points commas asterisks and
other signs in their proper place the
console as a logical and directly
readable display panel a tremendous aid
the programmers on
stored programs the processing unit
controls the IBM 1402 card read punch
which can read cards at the rate of 800
per minute and punch them at the rate of
250 per minutes the 1402 has 5 1000 card
capacity non-stop unloading radio
stackers with these 5 stackers many
following start two separate operations
are eliminated the IBM 1403 printer is a
completely new development a totally new
concept in high-speed printing watch it
go
the most important feature of the 1403
for printing output is a new dual speed
carriage which can advance papers the
rate of either 33 or 75 inches per
second
normally in printing reports more than
half the paper passes through the
printer blank unfinished the 1403 prints
at the rate of 600 lines a minute but
because of its new high speed carriage
the blank paper between lines is pushed
through far in excess of printing speed
much in the same manner than an elevator
with my floors where it doesn't have to
stop actually in high gear the 1403 can
move paper at the rate of 75 inches per
second this means that paper over 16
inches wide is moving at the speed of
magnetic tape this then is the new IBM
1401 data processing system it will give
you powerful data processing ability
with great reliability of components low
power consumption reduced air
conditioning and much smaller space
requirements as a card system the 1401
processing unit comes in two models this
is model a a single module with all the
features and capabilities we've just
described IBM product development
cognizant the market needs has created
in the 1401 a system designed to meet
data processing requirements not just
for giant corporations but for all
businesses and what is more the system's
designed to grow as your business grows
that's the reason for the model be a
double module which gives the user the
option of adding specific features to
the processing unit to fit the special
needs of his system as an example to the
job require a lot of multiplication
the calculate option available to the
model B will execute multiply operations
up to six times faster than in the basic
system but now without any further
discussion let's see the model B in
action we'll take a typical
manufacturing control application
inventory control producing a stock
status report into the file feed of the
read side of the 1402 with place cards
we could actually put in 3,000 IBM cards
at one time these cards represent old
inventory balances material requirements
receipts and issues on order items and
adjustments sorted into part number
sequence the 1401 processing unit
utilizing a stored-program analyzes each
card and determines what action must be
taken
add subtract multiply divide compare it
also instructs the card read punch to
create new inventory balance cards and
reorder cards these cards are separately
stacked for whatever action will be
required the cards read in will also be
separated so that one stacker will
contain available requirements card
another stacker will have missing
requirements cards for action the last
stacker will contain the detail
transaction and old inventory balance
cards the 1401 processing unit also
controls the 1403 printer it is now
printing out a complete stock status
report let's look at the report the 1403
is printing
you can see how detailed incomplete the
information is the 1401 card system
combines the work formerly done by a
combination of a counting machine
summary punch and calculator because it
performs these functions with greater
speed and fewer operations it means
substantial savings in this vital
accounting area certainly one of the
greatest advantages of the IBM 1401 data
processing system is that it affords
punch card users the opportunity to add
magnetic tape input and output with a
minimum of reprogramming and conversion
cost and here to demonstrate this
important feature of the 1401 is Bill
hotter thank you the goal of product
planning and developing the IBM 1401
data processing system was to provide
our customers with equipment that could
be custom tailored to their needs one of
the goals was to achieve machine
flexibility that would balance data
processing growth with business growth
here we have it for the unit record user
whose volume is outgrowing the maximum
card system the 1401 provides the
opportunity to convert some of this
volume to tape all the economy
versatility and system's advantages of
the punch card approach can be coupled
with the speed the additional input and
the storage compactness of magnetic tape
up to 6
7:29 tape units can be added to the 1401
system to convert to the model see a
complete card and tape system you may
choose any one of four different speeds
with the 729 model to tape drive you can
get either 15000 or 41,000 characters
per second with the 729 model for tape
drive you can get either twenty two
thousand five hundred or sixty two
thousand five hundred
directors per second the character rate
you choose is dependent upon your
individual needs the model C is a
complete independent balanced magnetic
tape data processing system let's see it
at work on an invoice writing job on
this magnetic tape unit we have
customers names and addresses and such
other information as class of trade
discounts products group discounts
standard shipping instructions unit
shipping charges salesman's names and
his commission for Sonny's we also have
the customers credit ratings total
outstanding accounts receivable punch
cards representing the products ordered
by the customers are fed into the reach
side of the IBM 1402 card refunds the
processing unit under stored program
control reads the magnetic tape unit
until applying to proper customer name
and address corresponding to the
customer number in the product order
card this is read directly in the story
as information for the printer and to
control subsequent operation the 1401
will then multiply quantity times price
to arrive at the total amount for each
item and apply the proper discount rate
it develops a net amount to be billed
for each item these extended lines would
then be written on magnetic tape for
months and sales analysis for each
invoice a card is punch representing the
salesman's Commission if any invoice
exceeds the customer's credit limit a
separate card is punched with the
necessary information and separately
stacked for immediate action the total
of outstanding accounts receivable is
updated for future control the invoice
being printed makes full use of the dual
speed carried of the 1403 printer
let me repeat again that the 1401 model
C is a complete and independent data
processing system in itself however it
has even greater versatility it can be
used as a powerful adjunct to existing
data processing systems specifically the
700 7000 series
here is Jim Beezer to demonstrate one of
these uses thank you for those of you
who have the IBM 700 or 7000 series our
new 1403 printer offers a new concept in
high speed printing at low cost
the 1403 with its tremendous paper
handling capabilities for spacing
skipping and ejecting its actual
throughput power can handle complicated
printing operations without tying up the
time of the larger and more expensive
equipment I'd like to show you just how
this efficiency can be accomplished in a
typical payroll operation the magnetic
tape on this reel has been prepared by a
705 for the purpose of printing payroll
checks and earning statements here is a
sample cheque it is an IBM continuous
farm punch card check on which it would
be possible to print 21 lines of
information actually in this operation
we will only need an average of two
lines of information 19 lines will be
left blank let's put the 1403 through
its paces
look at those checks go 234 minutes the
dual speed carry Turtles the blank
spaces at a terrific rate without this
feature a line passing speed in excess
of 4,800 lines per minute would be
required to get this same production 230
checks per minute here they are
the unique design of the 1403 the thing
that makes this almost incredible
performance possible is a simplified
chain mechanism developed by IBM the
1403 Princeton 132 positions using only
five sets of 48 alphabetic numeric and
special characters the chain moves at 90
inches per second fixed in this
horizontal plane the chain mechanism
assures perfect print lines engraved
type assures a high-quality print
impression each character before it
prints is check electronically the IBM
1403 printer was skillfully designed for
operator ease it opens quickly for form
setup and alignment and to speed
handling this new double duty stand can
be used to bring new forms to the
printer and to will completed ones away
coming up then the IBM 1403 printer can
bring new efficiency and improve
performance to your IBM 700 or 7000
series data processing systems and now
back to mr. Jones in New York I'd like
to thank all three of you gentlemen up
in Endicott for a fine job of
demonstrating IBM's new 1,400 series the
product was jointly developed by
domestic and world trade corporation
engineers here is a new IBM data
processing system truly geared for the
intermediate price range it is available
as is all of our equipment through
several methods of acquisitions purchase
purchase option installment purchase or
monthly rental the 1401 is under the
aegis of mr. om Scott general manager of
our general products division he has
some important information relating to
the testing of this new equipment so
let's return to Endicott and mr. Scott
like to proverbial iceberg only a small
fraction of IBM service is visible to
the customers eyes the great bulk is
behind the scenes in our research
laboratories and manufacturing plants
product testing is just such a service
reliable performance of IBM equipment in
your office begins with product testing
in our plants of course our handling of
equipment is a little different from
yours deliberately so your idea is to
keep your equipment going our idea is to
do everything humanly possible to break
it down to achieve this we submit all
new equipment to the most rigorous of
testing techniques we deliberately
overload we deliberately under load we
perform tricky operations repetitively
to measure the consistency
our performance as an example the new
IBM 1401 system underwent testing
procedures that covered many thousands
of machine hours of actual operation
every component and sub assembly was
exposed to usage far more rigorous than
it would ever encounter in any business
office when as and if we found
performance below our high standards we
took necessary corrective steps
immediately I want to show you two
especially interesting testing
facilities we have here at Endicott this
is our anechoic chamber dead quiet
insulated from all external sound here
we are able to measure scientifically
the pure sound level of our equipment we
have established specifications which
each piece of equipment must meet no
machine goes to market before these
specifications are attained and this is
our climatological for chamber where
machines are exposed to variations of
temperature and humidity far beyond what
will be found in the field performance
is measured under these adverse
conditions again the equipment must meet
the most rigid specifications before we
release it for marketing purposes what
you have seen of course is only a
fraction of the comprehensive testing
procedures that every new IBM product
undergoes now there is another area of
testing equally important this testing
program is your assurance that an IBM
product will perform satisfactorily when
it gets to your office and that it will
do the job for which it was designed in
our general products division we have
four plants employing over 12,000 people
your confidence in IBM quality
keeps the people in our plants fully
occupied your ideas as they come to us
and a constant stream create the climate
of challenge that keeps us on our toes
and for this we are most grateful and we
sincerely hope responsive now back to
mr. Jones in New York and now from
Endicott New York from the east to the
far west we jump to IBM newest plant in
San Jose California your guide there
will be our director of marketing
programs
mr. YP Dawkins good morning welcome to
San Jose situated in the heart of the
Santa Clara Valley 60 miles south of San
Francisco this is IBM's West Coast
manufacturing research and product
development Center we in IBM are proud
of this modern forward-looking facility
which services the entire western part
of the United States here 2500 IV
Emmer's are employed these four
buildings comprise the educational
center here at San Jose historically
education has always been a high
priority item and I began not only the
education of our people to service you
but education of you our customers data
processing is in a state of dynamic
growth it is being remoulded by
technological developments and equipment
and by the discovery of brand-new
application areas this calls for an
increased tempo and communication
between our customers and ourselves more
and more the most fruitful experience in
this line comes from our customer
educational services this service takes
place not only in our branch offices but
in the 22 educational centers situated
near the most important industrial
communities in the country 90,000
customers people attended educational
centered sessions at these centers last
year customer education is a two-way
street we learn
our customers learn we learn a new
computer applications that our customers
through experience and perceptions have
developed in the field our customers in
turn learn how they can apply new
configuration of IBM equipment to meet
their ever-increasing demand for Total
Information another most important phase
of this service is the IBM customer
executive educational program which is
centered in our installations at the
Tipsy Endicott and here at San Jose this
program has over 20 years of successful
experience behind it last year alone
well over 6,500 corporate executives
were enrolled they spent over 33,000
class days attending special study
sessions covering every aspect of data
processing at the executive level this
year's attendance will be even higher
this program not only helps cut IBM
customers executives wake them make the
most best possible use of their present
IDM equipment but most important it
offers a unique opportunity to pool
their ideas and experiences and the
rapidly expanding applications of
electronic data processing San Jose as
I'm sure most of you know is the home of
the versatile RAM at 3:05 the first IBM
machines to offer true in line data
processing data or information is
available with the same random
accessibility as with a conventional
filing cabinet the difference is
electronic speeds the RAM at 3:05
processes transactions as they occur and
updates related records in the same
processing step ram acts unique disk
storage unit can store millions of
business facts their management's needs
this complete new concept of business
record-keeping obviously fills a long
existing need your acceptance of the RAM
Mac is exemplified by this plant from
which over 500 machines have been
shipped this product is presently at
work speeding data processing in almost
every area of government and industry I
want to tell you about a new special
feature for this equipment increased
processing speed IPS as we call it
engineering development that can be
installed in existing 305 processing
units it involves no special program
addressing or control panel wiring with
input and output to the machine
remaining constant the speed with which
data can be processed processed
internally has been accelerated in short
more work can be performed in the same
amount of input-output time actually in
test runs we have found that
installations of IPs can reduce
processing time by 20%
without reprogramming or shifting of
data we anticipate even larger savings
with program changes and rearrangement
of data so that work can be accomplished
more efficiently in other words with a
new IPS feature you can develop longer
programs with more program checks and
totals giving you more input-output
balance with processing on your IBM
remet and now back to mr. Jones in New
York thank you for your information one
of mr. Dawkins's major responsibilities
is seeing that our customers are
provided with complete systems
installation services this means more
than the mere physical installation of
IBM equipment
it means complete free installation
planning no matter where you are located
trained IBM specialists are available to
perform this vital service sales
representatives systems analysts special
industry representatives applied
scientist customer engineers physical
planning engineers all are trained to
help you solve your data processing
problems these men work with you to
ensure a smooth installation IBM also
makes available its unmatched applied
programming service this group was
responsible for our recently announced
commercial translators a new computer
language they offer pre-tested free
written and pre analyzed programs for
each of our data processing systems at
the present time we have 230 highly
trained specialists
specialists preparing these programs
this service keeps pace with product
development for example our applied
programming people already have
developed programs to support the 707
these include Auto coder input output
control systems thought in merge routine
report generators and Fortran this
department has also developed programs
for the days 1401 which include a
symbolic programming language a set of
subroutines an automatic check for
accuracy for a demonstration of the new
1401 performing peripheral operations
with the 707 T in a brokerage
application we now go to participate and
Joe prevalent
adaptability is a key feature of the new
IBM 1401 data processing system in the
brokerage field as an example it can
meet the requirements of all firms
regardless of size the low volume firm
will use the basic equipment as an
independent integrated system for them
the 1401 card system can compute 1500
trades print 1500 confirmations and
punch 1500 computed trade cards in 30
minutes they will also be able to add
margin accounting applications a firm
with one thousand daily margin
transaction 30,000 physicians and 8,000
physicians to price daily can complete
this margin accounting function in two
hours larger brokerage firms with 700
7000 systems installed will use the 1401
system for peripheral operations such as
tape editing for printing tape auditing
and checking card to tape tape the card
tape sorting and rearrangement I'd like
to demonstrate the abilities of the 1401
in a typical peripheral operation
converting trade cards to magnetic tape
here's the procedure
the original entry is an IBM card
containing all the information necessary
to identify the trade to the computer
the card read punch reads information
into the core storage on the basis of a
storage program the information is
checked for accuracy and any error
condition is indicated by an exception
card the completed transaction record is
written on tape by the 1401 thank you
and is now ready for further processing
by the IBM 707 T
this is the 707 tea room the 707 tea
console the inquiry station the 7500
card reader the 7550 card punch the 7400
printer these units contain the stored
program and perform the logical and
arithmetic operations the reel of
magnetic tapes prepared on the 1401
has been placed on the 707 t tape drive
the 707 t is reading the magnetic tape
for the transaction records at the same
time it obtains the customer's name and
address and any other special
information required from the 7,300
romic file the completed trade record is
now being written on a new tape by the
707 t while this process is being
completed i want to tell you about a new
version of the 707 t computer this new
tape oriented system is created by
removing the card input and output the
online printer and their associated
controls a new console card reader is
added which is used for loading
additional program cards and exception
cards at the rate of 60 per minute this
means improved operation and
significantly reduced job caused
important savings that are made possible
by utilizing the new 1401 for the input
and output function thank you
we take the new shape condensed as it is
to the 1401 no pre-editing is required
one tape real will contain approximately
9600 confirmations the 1401 processing
unit under stored-program instructions
selects the information for the lines to
be printed on the form this economic use
of tape reduces tape processing time and
cost the printer is getting its
instructions from the 1401 if a
duplicate conformation is required for
certain customers the printers can be
instructed to repeat before reading the
next safe record the printed
confirmation in complete form is now
ready for mailing this demonstrates with
one approach to a single area in the
brokerage application of the 1401 in
addition the 1401 can be used in a
similar manner for balancing a stock
record take off prior to updating the
stock ledger
it can also be used in the bookkeeping
area for free balancing and editing of
ledger details the operations we have
just seen performed were facilitated to
a great degree by applied programming
know-how and handling generalized
routines you have also seen how the 1401
can free valuable processing time on
larger systems a significant data
processing economy now back to mr. Jones
in New York you have just had a look at
the IBM 707 T in action this machine
will be in operation next March at the
opening of our first data center in New
York's financial district IBM's data
centers will make it possible for you
our customers to rent computers by the
hour
they will supply backup time equipment
for peak loads and other emergencies as
well as providing facilities for
customer education and program testing a
second data center is being opened in
April in Chicago and the third in Los
Angeles in May these will be followed by
other centers across the country now to
get back to the IBM 707 T this equipment
is being manufactured a topic ipsy plant
so let's return there to meet the
general manager of IBM data of IBM's
data system divisions mr. WB McWhirter
Thank You Gil when we think about our
manufacturing operations we
understandably are proud of our plants
and our equipment but we're especially
proud of the IBM know-how which is the
special talent of our manufacturing
people some of us occasionally forget
the fact that a machine or system no
matter how powerful or sophisticated is
something designed and built by humans
and the human know-how is what
determines the character and the quality
of the machine or the system we'd like
you to see some of our people at work on
the manufacturing line and our
participant here you see 707 T's and 709
TS being assembled for final testing
before being shipped to customers as
units are moved into this testing area
power is applied for the first time our
technicians using specially designed
equipment check out every circuit every
component when the individual circuits
and components have been checked units
are connected together to form subsystem
groups and the efficiency of these
combinations is checked with two or more
units operating together also at this
stage recent engineering developments
and improvements are incorporated in the
machines or systems to bring them up to
date in every respect the subsystems
groups are then connected to make up a
complete system and that complete system
is tested by established diagnostic
program both component reliability and
systems reliability are thoroughly
tested the system must meet all
specifications for performance and
reliability when these specifications
are met each unit is given a final
cleaning and the covers installed once
again the entire system is retested
if everything checks out again if we
know beyond doubt that every component
individually and the system as a whole
meet IBM's quality standards then the
finished and tested product is ready for
shipment and installation when the
tested product reaches a customer's
office IBM's famous core of customer
engineers men who have participated in
the final testing and assembling take
over the training of our customer
engineers prepares them for a vital
customer service every man receives
advanced engineering courses in
education centers such as this one at
the Kipp C let's take a look inside my
name is Frank Soni I'm a customer
engineer out of the Cincinnati office at
president I'm here at the Education
Center studying the 709 T system during
my seven years with IBM I've had
training and experience on many machines
among these were the 701 and 704
computers members of this class have
similar backgrounds and experience this
instructor has been carefully chosen on
the basis of his teaching aptitude an
actual field experience right now he's
using the magnetic chalkboard to
illustrate a detail of circuit logic now
when we apply this positive potential to
our face it's very easy for electrons to
flow to the positive source in the
external circuit around to the emitter
where they move around and in essence
cancel the effects of our found positive
charge this TV receiver exemplifies the
progressive educational techniques and
operation here each classroom is linked
by closed-circuit television of course
the 30 learn here is supplemented by
what we call hands-on experience so if
you'll come with me we'll drop in at the
laboratory for a moment and found
negative charges the emitter sees this
negative potential therefore these
electrons are repelled
the lab is where we work with the actual
equipment
these men are following the logic flow
of one of the instructions through the
709 T system they're using an
oscilloscope one of the tools available
to us in the field these are some of the
facilities and techniques shoes to give
customer engineers the proper training
in the maintenance of IBM equipment when
our studies are completed return to the
branch office for our presents and
services assure you of maximum machine
availability thank you Frank for that
glimpse of customer engineering training
most of our customers who have purchased
their own equipment are who are
considering purchased rather than rental
know that iBM has established a similar
training center in Chicago and that this
Center has been set up to train customer
maintenance personnel so that they may
service their purchased equipment in the
customers own office many of you have
already used this Chicago Center and we
hope that more of you will do so in the
future our customer engineers working
closely with our IBM sales
representatives together provide another
important IBM service this is sales
engineering specific customer problems
are referred to a group of engineers
with practical field experience their
job is to adapt present equipment to
special customer problems often these
studies uncover the need for an entirely
new product one such product developed
in just this way is the 357 data
collection system which Phil Ralph will
demonstrate for you now there has long
been a need for a way to close the gap
between originating data and processing
it the recently announced IBM data
collection system does exactly that job
does it quickly efficiently and as
remarkably low cost its applications for
business and government are unlimited
the 357 data collection system consists
of one or more input stations located at
remote distances from the output station
each input station has a card reader
people board reading
IBM punch cards and of transmitting this
information by cable to the output
station along with the input card
readers there is a 12 column keyboard
available by which numeric information
can be keyed in for transmission to the
output station the output station
consists of an IBM o 24 or an IBM o 26
card price it can combine the
information sent to it by the input
station and the keyboard this single
card is then ready to enter your data
processing equipment as a source
document the input control unit can
connect as many as 20 remote input
stations to 1 output station if it is
necessary to determine the exact time a
card was created a read o clock is
available that will supply this
information to demonstrate how these
units tie together we will take a
typical application the reporting of job
time visualize a number of input
stations placed at various locations and
the o26 card punch in the data
processing department as an employee
starts work on a new job he will drop
his clock number card into the card
reader his clock number will be
transmitted to the output punch card
the employee drops in his job number
card which he received when the job was
assigned to him this job number is also
transmitted to the output card
the readout clock is simultaneously
punched into time the card is now a true
source document for the data processing
system when the employee finishes his
job he will go through the same
procedure but this time he will also
transmit the quantity of the work he is
completed
naturally quantity cannot be
predetermined so he simply sends this
information to the output station by
keying in the proper quantity on the
12th column keyboard
now at the output station a card has
been created showing the employee number
job number quantity completed and time
completed this card is then fed into the
data processing equipment to update
records no more need to send messengers
scurrying through the plant to pick up
data the time lag has been cut to a
minimum by the new IBM 357 data
collection system this is just one of
the many applications for which this
machine can be use other applications
include inventory control fluid motor
full of County maintenance of reporting
machine loading and the list goes on and
on wherever there is need to shrink the
time between data creation and data
processing the job can be done best at
lowest cost by the IBM 357 data
collection systems Thank You Phil Val
modern industry is highly specialized
and now no two industries of the same
data processing problem knowing this iBM
has in its three regional offices in New
York Chicago and Los Angeles special
industry representative these are
specialists experienced in the problems
of a specific industry
utilities petroleum insurance wholesale
and retail transportations banking these
highly trained executives are on tour to
analyze and help come up with
recommendations that will solve your
problem in this way is an example we
became aware of a definite need in the
banking industry for a complete demand
deposit system that would sell at a
price substantially lower than today's
operating course IBM 1200 series was the
answer and now we go to Endicott New
York to Hue Hennig for an additional
important announcement to this banking
story for every banker in the audience a
truly significant advance in banking
equipment the IBM 1401 data processing
system coupled with series 12
hundred character sensing equipment that
reads numerical data printed on paper
checks and other documents in magnetic
ink like this
the IBM series 1200 character sensing
equipment consists as you know of the
1201 proof inscriber which has the
ability to inscribe text and magnetic
ink the 1202 utility inscriber
which can create substitute documents
and the 1210 sword a reader which reads
and sorts paper checks and deposit slips
of varied size and thickness and
transmits this information directly into
the data processing system now one of
the main functions of the IBM 1210
sorter reader has been to sort checks
and deposit slip
digit by digit into the desired
numerical sequence however by connecting
to 1210 with the new IBM 1401 this
process is eliminated
transactions are segregated into the
various pockets of the sorter reader
based upon the computers analysis of the
data processing requirements of each
item this is made possible by the
two-way communication between the sorter
reader and 1401 data processor the
exclusive multi-channel reading method
of the IBM sorter reader is combined
with the problem-solving ability of the
1401
the 1401 makes all decisions on the
various exceptions which normally create
control problems right now you are
watching this new banking system in the
process of balancing groups of on us
items it is actually searching for such
exceptions as missing or wrong account
numbers missing or wrong ABA numbers
missing or invalid process control data
the stored program of the 1401 makes
uniform decisions it instructs the 1210
to sort these exceptions into
appropriate pockets of the sorter reader
at the same time valid items are turned
over to the 1401 and new adjusted
control totals are being developed here
a complete listing of all items is
prepared at shorter reader speed up to
900 items per minute at the same time
the 729 take units have been recording
each transaction with all transactions
on tape the 1401 is performing the
operations necessary to complete the
demand deposit job tape sorting accounts
hosting and statement preparation the
sorter reader may now be used
independently to accomplish the sorting
of paper documents to account number
sequence
the high-speed of the IBM 1402 furnishes
the ideal solution to a common paper
handling problems it's the Miss easy
entry into the 1401 system of such small
volume items as uncollected funds
special hold items special statement
requests and changes for the vast data
stored on tape in addition - letter
listings are prepared at speeds up to
900 items per minute all this makes it
possible to achieve the principal goal
of the common machine language you will
find that the 1401 will perform many
other jobs also installment and mortgage
accounting savings account
payroll and each will be accomplished
just as efficiently as the ones we have
demonstrated today use with the series
1200 character sensing equipment the
1401 data processing system fits the
requirements of any size banking
institution with a small Bank there is a
1401 card system larger banks will want
the faster processing provided by the
1401 tape system and for the largest
bank the 1401 can be used with a more
powerful system such as the IBM 707 T or
705 this is truly a building block
concept the 1401 in all its various
capacities can grow as your bankroll now
back to mr. Jones in New York Thank You
mr. Hennig and now ladies and gentlemen
to close this telecast it is my
privilege to introduce the president of
IBM
mr. Thomas J Watson jr. Thank You mr.
Jones this is a big day in the history
of the IBM company we have announced
some really exciting new products the
announcement of new products is always a
happy thing for our organization
particularly so today since we are using
this means of bringing these products
simultaneously the attention of most of
the people in the United States who are
interested in them
thank you all for coming to the various
locations throughout the country to view
these new products with us I hope that
you will find them interesting as we
think you will customers of course are
what have built our organization and
everyone in IBM and most particularly me
feels a great debt of gratitude to every
customer large and small with whom we
are fortunate enough to be associated we
have over five thousand engineers
working in IBM research and development
today in five laboratories in our seven
divisions all of these people are
working very hard to bring you better
machines so that you will want to
continue to do business with us as your
need for automation increases not only
does our research and development effort
promise a great deal in the way of
future machines for accounting and
management purposes but present computer
techniques are making it possible for
scientists to explore exciting new
frontiers as most of you know space
technology uses the electronic computer
as a fundamental tool significantly most
of the real progress that has come about
in our field and in our company has come
about through customer suggestions for
new devices and new machines necessary
to do a better job I want each one of
you to know how much we value your
loyalty to our organization how deeply
we feel our responsibility for supplying
the best possible machines at all times
and equally important the best possible
service if we cannot continue to do this
we do not deserve your business
it's rather in our company that we're
able to announce as many new products as
we are today and announce them with as
much enthusiasm to take you just a
little bit behind the scenes in IBM it's
our policy never to announce products
that are not fully tested until just two
or three days ago some of these products
had not completed their final tests in
the corporation to the delight of each
one of us they have now passed
successfully all of these tests
ready to serve all of you in the
marketplace as we start to ship them to
you I'm sure that you'll be is pleased
with them as we are with their
originality with their a reliability and
with their usefulness thank you again
for coming today
[Music]
you
