[Music]
these are the offices of frame
technology in San Jose California they
have Macintosh computers here Sun
workstations pc compatibles but the
common thread that ties all their
systems together is Unix
all of a sudden UNIX is hot that nasty
old operating system that used to be
considered too difficult for most people
to use is slowly emerging as an
operating system of choice as users
discover its power and as vendor start
to peddle it under a friendlier user
interface today we take a look at the
rebirth of Unix on this edition of the
computer Chronicles
[Music]
the computer chronicles is made possible
in part by mcgraw-hill publishers of
byte magazine and fix the byte
information exchange in print and online
byte and fix serve computer
professionals worldwide with detailed
information on new hardware software and
technologies welcome to the computer
chronicles I'm Stewart Shafie and this
is gary kildall Gary this is Rick Davis
of frame technology corporation Rick is
using what is unquestionably the most
talked-about new computer of the year
the next computer from Steve Jobs lots
of interesting features we could point
out about the next but I want to focus
on the fact that it runs under Unix UNIX
has been around eighteen years or more
but primarily in the university
community the techy community all of a
sudden everyone is interested in Unix
why well-stirred as you know the
traditional problem with the UNIX and
PCs that UNIX really requires a lot of
computing power a lot of central memory
a lot of backup storage of
high-performance processor and we just
haven't had that in PCs you know we
start to see the workstations come into
the high-end PC market and demand for
multitasking multi-user systems UNIX is
written and C gives us portability
relative portability across a lot of
different platforms like the next assign
Apollo and so forth and we're also
seeing standards evolve like object file
formats graphic standards and windowing
standards so forth it makes really UNIX
very viable in the high-end PC market
we're going to take a look at the power
of UNIX in its traditional workstation
environment we'll see some of these new
graphic user interfaces and we'll take a
look at the implementation of one
version of UNIX on the Macintosh we
begin with a background look at the
evolution of UNIX and for that report we
go to the University of California at
Berkeley it began its life at Bell Labs
in the early 1970s won the endorsement
of AT&amp;T and was adopted by universities
around the country who appreciated its
portability and its multitasking talents
it is UNIX an operating system with so
many variants you need a family tree to
trace its origins one of the earliest
centers of unix development is the
university of california at berkeley
responsible for one of the main branches
of unix called BS
for Berkeley software distribution
Berkeley got a fairly early version of
UNIX from Bell Labs and started writing
additional programs for it started
adding things when a larger version of
many computers came out Berkeley added a
number of new features to the system
that took advantage of the new computer
and we did software the way people
wanted the software here as a result
there were a number of other
universities and research labs that were
interested in the same thing the UNIX
operating system has special appeal to
programmers because of its many
programming tools UNIX is also
multitasking so several applications can
be running simultaneously it is
particularly suited to multi-user
environments and it offers structured
programming a way to divide problems
into smaller parcels on the other hand
the consequence of such a diverse
streams of development has been a lack
of standards to combine the best
elements of those diverse strands is the
latest challenge facing UNIX general the
standards have been picking and choosing
among the different features of
different versions and as a result the
standard versions will be not like any
existing version there'll be some place
in the middle for example a number of
programs have options and the standards
will specify a smaller number of options
then those will all be the same on on
every version
[Music]
joining us in the studio now is Karen
Lizardi Karen is product manager with
Sun Microsystems Gary Karen Munich's has
had sort of a bad reputation in the past
for a number of items like reliability
and lack of a good user interface and so
forth how does that change with the unix
in the last few years
well UNIX has gained a lot of momentum
in the last several years and there's
reasons for that as you know it's a very
powerful operating system and it
supports multitasking so that you can do
more than one function at a time it also
runs on a variety of hardware platforms
and many vendors in the industry to
support UNIX today one of the most key
things about UNIX is that it supports a
lot of hardware that run over on
networks reliability issues is that a
problem anymore
not that we're finding at this time as
as you know in universities today a lot
of developers learn UNIX that writes the
applications and so forth and they move
out into the industry and write
applications so there's a lot of support
from the developers but and users find
it hostile and many of them very very
very afraid of them this is one of the
things you addressed with the forward in
the demo could you describe basically
what kind of hardware we're dealing with
here yes this is a 386 I son 386 I and
it provides you the ability to run both
dots and units on the same screen
so you could open a window and run a DA
complication in another window run a
unit there was a distraction cost and a
piece of hardware like this car still
running under $5,000 ok ok let's take a
look at what you what you got here this
is a rather familiar looking interface
in fact tell us about open look ok open
look is a graphical user interface that
was designed by Sun and 18t and a joint
development effort we also license
technology from Xerox Corporation what
I've done today is brought four
applications that have actually
implemented the open look specification
open look is not a software product it's
actually consists of two books it's a
style guide for the developer on how to
design an application and a specific
for the toolkit designer it shows on the
screen actually I use these are for
applications we have here Sun right
which is what you see is what you get
editor Sun paint which is the paint
application or what we call a raster
application and this one is sun draw
which is an object editor or draw
application this is a file manager this
is critical this one allows you to see
graphically the UNIX file system right
on them on this on the machine as you
know most users that worked with UNIX
and users today dry rock commands on a
command line to get at their files it
was all by memory this is one of the
most integral parts about them it shows
how you'd use it now get into one of
these applications what we'll do is
first of all what I'd like to show you
is as you see on the on this area right
here is a control area and each one of
these windows has one notice that on
there is buttons all these buttons have
common labels as you can see each one
has file view edit what's remarkable
about that is each application you go
into the learning curve goes way down so
for example if I wanted to close this
window I simply click on the window mark
and it becomes an icon on the desktop
same thing again here and you can put
them away on your desktop and rearrange
them again any way you wish can you open
up the green box for example in looking
to reduce is the kind of interface that
most users are familiar with new here
you trying to make it comfortable with
stuff things though that are very nice
about open look though is that improving
my operations for example on the file it
says open or save on view it could be a
canvas it brings up the appropriate
window on edit you can actually pin up a
menu and you can move that to any
location that you wish what is
beneficial for the user is that I do not
have to go back up to the control area
to access the buttons all the time it's
minimum mouse movement which you don't
have on other user interfaces okay once
I pull the pin it goes away same thing
for each of the windows here
pull the pin it disappears now if we
wanted to actually you
this application I can bring this up
select whichever one I want to work with
I can easily move it out of my way
because I might want to do some other
things and draw right into the window at
any time I can also change the brush
pattern select any one of these again
tell it to go away and change it so
everything's very intuitive very very
friendly now one of the most important
things though that I found working with
the interface is that other interfaces
don't utilize is with the file manager
you can actually use something called
drag-and-drop
hmm if you wanted to actually load a
file into the window all I have to do is
grab the icon position it over the
window and it actually loads that file
into the window automatically now if the
entire file is not showing on the screen
we'll just put this one to the back I
can actually use the scroll bars at any
time to manipulate the window to see the
rest of the file if I stretch the window
with what we call the resize corners in
any one of the four corners then the
actual scroll bars if they're not needed
will go away in this case not all of the
file is still on the screen so they're
resident there's a lot of applications
being written out for open looking yes
actually we have over 1500 applications
that are being converted to support open
look and what's real exciting is the
applications that you see here today are
shipping this is not vaporware they're
available and we also have had early
developers kits that our developers are
taking then they're actually working and
designing applications so just returning
very quickly the price again I'm very
amazed at the $5,000 price tag we have a
vast array of workstations that Sun
offers and you can start at a very low
end and go over certified
we're familiar with UNIX of course under
many names and under many versions and
one of the popular versions of UNIX is
called SCO xenix developed by a company
called the Santa Cruz operation we have
a report from Wendy woods open desktop
is the latest attempt to sell UNIX to
mainstream corporate America open
desktop combines xenyx Santacruz
operations form of unix which runs on
PCs with other industry standard tools
and a graphical user interface called
motif it's all designed to offer a
palatable form of Unix for general
consumption these open system offerings
have never before been available in this
kind of a platform this widely available
pre-integrated ready to go and that's
really the value additive open desktop
it's not a new product piece in itself
but it's the collection and
standardization of all the open system
standards that are available today with
open desktop windows display various
applications running either on one's own
PC or on a mainframe files are shared
seamlessly between hardware platforms
the power of the 803 eight-six is tapped
the open desktop environment is expected
to be complete by September and se O's
track record of success has attracted
some big players to participate in the
project among them Dec and Tandy Santa
Cruz operation has doubled its sales for
each of the last ten years and has gone
from having just a few to now over 800
employees but perhaps the biggest
measure of its success comes from giant
Microsoft Corporation
which has just purchased nearly 20% of
the company in Santa Cruz California for
the computer chronicles I'm Wendy woods
[Music]
joining us in the studio now is Janna
Dobbs Janet's a product manager with
hewlett-packard Jeff before we get into
the motif user interface um bill packard
i know it's on the screen here way in
the background is a little bit of unix
there no it's like a directory and so we
all know that the UNIX is underlying
this whole user interface which of
course is different from UNIX it's a
does a different piece of software
why is Unix provide a good base for for
your product is a powerful operating
system in that it allows for large
amounts of memory and large programs
which are used in technical environments
factory floors large databases it's
powerful it's fast it's unfriendly so
it's it's been very successful in more
technical environments that's why that's
why the user interface is in front of it
okay now could could you tell us like
reading last segment what are we working
with here in terms of the hardware
there's obviously some equipment on the
floor here this was an HP 360 it has a
68 au 30 motorola processor in it it's
running about 33 megahertz what's caused
to this configuration series 300
workstations range from about 5,000 up
to 60 to 70,000 and this a configuration
like this goes from 10 to 15,000 tell us
about motif now and the interface in
particular how's your approach different
from what we just saw before in open
look
OSS motif is a combination of
technologies from both dec and HP if you
notice on the screen the 3d borders
around the windows it's an enhanced look
of the graphical user interface comer in
the PC environment from Microsoft both
Microsoft Windows and presentation
manager so it takes advantage of the
large installed base
[Music]
in the PC market and all the work that's
been done in graphical user interfaces
there is that the major difference the
the graphic look I mean we see it looks
quite different or functionally isn't
really the same basic idea
the behavior is based on that found in
the PC market so a user can't that has
been familiar with working with PCs can
walk up to a UNIX workstation and not be
concerned that its os/2 or UNIX or
whatever what they see on the screen is
what they're used to seeing and they
know how to open applications move
around in them did you do that for us
and show us how you can actually use
emojis yeah for example if I want to
move a window and I say I'm a PC user I
know that I put the mouse pointer on the
title bar click on that with the left
button and I can move that window around
on the screen I know that I can go to
the left upper corner hold the left
mouse button down and I get a system
menu which for each window contains
things like restore remove size if I
want to I con off' i a window i click in
the there's a minimize and maximize
button they're found in presentation
manager and on the left side it's
minimized and I can click and I Conniff
I that window and it moves into an icon
I can bring a window to the foreground
by by clicking in that window the light
source moves into that the border and so
I can tell which window or which
application is active at that point by
clicking in the upper right corner I can
allow an application to maximize or take
over the display can you access that
that's a raw UNIX window there and
actually work inside it yes I can I have
a terminal window right here but I click
in and make that window active and at
that point I can type in any of the
commands in the UNIX operating system
what is the status of motif mu where is
this as a product motif will be
available from OSF this summer HP in
Corvallis Oregon is under contract with
OSF to merge the deck and the HP toolkit
and we'll be turning that over to OSF in
July you talk about OSF and that's an
acronym for open systems for open
systems foundation foundation Software
Foundation okay can you tell us a little
bit about that group what's the greatest
form it's about a year ago to ensure
that software development environments
were open available for input from
different workstation vendors to ensure
that there were standards that would
exist to help end users and software
developers in creating programs
especially run UNIX and AIX in
particular okay and are there other
applications you talked about primarily
UNIX of course being in that technical
environment is HP working on new broader
applications that will run under your
necks and take advantage of we're
working on applications and other third
party developers are working on
applications with a user interface like
this more users will have access to the
power of a UNIX workstation and
therefore I think we'll find
workstations and more environments such
as maybe office environments mm-hmm
Jenna thank you very much in just a
minute we'll take a look at the new
Macintosh 2 CX and see the Macintosh
implementation of Unix aux stay with us
[Music]
with us in the studio now is Bill Jacobs
bill is product line manager with Apple
next to Bill Kerry Christian author and
research associate at the Rockefeller
University in the area one of the
problems with UNIX in the past has been
all these different versions and the
homegrown versions and so forth and then
there's becomes problem with you know
things like the libraries and so forth
being you will pass one program to
another UNIX system now is there any
standardization taking place - no
recently well it's quite a bit of
standardization in fact there's really
too much of it because if system is
broken into two separate camps on one
side an alliance between AT&amp;T which is
the originator of UNIX with son which is
one of the major technical innovators in
the say in this area which was the open
look version we started forgetting
history that's right and on the other
side there's a fairly large group of
companies that have are not pleased with
this they're afraid of the power going
to these two companies to their to their
detriment and they formed in other
alliance called the open Software
Foundation OSF and in that group you
have IBM plus a number of the other very
major players in this been that was the
motif we just saw on the recipe machine
what about next step on the next machine
that's yet a third version isn't it well
it's it uses the product called mock
which is a variant of UNIX it's it's
different enough from units that you
would probably classify it as somewhat
different category mm-hmm bill you have
a this is the first machine we've
actually seen on on the table just run
us take a look give us a look inside the
box there okay for Roenick we have here
is the Mac of the new Macintosh 2cx it
is smaller than the two fundamentally
the same electrical product in terms of
capabilities as the Macintosh 2x except
that by reducing the the number of slots
we've greatly reduced the cost and thus
the price in the machine it is a much
more clean internal design much more
easy to install things like hard disk
which simply snap in place and the cable
connects even the power supply there's
no screws holding it in it's held in by
plastic snap boxes so what
Dunne is not only reduce the the price
of the system through fixing some of the
RAM problems that the whole industry
suffered under but also by building the
machine more simply reduce price
okay sacrificed anything in terms of
performance for no this is a in terms of
performance is exactly the same as the
Macintosh 2cx and the direction mean
this is the to CX this is the to CX I'm
sorry same performance as the Macintosh
2x which is 10 to 20% greater than the
Macintosh - well you're running a so
what is a are you actually : yes apples
annex product is a UX so can you give us
a demo sure what we're gonna demo here
is something you've seen variants have
already today so I'll not belabor the
point this is a particular application
called magic it is a higher education
product for divining designing
integrated circuits and represents
fundamentally one of the key uses of
Unix today and that is for technical
professionals to do the types of work
they're involved in this is based on an
X 11.3 implementation we mentioned X
Windows is the underlying standard on
which open look and motif both be based
this is a currently available product we
just introduced it and started shipping
it a couple of weeks ago full x 11.3 and
rents on multiple screens so what's the
relationship here now you're running
UNIX a UX but are you where has the
relationship between the Mac operating
system in Unix what's going on inside
okay to show you that what I'll just do
here is exit the x11 implementation and
go show you the other side of the fence
for us here by exiting or attempted I
guess you have to put the mouse in the
box before that works the extra level
and implementation runs on the machine
and to exit that and then begin running
Macintosh applications as as you see
about 10 seconds we're now in a UNIX
terminal shell window as most UNIX users
are fairly comfortable with I've loaded
up a set of applications here the
important point about what I'm going to
show you is these applications are not
UNIX applications the first one I should
probably show is Mac draw 2 this is a
klaris product mmm yeah I'm sorry yeah
in order to in order to run klaris Mac
draw two on an aux system you simply go
down to egghead software and you buy the
version of Mac draw 2 that you buy for
your macintosh plus your mcintyre SC
from that you move the files the files
for the product off the floppy on to the
UNIX hard disk and then run them there
so here's an example while you're doing
that though what's the advantage of
doing that running it under UNIX instead
of just under the Macintosh the crucial
advantages that the end user gets to run
both the applications that he knows and
loves from the UNIX world and the
personal productivity software of the
Macintosh and that's we studied very
carefully the technical users world and
what he does day to day and he spends
about 70 to 80 percent of his time doing
writing drawing presenting even though
he's a UNIX techie he has all these
other things to do so we're you know
we're now in basically in a Macintosh
application and have all the all the
user interface of the Macintosh at our
fingertips let's open a just a file here
okay this is under Meg draw these are
Mac Dragic files some art that was
created by an artist for some purpose
and illustrates what you can do in Mac
draw the key point is you can now do it
on a UNIX system from a 300 our
application really instead of a $2000
location you only have about a half a
minute left carrie and i want to ask you
to kind of summarize from the users
point of view we've seen just in this
half hour you know four different
approaches to using unix what's a user
to do here in terms of trying to get
involved in the benefits of unix well
there a couple of things one is that
most unix systems are not being used in
environments where there are no
computers already so you have to think
about what you have if you've got a shop
that's been using apple products people
are familiar with the mac a ux is a
natural on the same side if you've got a
company where it's coming in from the
technical side they may be familiar with
many technical drafting applications
like you'd have on a sun system sun or
HP or companies like that are also a
natural if people have heavy involvement
in pcs they've been using pc software
things like xenyx and VPI you are able
to run the PC software in the way that
aux can run Mac software so I think for
most users you need to go with the
Alliance's that you're already familiar
with go with some of these vendors the
other thing is to keep track of the
numbers as best you can because in this
war of OSF AT&amp;T it's gonna be determined
by software vendors who writes who gets
the most applications on their product
and so if you look at the numbers six
months from year and now a year from now
you should be able to tell which of
these two
yeah who's really winning in the
marketplace and that's gonna determine
it gentlemen thank you very much that's
our look at eunuchs we'll be back with
this week's computer news in just a
moment in the random-access file this
week many new product announcements tied
to the just completed spring conduct
show in Chicago Intel stole most of the
headlines with its new 84 86 chip
containing more than a million
transistors the Intel 486 now goes
head-to-head with a new Motorola 6800 40
chip for the next generation of personal
computers however analysts say will
likely be several years before software
is written to take advantage of the new
faster chips several vendors including
Tandy grid and Dell introduced new PCs
based on the Intel 386 SX chip which is
a 32-bit chip using a 16-bit data path
and Compaq Olivetti and acer showed off
new 33 megahertz 386 machines sharp
became the first to actually demonstrate
a color LCD laptop the pc 8000 is a 386
machine with a 14 inch color screen
supporting VGA sharp said their
technology was different from the active
matrix LCDs used in miniature television
sets sharp said the color laptop would
be available by the end of the year for
under $10,000 toshiba showed off its new
4 megabit dram chips the new chips make
it possible to put as much as 14 Meg's
inside a Toshiba T 5200 laptop and
traveling software announced an upgrade
of its lap link program the new version
is called
lap length 3 and it will clone itself
onto another computer so that if you
have two different disk formats and only
one copy of lap link you can still
transfer files by first cloning the lap
link software onto another machine in
other news this week Motorola announced
a 50 megahertz version of its 68030 chip
that's the fastest clock speed in the
industry commodore has released a new
angus graphics chip for the amiga that
solves the memory limitation problems
with the current graphics chip the new
angus chip lets you use up to a megabyte
of memory
just for graphics a company called Mac
motion has used HyperCard to program a
new 9 axis robot system
the company says hyper card has enabled
programming costs to be cut so
dramatically that the cost of the robot
system may be reduced by a factor of 10
national semiconductor says it's
building chips for the National Security
Agency that self-destruct design
presumably for use by spies the chips
come apart if someone tries to open up
the machine finally Stanford University
is conducting the first-ever totally
computerized election the election is
only for student government but state
and county election officials are
watching the results the Stanford system
is using 70 Macintosh computers as
voting stations with special software
written by a Stanford sophomore the
designers say the benefits are not only
instant results but fewer wasted ballots
since the software is smart enough not
to let the voter do something which
would invalidate the ballot there is a
paper-and-pencil backup system for the
total computer phob who has never
touched a mouse that's it for this
week's random access I'm Maria Gabriel
for the computer Chronicles the computer
chronicles is made possible in part by
mcgraw-hill publishers of byte magazine
and fix the byte information exchange in
print and online bite and Bicks serve
computer professionals worldwide with
detailed information on new hardware
software and technologies for a
transcript of this week's computer
Chronicles send four dollars to PTV
publications post office box 701 kent
ohio for four to four oh please indicate
program date
[Music]
