hi uh This Journal article this next one
in the series um is going to be
our 2020 paper sorry this paper let me
tell you it took a long time to be
published so it was accepted in 2020 but
then actually came out in 2021 but then
the journal kept it as the 2020
publication
date it was is a very long process for
understandable reasons but it's kind of
a funny funny date wise one for me okay
this is was published in gesture um in
2020 and the title is context not
sequence order affects the meaning of
bonobo pan paniscus gestures and this is
by myself um Takeshi
fichi and Richard W burn so I have to
um so this paper is not open access in
the journal but it is in the in my
University's online repository and I'll
link to both the journal link and the
online repository Link in the
description so I just have to do a
little switch between there the
abstract in most languages individual
words can be ambiguous between several
different meanings but through syntax
and context the intended meaning of an
ambig ambiguous word usually becomes
apparent many great ape gestures also
have ambiguous meanings which poses the
problem of how individuals can interpret
the signaler intended meaning in
specific
instances we tested the effects of
sequence compositionality and
situational context including behavioral
and interpersonal contexts in Wild
bonobos pan paniscus at wber in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo we
found no effect on a gesture's meaning
from its presence or position in a
sequence however two aspects of
situational context did affect meaning
behavior of the signal immediately prior
to gesturing and relative age or sex of
signaler and
recipient the intended meaning of
ambiguous gestures was also completely
disambiguated by means of these aspects
of context our findings suggest that the
use of contextual information to
interpret ambiguous signals predates the
uniquely human lineage and is not
specific to language introduction great
ape gestures offer an opportunity to
reconstruct The evolutionary precursors
to human language since they form an
extensive system of mutually understood
intentional signals intended meanings
have been identified by recording the
outcomes that satisfy ape signalers and
most gestures seem to have several
meanings even when playful uses have
been
discounted these ambiguous meanings may
arise from gestures having multiple
distinct meanings or from having a more
General underlying meaning such apparent
ambiguity seems puzzling if
communication is to be
reliable however human language
frequently shows semantic ambiguity in
word meanings yet is efficiently
disambiguated in normal
discourse in this paper we investigate
whether two mechanisms that help to dis
uate words may also underly how great
ape gestures are understood when a
semantically ambiguous word that is a
word that has multiple meanings either
through poisy this is multiple words
with related but distinct meanings or
homophony multiple words that happen to
have the same form is used in
combination with other words the local
semantic syntactic context of the
sentence which words appear around the
semantically ambiguous word and how
those words are syntactically arranged
gives the recipient more information
than if the ambiguous word were used on
its own when a recipient hears the
sentence let's walk by the bank of the
river it is clear that the word Bank
does not refer to a building where they
might withdraw money further the broader
situational context what the signaler
and recipient are doing and who they are
may also help to disambiguate the word's
meaning if two people are walking
walking down the High Street and one
says let's walk by the bank the
recipient is unlikely to think that they
are headed to the nearest river unless
the speaker is a child obsessed with
using their new fishing rod both local
communicative context I.E signal
sequences or syntax and broader
situational context might also explain
how great apes disambiguate the meanings
of gestures when considering the local
syntactic context of a sequence of
signals there is sparse evidence that
non-human animals POS anything like our
complicated recursive hierarchical
syntactic structures however there are
some indications that animals combine
signals usually in two slot combinations
and that some combinations alter the
meaning of the component signals this is
seen in Chestnut Crown babblers Southern
Pi babblers putty-nosed monkeys Titi
monkeys um and banded mongooses for
example these two combinations in
which two signal types are combined in a
fixed order might be described as syntax
like they may be compositional where the
meanings of the signals both contribute
to a larger meaning or combinatorial
where the meanings of signals
individually do not directly relate to
the meaning of the signals
combined it has been proposed that a
two- slot basic syntax may have been an
important step in language Evolution for
early homins as a potential precursor to
complex linguistic
syntax whether other species see signal
combinations represent a homologous or
an analogous model better understanding
of the deployment of signal combinations
in non-human primates Hereafter
primates may give insight into the
validity of this hypothesis intriguingly
the first evidence that a primate might
be able to comprehend syntactic
structure came from ape language studies
on kzi a bonobo similar abilities have
also been found for a language trained
gray parrot and bottlenose
dolphins kzy showed understanding of
signal combinations and argument
structure in spoken English but had
varying success when word order or word
class were altered in their natural
behavior bonobos seem to attend to
Signal sequences in vocal communication
accessing information about the location
of desirable food through differing
vocal sequences although evidence is
limited and it remains unclear whether
they attend to the order of signals
Within These
sequences great a gesture research has
yet to find evidence that sequence order
changes the meaning of gestures but
given that bonobos have been shown to
comprehend syntax in other domains it
must remain a possibility bonobo
gestures have not been studied as
extensively as chimpanzee gestures and
most research comes from small captive
groups of bonobos while these captive
studies regularly report smaller
repertoire sizes than those of wild
populations they still show a similar
pattern of flexible usage across
contexts I.E one gesture type may be
used used in many contexts and one
context may contain many gesture types
this is often interpreted as means and
dissociation and is considered a
Hallmark of great ape gestural
communication however means n
dissociation more accurately describe
signals and their goals not their
contexts I.E one signal may have many
goals and one goal may be achieved by
many
signals therefore to fully examine means
and dissociation in great ape gestures
we must disentangle Le goals from
contexts the broader situational context
also helps in understanding the intended
meaning of semantically ambiguous words
and is perhaps a more likely candidate
than local syntactic communicative
context for the disambiguation of
non-human gestures situational context
is known to affect the meaning of animal
signals but its potential to reduce
ambiguity in ape signaling is unknown PL
and Goodall both recognize that great
ape gestures could be used in many
different behavioral contexts and this
has been confirmed in captive
studies however the possibility that
gestures might have different meanings
in different contexts has not yet been
examined here we investigate two social
aspects of situational context the
behavioral context the behavior of the
signaler at the time of gesturing and
interpersonal context the relationship
between signaler and recipient in terms
of the age and sex of
each both contexts could provide useful
information information for interpreting
the intended meaning of gestures like
what the signaler has been doing or
attempting to do and how they relate
demographically to their intended
audience male and female chimpanzees may
use different strategies of gestural
communication and so it's quite possible
that demographic variables also impact
on bonobo gestural Communication in this
paper We Begin by examining whether the
presence of a gesture in a sequence and
the position of that gesture in a
sequence Alters the gesture's meaning we
then examine whether behavioral and
interpersonal context might also affect
the meanings of
gestures the aim is that disentangling
the role of context May finally help us
to understand how an ape recipient is
able to correctly interpret the meaning
of seemingly ambiguous gestures methods
data collection we conducted fieldwork
at w Alo scientific Reserve Democratic
Republic of the Congo from February to
June 2014 and January to June 2015 we
follow two neighboring groups groups uh
sorry two neighboring communities of
wild bonobos E1 group with 39
individuals and P group 30 individuals
in 2014 there were 63 individuals with
28 adults 16 females 12 males 12
adolescents seven females five males
nine juveniles six females three males
and 14 infants eight females six males
in 2015 there were 64 individuals with
30 adults 18 females 12 males eight
adolescents three females five males 10
juveniles seven females three males and
16 infants 10 females six males age
classes for bobos were taken from
Hashimoto
1997 habituation for E1 group started in
1974 and for p group in
2010 we observed bonobos from
approximately 5:50 a.m. to 12 uh p.m on
a total of 204 days totaling
1,159 hours of observation
time for filming we used focal Behavior
sampling we started filming Whenever two
or more individuals came within a 5 m
range of each other to catch the
beginning of social interactions we
recorded video footage using a Panasonic
HDC sd90 video camera with a 3sec
pre-record function video coding the
best
bit video was sorted into a library and
coded using FileMaker Pro and the coding
scheme for this is in the supplementary
materials for the paper we created a
separate FileMaker Pro coding sheet for
each gesture instance defined as a
single gesture which included the
following information signaler recipient
signaler age and sex recipient age and
sex bout sequence signal Behavior prior
gesture type directed audience checking
persistence response weight recipient
response goal and goal met signaler is
the individual who produces the gesture
and recipient is the target individual
ages classified as infant under four
years juvenile 4 to 7 years adolescent 8
to 14 years and adult 15 years or older
bout is a single gesture or sequence of
gestures separated by over one second
and was coded as a sequential number out
of the total number of bouts that
occurred in the communication event for
example one of one two of five Etc
sequence shows the position of single
gestures for example one of one two of
three in a series of gesture instances
separated by less than one second signal
or behavior prior determines the
behavioral context defined as the
behavior of an individual immediately
prior to gesturing so this is without a
pause or like without an interruption to
do another Behavior that's in the
supplementary materials too um gesture
type is the physical form of the gesture
as used by bonobos and this is described
in an Open Access article that we
published in
2017 um and we have video examples of
all the gesture types available um on
the great apeed dictionary. ac.uk um as
well as the great ape dictionary YouTube
channel directedness audience checking
response waiting and persistence are
generally accepted markers of
intentionality in communication if a
signal if a signal is directed it must
be used socially I.E in the Pres
presence of an audience with visual
monitoring of a Target individual
audience checking is when the signaler
observes the attention of the recipient
before or during gesturing response
waiting is when the signaler pauses for
over 1 second after gesturing
persistence is when the signaler
continues to gesture towards the same
recipient all gesture instances were
required to be directed and to meet at
least one other Criterion for
intentionality audience checking
persistence or response waiting before
being accepted for analysis giving
4,256 intentional gesture instances
meaning was defined as the Apparently
satisfactory outcome I.E a change in
Behavior by the recipient that satisfies
the signal shown by sensation of
gesturing Asos offer a fine grained
approach for studying meanings in
contrast to previous studies that looked
at context alone to examine gesture
usage the ASO approach also centers the
goal directedness of gestures part of
graci and intentionality that allows us
to say that gestures have meaning in the
first place Hereafter we use the word
meaning to mean
ASO for each instance we coded recipient
response no response ASO gesture unknown
goal the specific change in Behavior by
the recipient also in supplementary
materials and goal met yes no or unknown
context was coded separately for meaning
as described above behavioral context is
taken from signal or behavior prior and
interpersonal context from SAR age sex
and recipient age sex all statistical
analyses were performed in R
3.5.3 interobserver reliability and as
an aside here if you're planning a video
data paper I want to see your int
Observer reliability please int Observer
reliability a second experienced coder
Katherine hober confirmed our accuracy
by coding a 100 gesture instances for
the following information gesture type
persistence and signaler apparently
satisfied uh CH has experienced coding
gray tape gestures but was not aware of
the hypothesis being tested in this
study we calculated int observe
reliability using Cohen's Kappa
revealing agreement for all variables
gesture type 87 persistence 7 and
signaler apparently satisfied 63 results
do gesture types convey the same
meanings when they are used singly as
when they are used in
sequences if the purpose of gesture
sequences is to modify the meaning of a
gesture type then one would expect the
meaning of gestures in sequences to be
different to those used singly to test
this we looked at gesture types that are
used both singly and in sequences um and
the range for the sequences was two to
eight gestures to illustrate what these
gesture sequences can include one
example of a two- sequence gesture is
arm swing plus directed push and the E
gesture sequence was object Shake plus
big lad scratch scratch plus object
Shake plus big glad scratch plus object
Shake plus present grooming we excluded
play and unknown meanings in order to
examine only properly identified
outcomes gestures used in play were
excluded from analysis as actions
performed in play do not necessarily
represent those actions non-playful
usage we required that a meaning be
achieved at least five times for a given
gesture type 14 gesture types were
suitable for analysis we first created a
proportional stacked histogram to
qualitatively examine the data and that
will appear
now most gesture types have a similar
profile for single and sequence usage
for 12 out of 14 gesture types the
primary meaning was the same for single
gestures and sequences only one gesture
type grab did not share any meanings
between single instances and sequences
so we then examined whether the
distribution of meanings for each
gesture type was the same for single
gestures and those in sequences six
gesture types mouth stroke present
grooming big loud scratch directed push
present climb on and arm up had only one
meaning and were identic identical for
both single instances and sequences for
the Ming gesture types where there were
enough data so no more than 20% of cells
with over five less than five expected
value and no cells with less than one
expected value we perform Ki Square
tests on a table of single or sequence
by meaning if there were not adequate
data for a Ki Square test and the table
was 2x two We performed Fisher's exact
test Fisher exact test can also be used
for an M * n contingency tables and when
we have used this method we specify the
size of the contingency table in table
two three gesture types arm raay bipedal
stance and rocking had the same
distribution for single and sequence
plus the six gesture types of 100%
identical meaning of course
and then five gesture types grab reach
touch other pre present genitals forward
and grab pull had significantly
different distributions to answer the
question do gester types convey the same
meanings when they are used singly as
when they are used in sequences yes most
gester types have the same primary
meaning for single gesture and sequences
so that's 12 out of 14 and most gesture
types 9 out of 14 had the same
distribution of meanings for single
gestures and sequences it seems that the
simple presence of a gesture type in a
sequence is not sufficient for changing
the meaning of that gesture type okay
next question are gesture types more
likely to appear at a specific position
in a
sequence before seeing whether the
position in a sequence affects the
meaning of a gesture we wanted to see
whether gesture types are more likely to
occur in certain positions in a sequence
to do this we first took all gesture
instances occurring in sequences for
which the position in the full SE
sequences known sometimes we observed
incomplete sequences due to filming
constraints we labeled the positions as
first middle occurring in any position
in the middle of a sequence and
last uh video people are getting my like
video reaction gestures throughout this
video um
apologies um I'm silly this gave us 291
instances in the first position 200 91
in the last position and 101 instances
in the middle
position um with sequences ranging from
2 to eight gestures so obviously the
middle position is a little less because
if you just have a two gesture sequence
then there is not a middle gesture we
then excluded play and unknown meanings
as in previous analyses and excluded all
gesture types that achieved any one
meaning fewer than five times note that
for this analysis there are some
additional gesture types these gesture
types achiev deman more than five times
in sequences so they're included here
but they didn't achieve a meaning more
than five times singly and so we're
excluded from the previous analysis this
left 415 instances in total um 172 first
58 middle and 185 last position again
with sequences ranging from 2 to eight
gestures we tested whether the
distribution of positions for each
gesture type was different from the
distribution of positions across all
gesture types where possible we use 2x3
Kai Square test with gesture type and
all gesture types by first middle and
last if a Kai Square test was not
appropriate we used fish's exact test
and figure a table three sorry shows the
results four gesture types were suitable
for KI Square analysis comparing the
distribution of positions for each
gesture type to the distribution of
positions across all gesture types of
these only one gesture type present
grooming had a significantly different
distribution possibly owing to the fact
that it never occurred in the middle
position we did not analyze gesture
types that were observed fewer than 10
times but did perform Fisher's exact
test on those that were observed more
than 10 times but not enough times for a
Ki Square test of the five gesture types
analyzed with the Fisher's exact test
one arm swing was significantly
different and one present climon was
tending towards significance of the nine
gesture types that we analyzed only two
had a significantly different
distribution of positions to the average
distribution to answer the question or G
types more likely to appear at a
specific position in a sequence no most
gesture types appear in a similar
distribution across positions to the
average distribution of all gestures
across all positions just as there is no
difference of meaning for a gesture type
whether used singly or in sequence there
is also no systematic variation in where
each gesture type occurs in the sequence
the next question is whether the meaning
of each gesture type is affected by the
position in which it occurs in the
gesture sequence does the position of a
gesture in a sequence
affect its meaning we began with the
nine gesture types for which there had
been adequate data for KI square and fer
exact tests in the previous section and
calculated the proportion of instances
for which a gesture in each position
achieved each meaning like in the
analysis comparing single gestures and
sequences of gestures we created a
proportional stacked histogram to
qualitatively examine the data and
that's figure two on screen now most
gesture types appear to have a similar
profile for all three positions
we then assessed whether the primary
meaning was shared for all three
positions um four gesture types big loud
scratch present grooming directed push
and present climb on shared the primary
meaning across all positions four
gesture types touch other arm swing
present GS forward and rocking shared
the primary meaning in two positions and
one gesture type arm raise did not share
a primary meaning in any position all
gesture types except rocking shared all
meanings across all positions rocking in
shared initiate copulation across all
positions but initiate gii rubbing was
only achieved in the first and last
position so big loud scratch present
grooming directed push and present climb
on all achieve only one identical
meaning for each position making
statistical analysis unnecessary for the
remaining five gester types the counts
for each cell are too low for KI Square
analysis we therefore performed M * n
Fisher exact test but wouldd like to
acknowledge that these results should be
approached with caution due to low
number of
observations as a caveat um by the time
you're recording gesture
instances used towards a certain meaning
in sequences in certain positions in
sequences you're dealing with a lower
and lower um or a smaller and smaller
data set as you go
along so none of the nine gesture types
those that are 100% identical and those
that were tested had a significantly
different distribution of Med meanings
depending on the position in which the
gesture occurred to answer the question
does the position of a gesture in a
sequence affect its meaning no all nine
gesture types had a similar distribution
of meanings in each position so can
behavioral context reduce the ambiguity
of gesture meanings our evidence
supports the hypothesis that bonobo
gestural communication is not structured
with sequence order syntax like
compositionality gestures used singly
versus in sequences do not seem to have
different meanings they do not a
distribution of positions different from
the average distribution and their
position in the sequence does not seem
to affect their meaning we now examine
whether the behavioral context defined
as the behavior of an individual
immediately prior to gesturing changes
the
meaning to look at behavioral context we
started with all gesture instances
single and in sequences together that
achieved a meaning then we limited the
meaning then we limited to meanings that
occur over five times from for a given
gesture type to maintain consistency
with a previous syntax analysis we
calculated the proportion of instances
for achieving each meaning by the total
number of instances for that gesture
type 15 gesture types achieved one
meaning in 100% of instances analysis
will continue with the remaining 13
gesture types which have less than one
proportion for each meaning for the 13
gesture types that had more than one
meaning we then cut down the dat is set
to exclude any meaning seen for a
context fewer than five times this
eliminated hand on and arm up from
analysis we then created a proportional
stacked histogram of the meanings
achieved by the remaining 11 gesture
types which is up now we then split
these 11 gesture types by behavioral
context which is the behavior of the SAR
immediately prior to gesturing we
created a proportional stack histogram
of meanings achieved in each context by
each gesture type three gesture types by
petal St object shake and rocking only
occurred in a sexual context and so are
not shown on the
histogram the meaning of grab and
present gals backward became completely
disambiguated when split by context grab
achieved reposition in The Grooming
context and climb on me in the traveling
context present genitals backwards
achieve Mount me in the agonistic
context and initiate copulation in the
sexual context arm raise was
disambiguated in two of three contexts
in achieving initiate grooming in The
Grooming context and climb on you in the
vocalization context the vocalization
context as another caveat um was
shorthand for juvenile tantrums and I
should have clarified that in the paper
reach arm swing and grab pull in one out
of two context so reach achieved acquire
food in the feeding context an arm swing
and grab pull achieved climb on me in
the traveling context and touch other
and present genitals forward in one of
three contexts touch other achieved clim
on me in the traveling context um um and
present genitals forward achieved
initiate GG rubbing in the agonistic
context one noticeable fact is that in
all gesture types occurring in a sexual
context except present genitals
backwards the gesture can be used to
initiate both copulation and GG rubbing
it is therefore unsurprising that
present genitals backward is the
exception as it is not physically
conducive to GG rubbing for all gesture
types occurring in multiple contexts We
performed fer exact tests by of meaning
by
context all G types had significantly
different distributions of meanings
compared across context so to answer the
question can behavioral context help to
reduce the ambiguity of gesture meanings
yes most gesture types eight out of 11
became disambiguated in one or more
contexts that is they achieved only one
meaning in that context the remaining
three gesture types only occurred in one
context and so are not displayed in
figure four this supports the hypothesis
that gestures result in particular
meanings because of their specific
behavioral contexts the behavior of the
signaler immediately prior to the
gesture provides additional information
so that the meaning achieved by the
gesture differs depending on the
behavioral context now does
interpersonal context further reduce
ambiguity in gesture meaning to
determine whether interpersonal context
specifically the age and sex of singular
and recipient affects the gesture
meaning we analyze gestures where the
behavioral context failed to
disambiguate meaning overall nine
gesture types were not fully
disambiguated in meaning by Behavioral
context in a sexual context arm raise
arm swing bipedal stance object shape
present gentless forward rocking and
touch other all achieved both initiate
copulation and initiate G rubbing in a
traveling context reach achieve both
climb on me and climb on you in a
grooming context grab pull achieve both
reposition and follow me and touch other
achieve both reposition and initiate
grooming for these cases we tested
whether interpersonal context affected
meaning specifically the six and age of
interactance to address the itive sex as
an interpersonal context we categorize
gestures as female to male female to
female or male to male ignoring the
direction of the gesture I.E male sorry
it's hyphenated so it doesn't matter
whether the direction was male to female
or female to male we required that each
category achieve a meaning over five
times for inclusion in analysis meaning
was disambiguated for six gesture types
with an additional gesture type present
General tools forward almost completely
disambiguated in the female male context
present genitals forward achieves
initiate comp population 97% of the time
and initiate GG rubbing only 3% of the
time upon closer examination all of the
female male GG rubbing instances are
between young individuals and adults not
between sexually mature individuals even
so the distribution of meanings for
present genitals forward between sex
categories is significantly different
two gesture types grab pull and reach
remain ambiguous for these we categorize
the age and direction of sign and
recipient so this does the direction
does matter adult to adult adult to
young young to adult or Young Too Young
meaning was disambiguated for one of
these gestures reach but grab pull
remained ambiguous to answer the
question does interpersonal context
further reduce ambiguity in gesture
meaning yes interpersonal context the
age and sex of signal and recipient
entirely disambiguates meaning in seven
of nine gesture types there are two
remaining ambiguous your types present
genitals forward achieved initiate GG
rubbing in 100% of instances for the
female female context and initiate
copulation in 97% of instances for
female male context with a 3% to
initiate GG rubbing involving subadult
individuals grab pull achieve both
reposition and climb on me and
illustrates a specific problem in our
observational methods namely that we
cannot determine how much force is
behind a contact gesture overall
behavioral and interpersonal context
together largely disambiguate the
meanings of bonobo gestures discussion
bonobo gestural communication clearly
does not have syntax in the complex
recursive way that human language does
but it now seems that it also lacks
syntax like
compositionality in general gesture
types in sequences are not interpreted
differently to the same gestures used
singly gesture types do not occur in
specific positions in a sequence and the
position in which a gesture occurs in a
sequence does not affect its meaning
although bonobas May attend to vocal
call sequences it is unclear whether
they attend to the order of
vocalizations within sequences and we
have found here that they do not seem to
attend to the composition of gesture
sequences however the apparent ambiguity
of bonobo gestures is not a matter of
vagueness they mean different things in
different contexts our classification of
Behavioral and interpersonal context was
a simple one yet almost entirely
resolved the meaning of those bonobo
gestures that had appeared ambiguous
touch other and grab pull in the
grooming context remained ambiguous but
perhaps important tactile information is
missing for these gesture types how hard
is the pressure being applied is the
pressure being directed we cannot deduce
these things from video and it is
possible that this missing information
on our part is obvious and important for
the bonobos minor variations in gesture
form for example hand fling or arm fling
where the signaler engages their hand or
their full arm in the movement do not
seem to affect the meanings of gestures
it is therefore unlikely that we are
missing subtle differences in the way
that gestures are physically deployed
that gives away the differences in
meaning however it is possible that
differences in classification of
gestures meanings and contexts in video
coding could affect the degree to which
gestures appear ambiguous and it is
always mindful it is always important to
be mindful of what is Meaningful for our
study subjects overall bonobo seem able
to retrieve sufficient information from
behavioral and interpersonal contexts to
correctly decipher the intended meaning
of ambiguous
gestures in the past researchers have
examined the context in which gestures
occur and then described a gesture's
meaning as flexible because it occurs in
multiple contexts a so-called means end
Association here we build on these
previous Studies by considering both the
flexibility of gestures across contexts
and the flexibility of gestures across
meanings or goals we found that while
most gestures can be used flexibly
across context they tend to have a
specific meaning in a specific context
this adds an interesting Dimension to
the interpretation of means and
dissociation gestures can occur in
multiple contexts and gestures can have
multiple meanings but when gesture and
context are combined their meanings or
goals become more specific moreover only
around half of gestures have multiple
meanings this distinction between
gestures that have only one meaning and
gestures that have multiple meanings may
suggest that great apes have two
families of gesture types unambiguous
and amb ambiguous
respectively here we have examined only
those gestures that have multiple
meanings whether there is any systematic
difference between gestures with single
and multiple meanings is a topic for
further research neglecting context in
inter species comparisons risks
confounding differences in context
frequency with real differences in
meaning for instance many chimpanzee
gesture types also appear ambiguous in
meaning and these two may actually have
specific meanings in specific contexts
moreover while a large overlap has been
found in the meanings of chimpanzee and
bonobo gestures the overlap was not
complete where gesture meanings
apparently differed between the two
species it is possible that the gestures
were in fact deployed in different
contexts there are striking differences
in social behavior between the bonobos
and chimpanzees such as the centrality
of females to the bonobo group and the
high frequency of genito genital
rubbing experiencing behavioral contexts
in different proportions may have given
rise to different fre quencies in
intended meanings even in the absence of
differences in underlying gesture
meanings thus future comparisons of
gestural repertoire among all great ape
species must take context into account
there are two main interpretations for
this relationship of meaning and context
an ambiguity account or a general
meaning account in the ambiguity account
a gesture has multiple meanings and
context divides those meanings allowing
the correct meaning to be accessed for
each instance with within the ambiguity
account gestures may be polymus one
gesture with multiple related but
distinct meanings or homophonic multiple
gestures and Associated meanings that
happen to have the same form the two are
currently difficult to distinguish in
non-human
communication in the general meaning
account a gesture has a more General
underlying meaning for example I want
something and context adds information
for example what is wanted food to
travel together to copulate
the difference between these
interpretations is important but
challenging to disentangle through
observation and current methodologies
may not yet allow us to differentiate
systematically between these accounts it
is possible that both are correct in
different cases thus while there may be
a more General meaning for closely
related outcomes for example climb on me
climb on you it seems unlikely that a
general meaning could underpin others
for example the varied outcomes of out
arm Rays or touch gestures our findings
reveal that great ape gestures may have
greater resemblance to human language
than hitherto suspected spoken
utterances out of context are multiply
ambiguous normally the intended senses
are seamlessly resolved through
contextual information in the same way
behavioral and interpersonal context are
almost entirely disambiguates the
meaning of bonobo gestures we suggest
that bonobos use this information in
correctly inferring the intended
meanings of signal
given these results contextual
disambiguation of signals most likely
dates to our last common ancestor with
the pan lineage and there is potential
that future comparisons with gorillas
and orangutans could trace this back
even further the ability to incorporate
context into human communication adds
another Rich layer of information for
signaler and recipient alike and it now
seems that contextual information is
also integral to the communication of
our closest living relatives and it's
time for those
references um scrolling up the
screen as always I will put um a link to
the paper and then to the repository for
this one um in the description below um
I'll also link to the audio version um
and to the great ape dictionary YouTube
channels where you can find more videos
of these gestures I see you again next
month bye
