it would be better if more people
understood what is wrong with the
progress narrative and understood what
authentic progress actually
entails and understood the caution and
restraint that it requires understood
the emphasis on maintaining understood
that very often the best way to solve a
problem is to remove its causes which
actually involves reversing some stuff
rather than always create new stuff but
the obviously Market incentive is on
create new stuff the history books
incentive is on new stuff but as we
think about how do we actually solve
problems in a way that isn't a racket
right that isn't solving a problem that
was caused by the result of our previous
problem solving and that will in turn
create more of
that today I am rejoined by Daniel
schmachtenberger who is the director of
the consilience project and the
co-founder of civilization Research
Institute where he and his colleagues
have have just written a new paper
called development in progress which is
the topic of this long horizontally and
vertically deep conversation with Daniel
uh we talk about what is progress the
history of progress who gets to write
the progress narrative and whether
progress itself uh actually means
betterment uh for Society for the
well-being of the human species and the
natural world uh you might might not be
surprised uh to hear that this episode
raised more questions than answers and
in fact I didn't even get to my
questions because we were unpacking his
paper um those are going to have to be
discussed in a follow-up
conversation um I think we have to
understand the problems the generator
functions the Dynamics and start asking
questions about where do we want to go
and how do we get there from here and I
think these conversations with people
like Daniel at least start to uh um
Define the parameters of the
conversation and where we need to go
please welcome Daniel
schmachtenberger Daniel schmachtenberger
welcome back good to see you my friend
good to see you holy crap you look
different uh one part Gandalf one part
Zeus one part surfer
dude you didn't mention uh Appalachia
Mountain guy that just stopped cutting
it when I moved to the mountains out
here all right well you look you look
happy and healthy I am uh happy it's the
sun just came out like just a minute ago
from where it was raining and uh
storming and there's a huge rainbow over
the mountains right out my window right
as we're starting to talk wow yeah the
last podcast we did we had a a
background of just bright virgent green
outside your window and I I know you
have a new setup there so we can't see
it um okay welcome back we uh believe it
or not it was a year ago uh that we had
our last podcast which was on artificial
intelligence and the super organism and
and this is kind of the first followup
to that conversation one of the core
themes we talked about uh before we got
to AI itself uh was the delineation
between narrow boundary goals and wide
boundary and wisdom and and that uh
brought you to talk about uh what you
called then naive progress versus real
progress and you have now written a
paper uh which I've read on this concept
you're now referring to it as immature
versus authentic progress and that is
going to be the theme uh of today's
conversation uh how would you like to
start I uh played a role in writing this
paper is a our team wrote it so
multi-authored
um yeah the relationship
between what progress actually is how we
think about it and what our goals are
and how we go about achieving them uh if
we are having narrowly defined goals as
we discussed last time that can be
achieved while externalizing harm in
other places and we do a lot of that and
we look at all of the goal achieving and
not all the externalities we can call
that progress and for those that happen
to make it
through that process that are not the uh
Losers of the war and not the species
that go extinct or not the animals that
are in the factory farms or uh the
cultures that are genocided or anything
else uh there's a survivorship bias of
being able to say you know those narrow
definitions those narrow goals uh we are
the beneficiaries of the progress of
those narrow goals kind of
differentially and so you can make a
progress
narrative associated with effective
achieving of narrow goals even if they
are driving rivalry and driving
externality and uh you know it's not a
great definition of progress it's um at
generously it's a naive definition of
progress less generously it's propaganda
and apologism for
winners and um the way that humans think
about what is progress what is actual
betterment of the world what are our
lives and service to in that way is
pretty important because it's
significant to how we Orient ourselves
individually and collectively so that's
why it's an interesting topic well while
I was waiting for you I looked up
progress in the dictionary
and it has different definitions
depending on the context but as a noun
it's described as gradual betterment and
as a verb as to develop a higher better
or more advanced
stage uh so so why don't you unpack a
little bit on why the concept of
progress uh in our in our cultural goals
our aspirations our narratives the
stories of modern human culture why it's
so important
I think most everybody watching your
show this is kind of obvious right they
don't think that the totality of things
that are technological advancement or
that drive GDP or you know other things
aligned with primary civilizational
metrics that were optimizing that we
consider the metrics of progress are
comprehensively good I think the people
listening to your show know that uh what
we consider progress by those
definitions is not necessarily good for
nature and is something that is not good
for nature that we depend upon a good
definition of progress uh is not equally
distributed good
for across wealth classes across uh
Global South across you know so many
things like that but we can just give a
couple
examples so in your definition it
mentioned both advancement and
betterment which are different things
and it's kind of important to think
about that because advancement could
could be purely a technological thing
with no definition of good right so we
can say that this iteration of the
iPhone is more technologically advanced
has more computer processing more
capabilities Etc than the previous one
so it's definitely progress from the
definition of advancement is the world
better as a result better is a question
that science actually can't answer on
its own because it's a question of good
right which is related to ought not just
is
and so now we get into moral philosophy
we get into something that is connected
to but outside of the domains of the
philosophy of science itself which is
what is actually
good and so let's say that we look at
the graphs that are very clear about how
uh screen time associated with phones
corresponds to teen suicide suicidal
ideations and self
harm and you can watch that as cell phon
started to become UB
and as people spend more hours per day
on the cell phones and it's easier to
spend more hours on the ones that are
more technologically advanced because
they do more things and end up being
more ad addictive that body dysmorphia
and suicide and mental illness go
up and so it's it's more advanced is it
better for the people that are using it
no um in a lot of metrics that really
matter right and if you look at the
total supply chain effects of making
those and you look at the conflict zones
associated with those mines and Supply
chains and everything that's all part of
the story of is the world better as a
result of doing this thing there's no
question
that the You Know Better Living Through
Chemistry uh leading up to the world
that Rachel Carlson wrote about in
Silent
Spring um like Leed gasoline did stop
engine knocking so it was absolutely
better from the perspective of the uh
efficiency of engine process not
knocking now and DDT killed mosquitoes
yeah very effectively so from the narrow
definition of kills mosquitoes and
provide some
convenience super effective and it was a
great Act of technological progress to
be able to figure out how to do this
thing now did the DDT start kill like
killing everything and causing oside at
scale and human health effects at scale
and pollinators and ecological collapse
and did the leted gasoline take a
billion points off of global IQ and make
us something like Forex more violent yes
it did that too and so this is the thing
is to think
about and again everybody knows from
who's listening here that GDP goes up
with war military spending for private
contractors G you know so if if GD if
Market size is a measure of
civilizational progress then war is
awesome um GDP goes up with addiction
right because if someone is addicted to
McDonald's addicted to their smartphone
and purchasing addicted to whatever
leads to more Market activity um it goes
up with diseases that are treated
through for-profit processes and so
there are a lot of ways and you know
there are kids who do very well at the
primary metrics of school like SATs but
who
are suicidal or sociopathic so from the
narrow definition of did this way of
raising kids and educating them do well
sat sure from uh did we raise healthy
human beings uh that can also contribute
to a healthy Society it's a very
different question and
so the the idea that Humanity has been
making kind of these strides of progress
as we have had cative knowledge and
we've definitely had cumulative
knowledge and there are definitely
things about it that are good um if
someone was trying to figure out math
from scratch on their own and there
hadn't been recorded knowledge they'd
never get as far as Roman numerals right
they'd get like maybe
counting and but we can learn all of
this knowledge and do things with
it so there is progress of stored
knowledge there is progress of of
capability of achieving things are we
are the goals well defined you know are
they good goals is a is a really
important question and
um the progress narrative the idea that
technology in particular is advancing
rapidly and is making everything better
and better along with the market and
democracy and
science uh and that this is the best
time to be alive
and that the Hoban view that you know
the state of man and nature their life
is Brut as short nasty and mean we have
civilized ourselves everyone is literate
um you know Etc nobody would want to go
back to the days before novacaine uh we
have so much more wealth now etc etc and
we're right about to develop AIS that
will usher in a phase of so much more
rapid exponential progress that it will
bring about um you know abundance and
Utopia for
everybody that narrative really took off
following kind of what we call mity the
enlightenment the Scientific Revolution
leading to the Industrial Revolution and
the rapid changes that have happened in
the world and that corresponds with what
you talk about of the carbon
Spike and it changed everything
radically and rapidly in a way that you
know there was no precedent for that
much change that quickly going from half
a billion people to 8 billion people in
200 years where it had taken 200,000
years to get to half a billion people of
humans being here I'm just wondering if
if the carbon pulse and the the um
related economic growth enabled people
to follow this uh idea of progress and
if we wouldn't have had growth they
would have complained or we would have
thought of different ways but as long as
it was possible for them too to be part
of the
winners um then this was all accepted
but now things are becoming too obvious
uh to deny what's happening to the
planetary ecological situation um
inequality um lots of pollution and and
other things so has there always been a
critique of progress uh and it's just
the last century or so it's been
diminished because everyone could ride
this wave or or historically what do you
think about that okay so I want to come
back to how the progress narrative kind
of formalized in
modernity um but let's go back before
that well before that well before the
carbon
pulse it's a pretty simple thing to
state that history is written by the
winners of
Wars The Losers of Wars don't get to
write history
books and the history that is written by
The Continuous continuously written by
the next winner of War cre creates a
progress narrative because the winner
typically says it was a good thing that
they won it wasn't a bad thing that they
won and so they will say things like we
were civilizing the Savages with our
colonialism and it's actually a great
Act of benevolence that these um you
know naked barbarous
Savages uh are getting taught English
and Christianity and literacy they were
all illiterate you know and so we will
uh
gruesomely strawman their civilization
or culture if not totally V villainize
it um and then you know paint a story of
what we did that goes along with the
power conferred by doing it and so the
if if
you one View kind of a real politic a
real view of history is just study
conquerors for a minute right just study
the history of conquerors genas
KH killed roughly 50 million people in
his
life and the estimates vary 50 million
is a pretty standard estimate but like
this was well before industrial
technology there were no tanks there was
no Air Force right like this was
Cavalry and he and his men killed 11% of
the entire global
population mind blly brutally
unnecessarily and you know to then also
recognize this that something like
10% of the population of Asia are all
believed to be his descendants now
because in addition to the amount of
killing the amount of raping that
happened so then you look at Atilla the
Hun and then you look at Alexander the
Great you look at Caesar you look at
Ivan the Terrible you look at the the
progressive history of that and there
were cultures that were way more
peaceful that lived in more harmony with
nature that were not focused on growth
of Empire at all
costs if you actually look at indigenous
culture it's a very interesting thing
the thing we call the beginning of
civilization it's such a funny thing
right like typically somewhere around
Babylonia Mesopotamia early Egypt we
call the beginning of civilization maybe
now we say Tey but like it's very
recent like some you know 10,000 years
and it has to do with animal husbandry
Agriculture and growing large
populations and permanent settlements
and the written word and a few things
like that but humans have been here for
a couple hundred thousand years before
that they had they had worldviews and
systems of medicine and systems of music
and art and poetry and dance and you
know like a lot of things there they had
the same genetic brains we have and
wisdom and and they didn't live old
people didn't live to be 30 years old
that's just utter gibberish right like
yes infant mortality was high uh but old
people were old people throughout
history
and
um you'll notice that there's a reason
why all those cultures stayed pretty
small right they stayed within one of
the dunar numbers and it's not that they
couldn't grow it's that they had very
strong reasons not
to and we discussed last time a little
bit that
pretty much any definition of wisdom
that anybody offers usually has
restraint as an embedded
concept wisdom involves what not to do
where you could have personal Advantage
where you could have some near-term
Advantage but it's actually not the
right thing to
do
and so uh if you think about the dunar
number right kind of the the first one
um what do you mean by first one well
the original dunar number proposed was
roughly something about 150 150 to 220
somewhere in there and then other people
have done kind of progressive Dunbar
like numbers which are different numbers
of people where different coordination
systems are possible up to that number
and there are some that are smaller than
that and some that are larger than that
but let's just take that one because
that was a very significant
one up to that
number everybody can fit around a tribal
counil and all be in a single
conversation without amplification right
they can all hear each other and
possibly all contribute to a really
significant Choice it's going to affect
everybody's
life everybody can know everybody so if
I'm making sacrifices for other people
they're not Anonymous strangers that I
think are they're like people
that have saved my life they're people
that helped raise me they're people who
I helped raise they're and so at the
scale where everybody can know everybody
everybody can love everybody everybody
has some connection with everyone and
where we can all have a say in that
which our life will be bound to it
there's a lot of reason to not get
bigger than that if it gets bigger than
that and there's a decision to make and
there's not time or capacity to hear
everyone's voice some people will have
to subordinate and now my life is
subject to things I don't have a choice
of so so in some senses there's a
negative feedback to progress uh and
because of so much Social
reciprocity that potentially informs
wisdom and restraint at that scale well
it's that they had some insight that a
larger number of people was not
progress and it was not betterment in
the definition that they were interested
in because it meant actually less having
a say in your own life and less intimacy
with everybody that you are in
engagement with
right well but for a lot of part A lot
of those
Millennia they were running up against
limits like they couldn't support larger
populations necessar neily because of
the natural resources and food and such
no I think there were a lot of places
where they could and you had multiple
tribes in the same place that ended up
creating tribal relationships with each
other you can see this in the recent
parts that we have in writing with the
iroy Confederacy and like that and yet
rather than all make one giant City they
actually stayed in these
separate bands or tribes and had
relationships with each other and they
actually had things about restraint that
were very clear and actually kind of
amazing so for instance when you look at
the Indians of the Pacific Northwest
where the kind of caloric abundance was
really high right because of the salmon
and you know other things like that when
they made technological advances like in
better fishing hooks and longer lines
there were rules to spend less to use
that efficiency to spend less time
fishing not catch more fish so it was
like an embedded anti-jev Paradox rule
yes and that's wisdom right it that's a
way to think about the what the Sabbath
is Right we've talked about this before
the
Sabbath amongst other things I'm not
reducing it to only this is a binding of
a multi-polar trap it's a binding of a
maximum power
principle right which is if anybody
works on Sunday they can get enough
differential advantage and get ahead
that they will end up you know beating
everybody else so then everybody has to
work on Sunday so now we have a world
where everybody works all the time
nobody enjoys it but everyone has to do
that and it's miserable no one can
connect with their families restore
regenerate themselves connect with the
Divine or anything else so you just
force nobody is allowed to do that they
made it punishable by death right in
Leviticus but what it meant was it bound
a multi-polar trap for everybody it was
actually using law to bind that thing
there's wisdom in that and that came
from a wisdom tradition and the thing
about the pot latch and let's get rid of
this Surplus let's not keep this Surplus
and grow our population let's not keep
this Surplus and have a reason for
another group to come war with us to
take the stuff let's actually get rid of
the Surplus and come back into depending
upon nature and being in kind of that
relationship similarly with the we got
better fishing hooks we could catch a
lot more fish and then we'll collapse
the fishing the fish population and
create problems for our social structure
and Etc so let's just spend less time
fishing and now we have more time for
art and love making and meditation and
other things right and so the
technological Advance didn't lead to a
jevans paradox because in the same
reason the same way that we talk about
now with jeevan's
Paradox if you have more efficiency that
could lead to using less only if you
create law that binds that that's what
it must be otherwise it you just get
return on investments of efficiency and
maximum power principle right um maybe
we'll explain that briefly for anyone
that is coming in this time who hasn't
come in before well maximum power
principle is um that we
um don't necessarily need energy but
energy per unit time uh is what we're
trying to maximize and that in nature
organisms and ecosystems self-organized
so as to better Access Energy because
energy is needed for movement uh for for
anything cellular metabolism digestion
all things relate to energy so
historically those organisms and
ecosystems that had more access to
energy per unit time had an Adaptive
Advantage um but I have deep questions
about the relationship of uh authentic
versus naive progress as it pertains to
maximum power as this conversation
unfolds but does that suffice for for
your question um the thing I want to add
is the just if anyone's hearing about
jeevan's Paradox for the first time and
what Maxim power principle at the level
of civilization means
well it it um the more technology that
we invent like LED light bulbs then uh
they become so cheap and ubiquitous that
we actually use more Lighting in the
world so there's a rebound effect as we
develop more technology that actually
uses more energy globally uh and this
you see in so many different ways I'll
just add the for the
people who kind of understandably
think couldn't technological advancement
create more efficiency such that we
could use less stuff and still have you
know uh economic quality in our life the
jbans Paradox is a really key thing to
understand which is if you make if you
figure out how to get copper more
efficiently or you figure out how to get
nitrogen more efficiently or energy more
efficiently it also means that that the
cost of that thing goes down which also
means that now the market input to a
whole bunch of areas that weren't quite
profitable open up and so now you get a
whole bunch of new market areas and the
net result is that when you a thing
becomes more efficient rather than using
less you use more use more of that plus
all the other things that are
industrially connected to it and as a
consumer as an individual if I save
money on some new technology I'm going
to spend that money at Home Depot or
Walmart on on something else that
requires energy and resources so if if
we had
the equivalent of the Indians in the
north uh um West that you were mentioned
before the native uh Americans that we
had some wisdom some Sabbath equivalent
some we can't fish more hours if we had
that in our system then this
technological innovation that we have
might not be uh result in uh immature
progress so let's talk about you know I
think it's pretty clear that making the
leaded gasoline and making the
DDT are definitions of progress that for
a narrow purpose are but are like
obviously pretty terrible and the same
is true when it comes to advances in
weaponry and um making I mean there's so
many examples
like making food that isn't perishable
great technological achievement um if
you consider food perishing a problem to
solve technologically as opposed to a
feature of life we're supposed to relate
with that keeps us living close to the
living ecosystem and aware of biological
things break down which also Keeps Us
aware of our own death which keeps us
aware of the meaningfulness of life and
you know so many things like that so um
if you look at the emergence of fast
food and uh convenience store foods that
have much more addictiveness and much
less micronutrients and are
comprehensively bad for the population
physiologically psychologically you know
Etc they still progress and so I think
that kind of progress everybody can
probably get all right there's a problem
with that but even let's say that we're
talking about things that are don't seem
to be Market driven but are even like
trying to make progress on solving
Global
problems so let's look at climate change
for a minute
um so the first paper on climate change
scientific paper was published in 1938
unep was created United Nation
environmental program was created in
1972 to look at Major Global
environmental issues and have
international coordination obviously
climate change had a US vice presidents
uh popularize it has had almost every
kind of celebrity you know NASA and Noah
and the largest scientific databases and
computational capabilities in the world
are backing it there's a trillion
dollars in climate Finance per year
nuclear energy Hydro energy solar energy
Etc and the total amount of fossil fuel
energy that is used goes up every year
that entire
time and there's a place where we just
have to pause a little bit if we take
that in to say wait wait so everything
we've done towards climate hasn't
decreased fossil fuel
energy it hasn't even slowed the
increase in the amount that we use each
year relative to the year before we're
continuing to grow the total amount we
used like what okay so if you think
about that for a minute
so because we want to get off fossil
fuel energy we're going to make a
hydroelectric Dam and it's going to
destroy a whole ecosystem by uh you know
flooding that whole area it's going to
stop migratory Pathways of fish and
correspondingly birds it's going to
cause geopolitical conflict between the
countries that were involved maybe it's
all those
problems maybe all that would be worth
it if it was stopping the fossil fuel's
use but if it's just like oh there's
another source of energy awesome we'll
use that energy and the fossil fuels
energy cuz there's still positive
Returns on both they're both profitable
to continue to use and think about all
the nuclear energy we've made right like
all the risk of nuclear waste having to
be managed forever all the risk of
nuclear power plants being able to be
things that can be targeted in war and
become nuclear volcanoes even by
non-nuclear Powers the increase in
visible material the all that risk and
it didn't even decrease fossil fuel
use and so you're like okay well the way
we've been trying to solve the climate
problem empirically is not
working and many of the solutions add
new harms without actually even
addressing the existing ones effectively
at
all so uh this is also not a good
definition of progress right but how how
much of your critique or or the paper uh
critique of progress is a is a um you
know a of GDP as our cultural aspiration
by a different name okay let's go back
to genghiskhan where we were for a
moment okay and friends because we were
preg GDP at that time right Y and we
were pre carbon pulse
yeah
so it is not true that all of the tribal
populations were as big as they could be
throughout history limited only by
scarce food that's part of the rewrite
of history that assumes that cities and
bigger populations are better and that
progress has been linearly happening and
Etc um there is no when I said that
earlier I meant like a 100,000 years ago
not not you know 10,000 5,000 years ago
but but go
on the the archaeology gets less good
the further back you go which means it
becomes more subject to the projection
of your
narrative because you have less data and
so you read the through your narrative
so if you have a Hoban narrative that
says their lives were brutish or nasty
and mean but that same narrative is why
we had Manifest Destiny it is the
Manifest Destiny of us colonialists to
take over North America to take it away
from being uh a vast Wilderness for
squalled Savages and to civilize it so
that it can hold civilization right like
was it you
read uh quot from many of the chiefs of
like it was only considered a Wilderness
to them we filled with like terrible
beasts and stuff we considered it a
beautiful paradise and we were friends
with all the animals and it was only
them that considered it full of squalid
Savages because they didn't have any
interest in coming to understand the
depth and intricacy and beauty of our
culture but it was progress because the
winners wrote the books yes and so if
there was a culture that didn't Orient
to its maximum size and maximum
colonialism and Empire expansion and
whatever because it wanted to not train
the kids up to go die in war it wanted
to train the kids up to have a beautiful
life it wanted to have not turn all of
nature into military equipment and stuff
and agriculture land but to you know
have some deep appreciation of what
nature was those cultures usually lost
in war to the cultures that did the
other thing well exactly so what if
there were 10 cultures 10 tribes back
back in the day and nine of them were
peaceful in harmony with nature um music
Community love making inventions if
there was only one tribe that was a
genghiskhan type thing that's who won
won in quotes this is a really important
part of the story of history in my
opinion
is
unless
the person doing the tribal Warfare
unless the other 10 all noticed it and
went and stopped them from even being
able to develop that capability then yes
the person who starts in the the group
that starts investing in offensive
tribal Warfare is going to win and then
what and this played a role in the thing
that we call cities and the movement to
larger civilizations is once we're in
the age of tribal Warfare smaller
numbers are going to do much less well
than larger numbers
are and so if there is any group that is
now starting to do the offensive Warfare
thing now a couple smaller groups need
to unify together people will have less
say and they'll have less Liberty but
already more of them will have to train
in military than in the Arts and other
types of things because that multi-polar
trap is now in place but there's a very
important thing is we've talked about
multipolar traps here before right an
arms race is a multi-polar trap where
everybody's racing to make faster
Hypersonic weapons and multiple re
vehicles and more
effective uh autonomous weapons and
whatever because we have to do that cuz
what if the other guy gets it even
though we're making a
world that is our own risk of dying at
all those things goes way up and is a
comprehensively worse world so the arms
race is a multi-polar trap the market
race even if what it's doing is driving
massive externalities is a multi-polar
trap the tragedy of the commons we have
to extract the resources even if we
destroy the ecology before the other guy
because if we don't it doesn't protect
the ecosystem the other guy is going to
destroy them all first and use that
increased Resource as competitive
advantage to beat us so the multipolar
Trap is
a is one of the reasons why we can't do
anything about climate change very
effectively right now is nobody wants to
price carbon properly at a country level
that has the rule of law to be able to
bind its own economy because it would
put them so radically behind everyone
else who wasn't doing that economically
and that economics has converted to
military power and technological
Innovation and everything else no one
wants to slow down their AI to try to do
it safely slow down their synthetic
biology so it's just kind of a full race
Dynamics now we've talked about this
before but there's something even deeper
that you just mentioned which
is the multi-polar Trap is usually
initiated by a
psychopath and in our tribal past subd
bar numbers there was strong social
reciprocity
that would inhibit the the potential
power of a
psychopath I want to build this out a
little bit more and then I'll say that
the not everyone wants to go initiate
tribal war and have their children die
in war so that they can have the
Glorious large empire that is not
everybody's
desire
the uh the the people who have won at
doing that thing I can't imagine
any anyone not Desiring that unless they
are betas who just couldn't win at
it um because they can't imagine
anything like fulfillment that is not
oriented on conquest or intimacy or
things like that and so not everybody
wants to do that thing right but if
somebody wants to do that thing there's
something wrong with them there's
something really deeply wrong with them
and but now everybody else has to do
something that can deal with that or
lose by default
right and yeah this is very much like
the emergence of a cancer in the body
right the the cancer is not just another
cell having its own individual freedom
to express itself in a slightly
different way and it should be allowed
to have its own individual expression
the other cells like there's a
difference between the liver cells and
the blood cells and the kidney cells and
the they're all different but they all
have a shared gen and they're all
working as parts of this larger hole and
they're constrained by that and that's
okay because they would also die like a
kidney outside of a body is not that
interesting it doesn't sustain itself so
all of the cells are constrained by
being a part of a body to serve the good
of the body so they get to have
individual expression but they also have
interconnectedness and with that an
obligation the cancer cell it's like no
the obligation I'm going to do my
thing and I'm going to actually consume
resources faster and replicate
faster and if it does that and
metastasizes that idea right then the
rest the rest of the body the immune
system has to kill that thing or that
thing will kill the rest of the system
including itself including itself right
and that's the thing is that the cancer
cell is having amazing progress at
consumption and replication it's
betterment for for its own goals yes
it's succeeding at its goals and then
there there are the most number of it
copies of itself right before it kills
the host and kills itself oh boy so um
certainly in the deep ecology movement
um there are some people that view
Humanity as a cancer cell and based on
the last five minutes um you're
suggesting that it's not Humanity it's
some individuals that through some
positive
feedback uh int with energy
Surplus um Broke Free of the the wisdom
and Restraint of small groups and it's
it's that multipolar trap that is
created that has created a lot of these
negative effects on the plan no can
argue that we that there are a lot of
cultures that have no descendants today
because Alexander or Caesar or
genghiskhan killed them all
and their memes and their cultures and
their genes didn't make it through that
particular selection
process and it that there that does not
mean that they didn't have higher
qualities of life or more sustainability
with nature it means they weren't good
at
War and they weren't good at even if
they were good at War individually right
because some people might take objection
tribal Warriors they were not good at
scaled violence effective scaled
coordinated
violence and we are the desent
unavoidably of the people that scaled
Empire with all of the ecological harm
Warfare genocide
Etc we are genetically and mimetically
and culturally the descendants of those
processes I I think that's a profound
Insight but I'll I'll push back a little
and say we're also the descendants of
those humans that killed off the neander
TS yes there is
so I'm going to make some conjecture
here that I don't have the data to
support
um and I would really like to get the
data which I which I know you by now
well enough these past few years is
something you rarely do but um but go on
the data for this is not available that
I have seen cuz it's ancient and our
archaeology has too many conflicting
things so our early tool
making call it stone tools and uh you
know then fire right like very early
tool
making was a a radical change and
obviously that didn't start with sapiens
right that started with homo habis or
something like that um was a a PR pretty
radical change in selection criteria
from everything
before and because now the selection
criteria were not the result of a
genetic mutation that was corporally
built into our
body it was the result of us
understanding how to extend what our
body does
extracorporeally where the ability to
advance those Technologies was much more
rapid than Evolution's advancement of
our bodies
predatory you know capabilities or
whatever kind of um selection
capabilities and that was the beginning
of a really significant asymmetry that
did not exist in the rest of the natural
world and the rest of Natural
Evolution in Natural Evolution the
mutation forces that are acting on
something that produce a bunch of
useless mutations I'm using kind of
standard evolutionary theory they
produce a bunch of useless mutations but
a few of them are effective and they get
selected for those mutations pressures
whether we're talking about Gamma raay
or oxidative stress or whatever or just
uh you know transcription errors are
operating across the entire ecosystem
all of the beings there's an even
distribution of kind of the mutation
pressures and then there's also a co-
selection process so the mutation that
leads to a predator getting slightly
sharper teeth or a slightly stronger jaw
or slightly faster running it's only
slightly right you don't get like a
massive jump like we get with AI systems
from one generation to the next so let's
say there is a mutation that leads to a
capacity that makes them slightly more
effective at their Niche let's say it's
a predatory Niche simultaneously similar
types of mutation pressures are
happening on the things that they eat
that make them slightly faster slightly
better at camouflage have slightly
sharper senses you know whatever it is
right and so neither of them are getting
a mass massive asymmetrical jump
relative to the other they're having
similar kinds of very very gradual
increases and then let's say the
Predator had one first so it's going to
start doing slightly better at eating
prey it's of course going to be
statistically eating the slower ones
more often than the faster ones and as a
result the inbreeding of the faster
genes also leads to a change in
selection Dynamic so both the
distribution of mutation and co-
selection lead to a process where there
is a symmetry of power that is
maintained across the whole system and
it's not just in a onetoone relationship
right it's the Predator with the prey
it's that prey animal with the plants
right as it gets the ability to digest
more stuff the plants start figuring out
how to put out more volatile oils or
spread seeds faster or whatever it is
but your point here is that it was
symmetric and it was really slow
yes and as a result you're actually not
getting power a symmetries you're not
getting concentrations of power you're
getting distributions of power and the
distribution of power is what's allowing
there to be a Harmony across that whole
space and it's why you don't get that
what is good for Lions as a whole is bad
for gazel as a whole right of course
this lion eating this gazelle that might
be the case but Lions as a whole and
gazel as a whole are actually symbiotic
species if the Lions went away the gazel
would actually do less well right they
would have the weaker genes in breed
more often and you know Etc if the
gazelle's went away Lions would do less
well so at the micro level it looks like
competition and even Zero Sum but at the
macro level they're
symbiotic but the key reason does have
to do with the symmetry of power in the
relationship in the same way that
like fighting in your weight class is a
thing right if you're competing in the
kind of original definition competing
means something like to strive together
if I'm competing with someone where they
get a little bit better and it for like
it inspires and teaches and forces me to
get a little bit better you know there
is some kind of co- progress together
but if I am going to fight with a guy
that's just 10 times my capability and
he just kills me right like I don't get
better from that there there's not a you
know similar kind of progress the
progress does involve a certain kind of
symmetry and the ability to navigate the
situation and so if you the first
question with progress is progress for
whom
yeah and then then we would say progress
of what across what metrics across what
way of assessing what is
valuable and progress that is progress
for some that is totally bad for others
but also bad for others that that some
depends upon is a
very narrow definition of progress and
even like the cancer cell that will
eventually kill its own host it's a
definition that is not actually
long-term even viable for the for the
interest of where the progress seems to
have been true so I can begin to surmise
why you and your team spent so much time
and effort writing this this paper um
this is a central um chasm in our
discourse that we need to address yeah
so we've talked before that the metac
crisis you know we
have lots of different Global
catastrophic risks just in the domain of
ecology we're facing right we could
really mess the biosphere up just
because of posos just because of
pesticides just because of mining waste
just because of biodiversity loss just
because of damage to oceans and dead
zones and coral like we have lots of
different from the extraction side and
the pollution side catastrophic Ric
risks that are the result of our success
AT
progress and by the way all those things
you mentioned are considered
externalities that are currently not
priced in our decisions and our success
metrics at all yeah and what is the cost
of the Great Barrier Reef like what
should the value of it be what should
the value of healthy soil microbes be
well everything dies without so
microbiology um but like everything
without air and the cost of air is
nothing and the reason the cost of air
is nothing is because I everybody still
has access to it and I can't uh patent
it I can't have differential access to
it so it's just no need to bother
putting a price on it but that also
means that it gets damaged through
industrial process continuously through
air pollution through burning things
where you're using up the O2 and turning
it into CO2 Etc and there is a slight
decline in oxygen globally because of
the burning of fossil fuels and much
higher in the oceans ocean oxygen is
declined 2% in the last 50 years
obviously the O and the
CO2 is there was carbon there were
hydrocarbons that were getting burned
which means oxidized right so you're of
course you're going to have those things
happen together um it's very interesting
so not just the most important things
like the soil microbiology and the
phytoplankton and the air that we are
rapidly destroying that are
the the most priceless priceless things
there could be right but if you look at
people's deathbed
Reflections at what they said was
meaningful and I was very fortunate when
I was growing up my mom took me to uh
old Foles homes to spend time with them
and I got to hear a lot of deathbed
Reflections and it was very influential
in my
life the highlights of what people say
was worth it had nothing ever to do with
anything that the market ever gave
them
yeah and everything it had to do with
was only the things that could occur in
the time that they were not an agent of
the market where they were not working
producing Etc it had to do with their
time with their family their time with
loved ones their time in nature their
time in religious
experience but the market can't Supply
those things very well so it doesn't
value them at all and it emphasizes
reward circuits that it can
monetize so I I don't want to diverge
too much from from your paper but if
there were a billionaire I mean there's
there's uh there's multipolar traps but
there's also social
traps um and if there were a billionaire
listening to this agreeing with the
logic that you're laying out but saying
I'm powerless to change my behaviors in
trying to maximize my my own Bitcoin
fiat currency lead over my competitors
because everyone else is doing it this
way so I see the world as being very
messed up and getting worse yet for me
in my position I'm doing the thing that
is best for my family irrespective of
what the future is how do we get Beyond
those I call them the 1500 uh Elites in
the world have to recognize this this uh
this trap uh that you're describing so
the idea of an
externality that we're building a
technology or a business or a law or a
nonprofit or a whatever to do
something we're building it to try to
usually solve some problem where we can
assess that in a narrow metric whatever
that
is or a small handful of metrics
but that
technology and Supply chains that make
it and the power dynamics it confers and
whatever do other stuff they affect
other stuff other than the stuff we
intended to affect and a lot of it ends
up being negative we go those
externalities they're going to be
positive externalities too and that's an
important thing to consider um so
there's this story that it's impossible
to forecast externalities because the
world is so complex and you couldn't
possibly know in advance so all we can
do is you know make something that is
innovative and awesome and then when we
see the problem work to solve it and the
continuous solving of problems is is
what humanity is here for and part of
progress uh this is
gibberish right this is just total
gibberish but it is self-motivated
gibberish for the people who did not
want to try to anticipate the
externalities or didn't want to admit
them because they were going to
privatize gains and socialize losses and
then later say it's impossible to
predict what the externalities would be
so um I think it was a Dow that just got
A1 billion
doll uh lawsuit settlement for P Foster
mediation that they have to pay like
101.3
billion which is significant and it's
because some of the investigative
journalism showed that not only is the
is posos in every drop of rainwater in
the entire world in Antarctica and you
know on all the continents and is it on
all the water surface areas and is it
not just affecting human health but it's
affecting all biology down to the
microbes in the phytoplankton in ways we
can't understand all of and it doesn't
break down there are no biological
processes CU it was built as an
industrial product to be a thing that
doesn't break down right to resist
corrosion and resist all of the various
types of things okay so
just
uh I think it might have actually been
Minnesota your state um just one State's
posos remediation was estimated at
costing $20 billion if they were going
to try to use known technological
methods to get the peos out so this 10
billion from the primary producer
globally is a joke I can send the stats
but it was something like 16 trillion a
year to do total P Foster mediation over
the course of a decade so the entire
Global GDP to remediate one class of
chemicals it doesn't include a
agricultural chemicals and Mining
chemicals and everything
else well that explains why we're not
doing it okay so stay with me I'm trying
to construct something I'm taking a
Circus
route so it turns out that it uh
investigation showed that that company
knew posos was a carcinogen before it
was ever put into the environment or put
into any industrial application they hid
the science it had cause cancer in the
lab rats and so there was just like a
direct cover up and the same thing was
true with leaded gas right we the people
who were inventing leaded gas were all
sick in the laboratory it was known to
be toxic Etc and there was just direct
suppression of that and if that's true
and I believe you that it is why were
those people suppressing it because of
short-term gain for them and the winners
write the history books sort of story
yeah so the short-term gain is hey if I
stop this engine knocking thing and
engines are the new thing cars are
everywhere right and I own the patent on
this tetraethyl Le thing and I can add
it to all gas it's needed by everything
we're going to make a lot of money and
probably it's not going to be that bad
for people it'll be an air it'll be
dispersed it won't you know it'll the
parts per million will be low whatever
so there are lots of times where we
actually know the harm something is
going to cause whoever it is industry
whatever ahead of time and do it anyways
covered up that's a known thing there
are other times
where we just don't try very hard to do
an analysis of externalities because if
we put money and resource into look at
is this going to harm things and the
other competitor doesn't they're going
to get first mover Advantage they're
going to later be able to say we
couldn't have possibly known and the I
the money that I put into seeing those
harms might just tell me not to do the
project and now how do I get a return on
that money that I put in and if it does
show me a safer way to do the project
it's probably so much later and with
less margins than the other thing and so
at minimum there's a kind of negligence
of if we do due diligence we do this box
checking plausible deniability version
because we know we're going to be able
to privatize the gains and socialize the
losses right the
uh Apple's A3 trillion doll company that
played a major role in smartphones in
everybody's pockets and the fact that
teen body dysmorphia and suicide and uh
porn addiction and mental health issues
and everything went up they don't have
any liability for that and so um they
also have no incentive to really limit
their privatized gains to avoid causing
those
externalities let me interrupt you one
more time which is on root to the the
billionaire question so like you said in
the day of uh unlet gasoline um they
were able to make a lot of money and
they s thought oh well this will be
dispersed it won't be that big of a deal
but now I think a lot of people that
work at corporations that are paying
attention to the metac crisis and the
human predicament and climate and oceans
and pasas and social inequalities and
and addictions and everything else they
have to be in these boardrooms wondering
this stuff is a little bit louder the
externalities are are more obvious than
they used this a different question that
I would love to answer but if I do I'll
never get back to your first question
keep going keep going remember keep
going yeah
it's exactly the next place to go okay
one is
about dark Triad traits and sociopathy
the other is willingness to be complicit
with
it okay which are basically the two
types of psychology that are conditioned
for in the
system
well can you briefly describe dark Triad
again I I've done it on a frankly but
maybe you could describe it dark Triad
is the three and the the three qualities
of sociopathy narcissism and
machiavellianism and then sometimes it's
referred to as the dark quad where
sadism is added as a fourth and these
are like particularly dark aspects of
human
psychology uh that can co-occur and so
we're not looking here at a DSM
diagnosis of a narcissist meaning
narcisstic personality disorder within
cluster b or sociopathic personality
disorder it's sets of traits that people
can have higher lower amounts
of and the same person in different
environments can have higher lower
amounts of you put a really lovely
person in a terrible prison and they're
they better develop these traits they're
probably going to die right they're
adaptive in some
environments um
and
so
uh you know people can look this up more
but narcissism is roughly kind of an
inflated sense of their own entitlement
their own importance their uh you know
leadership worthiness that kind of thing
soop is a lack of empathy for other
people um not really caring to take
their worldview not really asking will
this be progress for them not feeling
remorse if they end up being where the
externalities land and harm is caused
and machanism is the ability to sing
things strategically through you know a
complex play right so if that
machiavellianism is in service to
self-oriented goals self-aggrandizing
expanding goals that are not that
attuned to others you get problems with
that thing right but those also make
great leadership qualities for the
multi-polar Trap version of
progress and uh especially in an
Institutional structure where we have
corporations and things like that
relative to 500 or a thousand years
ago well the
corporation I mean it's a great example
right so 14th amendment was really
everybody knows to give personhood
rights to black people following the
Emancipation Proclamation and the end of
slavery it was for personhood rights for
things that had not been considered
persons black people were not considered
persons during
slavery and the loophole in what was so
obviously to give personhood rights to
people who had been previously
slaves was then used to give personhood
rights to corporations by corporations
that saw the legal advantage of being
able to have all of the due process and
everything that
have and I think in the first year after
the ratification of the 14th Amendment
the Supreme Court saw like something
like 15 cases associated with the 14th
Amendment associated with black people
and it saw something like 350 cases
associated with businesses um and
corporate personhoods
and um the corporate person The Entity
that is the public corporation is an
obligate
sociopath it can't a corporation an
Institutional equivalent of a of a human
dark Triad trait this is what I'm saying
a corporation does not it a corporation
is a you can think of it as a cybernetic
entity right the the operating
agreements the legal agreements of what
it is plus its whole operational
Machinery does not depend on any
particular person because you have an
org chart and if you lose this assembly
line worker or this Chief marketing
officer you replace them with a kind of
Market equivalent all the way up to a
CEO and so the entity is controlled by
the the cybernetic entity kind of
controls itself aligned with these legal
operating agreements not controlled by
anybody in particular and recognized as
a corporate person so it protects the
directors from legal responsibility of
what that corporate person does even
though of course it couldn't do it
without running on the people and then
you have a fiduciary responsibility to
maximize profit which is a measure of
extraction and so and of course that
corporate person doesn't have empathy it
cannot it's not a it's not a sensient
thing right it is a cybernetic thing but
it's not a sensient thing so it doesn't
have empathy it does have planning I.E
machiavellianism it does have my own
growth should continue forever and I
should be the market Dominator that's
narcissism
and so yes it is an obligate sociopath
and it is actually legally required to
maximize its you know share holder
return on profit um by the directors of
the organization so the idea that you
cannot possibly anticipate externalities
is not true but it's a useful idea of
those who are going to benefit by
causing
externalities and the people who benefit
by causing externalities because they're
privatizing all of the
gains get
to write the narrative in the same way
the history was written by the winners
of War previously like it costs a lot of
money
to
uh affect The Narrative of the world you
see this in political campaigns you see
it in marketing campaigns but if if an
idea is
spreading who is writing all that stuff
and who's up regulating it and who's
paying for the commercials and who's
getting the data to do the personalized
microt targeted ads and who's so the
ideas that spread are not just spreading
through a kind of natural selection of
the goodness of the idea they are
getting often times Amplified by
interests that want those ideas to
spread du right we know this this is how
political campaigns work this is how
advertising Works um this is how
propaganda works this is how you know on
and on this is how religion works right
there's a lot of money that goes into
prosing and getting the the ideas to
spread um so there are a lot of ideas
that
are marketing Andor apologism for the
dominant class in terms of power so the
dominant narrative is usually apologism
for the dominant power
system and that's why when we were in
the age of colonialism The Narrative was
that it was generous of us to bring this
colonialism to civilize
Savages it's why we were in the age of
spreading christiandom through all of
the various processes that bringing
christiandom to all of the
non-christians was the most charitable
good act we could do in the same
way
that like when we talk about
externalities when Facebook was in its
early
phases there were people
like you know Jared famously was saying
this very publicly but there were people
coming from the mclan school and um you
know coming from various coming from the
uh Mumford school who were saying hey
look this technology where you're
monetizing people's attention and you're
going to race to effectively monetize
their attention and unlike where TV
commercials did that but it was the same
for everybody you now get to have them
interact with it to gain personalized
info to split test how sticky you
monetize their attention a lot of the
things that are going to engage their
attention more are going to be lyic
hijacks they're going to be things that
make the person scared or horny or
distracted or or uh ingroup outgroup
Identity or whatever it is and this is
going to be really bad for society it's
not that no one was saying that then it
was being said it was being ignored it
was not being studied and researched and
pursued because and then later they get
to say we couldn't have possibly known
it was going to polarize society and
break democracy and
decrease everyone's attention spans so
the we couldn't have possibly known as a
story if
you think about well does am I saying
that you can anticipate everything of
course not but am I saying you can do a
million times better than we even
attempt to do now yes of course so in
the process of developing a new
technology
say could we proceduralized thinking
through the total set of effects not
just the intended set of effects and the
market um benefits of those but thinking
through if this technology really takes
off and goes to its full scale what is
the pressure of that on all the supply
chains to make it and what is the
Environmental effects of that what are
the you know polit geopolitical and Etc
effects um what if people use it is it
conferring some power if so what other
thing is it obsoleting how will that
change power dynamics Etc you just kind
of think it through now we have a
process that we've developed called
yellow teaming red teaming is you know
now become pretty famous which is you're
wanting to do something you want it to
succeed red teaming is a process you can
do to see how it might fail how somebody
could beat it or how it might fail
yellow teaming is if it succeeds where
might it mess other things up so could
we yellow team well yes you're not going
to predict everything but you predict a
lot of the things and then you keep
watching and when you notice other
things you procedurally internalize
them now in the same way all this was to
build up to the billionaire question the
long
buildup the
people in a multi-polar
trap who are at the front of the
race could stop the multi-polar
Trap but they don't want to because they
believe they can win so they use the
multi-polar
Trap as a
story of their
own lack of power to do anything else as
plausible
deniability the little guy cannot
necessarily stop the multi-polar
Trap but someone who's at the Leading
Edge of an arms race if they wanted to
apply the same energy and same
sophistication to agreements to pursue
because of course you there's a
situation that if my country becomes
more secure relative to other countries
which means develops better
weapons it automatically makes everyone
else less secure so now they have to do
the same thing and it just means that
you have an arms race of increasing
weapons forever and increasing budgets
going to it forever which is great for
defense contractors it's actually great
for GDP and it's bad for the everything
else now if we could just say how let's
make an agreement to all spend less on
weapons we can be proportionally less
right proportionally less such that
relative security changes well of
course people say well we can't possibly
do that we couldn't get China we
couldn't get Russia there's no way to
enforce it Etc
and we are saying that right now with
regard to AI well even if we wanted to
stop this thing from advancing that
has that accelerates every Global
catastrophic risk we couldn't possibly
because there's so many places racing
and we couldn't stop China and blah blah
blah therefore the only possible answer
is to win the multipolar Trap because
losing at it is too bad if you look at
the resources we invest in figuring out
AI if we invested those same resources
in actually creating healthy diplomacy
where we were not to our
International neighbors and really tried
to create Global coordination to bind
the multi-polar Trap we
could and
so the billionaire that says well I
don't know how to solve the problems of
the world like I'm too small right and
the it's a hundred trillion dollar
economy I'm almost nothing I'm this
little guy I couldn't solve the problems
of the world therefore me continuing to
just pick up all the game theory tokens
I can under a world of increasing
uncertainty the optionality of that is
what's best for me and my
family look at how much time you spent
figuring out how to gather all those
optionality tokens understanding markets
understanding how to do lobbying
understanding your industry
understanding financial markets Etc and
look at how much time you spend trying
to say if I applied all of that same
energy time thoughtfulness resource to
solving some of the great problems could
I you have not put enough time to say
that you couldn't possibly it's just not
in your interest this is what Jeremy
grantham's big point at the end of our
podcast was and I've I've talked to him
about it subsequently he wants the
elites the rich people to divert their
attention to the ecological crisis not
only climate but Plastics and oceans and
many other things because they haven't
they they're unaware it's just out there
and it's a it's a big Drive of his and
some others and fingers crossed because
uh that's what we
need and
yet I've encountered so many more
people
[Music]
who are conscious of what's happening to
the environment but like you just said
they plan to give away some of their
money in the future but for now they're
focused on their Investments and they
want to have a little bit more so that
they can give more to good causes in the
future future which I just scratch my
head when I when I hear that um but you
you could understand someone listening
to this past hour you've just
articulated that Winners write the
history books and the situation is so
bizarre and scary and complex right now
that if I don't have an answer I might
as well just try to be a winner which
means more optionality
tokens yes and think there is a I mean
that is definitely the state of AI
development very centrally it's
definitely the state of like the
posturing in
geopolitics um and just financial
markets it's the way of that too yeah
now if you look at that path of winning
and realize it's actually
self-terminating and it's not even a win
for you that could be the beginning of a
pause
and then if you look at
that okay
so you know people talk about like what
the the biggest Nobel Prize you could
want to win the biggest problem to solve
for Humanity often times like cure for
cancer if you look at the graphs of
incidents of different types of cancers
from 1950 till now you see a rise in
heaps of cancers right lots of rise in
endocrine and reproductive cancer in
different kinds of childhood cancers in
very aggressive turbo
Cancers and that rise in those
cancers in terms of year-over-year Rise
Maps very closely to the rise of
carcinogenic chemicals put into the
atmosphere and so when you look at the
um 230 million chemicals in the database
of the American Chemical Society and you
look at the huge number of them that are
put into the atmosphere uh and
environment through the 's in the paint
and the walls and then the carpet to the
industrial chemicals to the agricultural
chemicals the percentage of them that
are carcinogens is very high the other
ones
are uh neurotoxins or endocrine
disruptors or whatever so
correspondingly the increased rate of
autoimmunity of um autism and
Alzheimer's and neurodegenerative
disease of infertility and reproductive
failure follow those curves quite
closely is that the only Factor no is
that a major factor yes the other
factors are also the result of the
progress of this Society in other ways
like the processed foods that follow
similar curves um that mess up the
microbiome and micronutrient profiles of
the body and stuff like that in in your
paper you make a a point of highlighting
the hbos process and and crop yields and
food uh and that's been viewed as
progress but there's a whole lot of
stuff that doesn't
include yeah so I want to stay with the
cancer case for a minute
when if you look at all of the
scientific advancements trying to cure
cancer why don't they start with how do
we get how do we stop putting
carcinogens in the atmosphere and in the
food supply you know where there are
continuous Studies by groups like The
Institute for environmental medicine
that show there's roughly 300
carcinogens the industrial toxins that
are carcinogenic in the breast milk of n
ing mothers in the United States and
whatever why don't we work on getting
those out cuz the vast majority of
cancers we have are anthropogenic
they're caused by human activity we
don't need to try to solve cancer in
abstract like let's start with that and
often times the right problem solving is
reversing something that was already the
wrong path but I can't patent that I
can't Market that very well the new
pharmaceutical solution that I can
patent that doesn't address the Upstream
cuses at
all might have enough Roi to pay for the
research that I need to
do but if there's a thousand of these
entities out there and 990 of them take
the higher the high road and why are we
um putting these chemicals in there
let's do it a different way it's those
other 10 that decide to do it in our
current institutional Corporation
structure and and it's just like genas
Khan okay so this is
important if we build new types of
energy but we don't create both cultural
values and particularly law that binds
the use of the other energy we'll just
use all the energy because more energy
is awesome more energy means more GDP
means more you know all the things
associated with what interest of
power so creating a new
thing that is supposedly more positive
in a way is is not actually solving the
problem if you're not binding the
harmful thing because you will just get
both and it'll end up being Market
diversification and total more total
Market size similarly like the organic
food movement has been awesome in a lot
of ways there's a lot of people who shop
at the Whole Foods and buy Organics and
want there to be less pesticides and
whatever and yet more pesticides have
been used every single year during that
entire time so clearly it's not actually
decreasing total pesticide use because
we're bringing increasing amounts of
pesticides to Conventional agriculture
to the developing world and the
populations whatever so it just okay
it's like great we will add that organic
niche market on top of the existing
market and get more total market share
there has to be more of a focus of
actually
binding the things that have to
stop and so when you're mentioning if
somebody does that thing the interests
of everyone else who want to to again if
there were nine if there were nine
tribes that were really wanted peace and
wanted to be in peaceful Arrangement and
trade and whatever with each other and
they saw an early phase of another tribe
moving in another Direction and they did
interfere and not let it continue in
that way they could possibly have peace
for
everybody and that actually becomes the
obligation so like I said we have a the
the system that emerged in the context
of power competitions selects for people
who are oriented to power competitions
and other people who are complicit with
it those are the two things it selects
for and is that Dynamic that you just
described what
underpins Mok whato Coan scatti the
superorganism
yes the generative Dynamic can be
described a couple ways one is
humans get conditioned by their
environment right I grow up in a tribal
culture I grow up in
a uh modern technological culture I grow
up in a city in the Dark Ages whatever
I'm going to be I'm being conditioned by
the environment I'm in in terms of my
language my worldview my technological
capabilities desires identities all
those things
so and so the civilization is
conditioning the
minds which means patterns of perception
identity value and and behavior of the
people and those minds are in turn
creating more of the types of things
that they were conditioned
to and so there is a feedback loop
between the individuals influencing the
whole the whole influencing the
individuals and there's a particular
thing that is getting upregulated so
let's talk about theory of hyper agents
for a
minute I think we mentioned this
somewhere before but we'll do do it
again quickly
the gangas kons and the Alexanders and
the Caesars were obviously different
types of people than most of the people
that either worked for them or they
killed
right and the um you know Kings
following that and the and the robber
barons and industrialists and whatever
that like all have that in common up up
to today of that how much power they
have Consolidated relative to most
everyone else is Extreme and there and
it's not arbitrary there were things
about their psychology that had them
pursue that and be good at it so agency
our own ability to achieve our goals and
do the stuff we want to do you could say
that a hyper agent is someone whose
focus is maximizing Returns on
agency they want to do the things that
make them capable of more doing right
they want to and they want to use
towards what end
winning this is a great question right
towards what end is you were just
mentioning it with your billionaire
friends who are like well the future has
a lot of uncertainty the money gives me
the ability to live in one place or
another place to build this kind of tech
or that kind of tech to employ Tech or
people or land it gives me the ability
to influence Minds through media it's a
generalized optionality token so I'm
just going to keep working to grow my
total optionality
tokens um so that I always have the
maximum freedom and ability to do what I
want to do every scenario now one of the
reasons is that one of the reasons is
winning one of the reasons is their own
fear of death and wanting to be
remembered in the history books forever
whatever right some set of reasons that
are associated with
um
personal expansion of
power so a hyper agent maximizes kind of
return on agency it's important to state
that return on
Capital can be return on agency but it's
not
necessarily there are hyper investors
who are really good at applying Capital
to create more Capital but are not using
that to influence the world to a vision
of the world they want beyond that
heavily right like Warren Buffett was
not trying to change laws and politics
and culture all around the world he was
a hyper investor not really a hyper
agent whereas Kissinger had much less
money personally than Buffett ever did
but had radically more influence on
world systems through the influence of a
lot more Total Money of State funds and
you know whatever so um hyper agency is
the more fundamental concept which is
kind of the return on agency there are
people who are also motivated to do that
they're just not good at it and maybe
they become like a very controlling
middle manager or a gangster or
something but the people who are good at
it are good at
scaling and that's through both the
influence of a lot of people and the
employment of
technology and that can be social
technology like writing laws and uh
influencing Capital which are social
Technologies um creating narratives like
the rise of Nazism or ma or whatever
right so like but they're good at being
able to
scale so the kind of tier one hyper
agents the ones that have the most
influence in the world are not just
oriented to maximize Returns on agency
but they're good at
it
and if you look at the distribution of
traits that humans have in a population
like empathy they'll usually follow a
gaussian distribution right you'll have
most people are here and they
have some level of empathy for some
circle of people you know kind of
average there are bodic saas on one side
that are you know hyper empathetic and
there are sociopaths on the other side
no
empathy and we could also take say
machanism how good someone is at like
long gaming chess and there will be most
people are kind of here you have some
that are really amazing strategists and
some that really suck at it and
there's a kind of a naive sociology that
looks at the gaussian distribution of
human traits and tries to explain the
World by that distribution of traits and
it doesn't
work and it's because if you look at the
distribution of power which is what's
influencing the world it doesn't have a
gaussian distribution it has a power law
distribution the power law distribution
means a few people over here have almost
all the influence that's true in money
it's true in the the stats of you know
the differential between the top
wealthiest and the bottom poorest people
continue to get more and more extreme
and the graphs that look at the power
law distribution of money from 1960 to
2000 to now are amazing how much deeper
that curve gets but I think it's
something like the top eight wealthiest
people have more money than the bottom
four billion people currently right but
does that power law also work within the
top 1% there's another Power law Within
in that top 1% where 80% have or 20%
have 80% of the wealth that's obviously
1% is a lot of people eight people
having more wealth than uh four billion
people is pretty significant and so this
is true in terms of military power not
that many people can push nuclear
buttons um this is true in terms of
Media power this is true in terms of you
know Financial power this is true in
terms of technological innovation
capabilities is that there's these kind
of power law distributions
and so the people at the top of the
power law distribution explain the shape
of civilization much more than everybody
does and those people don't come from
the center of the bell curve of almost
any psychological
trait and in ancestral times we still
had the same gaussian curves but we
didn't have the energy Surplus and the
scale because power you know 10,000
years ago with 150 people or whatever
and Power in nature
there there is only so much endosomatic
energy that an organism or a human uh
pre modern human could use and so it's
the it's the scale of size of people and
the civilization coupled with the this
giant dollop of historical magic dumped
in our economy a couple hundred years
ago that allows this accordion to spread
upwards uh they didn't have the same
guess and distribution okay
why okay so going back to this idea that
the people who are at the top of the
power law distributions that have the
most influence are not at the center of
the bell curve of psychological and
behavioral traits they're usually like
two standard deviations to one side yep
more sociopathic less empathetic more
driven and motivated towards narrow
goals better at technology and and uh
propaganda and long range strategic
thinking and whatever right various
things and just to interject there did
those people design our structures or
did our structures self- select for
those recursively
both right
someone is Born Into structures someone
who wants to be at the top of the power
law is a desire it's a particular type
of Desire that really really wants that
and that is good at it and can win
enough win- lose games to ladder climb
to the very top of it and can drive
enough externalities and rivalry and
whatever to get there so they
are the current systems are selecting
for the people that can win at the
current systems but then those people in
turn change the systems in a way that
continues to optimize their winning
which is just like evolution is the
animal created by its environment or
does it Niche create to make more of an
environment that's good for it so we are
both being shaped by the niche and the
niche creating in turn but the other
thing is that it doesn't just mean that
they're making so you know that looks
like somebody gets to a high position in
finance and law in the current system
and then they change laws they do they
remove glass deagle they do Financial
deregulation they interpret the 14th
Amendment as corporate personhood rights
they interpret you know the the L'Oreal
case or whatever as to do um fiduciary
responsibility for profit maximization
so the people who can change the system
to continuously be better they they
decide that um bailouts for the banks
that failed and too big to fail and
golden parachutes made sense so it's
simultaneously or like someone is good
at War and then they innovate at War
right uh so it is this recursion now the
people who are in those top positions
are not only changing the system to be
better for them they also are obviously
invested in that success so anyone else
who would be very successfully doing
something that would mess that strategy
up they have a maximum incentive to make
sure don't
succeed I did a frankly a few months ago
I forgot what the main topic was but I
talked about dark Triad and in my
research it said that around 10% of our
modern population is is dark Triad but
that that is probably an underestimate
because of uh someone that's mchan is
not going to answer those surveys in the
way that would show that they're dark
Triad but are you saying that 10,000
years ago 50,000 years ago 10% of our
population were not that combination of
traits it's it's something modern look
at the story of how the Spartans raised
their
kids the you know the they're kind of um
famous stories that if when the infant
came out if it looked like it had any
deformities or was small or run kind of
thing that it was killed right away in
fantas side of ones it didn't look like
they would be kind of maximally dominant
and then how early they were being
trained in Warfare and you know the the
process that happened when they were six
where they had to kill adult slaves with
tools and if the adult slaves killed
them great they're dead but only the
ones that make it through are the ones
that have this much you know kind of
vicious
capability so is that conditioning the G
if you're in a Spartan society is that
conditioning the gaussian distribution
of
everybody of course it is yeah if if you
are in a and and this is why looking at
the kind of extreme outliers of the
things that we think of as human nature
under different conditioning is so
important is you can have the
Janes who across the whole population
nobody hurts
bugs I met some Janes when I was in
India they were just wonderful wonderful
human beings yes and so it's clearly not
just a a gaussian distribution or a
genetic thing because you can have an
entire culture where everybody who gets
raised there doesn't hurt
bugs and then you can have the child
soldiers in Dar for Liberia or whatever
where if you make it to adulthood you
have killed people you've hacked people
apart with
machetes so our culture is recursively
um building out the percentage of our
population that exhibit dark Triad
because of incentives and self-
selection and and other things
yes yes and
no
um I would say that there are not
there's not the kind of data that I
would feel was meaningful to try to make
really strong statistical claims but
I'll say some things about trends that I
think will feel intuitively resonant to
most
people
the um
Digital Universe as a native Universe
generationally
has narcissistic conditioning pretty
built
in meaning that if I'm in the the woods
the woods don't rearrange themselves for
me I can fall out of a tree and get hurt
I actually learn that there is this
unforgiving nature you know Eric likes
to call it uh of reality that I have to
actually respect respect it and interact
with it in a you know a respectful way
and it doesn't conform itself to me if I
have a digital Universe where the
newsfeed is literally conforming itself
to maximally entertain and engage
me and I have an infinite amount of
options and I can just all I have to do
is this and the whole universe changes
now I'm in this universe now I'm in this
universe and it's maximized for my kind
of dop me optimization do I have a world
in
which my conditioning is the whole world
is supposed to conform itself to what
I'm interested in and I'm supposed to do
very little and be able to get lots of
reward so so you're saying that what we
assume is the good life and our own
choice our own volition is actually um
manufactured Demand by the the winners
in in our current
Society again if we go to the old people
on their deathbed reflecting on was
meaningful most of what the people spent
their whole life pursuing is what they
wish in reflection that they had not
spent their whole time
pursuing and most of the things that
they called successes and progress are
not part of what is in their mind as
they're dying that they wish they had
spent more time
with well that begs the question how how
at what point in their life could they
have realized that and made different
decisions and we will see times where
someone decides to leave the rat race
and keeping up with the Joneses where
every time they get a raise they
increase their cost of living so they
have to keep working more and paying
someone else to raise their kids and uh
because the other person charges less
than they can make and on and on and
where they're like no it I'm I'm
out I'm going to lower my cost of living
and I'm going to try to do something
where I can spend time with my kids and
I can spend time in nature and I can
reflect on why I exist at all before I
die and the sense of meaningfulness and
fulfillment almost always goes up when
people do that as does the harm
footprint they cause on the world go
down as does the intimacy and meaning of
their meaningfulness of their
relationships and the quality of life of
the people they
touch and and where do those people fall
on the um behavioral gaussian
distribution or who knows well they're
so like I said the the selection
criteria selects for people that
lead things that end up winning at Power
and other people that are willing to
follow and participate with that thing
so um you know very famously in the
nberg trials of Nazis after World War II
when the Nazis were being tried for the
war
crimes and they were all asked did you
believe that everything you were doing
was
good about 90% of the Nazis said said
only at first at first we were you know
we had been in terrible poverty in the
Yar Republic our kids couldn't eat and
you know Etc the Jews had all this
wealth um and you know we we believed
that we were getting supported to be
able to you know do well for our people
and whatever but as time went on like no
we did not feel good about putting kids
in gas Chambers and we didn't feel good
about seeing them starving like we felt
really bad about it like 90% of the Nazi
said no I did not feel good about
it and then when they were asked did you
try to stop it they all said no and then
they quoted the same German phrase that
translates to officers orders I didn't
have a
choice and yet of course if 90% of them
had all said that simultaneously which
is a coordination failure here on their
part there would have been no Holocaust
but anyone on their own is like if I try
to defect I'll get thrown in the gas
chamber so it's best for me and my
family to just go along with it it it's
kind of a gruesome uh microcosm of what
we face on so many levels today yes and
so the ash Conformity studies and the
melgram studies were so important and I
think
actually uh
under represent how deep those
principles are right the the idea that
when
the authority was telling the person the
scientific Authority hey you're in a
study do this thing and we're doing
electroshock therapy whatever that the
person following Authority would shock
the other guy to
death because of I don't have a choice
the authorities telling me or in the
other one in the ash ones that if 10
people in the room were all saying this
line is longer than that line the person
would defect on their own understanding
to go along with that these are very
powerful insites and the Smoke Filled
Room if there's smoke coming under the
door and other people don't notice it or
don't care about it I don't speak up
yeah so and we are social creatures
social Conformity is a core
driver so
I if there was so imagine that you have
a that tin tribes in kind of Harmony
world and and for whatever reason
somebody hits his head gets traumatic
brain injury that knocks his empathy out
and now he's an and uh you know
wants tribal Warfare where it was not
necessary before and figures out how to
try to make a story that it'll be in
everybody's interest cuz the other
tribes are really plotting against us
even though they aren't or
whatever you could imagine a scenario
where the other people are like dude
you're crazy like no we're we're not
going to do that thing and you need to
chill out or you're going to get
banished and that happened right that
happened a lot but if that guy succeeds
because he scares people enough right
let's say he's really big or whatever it
is or kind of brutal that nobody wants
to stand up because even though if
everyone stood up together they could
deal with him individually nobody wants
to stand up to him you can start to have
a situation where everyone else has
their survival strategy
being um not like getting the goods that
guy is going to deliver he's going to
deliver safety and he's going to deliver
economic growth and he's going to
deliver whatever and you don't want to
piss that guy
off and so you get a kind of fty that
Stockholm
syndrome with that kind of leadership
and uh and also a recognition that if
you go against it it's not going to go
well for you and still won't change the
scenario so then again you have this
plausible deniability best for me and my
family is just go along with it that
combination of distortion
like profound ethical Distortion in
leaders and complicity in others and the
and environments that were already
created in power conditioning those
psychologies and then the psychologies
to get to the top of the power stack
conditioning more of systems that
continue to do that the recursion on all
of that is the thing that you call that
we call molok or whatever it is the set
of system dispositions that continue to
orient in a particular
direction and this is why they have
continued to orient in the direction of
more extraction more technological power
more military capability more money more
and its
advancement
technologically is it
progress in terms of good well obviously
none of the species we made extinct
through doing it think
so and obviously none of the animals and
factory farms think so and obviously
none of the you know some odd 50 million
people that are in conditions of slavery
today doing forced labor to make that
system work think
so no Native Americans in North America
think that the US progress story was
awesome American descendants of slaves
don't think the progress story was
awesome
[Music]
and not only that you know like even the
people who are winning so even the
billionaire his body is being exposed to
the carcinogens that the Industries have
caused that the medicine cannot solve
and if even if you look at the quality
of life there it is actually with
decreasing actual
fulfillment and the replacement of
fulfillment with um mostly addictive
flashes right reward circuits that
provide kind of addictive flashes
whether that's you know food drug or new
yacht or new position of market
dominance now this is actually another
part that's so
important I want real progress I think
it's it's a very important thing to see
that we can grow and that we can add our
life energy to the world in a meaningful
way and
this is why really thinking about what
would constitute actual progress that
the world is better as a result of us
having done this
better the world not my tiny world not
better in this metric but the world long
term thinking Seven Generations ahead
thinking about all the other species we
inhabited with thinking
about all of the different aspects of
self like does my did my cell phone
enhance a lot of things yes it diminish
a lot of other things even for me yes so
what do better mean if I really kind of
think and feel through that
well
um and so I I I want us to pursue real
progress I want us to rescue it from the
kind of progress but also in a
healthy life progress is not as
important it's not as Central because if
life is fulfilling that if life is a
gift now I'm not exclusively focused on
making it better in the
future and making it better that
corresponds to winning
usually uh or and I'm not even focused
on changing it as much as I am also
maintaining it and appreciating it so
progress gets a undo emphasis when there
is a disconnection from being where now
is miserable so good has to be in the
future by me doing some new thing and if
if you if you think
about the unlikely Miracle of our
existence right and you think about the
billions of years of stuff that had to
happen to make a biosphere with the
complexity that we could
exist and you think about the miracle
that we get to see colors and we get to
hear birds and we get to exist and that
we get to love children and we get to
like all the things
appreciating what already is that is so
profoundly unlikely that took billions
of years to make and so much activity
like there should
be most of our life should actually just
be an odd appreciation at what is and
then the desire to maintain and protect
it because it is so unlikely and so much
work went into bringing this
about but nobody makes the history books
for maintaining things they make the
history books for making new stuff or
destroying stuff or you put the two
together creative destruction which is
the Creed of society right now but like
99% of life should actually be
maintenance 99% of life is you feed the
kids and the meal that you made then is
gone and then you make another meal and
you wash the plates and then they're
dirty again and the but you're actually
maintaining the sacred thing and then
true progress is where I can add a new
thing that really is factoring
everything good for the
whole then yes I will add those things
and that's progress but it has to really
be good for the whole factoring
everything that's
involved and most of my attention is
actually needed to maintain all that's
happening so I both want to kind of like
reclaim what progress is which is
important and sacred but also move it
out of the
center and that it's only in the center
in the same way that like when someone
is more unfulfilled they have more
addictive Tendencies because they're
looking for a hit of something when
someone is more fulfilled they have less
addictive
Tendencies there is a way that when
someone is in appreciation of what is
and they're in meaningful Intimate
Relationships the so much of the impulse
of progress that is actually coming from
emptiness and the desire to be somebody
I got that Nobel Prize I got that PhD I
got that position I won I whatever is a
compensation for actual like trauma and
emptiness
and it's and so it's not only that it's
not authentic progress in the world it's
that where it's even coming from in me
is not aligned with the fullness of the
world and adding fullness it's aligned
with my own emptiness and the desire
to do something that will fill that up
that is not the right thing so it's the
hungry ghosts are consuming alcohol and
pizzas and building shopping centers and
getting stock options and all that to
fill
uh a trauma and a loneliness um not not
actually to achieve something Monumental
that's great for society uh and the
future yes but it will be sold as
that so is there any evidence that the
people that are um in the dark
Triad or those people that are um you
know riding a high a top molok and the
superorganism have a higher uh incidence
of of trauma and loneliness and and
emptiness I don't know stats on like
Aces right childhood trauma associated
with um those
positions there are certainly plenty of
very traumatized poor people um and it's
not like it's not like everyone responds
to trauma in the same way right they're
the to total nuances of how trauma ends
up affecting someone are
um not easy to put an algorithm together
to predict
so someone is physically abused when
they're little and they grow up to
physically abuse children someone else
is physically abused when they're little
and they grow up to be the most non
violent person who doesn't ever want to
be like that maybe even to the place
that as it's an
compensation
they uh don't stand up enough right
someone else has a the healthiest
response and actually becomes a
protector of children right so uh it is
not necessarily saying that the people
who are in the highest positions of
power were most traumatized but they had
types of trauma that oriented themselves
to both power seeking and types of
Education that oriented themselves to
good insights about how to do power at
scale
effectively so I can tell you an N
equals one uh uh experience um I was
recently in India and I spent a lot of
time with uh 30 people every day
chanting singing humming
eating um doing sports doing yoga Etc
and then I would go for bikes in the
forest and record sounds of birds and I
came back and my addiction impulses were
much lower because I had six weeks
living on more of a maintenance I'm I'm
maintaining the thing I don't need other
things and I was like oh my gosh this is
what we need to change the culture but
the other part was when I came back it
was a week or two and I got sucked right
back into the Vortex of of everything
going on in this culture uh so we need
both we need the personal discipline and
change in a community but we also need
the infrastructure and the institutional
change and and that Crucible think about
this when you were in that environment
with those people in
India the reward
circuits that you were experiencing on a
day-to-day basis
were the type of pleasure the type of
reward that comes from intimate
communion with other people that comes
from listening to
birds that comes from people having
authentic conversations that don't have
status climbing as part of them focused
on meaningful and real things came from
all that right and so there's a
fulfillment in that that is not oriented
with how many likes a thing got or how
much we did this thing or you know
whatever it's those things weren't
available I mean I had internet there
but there weren't all those other
distractions except there were parties
with music and there were Musical
concerts every night of the week there
those were the options right so it but
someone's not craving the other thing
because the reward circuits are full
exactly someone's actually in a state of
fulfillment and they're in a state of
fulfillment for things that make them
healthier the relational Network
healthier
and the and that can align with
stewarding the world
well now if you go to an environment
where there you go to a different
environment where there's nobody around
you and there's no real intimate
connections and so again we're we're
social primates this is such an
important evolutionary thing is that
there wasn't a lone dude with stone
tools and the serengetti making it with
the Lions and the hyenas there were
tribes of people that would make it and
so the the idea of umuntu I am because
we
are there was this foundational concept
of human beings before the thing we call
civilization right I am because we are
was like just at the most prosaic level
nature did not select for individual
sapiens it only selected for groups of
sapiens individual sapiens in
evolutionary environments were all
dead and so what's best for me that
the tribe is not a concept that's
not a thing right what is best for the
tribe that I can't exist without of I am
because we are I would not exist I'd be
dead without all of us that's like the
basic Insight so
I am because we are obviously just
starts with I couldn't survive without
us but then it's also deeper which is I
think in words that I didn't invent that
all these other people
invented and but my own most intimate
thing my thoughts with myself are in a
language that I didn't make I am my my
thoughts were made by other people right
the the the language of my thoughts my
understanding of the world was
transmitted to me largely by other
people the tools that I use the things
that I benefit from the all of that that
I am almost all the things I think of as
I am because we are right because of
things that were
created okay now I have so many
questions but and then it goes deeper
because the we was never never just
meant our
tribe also the extension to all our
relationships and all our relation ships
was all life and life didn't just mean
biological which is why they were
animistic those cultures were all
animistic the spirit of the Sun the
spirit of the river the spirit of
everything because it was a very clear
understanding what would I be without
the tribe I'd be dead what would I be
without the
sun I I would have never existed what
would I be without the galactic center
around which the sun orbits I wouldn't
exist what would I be without the
gravitational field what would I be
without the soil microbes what would I
be without plants what would I be
without all of that I wouldn't be so I
that is not the emergent property of we
isn't even a thing it's not even
thinking
well fast forward to today and when I'm
sitting around by myself lost in my
thoughts my thoughts are in English
which is a language of the winners um
that I'm not even aware of everything
that came before that English was
selected for in this progress uh story
over the last few hundred
years is that also part of the this
story totally
so are umelt are the things that are in
our awareness is the tiniest
tiniest sliver of a
fraction of what is real in Universe And
so there's you know like within the
progress Nar
most people don't
miss
the being able to actually understand
what the animals were saying in the way
that indigenous people have much more
understanding what the animals are
saying because they're growing up in the
environment listening to them right most
people don't miss that because they
never had it and they don't even realize
they don't have it and they don't
realize how much much more communicative
and Alive the forest is to someone who
knows how to listen and so they are
impoverished but they don't know
it and they don't miss having a bunch of
people that they can be completely
authentic with because they've never
experienced that they've never been
completely authentic with any human
being they've are always
withholding and lying to some degree and
always paying attention to appearance so
they don't miss a thing they don't know
exists and they don't miss what it feels
like to have a body that doesn't have
300 petrochemicals in it cuz they have
never had a body that didn't have 300
petral chemicals in it and what real
vibrancy feels like they have no idea
this has Rhymes and and analogies to the
movie The
Matrix
yes and so some people take the blue
pill right because the reward circuits
even once they see it and so one I have
people have a hard time imagining that
there was a life that was awesome full
of things that they have no experience
of or even awareness that is was a
thing there's a cool documentary I think
it's called Everything Is Rhythm that
shows how in African tribes
what when the way somebody was weaving
and the way someone was cutting
something and the were actually all
making music and dancing together right
they were actually all in this
experience of nearly continuous Rhythm
and whatever they were doing in part of
the communication process that was not
mediated through words and semantics
like what does it feel like to be part
of a culture where everything you're
doing is song and dance in coordination
with everyone and that you feel this
kind of Rhythm with each other and the
Rhythm with nature most people have no
idea that's a thing um and you know so
many things like that so it's hard to
Value things that you don't even know
exist and it's hard to let go of the
only of pleasure you've ever
had and so even though when you look at
the graph of the reported amount of
suicide I mean the amount the recorded
amount of suicide for teens proportional
to the number of hours per day they use
their cell phone and that as the number
of hours goes from a half hour up with
each hour up the rate of suicide goes
up the team doesn't want to give up
their phone they will completely fight
to keep their phone and don't want to
give up the pleasure hits they get
associated with the likes they get from
the beauty filter on Instagram that is
what drives their body dysmorphia well
that right there is another microcosm of
our entire GDP focused super economic
superorganism culture yes advancement is
not
betterment and if you have if you if you
go back to day cart so I said I'd come
back to modernity at some point
so there has always been this story all
that I won't say always for a very long
time there's been this histories written
by the winner and the winner usually
says them winning was a good thing and
you know genghiskhan United the
desperate Mongol tribes and Alexander
the Great and Caesar you know United and
expanded their great Kingdom and Etc so
there was always that element of
progress but it was also kind of bound
with appreciation of certain types of
tradition associated with religion and
whatever associated with modernity and
kind of mostly getting like a decreasing
the role of religion and the then kind
of Rapid increase in scientific and
technological progress the progress part
became almost the entire story and the
idea of progress through these new
institutions science technology industry
Market democracy Etc became like the
dominant
narrative
and if you go to day cart and the
separation of the objective world that
you can measure we can all measure we
can get repeatable measurements and we
can apply science the philosophy and the
methodology of Science and that's the
domain of is right but that science
can't say anything about the domain of
ought because I can't measure a right I
can't measure we can't all independently
measure is that beautiful is that good I
can independently measure how fast it is
or how heavy it is or you know how much
kinetic energy it has or whatever so
where does a come in so you know decart
is's like well that's the domain of
religion and it can deal with that stuff
but science can't and so science is only
going to deal with the is well but the
is is focused
on being able to reduce a domain of
reality to a model that emphasizes
mechanisms that both allows me to
predict things and then create the
applied side of which is technology that
can control
things and so it's learn how leverage
Works to be able to apply levers to
build um megalithic construction right
it's learn how genetics work to be able
to do genetic engineering it's learn how
um chemistry and thermodynamics and
Mechanics Work to make internal
combustion
engines but if the applied side of is of
science is
engineering what is a good technology
well no no no we can't do anything with
that right we so which thing gets
built is well where did the money for
the research come from somebody that has
money that is seeking Roi on that money
and so you don't really get science you
get the R&amp;D arm of the
market because the research money is
going to be pursuing something that
generally has some goal that's ass
associated with it and so the profitable
extractive you know whatever thing uh
and you
know because science can't say what
ought with its methods because of that
division of the subjective universe and
the objective Universe which not all
philosophies had even the Greeks didn't
divide those right as far as westerns
and definitely the VC system and the daa
system and Indigenous systems didn't
divide subject and object and make
object that is meable repeatably real
with some methods and the other either
not real or you know whatever
so because when you're just focused on
the objects there is no
meaning and and I can't measure those
things right I can try to measure a
neural Coral it when someone says
they're in an experience of intimacy but
that's not the experience of intimacy
um
so when Von noyman wrote uh economics
and Game Theory it's important that it
was those two things in the book Von
noyman and Morgan Stern right it was
Game Theory the
formalization of the mathematics of how
to win at win- lose strategy games under
uncertainty and the theory of the market
which was you know application of that
same principle
so what is a good choice science can't
answer but Game Theory ended up becoming
the best closest thing to what SC a
scientifically congruent thing could say
is the best answer or a good choice is
the choice that doesn't
lose and so under uncertainty assume the
other guy has more malicious intent more
military and prepare to not lose under
that
scenario and you know on and on and
so that definition of which has nothing
to do with good right it just has to do
with not a particular kind of bad to me
you know under that
uncertainty
um so if you can study the world down to
the level of mechanism where you can
then engineer to the degree that you can
Lander over on
Mars and you can split the nucleus of an
atom and you can make AIS that can beat
humans at war games and you
can uh scale up industrial technology to
planetary scales and and EXT species at
scale and make new species with genetic
engineering that level of technological
power in the domain of is applied is not
bound by what is actually good in some
deeper understanding where the only good
is that which Wins Game
theoretically that choice making system
on that level of Tech Will
self-terminate in in the same way that
cancer
does in the same way so many earlier
civilizations
did and so
the fact that we have such a powerful
system of the study of is that can lead
to all that
technology we do have implicit within us
the ability to have a comparably
abstract and deep and profound system of
Ethics or wisdom about the nature of Art
to bind that other thing I know you've
had Ian migil Crest on in the framework
of the master in the Emissary that the
goal achieving has to be bound by
picking good
goals and it is not the analytical break
all the parts Into Pieces come up with
the metric part that can figure out good
goals it's the field of I am because we
are so is this a good goal for the
totality of we am I perspective seeking
and feeling and being engaged with the
reality for everybody are all at the
table such that it could be so if we get
incredibly powerful at goal
achieving with shitty goals very narrow
goals that are beneficial in the
increasingly narrow metrics with
increasing harm externalization as we're
passing thresholds of harm
externalization capacity for the
planet that thing
terminates so to Steward that much goal
achieving power we must meet it with
what are good goals what is actually
progress what is worth maintaining what
is worth for sure protecting and
maintaining what do what should be
reversed that already harmed things
where the actual progress would come
from reversing some of the stuff not
just making more new
stuff so what if we had the ability um
to take uh a hundred or a thousand
billionaires but not just billionaires
but the the Social Power equivalent
modern day of Kissinger as you said
earlier and like in Clockwork Orange
like force theirs eyes open and watch
this entire episode what what would such
a group of people and Beyond be able to
do from the moment we are in 2024 and
you know the The Meta crisis at at its
current state what could we do to step
more towards authentic progress and um
the maintenance of just the good things
that make our planet and our
civilization viable and and get rid of
the the bad goals so there's this quote
from uh General Smedley
Butler um and he called War as a racket
it's very famous um I'll read just the
beginning it's long and people can go
check it
out and you know I'm assuming people
know what a racket is a racket is like a
classic example is a protection racket
pet where a gang will come rough up a
store so the store thinks that they need
protection and the police aren't
protecting them and then other members
of that same gang come offer them
Security Services for sale and so they
are protecting them from themselves for
a fee so they are basically
manufacturing the demand and then
offering the supply the
amount if you if you look at um
how much of our modern market and Market
government system meets the criteria of
creating a problem that's a result of
some part of Market or technology that
some other part of market and Technology
will come to solve that will then
simultaneously create new problems the
whole thing being a racket is actually a
very um important Insight but with that
definition of a racket what he says here
is war is a racket it always has been it
is possibly the oldest e the most
profitable surely the most
vicious it is the only one international
in scope that's not true anymore he
wrote this in like
1881 um oh No 19 something um it's the
only one which uh in which the profits
are reckoned in dollars and the losses
are in lives racket is best described I
believe as something that is not what it
seems to the majority of the people only
a small inside group knows what it's
really about it's conducted for the
benefit of the very few at the expense
of the very many out of War a few people
always make huge
fortunes
show I mean again another microcosm of
our situation but now I'm seeing war in
light of this conversation as as a a
progress narrative um erasing parts of
history and and writing a narrative for
for the masses that feels good sounds
about right uh but is really divorced
from what could be possible uh given our
history now people will say that I'm
romanticizing indigenous life and don't
I know that there was infanticide and
blah blah blah um I'm not romanticizing
it I'm saying that the Hoban story is
the villainization of it and that's
definitely
self-interested propaganda that
justifies evil
and that um there was obviously a
humongous range of the way tribal people
lived over 200,000 years in different
environments with different groups of
people oh this was the unsubstantiated
thing I was going to say earlier now it
comes
back it so we were saying that there was
this kind of symmetry of power that
happens through natural selection that
of you know where the increase in power
happens with this evenly distributed
mutation with co- selection but
that when we start developing
technologies that increase our let's say
coordinated preda of capability faster
than the rest of the environment can
also be increasing its resilience to it
then we can over hunt an environment and
rather than have our population shrink
either start farming the environment or
move on to the next population move on
to the next environment and start over
hunting it so there is some indication
though it does seem like the the jury is
still a little bit out on some of this
that the extinction of a lot of the
megap and the earlier hominids was the
result of
sapien's success at this strategy
meaning it was uh Extinction including
to the other kinds of humans we could be
inhabiting the world with early
on it so the hypothesis I have is that
the early indigenous wisdom Traditions
were learning from some of those m
akes and there are certainly indigenous
stories that indicate this that when we
some of them have stories that when they
saw the destruction that they were able
to cause with their stone tools they
realized that they had to bind them with
wisdom and that the kind of wisdom
Traditions emerg
to take more careful
responsibility and that there may have
been something like uh one phase of a un
renewability and then lesson that led to
a more kind of sustainable phase um so
that's the thing I'm saying is I I can't
substantiate across the board but sounds
probably uh at least part of the
truth you increasingly talk about uh
indigenous cultures indigenous wisdom uh
and you bring up examples that I've
never heard of H how do you learn all
this uh there
are obviously some books and papers
studying this and there are increasingly
indigenous people who are becoming
Scholars who are also but who speak
their native languages and are
translating it um but I have also just
pursued making friends with people of
that type particularly the ones who
are have studied their own histories and
kind of understand modern anthropology
evolutionary theory sociology and can
kind of explain the um Parallax on those
ideas and this is an area I actually
really want to invest a lot more time
and attention because the thing that we
call civilization has been around for a
very short period of time the thing we
call industrial civilization in even
shorter period of time the it's the
thing we call civilization is fair to
call the domestication and the beginning
of human
domestication where the other thing was
more Sapient in The evolutionary
environment right we we call it wild now
it was not but they wouldn't have called
it Wild and the domestication of humans
at scale and the domestication of
livestock went
together and this is actually really
fascinating right which
is the and we've talked about this
before that the emergence of the plow
and kind of ox drawn or you know um
donkey or horse drawn plow creating
grain and Surplus you could call the
beginning of the anthropos
scine uh
where if I'm hunting and Gathering I
don't want to change the ecosystem I
want to partake in the abundance of the
ecosystem right like maybe within the
trees a little bit um but even if I am
digging with a digging stick like in
early horiculture I can't do vast spaces
so I don't need to clearcut land to
allocate it to agriculture once I get
and Grains aren't useful in small
amounts but once I can have an ox draw
the plow and I can do these vast kind of
row crops now I can get enough grains
and I can store them better than I could
store other stuff that I can get this
kind of vast Surplus so we can see why
the the ox drawn plow was a massive
advancement in the ability for Surplus
which meant that you could grow the a
much larger
population it meant that you could send
that Surplus along War routes so that
you could support much larger
Wars it meant that you could with that
large population have more
specialization and division of labor so
you could Advance the total Tech stack
you know I means all of those things but
with the emergence of the plow was also
the end of
animism because in the hunter gatherer
life sometimes the animal kills me
sometimes I kill the animal just like in
the Predator prey kind of relationships
I can pray to the spirit of the Buffalo
I can and apologize for needing to take
its body I can say when my body dies and
goes into the Earth and becomes the
grass that its ancestors will eat that
we are part of this great cycle of life
and we breathe our spirit into each
other but I can't domesticate that
Buffalo into an ox and yoke it and beat
it all day long and still talk about the
great spirit of the
Buffalo and so then we move to man's
dominion over kind of models religions
that the animals God put us here to rule
over they're all here for us Dominion
Etc and the domestic a of the animals
where their well-being didn't matter
they were here for us also Co cor
corresponded with the beginning of
slavery so so that's all those things
you just mentioned are a story that the
winners are
telling
totally and it's why the indigenous
narratives of the early civilization are
very different um and it's that the
Agricultural Revolution was not an
awesome thing but if the population that
does that thing will become a larger
population with more specialization
division of labor and then it will win
and war against the cultures who don't
so one of the insights is that when a
new technology emerges there's two
insights here that are important first
is technology is not values neutral
we've talked about this it actually
changes human values because in using it
like if I go walking around in a forest
with a camera what I perceive changes
cuz of holding the camera I'm looking at
different things if I go walking around
with a gun my perception of the forest
changes if I go walking around with an
axe my perception of the forest
changes the affordance of that tool
attenuates my attention to the things
that that tool can do something
with and so the process of even engaging
with the tool attenuates attention right
changes the nature of attention and then
it also makes a different behavioral
pattern beating an ox all day long is
very different than hunting it's a so
I'm have agrarian Mythos rather than
Hunter gather Mythos I'm going to be
dreaming and thinking and feeling in
those types of ways I'm going to be
conditioning my nervous system based on
the movement patterns that my body is
going through in those ways I'm going to
have radically less complex total
movement patterns than I had in the
other environment which leads to less
complex and dynamic thought and
phenomenological patterns and on and on
so and then of course I can't believe
that the animal is animistic and as soon
as I do the Dominion model then and and
they were here for us then the women are
here for the men and the lower classes
are here for the upper classes and the
slaves are here for the slave owners and
the and the what was a forest that we
had to clearcut to turn it into Agland
is all fine and so that model starts to
develop so the first thing is the
technolog is not values neutral it will
code our attention and change our
behaviors and as a result change our
psyches and Societies in heaps of ways
so the externalities of tech are not
only physical they are psychos cral the
next thing is that if that thing confers
Advantage game theoretic Advantage it
becomes obligate because the people who
don't use it will just simply lose in
power competitions even if what wins at
Power Sucks for all kinds of metrics of
what is beautiful and
good and so the technology is both mind
altering value altering attention
altering culture altering Behavior
altering and
obligate and this is why the Sabbath was
about controlling the use of technology
and controlling productivity this is why
wisdom around when a new technology came
out do we build this or not and if so
how do we use it how do we change those
patterns we consider it is necessary and
if you do not have that then everyone
becomes the result of dominant culture
dominant technology because it has to
the P whoever is best at running the
system of technological power and that
was caval REM at the time of gask Khan
and it was industrial Tech at the time
of Rockefeller and it was computer tech
at the time of gates and it was the
people who it is now at the time of AI
and Etc whoever is best at the power
associated with the tech stack will also
then determine the
narratives and there will be narratives
that support that power stack as
good so I know you and your organization
are working on some pretty important uh
projects yet you spent
the time these last few months to write
this paper on immature versus authentic
progress presumably because you think
it's critical uh that people understand
this and think about it and presumably
because you see some sort of a uh maybe
thin but uh narrow but a path forward
where we can head towards a more
authentic progress for our uh fellow
humans alive on the planet today and and
in the future can can you outline that
or are there still uh foundational
pieces yeah
so there are many famous authors who
have contributed to the progress
narrative and of
why antibiotics and vaccines got rid of
pandemics and plagues you know Etc and
why
um hobber Bosch and the Green Revolution
led to being able to feed so many more
people and
why uh you know on and on all the good
things and why it's getting why the
world's getting better and
better and there's not no truth to
this but it is definitely
cherry-picked it is definitely what is
better for those who were not genocided
or extincted or killed in war or or are
still in the positions of poverty that
the same system that is offering those
things to some is creating for others
right it's definitely cherry-picked in
terms of who it's looking at progress
for and it's definitely cherry-picked in
terms of what value metrics it's
considering and which value metrics it's
not
considering it's definitely also framed
that the types of value that were
destroyed are not even mentioned or
talked
about the types of value that are not
really real value they're basically like
racket type value are
overemphasized um a lot of the
comparisons are decontextualized there
will be things
like in 1815 the average American only
you know had a150 a day and now
inflation adjusted they have 10 times
that or you know whatever it is like
yeah but they grew their food in a way
that didn't take dollars and
they made their own house and like the
idea that dollars were mediating their
life was gibbous that's not true so
you're decontextualizing the fact of
dollar as how their life was mediated
which it is now to then is is not true
right so there's a place where that is
we wrote another paper called how to
mislead with facts and it's cherry-pick
the
facts decontextualize the facts and then
kind of Loff frame the facts and you can
make specious conclusions from true
facts right so that's that story
and so I'm not saying that there are no
truths in it but like okay if the the if
you take the best examples that there
have been like the the progress stories
Darlings you know H Bosch is obviously
one of them which is the creation of
synthetic nitrogen and then you know
beyond that synthetic fertilizer which
is now you know NPK
um which did make a lot of unable so
aable and did allow us to be able to
grow a lot more total crop through you
know industrial
Agriculture and that did play a major
role in the population going from half a
billion to 8 billion in 200
years which is a 16x in
population and as you state the in the
industrialized world the resource
consumption per capita was not just the
food but all of the energy for the
entire system the energy the tractors
using in the lights whatever and that's
something like 100x during that same
time and that 100 Xing per capita and 16
Xing the capita in a very very short
period of time from what was already
kind of a steady state post agrarian
Revolution right which was had brought
the numbers to way higher than they were
in the kind of hun gather
time is all using resources from the
earth faster than they can regenerate
and turning them into trash and
pollution faster than they can be
processed even calling it resources
right this is when you're talking about
language the idea that an a whale is a
natural resource as opposed to a
sensient being with its own life is not
that different than the idea that a
person as a slave is a natural resource
rather than a sent being the idea that a
3,000-year old redwood tree is a natural
resource cuz I can make Timber out of
it um and we you know in business we
talk about human resources which is not
beings that
are whose moms had hopes for them and
who are going and who have children and
who are going to have deathbed
Reflections they are resources that we
want to employ in a way where we get
more out of them than we put into
them right like it is such a it's
such a
psychopathological
worldview the instrument
instrumentalizing of everything in that
kind of way so nature is not natural
resources nature is nature is all the
beings that were here for all this time
before we were here and that our life
doesn't exist without I am because we
are right um so you look at the hubber
Bosch and you say okay was that
exclusively good that thing where that
population grew and the resource
consumption grew def but there's a curve
that looks at human population and
species Extinction and shows how closely
those are
correlated and the dead zones in the
ocean are the result of the Agricultural
affluent from the habber BOS right and
like we're it's a 3/4 water planet and
we have 500 dead zones that are the
result of that mechanism and a lot of
the health issues that people have are
because we're not putting everything
that came out of the soil back into the
soil we're taking everything out and
putting three minerals back in right a
very tiny subset so you get
micronutrient deficiency so you look at
that darling and you're like this was
not exclusively comprehensively good so
with just fixing the prices uh on
environmental externalities energy and
other non-renewable inputs get us much
of the way towards uh uh real
progress kind of sort
of um because all those negative things
you just said none of those are in our
price system at all right indulge me
quickly on the this one other example I
wanted to give of a darling of the
progress story which is like the one
that is so easy to sympathize with of
who wants to do Dennis in the time
before Nova like that that seems
Dreadful
torturous okay now I can't say that I
know for sure how dentistry in the time
before Nova can but in the Indigenous
World specifically so this is important
a lot of the Dreadful world before the
progress narrative was the already
civilization system right people living
in cities during the Dark Ages and
whatever where we saw the great plagues
do you have huge
plagues that are zuntic when you don't
have animal husbandry where you have you
know close proximity with all of the
rats and the cats and the all of those
types of things with the grain stores
and the animals that are there inside of
large population density Urban centers
no right it's a very different situation
and so so many of those problems like a
high population density City High
population per
capita shitty hygiene and animal
husbandry you know in the environment
yes that's a pandemic breeder and but
the answer could have been to change the
city design right not just you know
vaccines and you know antibiotics Etc I
I actually think we might under
attribute how much just plumbing and
hygiene went to the benefits that
occurred there but um so if you look at
the so much of what we think about how
Barber
Dentistry and Medicine whatever were was
also again in the
post the the post Caesar gangas
Khan uh you know Etc era the post
civilization era you go back to
indigenous world and Weston Price's work
and I know there are questions on
replication and whatever on Weston
Price's work but Weston Price's work
when you know was involved in founding
the American Dental Association and he
was looking at the last hun gather
tribes around kind of turn of last
century that had not adopted grain into
their diet not gotten into agriculture
because it's not grain and under gather
and he found that they had no cavities
and they didn't have a problem with wi
wisdom teeth and they didn't have major
occlusion issues they had these amazing
teeth right this was a huge thing that
he documented and he's like we didn't
just evolve wrong where we have wisdom
teeth issues we're eating a diet that
demineralizes our Bon so that we don't
actually have the bone density to be
able to get that last part so we have
wisdom teeth that's also the occlusion
shoes and it's also the cavities these
people didn't have toothpaste or
toothbrush but they also didn't have
cavities then watched when Western diet
was introduced specifically heavy grain
diet and they all start getting cavities
and having occlusion issues so again
from the racket
perspective do I like novocaine if I
have to get my mouth drilled on yes is
it entirely possible that a huge amount
of the dental issues were already the
result of having solved problems in
shitty ways that caused externalities to
our orthodonture and to our Dentistry
itself where then now you need that
thing and the right answer would have
been a comprehensively different teex
stack right that didn't have most of
human diet come from something that we
didn't evolve to
eat do do we even as a culture as a
species have the ability to measure and
govern such
complexity like obviously once Weston
Price and other people like him figured
that out was there a vector to change
what was happening or was it the the
racket in the one person in 10 that had
the dark Triad traits just swamped
everything else the direction of more
new technology keeps
increasing novel complicating effects
that are very hard to monitor but like
let's say we're let's say we're talking
about humans in a state of nature right
vast majority of human civilization
do we understand how the whole world
Works no do we understand everything
about hydrology and how all the
convection patterns work and how all the
funguses and bacteria and kingdoms and
everything work no of course not but
does it work
yes and did it take billions of years of
radically Complex Evolution doing
distributed information processing to
make that whole thing work and it's
still doing all that yes okay so things
that I do that are going to change that
whole system in a way that doesn't have
any evolutionary precedents I should
kind of go slow on I should kind of like
really think through and do some tests
and really look at all of the effects
now if
so
can let's talk about the complexity for
a
minute let's say we discuss the movement
from what we call currently conventional
which is kind of this weird indust
agriculture method where you turn
natural ecosystems into basically
desertified soil that you spray NPK on
you put highly hybridized row crops in
that are designed for combines and then
you cover them in pesticides herbicides
and fungicides that are designed to kill
the most robust
creatures um and then humans are both
getting Trace mineral deficiency super
weird genetics of the
plants dead microbiome of the soil that
modulates the genetics of it and covered
in pesticides and herbicides so then we
have all these diseases so you see
disease on the rise but then the answer
is
Pharmaceuticals and they're regulated by
the same industry Food and Drug and the
NIH puts money into drug studies and
stuff but not into dietary studies which
is why the food pyramid is created by
the American Dairy Council and American
grain Council and um you know so so you
look there's a racket right of course
it's a racket and whether it was
designed or emerged through shared
system incentives is actually mostly
irrelevant to the point of course it's
some of both and but if you say
okay how does soil work in a natural
system everything that comes out of it
goes back into it there's a loop closure
right so uh the tree when it dies
decomposes into the soil the leaves when
they fall decompose into the soil the
animals that are eating the things their
poop goes into the soil and their bodies
go into the soil every everything comes
out goes back in and it's actually all
made of the same atoms right the same
distribution of atoms basically like six
elements that make up most everything in
the distribution of Trace
elements if I take stuff out of the
soil that involves all of the living
compounds in the complex chemistry the
humic and fulvic acids and the and the
amino acids being produced the ETC and
all the trace minerals and I put back in
three minerals that are enough to make
some that looks like a
plant but has totally lower amounts of
macronutrients and different
phytochemicals and
Etc like it's kind of can I predict
exactly every single biochemical change
no can I tell that's probably going to
have problems yes that's pretty easy to
tell do I want to not spray things
designed to be poisonous to cockroaches
that could make it through nuclear war
and designed to be poisonous to
exoskeleton creatures do I want to not
spray poison like that on the food that
we eat yeah that like that seems pretty
reasonable and um do we do we not want
to grow food in a way that is killing
the top soil that we depend upon but
they should be regenerating it so you
start to look at what are the principles
all the stuff that comes out has to go
back in there's going to be a balance of
things that fix nitrogen in the soil and
use nitrogen the principle set to do it
well is amazingly
simple and what is
that this is I'm this what I'm giving an
example in the case of Agriculture like
how do you do agriculture properly put
it put back in the soil all the things
that come out of
it make sure that the things that are in
the soil have a distribution of the
different types of things that are kind
of like you find in a natural system
natural system has legumes fixing
nitrogen and non legumes pulling it out
and then it has plants that naturally
repel excessive amounts of insects of
the insects that those come to there you
can see those patterns in nature so can
we build off of that you know a kind of
permaculture approach that just Maps
some of what nature is
doing and can we tell that if the trace
minerals that are in the plants or in
the animals that eat the plants that we
evolved with go back into the soil and
back into the plants that we're eating I
can't predict exactly what percentage
that will lower Ms over what time period
relative to all the other multifactors
but can I versus rheumatoid arthritis
versus autism but can I guess that as we
get the trace minerals back in as we get
the quality of the soil up as we get the
pesticides out following the way the
curves of the diseases and the curves of
those things happen together that in
general the health of the soil the
health of the plants health of the
ecosystem and the health of the people
are all going to go up together
yes and I don't need to try to
optimize every I don't need to
understand every bit of how the soil mic
microbiology does everything it does I
have to just pay attention to what it
needed to do that evolutionarily and
continue to support that I but this is
that thing again we have to appreciate
the thing that is already here with its
evolutionary complexity and seek to
maintain it and make sure that what I'm
adding to it is not debasing that which
it depends
upon so in your paper you outlined three
strategies to move towards authentic
progress uh and I'm going to I'm going
to ask you uh to to list those in a
second but first I want to read a quote
from your paper Okay progress worth
believing in progress that is really
about in increasing betterment
increasing the goodness in the world
must still be able to be considered good
once it is taken account of all
perspective and
externalities so for such here's my
question for such a a metric to occur
doesn't there first need to be a
culture-wide change in our values uh
otherwise why would such a thing come
about there's another paper that we
wrote on perverse as cemetries and the
perverse say symmetries are kind of this
like entropic gradient which is if I cut
the tree down or I kill a whale or
whatever I didn't kill all whales I
didn't cut down all trees there are
still forests I can access uh I can
still breathe the
air so I'm not experiencing that I'm
causing the problem at
scale um and in fact I'm not causing the
problem at scale I'm causing some tiny
little paper cut towards it and
everybody else is doing that but
advantage of the tree to my family as
Timber and selling it on the market is
is profound and
obvious so there is this as symmetry
between how significant the upside is to
me versus how what a tiny part I am of
the downside but then the System
Dynamics of everybody doing that
absolutely ensures the downside and
ensures it to be something that will end
up affecting
everyone um so there's a lot of perverse
asymmetries like that like those who pay
more attention to the risk of a
technology upfront won't win the
technological race and first move
Advantage is those who pretend that it
isn't there or cover it up and make
narratives about how positive it is and
scale it
rapidly ultimately we have to overcome
all of those perverse
asymmetries because we are powerful
enough that we are not small relative to
the ecosystem anymore you know or small
relative to our own Survival our own
species
capacity and so this is a with that much
growth both of like no other species
could destroy the ecosystems that they
depend upon so they did not have to
ensure that they
didn't um because we can we have to
ensure that we don't right and this is
the whole that the same recursive
abstraction that leads to the ability
for technological progress and war
strategy
and business strategy that that same
recursive abstraction can lead to the
vow of the bodh satva and the
recognition the conscious recognition
when men are not the web of life we're
merely a strand in it whatever we do to
the web we do to ourselves and extending
our compassion to all sensient beings in
the universe we
can expand our capacity for wisdom as
much as we expand it for intelligence we
can expand the scope of our
consideration of what a good goal is as
much as we expand our goal
achieving what I'm saying is we must now
you asking is there a cultural thing
that has to happen yes obviously our
culture as we already said is being in
shaped by our tools and by our social
systems so our our super structure our
culture our value systems our social
structures our economies and governance
systems and institutions and our
infrastructure our tool set are all
co-influence
co-influence co- influencing each other
so obviously we can't as you as you saw
when you're in India you change your
environment and something that no amount
of moralizing yourself to do would ever
work was automatic in a different
environment and so can we achieve
cultural change by just moralizing
people that they should culturally
change while they're still in the
environment that is predisposing the
culture that is here no that's not going
to work that well at the same time where
is the intervention point is some people
who already recognize that that's not a
culture they value enough they recognize
the fail of it they meditate on
meaningfulness enough that they actually
stop willing to be complicit with
it and not just to remove themselves
which is a step which some people do but
to say how do I dedicate my life energy
to changing those
Dynamics which should then entail a
study of change efforts that were well
motivated and failed and or made worse
problem so as to not repeat that to try
to understand why that happens to
understand what change that would change
all that could actually would require
and what it would be like now of course
to really change culture at scale we
have to change the technology and what
it predisposes right we have to change
the social systems as long as you have
an economic system we putting the
externalities are externalized and cost
then I can't empathize and take want to
take responsibility for all the harm
that I'm causing if I'm competing
against someone who's not internalizing
those costs like e economically you
can't you're economically incentivizing
sociopathy through the cost externality
so of course that has to change and of
course as that changes that makes
possible a different value set in the
same way that like the algorithm on
Facebook could upregulate for different
things it could upregulate for exposing
people to different worldviews and
different ideas and paying attention to
only upregulating the ideas that drive
common Unity rather than you know
division so those are places where
culture is affected by technology and
social system but how does it start it
has to start with a culture
first recognition of the I am because we
are the version of progress that is good
for I that is not for we is actually not
real progress I I remove myself from
that thing I won't participate in the
LIE of it and I will dedicate myself to
wanting to understand
what is would actually be good for the
whole and make sure my life energy is in
service to that and then progressively
that I am participating in things that
have more agency to be able to affect
that so it starts with a change of
values and Consciousness with some
people and that expands upwards and
ultimately I think um you're inferring
that we need a a
modern-day equivalent of a Sabbath
superimposed onto the superorganism
structure that is leading us into a
terminal
phase um I want to speak to
imposed people with a Libertarian bent
will be naturally
concerned by some of what is being said
and I want to speak to them okay
that was my word I I could have used
emerge or or something but go on but we
did talk about restraint and then we
talked about if someone wants to do the
thing that is more like a cancer cell or
more like cause tribal Warfare they're
not going to be the ones to restrain
themselves from doing it other people
will have to that is something like law
right that is something like imposition
and so then we are right to consider how
those systems have went in the
past
and because you
using Force to curtail someone's Liberty
has its own problems even if what
they're wanting to do with their Liberty
has problems and that's already in in
the Zeitgeist right now A lot of people
are worried that climate change is such
a a thing that will cause people to eat
bugs and not own anything and all kinds
of authoritarian rules yeah and I think
if
the people who were talking about that
eating bugs are the solution and not
owning anything were themselves not
major Capital owners uh who were not
applying those things to themselves
people might feel a little better about
it but um like the dude that don't
that is a hunter gatherer and he eats a
lot of crickets and grubs and if he says
like bugs are good like nobody's freaked
out about that they're freaked out about
um a situation of radical wealth
inequality in class Warfare and the
class Warfare telling more stories of
justifying radical and quity as the you
know as the solution while they have the
largest carbon Footprints themselves um
so like understandable right um so the
thing that I want to say is
the
you you introduced me to her um Vanessa
andread who you had on the show who uh I
had a conversation with and just thought
she was amazing and um really respect
was in her book she said that her uh the
chief of her tribe the his definition of
colonialism she probably said that on
your show but I'll bring it up is that
colonialism was not about taking other
people's land fundamentally or about
abuse of land or abuse of people or
anything that those were epiphenomena
that the core of it was believing there
are separable
things and you can say even deeper than
that is being conditioned to perceive
the world as a bunch of separable things
which is what B said was the underlying
cause of all the problems which is what
Krishna Morty said was the cause of all
the problems which is what Einstein said
so if I believe there's a bunch of
separable things and I'm separate from
other things and I can optimize some
things at the expense of other
things
and then I can actually rationalize that
everything is trade-offs and that's how
it is and Etc and you know then reify
social Darwinism and nonsense like that
so the root
one could say that the root of the
issues is if
people want
things
that inevitably cause harm to
others that's the root of the
problems either because they know it
causes harm and they want it anyway so
it's some kind of you know rivalry or
sociopathy or something like that or
because they don't know it causes harm
and it's from you know ignorance and
externality they just want what they
want and they're not thinking about what
all the cause and effect would be
because if you then say great let's let
the let's let people pursue what they
want and what they pursue getting causes
harm and then also creates propagating
patterns or to protect themselves
against the harm the other people have
to do similar competitive things and
blah blah blah and you have a world
defined by arms
races but if the other answer is don't
let the people pursue what they want use
some kind of enlightened law that says
says that's bad and prevented by force
the oppression is inherently also bad
and the asymmetry of force tends to lead
to an increasing Corruption of the power
stack and so neither of those are good
so as long as humans
believe that they are separate from
everything else as long as they perceive
the world separably you were mentioning
language earlier and I think similarly
Vanessa was telling you that English has
like 70% of the words are nouns in most
indigenous languages a very small
percentage of the words are nouns
you look at Whitehead as one of the kind
of great philosophers of 20th century
and the reason he came to process
philosophy is he's like there's no
things like the things that we think of
as
things are processes of interaction of
other things right a tree is not a
static noun it's doing trillions of
metabolic functions every second it's
interacting biophysically with the sun
in the air it's interacting
biochemically it's interacting
biologically doing Gene transfer with
the fungus on its roots the soil
microbes like the tree is in alive
process it's a verb it's a lots of verbs
and the idea that it's a noun just makes
us think very poorly makes us very bad
thinkers and the fact that we're
thinking in nouns all the time built
into our language is making us bad fers
at scale that we don't even realize
because we don't know what it's like to
have a language that doesn't see the
world as a bunch of nouns that are all
separate so changing how a lot more
humans uh perceive their relationship to
others to Nature to the whole is kind of
a necessary prerequisite for uh
authentic progress yes because if
I I I was um I was just giving this
example to someone I'm a a little kid
who's at the phase when they say what is
that what is that what is that right and
they're trying to understand they're
trying to like learn what all of the
things are the anatomy of universe and
that phase usually happens right before
the phase where they say why why why why
why because they they're trying to learn
the the mechanics the the Dynamics of
universe the kid says what is that and
they point to a thing we call a
tree I don't say that's a tree or more
specifically that's a spruce tree or
whatever because that's going to teach
the kid a bunch of things it's going to
teach them to just accept a default
worldview and not think for themselves
it's going to have them confuse the
ground reality with a symbol it's going
to have them think in generalizations of
Now understand what are trees and what
are not trees generalize all of them and
stop perceiving uniqueness it's going to
have them you like it does all that
stuff to them right so the kid says what
is that and I'm like let's go closer and
we go closer and I'm like touch it and
touch the leaves and then touch the
flowers and touch the bark and you know
touch all these parts and like what does
it feel like and then smell it and then
notice the other little animals in it
and um and then you know just have them
engage in that way and then say do you
think the tree stops there do you think
what about this Moss that's growing on
it is that part of it or is that not
part of it what about the uh the soil is
that part of it or not part of it
and and then I'm like what do you think
it is to that squirrel what do you think
it is to that little bug what do you
think it it is to itself and you know
what do you what do you feel when you're
with it and eventually we'll come to in
English we call this a tree in Spanish
they call call it arole and in this
language they call it this and they do
different kinds of things but this
particular one notice that if we go look
at this one they're
different and in fact this one there's
not another one in the entire universe
quite like
it and it's not even the same as it was
yesterday and it'll be different today
so the only way to know it is to be with
it fully more presently in this moment
and you know so imagine if kids grow up
that way rather than that's a tree
memorize its Latin name understand the
boty associated with it blah blah blah
like then they're using much more of
their whole self to understand reality
in a much more full Rich way that
understands that that same thing is
different from every different
perspective and so many different
contexts and um and
so if someone is perceiving if they are
supported to perceive the uniqueness of
everything and the interconnectivity of
everything that nothing is fungible and
nothing is separable nothing can be
standardized without actually causing
harm and nothing can be optimized at the
expense of others without causing harm
and they get that uniqueness in our
connectivity of everything and they get
I am because we are for a we that
extends to the
stars and then what they want that comes
from that first hungry ghost desire is
not the main thing that emerges this
like awe and fulfillment and Fascination
and gratitude it emerges from that
connection and it's actually the lack of
that connection that leads to the Hungry
Ghost place that needs more and more
hits and progress so the first thing is
just not that much desire emerges in the
same the same way and then the desires
that do emerge are in connection with
everything else that I'm connected with
like is it it will it be good for the
tree is it bad for the tree what about
the squirrels in the tree I just spent
time communing with them I love them I
wouldn't want it wouldn't be good for me
if it hurt those
squirrels now the desires that arise for
people who are in connectivity with
their inner con who are clear on their
inner connectivity with everything those
desires can be pursued in a way that
doesn't harm anything because their own
identity is not separate from everything
because their perception is
clear what percent of humans alive today
uh would have to have such a value and
Consciousness change to to effectively
change the super structure social
structure
infrastructure um going forward I don't
want to
critique too
harshly but if you look at what we said
that since the climate movement started
all of the work that has happened has
not actually empirically decreased the
fact that fossil fuel use goes up every
year yep and Emissions go up year yeah
and the environmental movement has not
changed the fact that more tons of
pesticides are used each year than the
year before yep and that species
Extinction
continues even the the not Market
seeking best motive there's clearly
something off with how we're doing stuff
right like clearly we don't just need
more of that thing that not only is not
effective but then makes nuclear and
dams and other things that don't get off
fossil fuel and cause other problems so
there's the mind that was conditioned by
this kind of system can't avoid making
more of this kind of
system it is part of an autopoetic
process and there is a need to extract
oneself from it and then
actually
deprogram the the nature of that kind of
mind that's started by a language of
sounds and perceiving everything is
separable and separate and then in
rivalry and from a place where I think
my fulfillment comes from status and
getting things and just all the nonsense
right to where there is a
mind that and and a
being whose motive is not what's in it
for me who actually feels a fulfillment
that they get to exist at all who feels
an awe that they have already got to see
sunsets and color feels a fullness in
that whose MO is actually in service of
future beings that they get to keep
experiencing it and their desire to
protect and maintain and serve
life and that can perceive the
interconnectivity of things enough to
not over focus on one part in a way
where the solution to that part will
externalize harm elsewhere without
realizing
it so if one wants to really not
participate in causing more harm and
maybe really change something one does
have to look at how this system has
actually conditioned their own
mind and how they understand what
problems are and what Solutions are and
how to figure those things out and how
to measure them and how to scale them
and how to all all like
that and come to say like how does
nature work and how do I understand how
nature works such that I can
work in a way that is aligned with
that
and
uh yeah there's there's
found
deconditioning and re and new learning
that has to
happen it feels right to me because I've
experienced it and I noticed it in you
since I first met you even just the
change in your language and and some of
your ideas um I have 12 questions that I
had prepared after reading your paper
and we're already 3 hours in so I think
we're going to have to do
a part one and part two but but let me
ask you this um and then get your your
input on how you'd like to proceed um
here's another quote from your your
paper philosopher and psychologist Eric
Fram wrote that optimism is an alienated
alienated form of Faith pessimism an
alienated form of Despair if one truly
responds to man and his future in effect
concernedly and responsibly one can
respond only by faith or by despair
rational Faith as well as rational
despair are based on the most thorough
critical knowledge of all the factors
that are relevant for the survival of
man so with that quote Daniel what what
are your goals and the organization that
you work with with publishing papers
such as this one on immature versus
authentic progress what are you hoping
to influ fluence and Achieve and lastly
how can our viewers um help in in those
goals yes this is another open loop um
we were talking about
uh about kind of how the progress
narrative really accelerated
postmodernity that if one has that story
that things are getting better and
better because of tech which also
includes having written the history as
uh and Alternate realities as you know
worse than they
were and someone doesn't think about all
the externalities they think about the
hobber Bosch without thinking about the
dead zones and the ocean and the extinct
species and the you know everything else
the default assumption is that when new
tech emerges it'll cause some problems
until we figure out how to use it then
we'll rightly regulate it and um net net
it'll be good right that's kind of the
default assumption and so then that
default assumption when we look at
technologies that have radic more
powerful than any power than anything
we've ever touched that scale faster
that have more complexity are more not
understandable and more unregulated like
AI like synthetic
biology the the default assumption will
be yeah it it'll probably be net
positive it'll cause some problems we'll
figure out how to solve those
problems and I actually don't think a
right assessment of the history of
Technology warrant
that nor do I think these Technologies
currently warrant that as the right
assumption and so in the face of
exponentiating technology that is also
exponentiating destructive
capacity and it's not just destructive
capacity through its militarized uses
it's even through its Market uses doing
a thing that we want that is narrow
progress that's driving externalities
more as we pass planetary boundaries if
it
is uh
I I want more people to have
a uh a wider kind of clearer worldview
through which they can look at things
that are being called progress and
promising a better future to be able to
look at the issues that are emerging
right now and have a different default
assumption and a different like where
should burden of proof be actually some
of these things are so harmful burden of
proof should have been proving lead was
safe before putting it in gas and
aerosolizing it to everybody as opposed
to having irreparable harm that could
never be addressed and then regulating
after the fact um and so uh where there
is truly existential risk portended
burden of proof shouldn't be that it is
really dangerous it should
be we actually have to prove adequate
safety through doing a detailed enough
analysis of what those anth order
effects will be before we rapidly scale
the stuff so that was the reason that we
wanted to put that paper out now is
because um the rate of
technological I will not call it
progress I will call it advancement
because it is definitely increas in goal
achieving with it with not the refining
on what is a good goal um without
changing the economic incentive that
leads to externalities and all like that
but the rate of technological
advancement is definitely in the
verticalized part of the exponential
curve
no one can actually really understand
the speed and the portent of it the fact
that now you know that there was nothing
like Mo's law right it it historically
and it kind of ate the world and that
was Progressive doubling of compute
power every couple years and just the
hardware on GPU based AI will 10x in the
next six
months you know the the power will 10x
in 6 months not 2x in two years right
and then in 6 months it will do it again
in less time than
that and the software and the parameters
and the data are also 100x in less than
a
year probably something like
that and if you look at I think it's a a
million x increase in the last 10 years
um and
so you know and if you take something
like AI where we're developing it for
increasing ing generality it is
basically a general purpose goal
achieving tool do you want to beat
people at chess do you want to beat them
at go do you want to beat them at
Starcraft do you want to beat them at
missile targeting do you want to beat
them at protein folding do you want to
uh beat them at comprehensive War
planning or high-speed currency trading
great let's increase the ability to do
all those things the technology will be
developed for one
purpose and we'll focus on the upside of
that but when the cost of the technology
becomes cheap for that purpose and then
the affordance allows everybody to
advance every kind of
goal that has to be really thought about
as part of the externality
set but I I I the AI is another
conversation that I want to have with
you especially with respect to to
climate change and and the environment
but on this topic isn't AI being trained
with the old linear model in English and
with all the perceptions of what we just
discussed
uh of of of progress and isn't it like
an exponential layer of the same on top
like you said as humans we have to
change our perception of our relation to
the whole isn't AI like being
fed zillions of times more the
perception of the what we don't
want yes but worse than
that it does not you know it has the
ability to already do go achieving
obviously it does not have the ability
for empathy which means that goal
achieving without empathy is
sociopathic um I'm not saying sadistic
it doesn't have interiority oh so so AI
is only a dark Triad not a dark
quad um the whole conversation around
will AI develop s insta as another thing
more importantly is that AI doesn't
operate by itself it operates inside of
companies and of militaries with the
people that are there as part of a
cybernetic system so it already doesn't
have to be completely General to be part
of a cybernetic system that is General
because what the AI does what other
types of AI so the whole cybernetic
system has a hybrid of cognitive
architectures plus what it predisposes
the people to do you know is actually
the thing that's being selected for
so as we're in a place where
technological advancement is speeding up
it is being sold as the solution to all
these problems they're problems that our
previous technological success has
caused the harms of these Technologies
are being downplayed everyone is racing
as we're crossing planetary
boundaries it would be better if more
people understood what is wrong with the
progress narrative and understood what
authentic progress actually entails
and understood the caution and restraint
that it requires understood the emphasis
on maintaining understood that very
often the best way to solve a problem is
to remove its causes which actually
involves reversing some stuff rather
than always create new stuff but the
obviously Market incentive is on create
new stuff the history books incentive is
on create new stuff but as we think
about how do we actually solve problems
in a way that isn't a racket right that
isn't solving a problem that was caused
by the result of our previous problem
solving and that will in turn create
more of
that first we have to say is this
actually a problem is it bad that food
perishes and that's a problem to solve
through artificial preservatives and
making Twinkies that can last 25 years
as opposed to like fresh vegetables that
start to Decay or is that not a problem
it's actually a feature of reality we
should interact with and
embrace there's that Meme that shows a
picture of a rambunctious kid and it
says and easier than
parenting
um
is is
our children wanting our time and our
attention a problem that we need a
technological solution like an iPad for
well yes because we have to work because
all the other parts of the system but
like tribal life was the kids and the
old people spending tremendous amounts
of time together it's the center of
civilization with everyone else spending
time supporting that and so
the first part of problem solving is is
this even a problem or is this actually
a feature of reality that yes it
requires like do I want to automate
every single thing that requires
muscular engagement where then you have
a society of O obese people with brittle
bones and like that or do you actually
want that like all the dynamism of our
bodies and the development of strength
in them is actually important it's
actually required that I don't want to
automate all those things way do I want
to remove every kind of pain like oh
your family member just died and so you
feel depressed here's a here's a psych
Med to take your emotions away is it a
problem that you're feeling
emotions and the answer is a
technological solution like a psyched or
is in the exploration of those emotions
the possibility that you can have a
meaningful life at all because you
understand that everyone you know in
love is going to die you're going to die
what is Meaningful while you're here why
did what does it mean that you love that
person that you're in deep question some
of the depression is like I was a
to that person I didn't express
my love to them as much I was too busy
working at my job to have a cost of
living of that has a bunch of stuff
that doesn't actually make me happy but
that I think that I need and I feel sad
and I realize that maybe I'm not going
to stop and then I'm going to die and
there aren't going to be that many
people who are that touched by me and
like maybe that depression is
exactly what the you need to
reflect and make a meaningful life
change not a psych meded so the first
part of problem solving is is this a
problem that needs a technological
solution or is this a pro or is this a
facet of life that I actually need to
embrace and be
with the next step is if it really is a
problem what caused it it was this
always the case and it's a feature of
reality or was this caused by other
things we did where the first step is
undo the
causes as opposed to ameliorate at the
symptom level while those causes
continue to express somewhere
else and you know so there are these
kinds of steps of what would it mean to
engage in problem solving in a way that
does not cause more problems and it is
possible and it does result
in the possibility of having us have
what we add to the world be actual
progress meaning actual betterment but
uh it is different in process and
different different in process and
different in motive in almost every
way is there a third
step
um there's some papers we're going to
publish on the processes that you can
walk through and they're not formal
they're not algorithmic their their
principled kinds of reasoning like is
this really a problem that needs a
technological solution or is this a
facet of reality to be with is this what
were the causes have I traced it back to
the causes do I understand them do I
understand the cause of those causes you
know like those kinds of things
one of them is yellow teaming yellow
teing is once we decide there is a thing
that we want to create whether it's a
law or a business or a technology
because there is some thing where we've
addressed the Upstream causes Etc and
there's still something to develop then
I really want to think through if this
thing succeeds and solves the narrowly
defined definition of a problem what is
the totality of the effects of it
succeeding on all the other areas and
where is it going to externalize effects
CU it's going to have effects other than
that one area and if it externalizes
more positives awesome that's a good
sign that it's in the right
direction and if you look at like a tree
a tree does a million positive things
for a million entities over a million
time scales right the tree is causing
benefit to squirrels and to butterflies
and to birds and to insects and to soil
microbes it's stabilizing top soil and
holding moisture in the ecosystem and
causing transpiration and keeping the
river clean and the banks of the river
so like positive externalities are
actually the result of good design based
on understanding the interconnectedness
of things negative externalities where
you don't understand the
interconnectedness you optimize it for a
narrow thing and externalize everywhere
else so the yellow teaming is the
thinking through the network of
relationships and causal Dynamics such
that you look at the externalities both
physical and psychosocial see where
there are possibly harmful ones and say
either we don't do the thing or how do
we design such that that's not the case
that the externalized effects are
positive
and that is actually possible not
perfectly but progressively better it's
sometimes uh with increasing frequency
seems to me that we're waking up as a
species at the exact time the clock is
running
out that's the hope that's the
possibility yeah so uh isn't the paper
in the public domain uh and a podcast
about naive versus authentic progress a
tiny sign of authentic
progress there are signs of authentic
progress in the world there
are more people that kind of care about
deep ecology there are more people that
are
um interested in thinking about
long-term futur as well you know the
there are more people interested
in approaches to healthc care that are
not
exclusively uh you know Al apathic
healthare
currently
the rates of growth of the things that
are moving in the authentic progress
Direction versus the narrow progress har
externalizing direction are not adequate
right and like I said many of the things
and and everybody that is contributing
to The Meta crisis thinks that they are
contributing to real
progress right I'm I'm providing a
product or service that the market wants
which means there's demand for it which
means it's
increasing it's solving some problem for
someone that makes their life
better and I'm employing the tools of
science and technology which is this
awesome system that allows us to
understand the world in a unified way
and improve things and like that's the
story so it's like the and that's why
people can come out in such defensive
fossil fuels of look at all the things
they give us and um you know and of the
market and and they do and they give all
of these externalities and while that
has benefited some and sucked for others
it also benefits some dimensions of self
and sucks for the dimensions of self
even for those most being benefited and
it is in the process of self-terminating
where it will be a benefit to nobody no
one in which case the damn I really
don't want to be complicit with that
thing damn I really don't want to just
what's best for me and my family is
continue to have optionality
tokens and damn I don't want to try to
make things better where I end up making
them worse because I am coming from the
same type of mind that engages in
rivalry and cause does a movement in a
way that creates counter movements and
that optimizes for one thing in a way
that ends up causing harm elsewhere so I
want that the activism the protection
impulse in me reconnects to the source
of reality deeply
enough that I know how to participate
that I'm guided in how to participate in
a way that is actually meaningful so I
would actually like to see a slightly
slower movement into
action a deeper movement into
withdrawal and a deeper understanding of
the history of well-intended failed
actions more rigorously it's very
painful and a deeper being with the
emotions about the whole thing and
really taking it all in and noticing how
much of our desire to make it better is
still ego is
still um an avoidance mechanism for not
wanting to feel it is still a
problemsolving mode that is
reductionistic that will end up
contributing to it and like letting that
stuff subtle
uh to get to a place where one can
engage in how to shift the System
Dynamics of the world in a way that are
actually what's
needed here here uh once again you have
surprised me um I read your paper I
understood it and this conversation went
in a different way than I expected um
what would you like from our viewers How
would would you like to wrap this up and
what are next steps you mentioned 12
questions that we didn't get to and you
know some viewers may have questions
thoughts so if there are interesting
questions then maybe we can do a session
two particularly if once we publish some
of these papers people have questions on
them because we don't have where we're
publishing them the ability to answer
them there um I think the thing that I
would hope
people leave with is
is deepening appreciation of the
tremendous amount of nonhuman activity
that it took to make the world that you
exist
in the
incredible uh preciousness and Miracle
of it and the desire
that the thing that makes your life and
the life of everyone you love possible
you want to have occupy more of your
attention than it does
now and that the places where your
attention and your time and your energy
are occupied by the result of
a system that resulted from selection of
coordinated violence and like that that
you really want to root that out of your
own self in
psyche
and and you want to just just like
appreciate
the the universe and world that gives
rise to the possibility at all and then
seek to explore how do I like there then
there's something like a vow like a
hypocritic oath it's like I I'm not
willing in pursuing a narrow definition
of advancement for me or whatever or in
being complicit to cause harm to this
like miraculous world not willing and
I'm going to look really carefully at
what does that
and rather than jump so quickly to well
yeah but I can't because I have to work
whatever try a little harder to say do
you have any other possibilities like
don't jump to your own lack of agency so
quickly like we said about the
billionaires that would say oh I don't
have agency relative to the thing well
like how long did you spend thinking
about it like how many options did you
really
pursue
and uh
and I think the combination of the
removal of some of the energy from this
world world system the increasing
appreciation of
the natural
world and the commitment to both not
cause harm the study of what does and
then the commitment to be part of what
can actually protect against harm uh can
result in like that is the movement or
the set of cultural shifts that I would
really like to
see that's a hell of a start my friend
um for my part it's about a half hour
away from being dark here in Minnesota
and I'm going to bid you good night and
I'm going to go sit by a tree uh and
reflect on it's not just a tree and all
the processes and parts and
relationships and just do a little bit
of a pre uh uh dusk sitting um gorgeous
th this this was a lot it was beautiful
and wise and uh has given me much to
think about thank you for all your work
all your thought uh and all your efforts
uh on behalf
of our planet the future and uh all of
us striving to um play a role thank you
my friend likewise my friend it was a
delight to be with you
today if you enjoyed or learned from
this episode of the great simplification
please follow us on your favorite
podcast platform and visit the greats
simplification tocom for more
information on future releases this show
is hosted by Nate Hagen edited by no
troublemakers media and curated by
Leslie bat Luts and Lizzy serani
