so my pleasure to introduce our esteemed
guest to the stage David Brooks is
regarded as one of the nation's leading
writers and commentators an oped
columnist with the New York Times he is
a regular guest commentator on PBS
newsour nprs All Things Considered and
NBC's Meet the Press his new book how to
know a person the art of seeing others
and being deeply seen is the latest in a
collection of five best-selling books
including bobos in Paradise on Paradise
Drive The Social Animal the road to
character and the second Mountain how to
know a person is an honest and personal
guide to fostering meaningful
Connections in every aspect of our lives
and for our Philadelphia audience I have
to let you know if you don't already
know that Mr Mr Brooks grew up on the
main line he went to Radner high school
he's a he's a local boy local talent and
we're really happy to have him back in
town tonight so please join me in
welcoming David
Brook thank
you I'm not tall enough for this
Podium is Kobe Bryant used to speak here
is that what's going on
here uh it's a pleasure to be back here
and um to be back in Philadelphia my
somewhat Hometown you're going to
shorten if you could give me taller
heels on my boots that might
work um so I'm I'm going to try to offer
you um we'll talk a little politics at
the end but mostly I'm going to try to
offer you array of uplift in the dark
and uh confusing and hard time uh so I'm
F first going to start start talking
about the subject I know best which is
myself um and so uh some of you may
remember that movie Fiddler on the Roof
uh and you know from that movie how warm
and Huggy Jewish families can be they're
always singing and dancing and
frolicking around uh I came from the
other kind of Jewish
Family and so the phrase in our home was
think yish act
British uh and so we were sort of
unemotional stiff upper lip
types and then uh in Nursery School when
I was four my the teacher apparently
told my parents David doesn't play with
the other kids he just observes this
which I guess is good for a career in
journalism I always say that if I tell
journalism students if you're at a
football game and everybody else is
doing the wave and you just sit there
and don't do the wave you have the right
kind of aloof personality style to
become a journalist because we just
watch things and then uh when I was 17
at Radner uh I wanted to date uh oh when
I was seven I uh read a book called
padding in the
bear and decided that moment I wanted to
become a writer and I've pretty much
been writing every day since
uh my Fitbit used to tell me when I
write between 7 and noon and my Fitbit
used to tell me I was
snapping but I was doing what God put me
on this Earth to do so I my heart rate
apparently went down and then when I was
17 at Radner I wanted to date this woman
named Bice and she didn't want to date
me she wanted to date some other guy and
I remember thinking what is she thinking
I write way better than that guy and so
those were my values
um and then when I was 18 uh the
admission missions officers at Columbia
Wesley and brown decided I should go to
the University of Chicago
uh and so that was an extremely cerebral
place the famous saying about Chicago
it's where fun goes to die uh my
favorite saying about Chicago it's a
Baptist school where atheist professors
teach Jewish students St Thomas
aquinus um so we were very much up in
our head and I fit right in I had a
double major at Chicago in history and
cibus
um and we actually freshman year we uh
took my roommate who had never boxed a
day in his life and entered him to the
Golden Gloves competition and we gave
him a nickname the kosher killer uh and
then we uh we practiced the Chicago way
which is we didn't practice boxing we
read a lot of books about boxing uh and
his illustrious career lasted 29 seconds
um and so I was pretty
intellectual uh and then I into
journalism which is a little bit of a
detached profession where you're you're
uh observing people and judging them I
was hired as a conservative columnist at
the New York Times a job I likened to
being the chief Rabbi at Mecca uh not a
lot of company
there uh and then I got a job in TV H
but I got a job in the most cerebral
form of TV which is the PBS NewsHour
where we have for TV extremely long
14-minute conversations about things uh
and I love our audience uh it's a
somewhat seasoned audience and so if a
93y old lady comes up to me at the
airport I know what she's going to say I
don't watch your program but my mother
loves it
so
um and so all this is to say I was up in
my head a lot and there's a moment from
about 10 years ago that symbolizes for
me that way of living so I love baseball
I've gone to hundreds maybe thousands of
baseball games I've never caught a
ball and so but I'm in Camden Yards in
Baltimore with my youngest son and a
batter loses control of the bat it flips
up in the air and it lands on my
lap and so getting a bat is a thousand
times better than getting a
ball and so a normal human being stands
up holds his trophy in the air jumps up
and down high fives everybody hugs gets
on the Jumbotron I take the bat put it
on the ground and just sit staring
straight ahead with no em emotion on my
face and so I look back on that uh and I
think show a little Joy man show a
little Joy but that wasn't who I was but
I do if I'm not a exceptional person but
I am a grower I try to
grow uh and so you know parenting was
sort of an emotional Revolution I had
some public failures and
humiliations uh and I learned about
Emotion by I wrote a book called The
Social Animal uh to learn about emotion
which is a book about emotion classic
University of Chicago trick to try to
learn about Emotion by writing a book
about
emotion and I think I open up my heart
and the sad thing was as I opened my
heart I became more open to music and
dance uh and the Arts and I discovered
unfortunately my heart is 14 years old
perpetually I like whatever songs
14-year-olds are listening to at any
given moment and so caty Perry I Kissed
a Girl avra LaVine complicated every
song in the Taylor Swift song book I
don't even remember high school I have
listened to so many songs at high school
breakups it's as if I was reincarnated
and I came back as Britney Spears um and
so I did get a little more emotion I can
prove it to you though I have to name
drop so I've been interviewed twice in
my life by
Oprah in 2014 and in 2019 and after the
second interview she says to me uh I've
rarely seen somebody change so much you
were so emotionally blocked before and
that was like a good moment for me and
she should know she's Oprah right
um and the weird thing is and the sad
thing for our country is that I was as I
was making a journey toward becoming
more fully
human the country was making a journey
to becoming less human and more
dehumanized and there are all sorts of
Statistics I won't recite them all but
we all know the suicide is up by 30%
depression rates are skyrocketing 36% of
Americans report feeling lonely
frequently 45% of teenagers say they
feel despondent and hopeless most of the
time the number of people who have no
who say they have no close personal
friends has gone up by four
times 36% more Americans are not in a
romantic
relationship uh the number of people
Americans who rate themselves in the
lowest happiness category has gone up by
50% and so what I see in my career is an
epidemic of blindness of people not
feeling seen valued and heard and when
you feel yourself not seen you regard
that as an insult which it is and an
injustice which it is and so you lash
out and so a society that becomes more
sad eventually becomes more
mean and so I was at a a a restaurant in
New York and the owner told me he has to
kick people out of the restaurant uh
every week now for rude Behavior never
used to happen uh my sister-in-law is a
nurse a head nurse at a hospital in
Camden and apparently her main challenge
is keeping nurses because the patients
have become so abusive the nurses want
to leave their profession and so that's
just sadness and
meanness uh and so why is all this
happening well I could tell a bunch of
stories one of them would be the
technology story social media is driving
us crazy one would be a sociology story
we're not as involved in Civic Life as
we used to be wouldn't be an economic
story there's more in income inequality
than there used to be and so we leave
desperate lives
but the story I emphasize is the most
direct which is we become sadder and
meaner because we don't treat each other
with the consideration that we
deserve and treating each other with
consideration and Reserve we deserve is
partly a matter of just being
openhearted toward each other but it's
crucially a matter of skills to be a
good friend to be a good parent to be a
good teacher to be a good colleague
requires certain social skills how do
you be a good listener how do you reveal
vulnerability an appropriate Place how
do you offer criticism in a way that's
caring how do you disagree well how do
you sit with someone who's suffering and
so in my view we don't teach these
skills anymore if we ever
did and so people are go a wash in
Social ignorance and so my book is
simply an attempt to walk us through the
skills it takes to be to know another
human being and make them feel known
seen and heard and so I would ask you
how how good are you at these skills
well I haven't met most of you but I can
tell you with great confidence you're
not as good as you think you are there's
a guy at the University of Texas who
studies this and the average person when
they meet a stranger and start a
conversation with him they accurately
understand what's going on in that
person's head 20% of the time with
friends and family it goes up to 35% of
the time some people are pretty good
they're 55% of the time and some people
are zero% of the time but think they're
100% of the time we're often strangers
to each other in any group of people
there are people who are diminishers and
they're illuminators the diminishers are
not curious about other people they
stereotype they ignore they don't ask
questions I sometimes leave a party and
I think no that whole time nobody asked
me a question and I've come to recognize
my assum my conclusion is that only
about 30% of the people you meet are
question askers they persistently are
curious about you the other 70% are
perfectly nice people they're just not
questioners and those are diminishers
illuminators on the other hand are
people who are curious about you and
make you feel special and lit
up and so there was a novelist who wrote
about 100 years ago named I Foster and
his biographer said of him to speak to
him was to be seduced by an inverse
Charisma a sense of being listened to
with such intensity that you had to be
your most honest sharpest and best self
who wouldn't want to be able to bring
out that's that in other people there's
a probably apocryphal story told about
Jenny Jerome who would later be go on to
become Winston Churchill's mom and in
the late 19th century when she was a
young woman one night she was seated
next to a dinner in London with William
Gladstone the Prime Minister of England
and she left that dinner thinking that
Gladstone was the cleverest person in
England then a couple weeks later she
seated at a dinner next to Gladstone's
great political rival Benjamin Disraeli
and she left dinner with Disraeli
thinking that she was the cleverest
person in
England and so it's good to be Gladstone
it's better to be
Israeli many of you probably know the
vaed research facility Bell labs they
had a bunch of researchers and some of
them were just more creative and
Innovative than others and they wanted
to know why and so they checked out
their IQs they checked out their
educational backgrounds they couldn't
figure it out it turned out the most
creative researchers were in the habit
of having breakfast or lunch every day
with a guy named Harry nywest who's
electrical engineer and he got inside
their problems he got inside their head
he asked them the good good questions
and he walked with them as they solved
their problems and so Harry nist is an
Illuminator and so how do you get better
at being an Illuminator well the first
thing whether you're young or more
seasoned is you read study the
humanities you study literature plays
the Arts the humanities are the most I
tell young people the humanities are the
most practical thing you can major in
because they teach you about other
people and if you can't understand other
people you'll be miserable and you'll
make people around you
miserable then there's a series of steps
one should walk through to really get to
know somebody well and make them feel
respected and that series of steps
begins with the first gaze you're just
encountering
somebody and you're looking at them when
we meet somebody there's a series of
unconscious questions going through our
minds am I am I a priority to you am I a
person to you will you respect me and
the answers to those questions are
communicated in the eyes before any
words come out of your mouth I was in
Waco Texas several years ago and I was
having lunch with a woman named laru
dorsy and Mrs dorsy was a teacher most
of her career and she presented herself
to me as this Stern disciplinarian sort
of a drill sergeant type and she told me
I loved my students enough to discipline
them and so we're sitting there and I'm
a little intimidated by her she was
tough tough lady and in the diner walks
a mutual friend of ours named Jimmy
derell who's a pastor he pastors the
homeless uh and he goes up to her and he
grabs her by the shoulders and shakes
her way harder than you should shake a
93y old and he says Mrs dorsy Mrs dorsy
you're the best you're the best I love
you I love you and that Stern
disciplinarian that I had been talking
to turns into a bright ey shining
9-year-old
girl and so the moral of the story is
greet people more like Jimmy and less
like me and that's partly because he's a
warm big personality but partly the
profound thing is this Jimmy's a pastor
as I mentioned and so when Jimmy greets
anybody he's greeting someone anybody
made in the image of
God he's looking into the face of God
he's looking at somebody with the in a
soul of infinite value and dignity he's
looking at somebody so important that
Jesus was willing to die for that person
now you could be Christian Jewish Muslim
Muslim Buddhist atheist agnostic I don't
care but greeting each person you meet
with that level of reverence and respect
is a precondition for seeing them well
it says know that each person you meet
is not a problem to be solved they're a
mystery that you will never get to the
bottom of so it's that first gaze is so
powerful attention is a moral act the
kind of attention we cast on the world
determines the kind of person we are in
the world so that's the Gaze the second
phase of getting to know someone is what
I I call accompaniment most of life is
not having deep conversations with other
people it's just hanging out it's
picking up your kids at school or
attending a meeting accompaniment is an
other centered way of being a normal
course of life we think of The Pianist
who accompanies a singer The Pianist is
there paying attention to the singer
he's there to Make Her Shine and so we
want to have that other centered way of
being and sometimes it can be just as
casual as hanging out I have friends who
say we like our friends to be linger
when they come for dinner we just want
to linger with them they're fun that's a
great quality of accompaniment the
second is
play when you're playing with someone
you don't have to have deep
conversations whether it's pickle ball
or Uno or basketball whatever you're
just but when you're at play you're
you're yourself you're more natural I
have friends who I played basketball
with and you can imagine how good I am
uh and we've never really had deep
conversations but we've had trash talk
and high fives and we passed the the
ball and we really sort of know each
other you can see how powerful it was
when my kid my oldest son was about 14
or 12 months I can't remember um he woke
up he woke up at 4 in the morning every
morning and I played with him till 10:00
a.m. when I left uh and I remember
thinking one day you know I know him
better than I've ever known
anybody and he's known me better than
anybody's known me because I was so
emotionally open and play and no words
had crossed between us cuz he couldn't
yet talk and yet there was a a deep bond
between us sometimes accompanyment is
just being present it's just showing up
at the right time so I had a student uh
a couple years ago two years ago named
Jillian Sawyer and Jillian's uh dad died
of pancreatic cancer uh while she was in
college and as he was dying they talked
about the fact that he would probably
miss some of the big events of her life
like her
wedding and after college she was a
bridesmaid at a friend's wedding and she
went through the wedding she watched the
father give a toast to his daughter a
beautiful toast the Father of the Bride
and then it came time for the father
daughter
dance and she just didn't want to sit
through that so she left the table and
went to the restroom quietly just to
have a
cry and when she came out of the
restroom all the people at her table in
the adjacent table had gotten up and had
were just standing by the door of the
restroom and she wrote this in a paper
uh that she gave me permission to quote
from what I will remember forever is
that no one said a word each person
including newer boyfriends who I knew
less well gave me a reaffirming hug and
headed back to their table no one
lingered or awkwardly tried to validate
my grief they were there for me just for
a moment and it was exactly what I
needed that's a beautiful example of
just the art of presence just showing up
for somebody so that's the second phase
the third phase is
conversation you have to be really good
conversationalist to get to know other
people and to have the kind of
encounters you want to have and so how
good are you at conversation well again
I don't know you that well but you're
probably not as good as you think you
are it's easy to have bad conversations
that's two people making statements at
each other that's a bad
conversation a good conversation goes
somewhere people say something and the
other person says yeah that's good let
me build on that and then build on that
build on that and we start at one place
we ended up over here I asked a bunch of
conversation experts what are some tips
to become a better
conversationalist and they gave me a
bunch a few of which I'll repeat here
one treat attention as an onoff switch
not a
dimmer it should be 100% attention or 0%
but not
60% two be a loud listener I have a
buddy named Andy Crouch who lives in
swathmore and when you're talking to him
it's like talking to a Pentecostal
Church he's like Amen uhhuh brother
brother preach
that and I I just love talking to that
guy make them authors not Witnesses when
people tell you a story they don't go
into enough detail and so if you say
well where was your boss sitting when
she said that to you suddenly they're
narrating you a story you want to get
people in a story mode even in
journalism I no longer ask people what
do you believe about this I ask them how
did you come to believe that about this
that's they start telling me a story
about some experience they had or some
person who shaped their values a much
better
conversation Don't Fear the pause if
we're in conversation and I make a
comment that starts at my shoulder and
goes to my fingertips at what point have
you stopped listening so you can start
thinking what you're going to say in
response probably here so let me talk to
my fingertips and then pause and then
you can have a thoughtful
response don't be a
Topper topping is when you say something
about how you're having problems with
your teenage son and I say I know
exactly you're going through I'm having
problems with my Tommy it sounds like
I'm trying to relate but what I'm really
doing is say I don't really care about
your problems let me talk about my own
and so don't be a Topper two final ones
keep the gem statement in the center
when we have an argument there's usually
something deep down we agree upon if my
brother and I are arguing about our
Dad's health care we both want what's
best for our dad and so if we could keep
that point of agreement the gem
statement in the center you save a
relationship in the midst of an argument
and then the final one is find the
disagreement under the disagreement when
we disagree about something like tax
policy there's probably some
philosophical reason we see it
differently so let's explore what that
is it's a more fun way to have a
conversation finally the quality of your
conversation depends on the quality of
the questions you ask and so we should
get really good at asking great
questions now kids are phenomenal at
asking questions I have a friend named
naobi wayi who teaches seventh grade
boys in New York how to be interviewers
how to ask questions her first day in
class she said okay you guys can ask me
anything and I'll answer honestly first
question from a seventh grade boy are
you married no second question are you
divorced yes third question do you still
love
him her eyes
widen she says yes fourth question does
he know do your kids know by now she's
crying so kids are great
questioners and as adults we get a
little shy about it too shy in my view
and so we want to get good at asking
questions and sometimes you're just
getting to know someone you're not going
to ask some deep profound question I ask
people sometimes like I always ask
people where you're from or where'd you
get your name or tell me some your
favorite unimportant thing about
yourself I learned from that question an
academic I rever watches a lot of trash
TV but that's his favorite unimportant
thing about him but you want the
questions to be open-ended storytelling
questions so I read in a book called
you're not listening by ke Murphy about
a focus group moderator who was hired by
grocery stores to find out why people
are coming into the grocery stores late
at night and she could have just said
tell me why do you go to grocery stores
late at night to the focus group instead
she said tell me about the last time you
went to a grocery store after 11: p.m.
and one lady who' been quiet through the
whole focus group said well I had smoked
a joint and I I wanted a Minaj ATA with
me Ben and
Jerry and
so you got a little glimpse into her
life
um once you get to know somebody my
favorite questions are ones that take
them out of their daily experience and
get them 30,000 feet looking at their
life and so it's like what crossroads
are you at most of us are in life some
life transition what crossroads us if
this 5 years of your life is a chapter
what's the chapter
about uh what would you do if you
weren't afraid I had a friend who was
being interviewed for a job and at the
end of the interview he he said to the
interviewer what would you do if you
weren't afraid and the lady burst out
crying because she wouldn't be doing HR
at that company I asked my students at
Yale what would you do if you weren't
afraid and every year two or three say
well I wouldn't be at Yale it's not the
right school for me but I need the
prestige and so fear governs all our
lives to some degree Peter BL who writes
about Community has some great questions
but you really have to know people to
ask these ones what's the no or refusal
you keep
postponing what's the commitment you've
made you no longer really believe in
what's the gift you hold in Exile what
talent do you have that you're not using
these are deep questions I once had a
dinner party and my wife thought I was
really pretentious but it worked I asked
how do your ancestors show up in your
life because we've all been shaped by
our ancestors and there was a Dutch
family and they talked about their Dutch
Heritage there was a black family they
talked about the African-American
experience I've talked about Jewish
Heritage and it was a great conversation
because we were all we all knew we were
affected by our heritages but we didn't
really hadn't really pinned it down so
we had a great conversation talking
about that and so these are the easy
parts of getting to know somebody under
the normal circumstances of life now we
happen to live in a time that's not
normal and so to have a graduate degree
level of social connection with other
people you've got to be able to make
that connection under under favor
unfavorable
circumstances and so I had a friend um
that I mentioned all the mental health
problems I had a friend named Peter Marx
who we were friends since we were
11 uh and Peter uh had this seemingly
Charmed Life he had a great wife
wonderful kids he was an eye
surgeon but at age 57 uh he got hit by a
very severe recession
depression and I thought I was well
educated but I didn't know what
Depression was really I learned that you
can't understand depression by
extrapolating from your moments of
sadness depression is not like that uh
as Michael Gerson said depression is a
malfunction in the instrument people use
to perceive
reality and so in the case of my friend
he had these vicious lying voices in his
head saying you're worthless nobody
would miss you if you're gone and so I
didn't quite understand how
severe the Despair and the pain really
was and so I made social skill mistakes
and a lot of this was over coid we were
talking by phone and so I in the
beginning I tried to give him ideas
about how we could live make the
depression lift and so I said well you
know you used to do these service trips
to Vietnam why don't you do that again
and when you do that I learned all
you're doing is showing the depressed
person you don't get
it because because it's not ideas that
the depressed person is missing it's
energy and a lot of other stuff and then
the second mistake I
made was to say your life is so great
you know appreciate what you have around
you and basically I was just telling him
you should be enjoying the things you're
palpably not
enjoying and how better to make somebody
feel even
worse and so I think I learned gradually
over the time that a friend's job in
that circumstance
is just to acknowledge how much the
situation
sucks and to remind him you'll be there
I'll be there forever I'm not going away
from
this uh there's no abandonment here uh
and I wish I had um sent a more text
little tck touches just through the day
uh no response necessary Victor Frankle
in man search for meaning when he would
counsel people who were contemplating
suicide he said life has not stopped
expecting things of
you and it seems seems harsh to me but
he says it it calls people to understand
the effect they have on the world and
the effect they can have on the world
because in times like these people who
have been through some suffering have
the credibility to talk to other people
through this Pro their own process of
suffering there's a great quote from
thoron
Wilder without your wound where would
your power be it is your very remorse
that makes your low voice tremble in the
hearts of men the very Angels themselves
cannot persuade The Wretched and blund
ing children on Earth as can one human
being broken on the wheel of living in
love service only wounded soldiers can
serve That's The Power of it that a
depressed person can have on the world
or of someone who's been through this
now sadly Peter succumbed to Suicide
about a year and a half ago and nothing
I said there are things I said wrong but
nothing I could have said would have
made any difference the monster was just
bigger than Peter and it was going to be
bigger than the rest of us and so it was
a hard a hard lesson so that's one kind
of social skill that unfortunately has
become necessary for so many people how
to sit through sit with people who are
going through depression mental health
issues grief the second kind of hard
conversation that has become
unfortunately necessary is conversations
across ideological difference across
class difference across racial
difference across any kind of difference
and these can sometimes be hard
conversations uh often when you're in
these conversations there's critique and
there's blame especially me I walk into
a room I I come associated with the New
York Times with Yale University I come a
pretty establishment Elite
credentials and a lot of people on both
left and right see me as part of the
systems of Oppression that keep them
down and so there's often
criticism and my instinct is to um be
defensive oh I'm not the r I'm one of
the good guys you don't understand the
things I'm dealing with but I've come to
appreciate that our in this world my job
and I think all our jobs when we're
being we're talking across difference is
to stand in the other person's
standpoint it's to ask the other person
in three separate ways in three
different kinds what am I missing here
tell me more about your point of view
tell me more tell me more tell me more
and if you ask them three or four times
in different ways you'll be astonished
how the third and fourth answer is
deeper richer and more complicated than
the first first answer so you learn a
lot but second you show respect you show
respect from their point of view and
there's a great book called crucial
conversations and in that book um they
say in every conversation respect is
like
air when it's present nobody notices and
when it's absent it's all anybody can
think
about and in any conversation your
conversation is happening on two
different levels what we're nominally
talking about and the under conversation
which is the flow of
emotion passing between us with every
comment I make I'm either making you
feel safer or less safe I'm either
showing you respect or not I'm either
showing you my motivations for telling
you this or I'm not and so it's to pay
attention to that emotional conversation
underneath and these skills of of from
the first gaze to the conversation to
hard conversations amid conflict these
to me are the essence of moral life sure
moral life is big things like reporting
embezzlement in at a workplace telling
the truth at a trial but to me the
essence of morality is to be a genius at
the close of hand Irish Murdoch the
novelist and philosopher said morality
is something that happens in the minutia
of day-to-day encounter and our job
normally we see the world through
self-serving eyes our job is to get the
self out of the way and enter
reality and to she says cast a j just
and loving attention on the people
around us and that's how we prove who we
are and how we show up in the
world uh and so I ask people now tell me
about times you feel
seen uh and some of my favorite ones are
just little daily things like there are
some big epical moments but people with
glowing eyes will tell me about times
they really felt seen and so I had a guy
tell me Well my second my daughter in
second grade uh was having struggling in
the year in her in class and the teacher
one day said to her you know you're
really good at thinking before you
speak and that took that one comment
turned the girl's ear around because it
took that thing that moment which she
thought was social awkwardness her
weakness it turned into a
strength and as she told me that he told
me that story I thought of my own 11th
grade teacher Mrs dnap at Radner I'm I
was making some smartass com in a class
which is what I did and she said David
you're getting by on glibness stop it
and on the one hand I was humiliated she
called me me out in front of the whole
class on the other hand I thought wow
she really knows me wow I'm so on
her a woman in her 30s told me a story
about when she was n when she was 13 she
had her first taste of alcohol and got
so drunk she was just lying she couldn't
move on the front porch of her house and
her dad who was a strict disciplinarian
loomed in the doorway and she thought
he's going to scream at me all the
things that are already in my head I'm
bad I'm bad I'm bad instead he just
scooped her up R her inside laid her on
the sofa and said there'll be no
punishment here you've just had an
experience and 25 years later she
remembered that moment as the time her
dad really got her and knew she didn't
need to be screamed at at that moment
and so these are long memories there's a
guy named Rabbi Elliot KLA who tells a
story about a woman who has a brain
injury and so sometimes she'll just fall
to the
ground and she told him I think people
rush to help me up because they are so
uncomfortable with seeing an adult lying
on the floor but what I really need is
for someone to get down on the ground
with me and that's empathy it's knowing
not what makes me comfortable what what
you need at that moment and when people
do that that's also great times of great
seeing I'll give you a few examples and
these are a little more
profound of what great seeing can do
because it's a creative act that changes
relationships and in my view changes
societies one of them it's just
handy to be able to see people well
Franklin Roosevelt in 1933 34 something
like that uh met a guy came to his
office named Lyndon Johnson who was then
a 28-year old
congressman and after the meeting FDR
says to his Aid Harold iy you know
Harold that's the kind of uninhibited
young pro I might might have been as a
young man if I hadn't gone to
Harvard uh and then FDR continued in the
next couple of generations
the balance of power in this country is
going to shift to the South and West and
that kid Lyndon Johnson could well be
our first Southwestern
president pretty
good some of you probably know the movie
Goodwill
Hunting and in that movie Matt Damon
plays this math genius Robin Williams
plays as therapist and Matt Damon goes
through the movie eviscerating people
with his wit including Robin Williams
character Williams pulls him out to a
pond and gives him a version a longer
version of the following speech
you're a tough kid I ask you about war
you probably throw shakespear at me
right once more into the breach dear
friends but you've never been where near
one you've never held your best friend's
head in your lap and watched him gasp
his last breath I ask you about love you
probably quote me a sonnet but you've
never looked at a woman and been totally
vulnerable known someone who could level
you with her eyes I look at you I don't
see a intelligent confident man I see a
cocky scared shitless kid you're a
genius will no one denies that
personally I don't care about all that I
can't learn anything from you that I
can't read in some book unless you want
to talk about you sport who you are then
I'm fascinated but you don't want to do
that you're terrified of what you might
say and so that little speech comes from
great listening in the first place he's
heard the thing the very thing the Matt
Damon character is most desperate to
hide which is how terrified he is of
life and second it's a great critique
with care he's saying there are two
kinds of knowledge in the
world there's book knowledge and then
there's the personal wisdom you acquire
by risking things emotionally and having
experiences you have book knowledge you
don't have the knowledge that really
matters and so he does that with
unconditional love and he points the
Damon character in the direction he
needs to go it's just a beautiful
example of
wisdom
I read a story a story in a a book
called Lost and Found by Katherine
Schultz and in that book she describes
her
father as this cheerful talkative
gregarious guy a guy who had opinions on
everything from infield fly rule to
whether apple cobbler was better than
apple crisp he just sounds like a
wonderful
guy uh and he aged and as he got old and
sick suddenly he just stopped talking
and nobody could figure out why and so
the family visited him in the hospital
in those final weeks and she writes I
had always regarded my family as close
so it was startling to realize how much
closer we get how near we drew around
his waning flame then one evening at the
very end he sat in the room and the
family all went around the room and they
all said the things they didn't want to
leave
unset and Schultz writes my father mute
but seemingly alert looked from one face
to another as we spoke
his brown eyes shining with tears IID
always hated to see him cry and seldom
did but for once I was grateful it gave
me hope for what may have been the last
time in his life and perhaps the most
important he understood if nothing else
I knew that everywhere he looked that
evening he found himself where he had
always been with his family the center
of the circle the source and subject of
our Abiding Love and so that was a guy
who died well seen
and it's just profound for the people to
be involved in that kind of experience
and if it's great to be seen I can tell
you it's also great to be the one who
does the
seeing so once about two years ago I was
sitting at my house in
DC and I was reading a boring book at
the dining room table which is what I'm
paid to do uh and my wife opens the
front door which you can see from the
dining room table uh and she pauses in
the
doorway and the Summer sun is streaming
and behind her and she doesn't really
notice I'm there because that's the kind
of Charisma I have
um and but her her eyes rest on a um an
orchid that we keep on a table by the
door and she's just thinking about
something and I have this sensation wash
across my mind which is I know her I
really know her I know her through and
through and if if you had asked me at
that moment what I knew about her it
wasn't the personality traits I would
describe to a stranger or even what she
was thinking it was the es and flow of
her music the harmony of her way of
being the incandescence of her
personality the moments of fierceness
the moments of insecurity it was as if I
wasn't seeing her for a brief moment I
was seeing out from her and when you
really know someone you you see the
world a little from their point of view
and if you would asked me what word I
was to describe how I was looking at her
the only word in the English language I
can think of is the word
beholding I was just beholding her which
is like just
appreciation and it was just a beautiful
moment I told an older couple this story
recently and they said yeah that's what
we do with our grandkids we just
behold and they say you can never really
get to know a stranger I think that's
wrong I think in examples in my life and
in many of the lives of people I've
spoken to there have been moments when
that profound Act of seeing another
person really does happen and out of
that if we live in a dehumanizing age
then seeing another human being is the
most practical and aggressively
effective way to fight back at
dehumanization and we live at a time
when people are not seeing each
other in this country
and in the Middle East uh and
everywhere and it's a brutalizing time
to be
here and the natural urge is to cower in
close in be protective and I understand
that urge but the people I admire at
this time are the defiant humanists who
say I will not be calloused over I will
not put up the barriers I will not
declare war on the others I will be
defiant enough to do the essential
humanistic Act
which is to try to understand your point
of view try to acknowledge you as a
person worthy of respect and
investigation and
curiosity and it's not naive to lead
with respect it's not naive to lead with
trust it's not naive to lead with
curiosity to me it's the most practical
and effective things we can do in a time
of brutal
dehumanization thank you very
much
thank you no the depression experience
is an isolating experience so just to
show up for people is just tremendously
powerful thank you Mr Brooks um thank
you for your wonderful presentation I am
a relatively young guy that uh watches
you every Friday night thank you for
helping our demographics thank
you can I bring you around to our donors
I'd like
to
um uh a quick question so um I actually
watched your uh interview uh about a
book on PBS that was it last week and u
i uh about the eye contact uh thing uh
uh the
gays I grew up I was born in West Africa
and I grew up in West Africa and
culturally uh I came to America
immigrated to America about 31 years ago
and uh we were raised uh in a different
culture where eye contact was not uh a
part of the culture interesting and so
when I came to this country uh being a
naturally shy person uh it took me a
while actually to understand I mean the
importance of that i i gaze and so
America being a country with so many uh
different people from everywhere I mean
when you meet
someone uh that uh has his or her G
uh on the on an angle I mean how do we
account for that I mean it's taken me a
long time to understand it and I I make
it uh I I make an effort uh to to
establish eye contact nowadays but uh uh
I recognize that uh that there are
people that culturally are uncomfortable
with that so yeah well first we should
cut each other a little slack first for
our cultural differences uh and for uh
sometime personality difference people
who are on the Spectrum if you look if
for them looking into somebody else's
eyes is like touching a hot stove
there's just so much incoming that they
they just don't like they it's too much
for them and that's just the way they're
wired um but second these cultural
differences um you know uh I have
friends who've immigrated here and they
said when I first moved here my cheeks
hurt because I had to smile so
much uh and so I I you know these cult
we have probably a more individualistic
Society than a West African society or
Asian soci soety we're a pretty
individualistic uh group of people um
and so these cultural differences need
to be accommodated for but one of things
I admire most in people there there's
this phrase Social Capital which is how
you build Connection in society and
there are two versions of it one is
bonding and one is bridging and so
bonding is with people right around you
probably like you but bridging is the
more exciting which is meeting people
who are completely unlike you and
getting into their heads and seeing how
their culture is different and that you
know we evolve to be in bands of 150
people sort of like
ourselves and now we live in these
wonderfully diverse societies and our
social skills are not adequate to the
societies we now live in but one of the
joys is having social
range uh you know I for example I don't
know what country you're from uh Ghana
so I had a woman in my class I had for
some reason yeah we have a lot of Ganan
students
uh I'll tell you two quick stories about
Zara who's from Gano uh the first is I
was asking the students um what are you
what are you GNA what are your goals
after graduation and my American student
said I want to be a lawyer I want to be
a banker whatever whatever and Zara said
well it's not totally up to
me my Village was here and they helped
me come here so we're all going to talk
about it together and it was a more
communal way of
approaching and then the second Z Zara
story I'll tell you you is I had a kid
from a very fancy Prep School named
Harvard Westlake which is out in La it's
sort of like exitor Andover type school
and he was a total bro and he treated me
like a total bro and I kind of liked it
he was a wise ass he'd say Brooks stop
being a dick your name dropping again
and I got a kick out of the kid and
I and about twoth thirds of the way
through the class Zara raised her hand
and said Professor books we don't
appreciate the way Alex is talking to
you and so I said oh let's stop the
class how many of you think Zara is
right and how many of you think Alex is
right and the vote was 24 to1 on Zara's
side and so there was some sense of
dignity that she thought should we do
and I was very glad at that day to have
her into my
class
yeah
yeah so I would say this is a case where
it's good to be pushy uh and so that I
have a friend and a source in this book
named Nicholas Epley who's a social
psychologist at the University of
Chicago and he commutes down to school
every day and he was on a commuter train
and he he knows because he's a social
psychologist the thing that makes us
happiest is having conversations with
other human
beings and but he's looking around the
commuter train and everybody's on their
screens with headphones
in and so he's a social psychologist he
pays people on the subsequent trips $100
each to talk to a
stranger and they all report back
afterwards with the researchers that
this ride talking to a stranger was a
thousand times better than their normal
ride just on their
screens and his conclusion is we badly
underestimate how much people how much
will enjoy these conversations we badly
underestimate how deep people want to
get
uh and so if you can break through it
actually pays off and I'm as I said not
the jokey the most social guy on Earth
and I used to go on the plane with
headphones in even if there was no music
so my seatmate wouldn't talk to
me but now I talk to people and you know
I talked to a guy a couple weeks ago or
months ago who was this big Trump
supporter he migrated this country from
Russia from at age seven he built up a
company selling T-shirts to uh other
parts of the world
and he made a fortune lost a fortune
made a fortune lost a fortune had more
marriages than I could count and at the
end of the ship he's showing me his
vacation he's an 80y old guy he's
surrounded by 20y olds uh on the back of
a yacht I don't know where these people
came from but so he wasn't my cup of tea
but I remember that
conversation and so I I just find if you
can break through that barriers people
will enjoy it the final story I'll tell
is a guy named Dan McAdams who's a a
research at Northwestern he studies how
people tell their life stories and so
what he does is he brings people in he
asks them tell me about your high points
your low points your turning points and
the interviews take four hours and he
said half the people cry at some point
but then at the end he hands them a
little check to compensate them for
their
time and they um they push the check
back they say I don't want to take money
for for this this has been the best
afternoon I've had in years years
because no one has ever asked me the
story and as a journalist I can tell you
if you approach somebody and say tell me
your story in a respectful way no one
ever says None your damn business
they're a thrilled to do it now having
said that when my wife tells me to put
away my phone I get pissed off at her
but but it's probably a good
practice um Hello thank you again for
all you've shared today and for your
optimism and joy and you've made made it
clear that that you've made a lot of
changes and you're really happy about
those changes and when I told my friends
in my book group I was coming you know
they were interested and said he sure
moved to the left lately now that's
where they live they're they're happy
about that but my question of you is has
that change in all the changes you've
made also been difficult uh good
question so the the first first on
politics um my heroes are a guy named
Edmund Burke who's a class a
conservative of the old school and his
key concept is epistemological Modesty
that the world is really complicated we
should be careful about what we can know
and so change should be gradual and
incremental and he was my hero at 25
he's my hero today and my other hero is
Alexander Hamilton and Hamilton is a
Puerto Rican Hip-Hop star from New York
um uh but no his his thesis is we should
build a society in which poor boys and
girls like him can rise and succeed we
should have social Mobility so those are
my anchors and I those are still my
anchors but in my view the Republican
party has shifted so far in a different
direction that it's not conservative to
me and on some issues I probably have
shifted to the left capitalism does not
distribute its what it produces as
fairly as it ought
to uh race in America is a National
Crime
and so you know I've written columns for
reparations recently things like that at
least within the last five years and so
that would be a shift over the left and
I would say once you get out of the team
mentality it's wonderfully
liberating to be able to think for
yourself and it used to be I was on a
team and now I'm on there's a a party in
the 19th century called the wig party
which had Daniel Webster and Henry Clay
and early on Abraham Lincoln and they
represent what I think is the best
political party the best political
tradition in America and now there are
six of us so
uh I'm on no team anymore but it's
liberating and then as for um the
emotional first of all I haven't lost
any friends because the Republicans I
was super close to have all become never
trumpers and it's weird that the people
who have become trumpers were people I
didn't like
anyway and I don't say that because I I
have a lot of friends who are Trump
suppor supps and members of my family
who I love so I don't mean to be harshly
judgmental but it's just my crew all
became never trumpers and then the final
change I would say is um i' I got a lot
more emotions going on right now like
when I was back at rner I used to think
well all these people are suffering but
I'm shallow I'm happy with that I'm I'm
I'm good and now I feel um happy like
joyously happy sometimes and really sad
and pained other times and I think man
emotions are very much a mixed blessing
um but it's better to live that way than
not there's a novelist who I admire
named Fred Frederick bner his dad died
when he was nine and he never
grieved and then in middle age he said
if you cut yourself off from the pain of
life you cut yourself off from the holy
sources of life
itself and so he opened them up himself
up over the course of his adulthood and
by the end he was crying about his dad
every
day and he said what we want most is to
someone to look in our face with full
understanding and respect and what we
fear most is somebody to look into our
face with full understanding and
respect and so he says what you should
do is you should tell your secrets from
time to time because if you tell your
secrets you will not fall for the false
version of yourself you're trying to
sell to the
world and you'll make it easy easier for
the other person to tell a few secrets
of their own and so that that's the kind
of trajectory and path of openness and
deeper connection that I'm shooting
for oh thanks very much David for
everything and uh I'm an older guy that
likes watching you on Friday night um
the uh the basic question is uh when did
you first realize you wanted to write
this book and how long did it take you
to do it yeah so um I'm on a four-year
cycle I come back to the Philadelphia
Free Library every four years uh and
I've been on that cycle for since 2000
or so uh and so it just takes me a long
time to acquire all the
information uh and you have to give
yourself to permission to write badly so
if you look at the first 200 drafts of
this book they're pretty bad and so that
takes me a while and I think when I
first uh wanted to write this book uh
was how many people told me they felt
invisible and
unseen and I was just it came up again
and again in
interviews and this was black people
tell me that white people didn't
understand the systemic injustices they
face every day it was rural people
telling me they didn't feel seen by
Coastal Elites it was Republicans and
Democrats looking at each other in blind
incomprehension uh it was lonely kids
who had no one to see them well it was
people in broken marriages uh who
realized the person who should know them
best had no
clue and it just seemed there was so
much pain and at about this time I just
wanted to get be a deeper version of
myself and so I'm partly it's for
hopefully for the society but personal
transformation and social transformation
happen at the same time and it's how we
each show up in the world uh is how we
make a
world and so I wanted to be better
myself and so a lot of us writers we're
just working at our in
public uh and and uh my favorite saying
about writing is a writer I'm a beggar
who tells other beggar where he found
bread so if I read something or hear
something that's useful to me I love
sharing
it uh and so that's the thing that gets
me greatest joy is when I learn
something I write it down I put it in a
book I talk about it and I see other
people writing it down and that's so I'm
not so much a writer I'm a teacher I
just convey the knowledge that I've
heard uh and it's I must say it's been a
horrible four years in many ways but
it's been so uplifting to be around
people who are just phenomenal good
illuminators so thank you very
[Applause]
much
