hey
Sarah wonderful to see you hello Darren
how are you I'm pretty well and I'm
super excited to be here today with you
I'm so curious about your work and your
history and I'm fascinated by everything
you do um so I'd be grateful if you
could just take a moment and tell people
who are not yet familiar with you a
little bit about yourself and your work
and what fascinates
you okay so so uh I live part-time in
Greece and part-time in England and I
wrote a book two years ago about the
history and culture of dreaming in the
ancient world with particular emphasis
on Mesopotamia Egypt and Greece and now
I'm running dream themed retreats in
Greece and other areas where there are
ancient uh temples dedicated to Sacred
sleep or Divine dreaming so that's what
I'm up to these days and I guess I got
into this whole area because I've just
always loved dreaming and been a lucid
dreamer since I was a kid and it's been
a huge passion of mine and then over the
years um I've realized that my kind of
love of ancient history and culture
could be married to my love of dreaming
so I've discovered this kind of Niche
weird path for
myself uh and I'm loving every moment of
it beautiful yes I am um particularly
inclined to pay attention to people who
are operating on the outskirts of uh
what we would think of as
ordinary uh humanity and ideas and
Concepts and stuff um and your work is
particularly fascinating to me due to my
own long um astonishment about the
nature of dreaming and and some of my
early
experiences I wonder if you might be
willing to share a few episodes from
your childhood dreaming that were
particularly influential for you that
you may
remember well one of the things I was
thinking about today actually was um I
had an opportunity a couple of years ago
to in interview this amazing woman
called Rebecca sharck who is one of I
think only about 80 people in the world
who have been diagnosed and assessed for
this
um not really a condition but a state of
having highly Superior autobiographical
memory so she's also on the autism
spectrum but she has this phenomenal
memory where she thinks she can remember
before she was even born and she has
memories of being a baby of being a
toddler and uh when I discovered I was
going to interview her because I was
interviewing her with my friend Anthony
Peak who I have co-hosted his
Consciousness hour YouTube series with
for a while um I was really excited to
ask her about Lucidity and dreams
because I figured if she has highly
Superior autobiographical memory then it
must mean that her dreams are Lucid
because dreaming and memory basically if
you have a great memory then I think
you're more likely to become lucid and
one of the things I would always advise
for people seeking more Lucid episodes
is to do what they can to improve their
memory um there's a relationship also
there with like language and being
detail orientated so it fits in really
well with autism spectrum as well and so
many other aspects of sort of hyp
sensitivity synesthesia she's sythetic
as well so I was just super fascinated
by this and it turns out that she is
lucid in all of her dreams and one of
the questions I wanted to ask her was
because I have these memories of dreams
when I was a baby perhaps or um a
toddler that were all white and I said
do you did you have dreams that were all
white in the beginning and she said she
remembers having dreams that were all
white for a while
and like me um were populated in the
first instance by like a single favorite
toy in my case it was a Fisher Price
pull along phone and uh and I I remember
this dream distinctly of my Fisher Price
uh phone you know the little one that's
got a face that you pull it along it's
called like a chat along or something
like that I picked up the receiver and
it was my nan telling me that um no it
was wor or Gage telling me that he had
killed my nan
do you have worel gumbage in
America so worel gumbage is a terrifying
scarecrow TV show that I I know the
actual episode that that dream was
inspired by because I can remember being
terrified of woral gamage when I was
small um and I found out when it air and
so I would have been about four then
when I had this dream and uh I answered
the phone and words of gumbage was like
a really scary like um wrinkly faed
horrifying scarecrow that could take his
head off and Chuck it at people and uh
there was this particular episode that
really scared me where he was chucking
his head off of the back of a van and
throwing it at people and I think that's
what inspired the dream so I remember
that very distinctly I remember um a
dream that had my first experience of
ecstasy when I would have been about um
I get I was at primary school and I
dreamt that I was a cat sitting on a
rocking chair and I guess I'd had lucid
dreams before then but this dream was
lucid and I had this like bodily
sensation of ecstasy like this euphoric
feeling which I've come to since really
associate with the Lucid state so in
this dream I was just a it was a very
simple dream I was a black cat sitting
on a rocking chair but I could feel this
like Delight in being in a cat's body
and the texture of the pads on my paes
and like my fur and teeth and Claws and
everything and it it was just an amazing
sensation and so I very much distinctly
remember that dream and
then one of the sort of main features of
my dreaming especially when I was a
child was there was this particular
landscape this D dream landscape that I
used to return to every single night and
there I used to draw maps and it's one
of the techniques that I use for
dreaming is like this dream cartography
dream mapping where you draw out um the
landscape of your dreams and the
architectural structures and the
features of the dream landscape to kind
of create feedback between the waking
World your creative output and what
you're dreaming about and it works
really really well especially with
children because I do dream workshops
with children as well and they're a
brilliant at it so I do exercises with
them where they'll do something like
design a fantasy dream theme park and in
the act of doing that the process of
doing that um they're actively imagining
exploring the stream theme park
designing the rides getting excited
which I think is an important part of
like the emotions associated with um
experience and really fantastic things
so they get excited doing it they
imagine themselves doing it they tell me
stories about what it's like being there
and then that I get them to dream it
that night and then they report back and
tell me like what it was like exploring
their dream theme park so my one my
dreams uh landscape that I can still
remember now it had things like uh an
underground Pier a red Velvet
Underground cuz I was into the Velvet
Underground when I was a kid and uh uh
it had a sinking sand beach with a cable
car ride over the top of it um there was
a a huge kind of um uh School building
with lots of small windows that had a uh
jungle next to it and a farm where they
bred flatfish like just all these little
things I like drawing and and create
maps of and I was always really into
those books that have um fantasy maps in
like uh you know cartography and it like
tokens Lord of the Rings and Alis
Wonderland and all that kind of
stuff brilliant oh I'm curious if you
can
recall an early
experience in which
something profoundly strange occurred
that you didn't
understand uh lots of things my dream
life and the kinds of experiences that I
had in my dream life I think um directed
me towards exploring philosophy
esotericism um considering perception as
being malleable reality as being
malleable considering that there was
something that happened to your soul
upon death that your soul goes on
Journeys during dreams so um as a kid I
was a bit obsessed with a creating some
sort of machine that could record my
dreams so I could show them to other
people and B um that if I perfected
Lucidity was able to absolutely do it
and be in complete control all the time
that I would um survive dying and I
could explore these other Realms that I
would visit in dreams and I was sure
that um where you go when you die is the
same place you come from when you're
born and a place that you can access in
dreams as well that's why ancient
culture so like great for um exploring
dream because you can kind of look at it
in a very academic scholarly way looking
at the material culture but through
dreaming it's a very legitimate way of
doing something really creative with the
imagination as well so I love it because
I like being scholarly and academic and
really nerdy and going to lectures about
ancient near Eastern material culture
and all that kind of stuff but I also
like thinking about what what I might
imagine the dream life of someone in
that time could be
like that brings up so many questions
okay so once again I want to ask you
about any early experiences or a um
Central experience in which something
occurred that you were completely
unprepared for and didn't understand
anything like that in your
Recollections that so I had a dream once
um that you know I told you about there
was a school building with lots of small
windows and I remember walking past and
as I say like I was always reading about
esotericism like it got me into thinking
about the nature of the universe I and
the cosmos and all this kind of stuff
and I walked past this school building
one time where there was a you were
walking into a jungle like a a dirt
track and this is where the the shed
that had flatfish uh where they were
breeding flatfish and then there was a
tunnel in the flatfish heart that you
could access the Red Velvet Underground
through and as I walked past the school
building once um there was an
equation written like in chalk on the
side of the building and when I looked
at it I understood the secret the
meaning of the universe and I had this
kind of mindblowing epiphany type of
experience and when I woke up I tried to
write out this equation and like since
then I've come to the realization that
your dreams will kind of provide you
with what you think might be required to
understand something because now I don't
think there is any meaning or secret of
the universe but at the time that's
something I was questing for and it
seemed to me like logical as a child
that that could be something that was
contained in an equation so even though
I saw this writing on the ward this what
I considered to be an equation on the
wall it was probably nonsense but it it
acted on my Consciousness in such a way
that it facilitated this like
mindblowing transformation and I had a
lot of other dreams and one of the
things I'm really interested in because
of this is dreams where I'm given a drug
or a substance in a dream and that drug
or substance Chang changes my
Consciousness in the dream so I have
like a psychedelic experience or I can I
get drunk or it just it acts as an agent
of transformation within the dream which
is something that really interests me
with regard to myths around this idea of
eating food in the underworld or taking
food from another realm and the fact
that you have to stay there if you if
you do that wow okay so that brings up
something yeah there's there's so many
things here those are beautiful
recollection
um I'm this is such a treasure oh my
gosh uh okay so what about
experiences that happened for you either
hypnogogic or H
hypnopompic where you had an experience
that wasn't really dreaming but was very
surprising anything like
that I've had a couple of really great
hypnogogic experiences recently because
I'm looking into Greek mythology so much
and especially exploring the gods
goddess or figures of uh importance in
the esian family and in the esian
tradition so two of those that I've been
I purposefully kind of incubate for
dreams with and I have kind of
hypnogogic
meditations focused on them have
resulted in sort of interesting
encounters so telesphorus I had recently
which is probably my favorite led me on
this whole amazing Quest to discover who
telesphorus is and what I loved about
that so I had this um I had a hypnogogic
experience as I was falling asleep I'm
very interested in tesus he is this kind
of child God sometimes represented as a
dwarf sometimes represented as the child
or son of
aus and he you know we're told he
represents the completion his his kind
of the personification of the completion
of the Cure and the success uccessful
treatment of a patient entering the
holistic healing sanctuary ofius and
he's mostly um associated with the site
of pergamon the esion of pergamon in
Anatolia so as I was falling asleep
teles forus came to me in an image and
told me that if I needed if I wanted to
know him then I had to really know his
name and that was it it was just a very
direct succinct message and so I started
to look into his name and think about
him a lot and um meditate on it and uh
look at all the statues I could find of
him and all the records I could find of
him anything in stories that I could
find and one of the other things that
came through in that as well is that I
might find him in uh folklore or fairy
tales as much as I might find him in
mythology and he is supposed to be a
Celtic supposed to be a figure from
Celtic mythology that's the idea um but
then the next day I received an email
from someone saying I've just seen this
little telesphorus in a French Museum
completely out of the blue and they sent
me an image of uh the telesphorus that
they saw and that was like validating so
I got even more into it and I wrote an
article about how um one of the other
things it wasn't part of the hypnogogic
experience but something that came to me
is you know like sometimes just
information just sort of comes out of
nowhere doesn't seem to relate to
anything you're thinking about the time
you might not even know exactly what
it's referring to but one of the things
was that I thought telesphorus was born
with a cool um and I don't know I can't
remember now where that even came from
but the more I looked into it the more I
thought um that that would make a lot of
sense especially in terms of him uh
developing and evolving out of this
Celtic uh almost gen type figure
because uh there's this concept of the
luck child this uh lucky child that's
born with a cool and is protected from
harm throughout their life and telis
forus acts as someone who protects
someone throughout their life he
protects them in birth um he brings them
into the world he's often associated
with um women in labor and facilitating
an easy Journey from uh the mother into
the world and then often he is found as
a votive in the graves of children um
and shows them holding their hand and
taking them into death and being their
guide in death
so there was just something intuitive
about he might relate to this idea of
the luck child who's born with a Coe and
and as that figure could be like a lucky
charm like a lucky totem type of figure
so I just got really into researching
that and I i' it's a there's a lot of
stuff that I found out about telesphorus
and about um actually being born with a
CO being like a huge thing in the
ancient world across all sorts of
cultures that if you're born with some
of the amniotic sack on you um that this
means you're going to be lucky
throughout life and in ancient Greece
they even practice a sort of divination
looking at the condition of the cool on
the body and especially if it was um a
kind of band around the child's head
that that showed that they were already
crowned and so there's this association
with being born with a cool and marrying
into royalty because you've already got
a crown um either having great Beauty um
but one of the main things is being
protected from drowning so perus the
hero Telos the hero who is actually why
I think telesphorus his name telesphorus
because um the first mention of his name
is found in an inscription at pergamon
and Telos the king who's like a mythical
hero King is the legendary founder of
pergamon so I think they there's some
Association because telesphorus seems to
sort of suddenly be named telesphorus
and appear as telesphorus in pergamon
for the first time so um so yeah I went
down like a lot of rabbit holes with
telesphorus but uh I felt that that was
a a special important thing to study and
one other thing about the esion at
pergamon is um the main Treatment Center
where you went after you had kind of
undergone all the other stages of
healing so the catharsis in the theater
the purging the purification in the cold
water
baths when those stages of the healing
had been completed you walked through a
tunnel and at the end of that tunnel is
a treatment center a circular two-story
Treatment Center that was actually
called the telesphorus so is the Temple
of telesphorus and that's where you were
perfected so one thing that's um come
through to me recently and something
I've been working a lot with
hypnogogic um incubation and sort of
intention dreaming is that Darkness was
a massively important part of healing
and what we call initiation but that
wasn't really initiation in the ancient
world in terms of the rights of a
lfca this idea that you are perfected in
darkness and that Darkness itself is
um uh a kind of ritual practice to
reveal the Divine presences of gods and
goddesses so I've I've recently started
working with Maria Maru in in Greece and
uh
she's she sort of specializes in deep
eological analysis of ancient Greek
words and is incredibly passionate about
it and has spent years researching The
linian Mysteries and you know her
description and her explanation for what
was happening in the tus um TST area and
the the initiation Hall is that
um the te telion the word telion the the
root of that um means something like the
perfect the place where the perfecting
rights were carried out and uh one of
the things that Maria says that I find
really interesting is that 30,000 people
would take part in that sacred way
pilgrimage um 3,000 people were allowed
to pass into the sanctuary and could
take their place in the
telion um but only a hand of those in
the telion would actually have the
experience so it isn't like the
Freemasons you you're not going through
grades and receiving qualifications and
getting any seals of
approval um it isn't like a hierarchy
like that it's you either are perfected
you either have the Divine experience
and the direct experience of the gods
and goddesses or you don't and um that's
something that I think is very
interesting so something you know one of
the other things she says about the
telion is that um some of the initiates
some of the Mis diey that enter the
telesterion report spontaneous healing
events so the darkness and the
perfecting rights themselves like what's
occurring in the teles ferion uh
pergamon of when a patient is perfected
in darkness by the gods is that you are
kind of perhaps leave your body um
encounter something Divine and come back
in and your con your Consciousness your
spirit is
re-calibrated so that you can be healed
from things and I guess I think of that
because I like to think about these
things on a sort of practical scientific
level how is this possible that someone
could be healed from something like um
an outof body experience and I think
about something like um it's not a what
what used to be called disassociative
identity disorder I think it's got a
different name now um but
where someone experiences a trauma or a
shock and in order to cope with that an
aspect of their personality kind of
splinters off and they create this other
personality so in some of those um some
of those cases you can have say
someone's got three personalities one
personality has got an allergy for
example and if they're having an
allergic response they can call in the
other personality or the other
personality can be uh coaxed out and
that allergic response will stop so it
is really you know something that I
think is a much more sort of complex and
fascinating Avenue to explore but I
think that one of the things I'm very
passionate about is uh like ancient
Greece ancient Egypt ancient Mesopotamia
is we unfortunately have kind of
forgotten about the existence of the
soul and the Soul needs to come back to
Medicine in order for
holistic um healing treatments to take
place like we are more than the sum of
our parts and the ancient Greeks
absolutely acknowledg that we have a
soul and that Soul can be healed and
perfected through
non-physical
experiences so much there excuse me to
digest um and so many thoughts
um so a couple of things that occurred
to me as I'm
listening and trying to understand um
the incredibly Rich intelligence that
you're sharing here which is just such a
treat oh gosh um
so it strikes me that the the journey
that you're talking
about during the
linian process we we call it an
initiation resembles uh a a sort of a
recapitulation of
conception um
embryogenesis Transit through the womb
into the
world as if this is being uh
intentionally almost as if that's the
central figure or one way to see the
central figure of existence is this
process and so by undergoing it occurs
to me anyway that by undergoing this
proc process again it's like being
reconceived and then facing the
crisis that happens uh in the transit
from the womb through the birth canal
you know to the exit of of into
birth and
somehow uh for some reason the tarium
reminds me of what the child Encounters
in their first moments of existence
right they're surrounded by beings right
and and these beings mediate the
experience of the transition from the
existence in the womb to the existence
in the body and and the human world and
things like this and so it it seems to
me that the
telerium might be reminiscent
of those beings that mediate conception
and
embryogenesis and have
uh herview over the transition from the
womb to birth what are your
thoughts yeah well I think that that is
something Maria would um definitely
resonate with and she talks about this
idea of um ins soing matter and that it
is
this opportunity to die and be reborn
consciously you know when we're first
born into the world we don't know what's
going on if you have that second death
it's less about the Death part and more
about the rebirth but the death is
necessary for you to experience the
rebirth and you get something very
similar happening at the holistic
healing sanctuaries of aspius as well
where ipnos the god of sleep is seen as
the brother of death Thanatos so you you
go for your sacred sleep in the enim
materion and that serves as a pseudo
death from which you wake up and your
your unhealthy sick self dies in The
enkarion and your Healthy self is reborn
to the world and so um people entering
there is an initiator equality to going
to alistic Healing sanctuary ofius and
one thing that I think is really um
important to consider with regards to
the mysteries of lfer as well is the
Mist die would begin this process of
self-change and self-improvement six
months at least before so the mogg
starts teaching them the ways to live a
better life life in the
spring
and that six-month process they're like
trying to be better and nicer and a good
person every day and improving
themselves so when you get finally to
the telesterion it's this huge climax
it's a huge um moment of realization
that you've been preparing for for six
months and I and for me it is it's an
opportunity to be consciously born to be
the person that you want to be to be the
better person with all of your faculties
and everything that's gone before it's
an opportunity to get rid of everything
that doesn't serve you um up until that
point and embrace a new life and it
reminds me as well of um the Oracle of
tronus where you have to drink first
from the Waters of Oblivion of Lethy and
then you drink the Waters of memory so
you know it seems weird that you drink
the Waters of forgetting and Oblivion
but I think sometimes in order to grow
and in order to
um upgrade to the better version of
yourself you have to forget the stuff
that's gone before and embrace the the
new remembering of what you're about to
encounter so you drink the Waters of
Lethy and then you drink the Waters of
minimini so you can remember what you're
about to encounter but with regards as
well to um this idea of the womb and the
Genesis you know just the goddesses you
have um uh dionisis has an important
role in the mysteries of lfca in his
role he's like a torch bearing version
of himself he a special version of
dianis especially for the lfan Mysteries
and panie is is called uh Corey at the
LFC mystery so she's the maiden and you
know the word Corey the eological root
of it comes from Sprout so she's like
the essence she is you know we've Me and
Mar even discussed perhaps the word core
comes from Corey
yeah so um
so dimetri is the Earth Mother and Corey
is this Sprout this Essence this first
chot of life and the process of uh going
on the sacred way of taking the kikon of
being in the telesterion of that you
know there's Psycho Drama that's enacted
there's uh mourning and loss and drama
um you become one with the gods and the
goddesses of the rights like you are
them and so by by sharing I think
there's an aspect as well you know the
the potential psychedelic um components
of kikon I'm I'm still on the fence
about I don't know whether or not there
was any psychoactive substances in it I
know there's a case for
um uh uh the um enzyme the uh I forget
what it's called now what's the the main
one that's considered Ergo so there's a
case for OT being on on the barley that
was used to make the kikon but I kind of
think given the preparation and the
anticipation that very
little extra is required for you to have
uh hallucinations especially if you
consider the telion is dark and you've
been fasting for a night and you're
ecstatic and you're like highly prepared
for something incredible to happen and
you believe that the gods and goddesses
are going to actually uh manifest in
that space that's an enormous amount of
anticipation which you know I don't know
if you know about this kind of Darkness
Retreat therapy that's a big kind of
trend now of people going on Darkness
Retreats where they are put in a space a
completely black cave for example for
three days and I think it's like
something within uh 50 hours you begin
to huc inate vividly hallucinate so it
takes very very little for human beings
to start hallucinating so for the kikon
to be packed full of uh Ergo is kind of
unnecessary but I also wouldn't rule it
out and there were fields that were
dedicated to Growing The Barley that
were used to produce the kikon and all
this kind of stuff but for me the taking
of the kikon is more about kind of theia
the idea of having this sacred meal with
the god this Divine hospitality and uh
you get the same thing in the esion
holistic healing sanctuaries as well
where um a big part in epidavros in
particular is about sharing this meal
with the God and that that in itself is
a healing ritual because you are
partaking of the same food and you are
becoming Divine and through becoming
Divine you are um throwing off the the
kind of uh illnesses that can affect
Mortals so to me visiting the sanctuary
of asclepius you get this real sense
because it's enclosed by sacred grove as
well it's encircled by trees and the
sacred grove was protected in those in
that area if you cut down a tree you
could be um you could be killed like it
was a very serious offense to cut down a
tree that belonged to the sacred grove
of a sleepus and that sacred grove acts
as a kind of buffer zone between the
mortal world the Ordinary World and the
world of uh the gods and goddesses and
there is something it's a big it's a big
um Sanctuary the one at epidavros and uh
actually the footprint of it in terms of
the archaeological site today is a bit
smaller than what it was originally
because there are other temples on the
outside of the uh archaeological
enclosure but the the the place really
feels like it was a a place where the
gods lived and I think there's also
something for me that's really important
of how Beauty and nature can heal you
and that if you find yourself in a
beautiful environment and you're
surrounded by
biodiversity that that just helps
encourage healthful life and Agia who is
um a scalia's daughter you know she's
often called the personification of
Health but really her name means
um whole she's wholeness know she is
like Perfect Harmony and wholeness and
wholeness is health and so
this uh very
important way of considering healing as
being wholeness is something that I
think we would do so well to return to
these days um especially with regards to
considering Beauty and nature and um
treatment for the
soul W I have a million things in my
mind um let me walk through a few of
them when you were first
describing by the way Maria's work is
absolutely fascinating I hope to do an
interview with her sometime very soon
I'm so grateful to you for introducing
me to her work
um she is absolutely brilliant I've
listened to the the recording that you
shared with me over and over and over
again and every time it's one of those
things where every time I listen to it
it's as if I'm I'm
being it's like I'm being transformed
inside right I'm get I see totally
differently each new time which kind of
reminds me of the
process of having a day of Waking Life
falling
asleep dreaming and then Awakening again
right there's so much here that's
fascinating um because one of the things
now that may be different for the woman
that you were describing in the early
part of the interview I can't recall her
name yet um it may be different for her
and it perhaps say again please highly
Superior autobiographical memory yes yes
re yeah um
Rebecca shck
shck so for her it may be different I'm
not sure but one of the things that I
find very profound and I am I've been
long fascinated by dreaming and I've you
know I've made discoveries of my own
that I think are unusual but
um are waking okay so the concept of Le
right being dipped in the waters of
forgetting and then being dipped in the
waters of I I pronounced her name neosan
but I think you called
her how do you pronounce it um I well I
mean i' I'm not that bothered about
pronunciation as as long as well I like
saying minimini minimini
minimini when I first um wrote the book
I thought it's nimos n yeah but I say
nimini now I mean I guess because I'm in
Greece people are saying things back to
me and I'm trying to remember how
they're saying it of course do you do
you recall how um Maria says
it I think she says mimini
Okay so
first of all we can imagine a very
simple metaphor which I think is Trivial
just the metaphor of a chalkboard right
we write on it we write on it and then
it goes back to
black and now we can write a new
um and you know I've been fascinated by
the concept of Le and of course this is
the root of the word in English
lethal right to mean deadly um
so when I awaken in the morning it is as
if a vast array of memories of Darren
his
history what has harmed him what has
given him Joy what he regrets all these
things right this is a vast weight to
carry yeah and most of that stuff
disappears when I go to sleep right it
doesn't really accompany me it doesn't
accompany me in my dreaming in the way
it accompanies me in my Waking Life
let's put it that
way and also when I wake up there's a
there's this long linear Continuum of
Daring right that I know and is familiar
and I have the things I have to do and
the problems I've solved and so forth
and all these things right like a vast
library of stuff whereas
um when I begin to
Dream It's like a new
world my dreaming self does not recall
yesterday's
dream right though it can it's not you
know it's not a law it's a principle
right it can yesterday's dream can
certainly influence what I dream tonight
and so forth
um so there's something fascinating
about uh being cleansed and also this
purgation that you spoke of I think is
super important it's
something I was reminded when you were
talking talking about the
Elia
process and by the way Maria pronounces
it
LF not
luse LF right lfan or perhaps you could
uh correct
my is I say alfis and linian Alis and
linian okay great
so when when you were describing the
process you went through through like
four or five phases and one of them was
purgation right and then you talked
about how there were 30,000 people a
certain number of them would be chosen
to actually undergo the process the ones
that got to the telerium maybe some
small number of them would actually
undergo the healing
experience and I think what do you think
about the idea that this could be the
birth of the concept of democracy
right that some are chosen that we have
we're supposed to undergo purgation
before we go out voting and so forth
right yeah it it's probably wise that uh
people that make decisions about the
world have gone through that process I
mean one of the things I was I did a
podcast this morning actually one of the
things I was talking about was uh Peter
kingsley's Research into dream
incubation I don't know if you've read
uh wisdom of the Dark Places is a book
he wrote about the history of dream
incubation in ancient Greece and the
fact that um edles and penades were uh
almost the kind of the last of a long
line of what we might Now call kind of
shamanic sages that we associate with
Eastern practices but there was a
tradition in um Italy and Greece in uh
the um
poish uh around the Greek world
of a kind of wisdom system and tradition
that unfortunately was lost and that um
he talks about dream incubation being
something um
where people that were leading
communities and the heads of these po or
these elected members would purposefully
dream to make decisions to write the
laws of the police and that to me makes
so much sense you get a group of people
that dream they try to connect they
receive the laws in that dreams you
still have to check um because you've
got these other people that you're
responsible to something about the
veracity and show discernment in terms
of interpreting those dreams and not
making you know crazed decisions based
upon perhaps unhinged epiphanies or
whatever and I think veracity and uh
discernment is really important when
when thinking about dreams um even in
the same way that you might with regards
to psychedelic episodes as well because
I know there's been a lot written about
um
uh some issues are surrounding uh
psychedelics and how they although
they're supposed to kind of dissolve the
ego can often result in Jesus complexes
in people where they don't show
discernment in terms of integrating
those epiphanies and they think that
they are you know accessing the secrets
of the universe like I told you about my
dream when I was a kid you know so
discernment and veracity testing are
really important with dreams as well but
uh I think that because dreams enable
you to make really fantastic novel
associations with enormous amounts of
data and to have this overview effect
that actually good decisions often
result from spontaneously divinely
inspired dreams that um that do often
result in good uh good solutions to
problems like they one of the one
research about lucid dreaming is that if
you're a regular Lucid dreamer you're
good at problem solving it's like a a
kind of uh something that lucid dreamers
been recognized at good problem solving
uh which I find quite interesting
because novel Association and having the
overview effect I think they can often
make quite good mediators because they
can dream of another person's
perspective I'm so reminded of our um
over
wrought uh valuing or authorization of
thinking right and it strikes me that I
mean I've recently been struck by the
Insight that thinking is one of the
worst things you can do with a mind we
think this is what minds are for this is
not what minds are for minds are for
something like dreaming communion
Insight forging the third mind together
and moving together into this place from
which our per view is radically expanded
and and uh there's just so much like I I
was saying that I think
thinking you know for a mind thinking
resembles what it would be like for a
bird to be nailed to a rock it's a
symptom of isolation and and of course
you know I'm hyperbolizing and I'm
Italian right we do this naturally I'm
being very hyperbolic but I think we've
got entirely the wrong idea about what
minds are and what they're for and it's
because we're paying too much attention
to the pseudo left hemispheric you know
grasping
manipulation um objectification utility
pragmatism accounting courtroom games
right all these things which if you
pattern recognition you know our pattern
recognition is supposed to be used and
applied for survival and uh this is why
I think social media uh drives people
insane because of course you can see
patterns in it because it's all patterns
and algorithms and so this is why we are
living in these like increasingly small
Echo Chambers and Halls of mirrors and
arguing with ourselves and AI is going
to drive everyone even more insane
because they're talking to themselves
and and people can't help but have
opinions on things and there's almost
like a pathological need to express that
opinion when the opportunities become
available and the more forms of
communication we have the less we're
actually communing communing is more
important than
communicating so I think um in our
common daily lives and those of us who
are not particularly well-versed
in the wisdom of
dreaming um we place far too great an
emphasis on thinking and I honestly
believe that there's a place for
thinking right I don't want to just
throw it out the window but in an actual
communal
situation the amount of thinking we
would do is much more is vastly
minimized and I think thinking is a
symptom of isolation from the polus from
communal um awareness concern reputation
problem solving questing play creativity
all these things and um you know I don't
I don't want to just go on about my
perspective here but there's a couple
more things I want to say now AI the
humans are going to invent a mechanical
God what could go wrong I mean that's
going to go great every massive upsurge
in technological development for the
humans has almost been the opposite of
something like um the development of
awareness communality presence
authenticity uh Resurrection
Rejuvenation all of these things right
um and but I I don't think the humans
realize that our Technologies are cenic
they produce mind States the same in a
not dissimilar way that drugs do right
and I don't know if you've looked much
at images produced by AI but those I
played around quite quite a bit because
I've been I'm fascinated by the problems
of technology and so have been for many
many years I'm a
technician and um my early experiments
with having chat GPT produce
images were liter mind-blowing I mean
they were psychedelic experiences
um that were more like psychosis and
Insanity then they were like oh let's
produce beautiful images
um so I'm fascinated by all of that but
I want to stay on topic here and there's
a couple of things one I mean that's
something that really interests me as
well and I'm really interested in how
material culture
influences
um uh perception of reality
and structures of reality so you look at
the early creation myths and they tend
to rely upon the material culture of the
time and the technology of the time so
you have people being created on a
Potter as well for example or you know
the earliest ones are people coming from
the stars and now we talk about uh
simulation Theory and that we're all
living in a computer game and um you
know AI will become the next uh creation
myth that we are created well people
already say that don't they that we're
created by like a highly technology
orientated civilization and and we're
minions for it or whatever but um one of
the things I research in my book I'm
very interested in um M I'm super
interested in ancient material culture
and how that can help you kind of
reverse engineer the likely feelings
about reality because so say for example
one of the things I'm really interested
in is the history of mirrors and the
earliest mirrors ever discovered uh to
my knowledge are have been found at
Chaple Hoak and Anatolia and they
polished obsidian surfaces like uh
palm-sized handheld mirrors and they
became Elite grave Goods around this
time as well they're also really early
obsidian mirrors found in China and
places like this and um and then later
on in Egypt mirrors became associated
with rebirth with life with the sun with
hator and with raah and um uh when glass
and mirrored surfaces were invented one
of the kings of France developed this
condition called the glass delusion so I
think you're completely right material
culture does reflect back to us our sort
of psyche and vice versa and we are
augmented and changed by our habits and
cultures and um the glass delusion means
that you believe you're fragile and that
you could shatter because there's this
kind of over associating with the
material world I guess and I think
that's why so many kids kind of go crazy
when all they have is um the internet
and they don't have physical one-on-one
interactions with people very often they
don't have to even acknowledge their
physicality they can exist in a
completely cerebral virtual way and
therefore they're disconnected from
their body and they feel uncomfortable
in their body as you would if you are
sitting down all the time and looking at
a screen it's the obsidian mirror this
is an obsidian mirror and so is the
computer and so is the television right
we've and we keep this in our hand at
all times and it lights up I mean we
should think very carefully about the
metaphor what this is
replacing right because part of what
this is
replacing is something resembling a
guardian Spirit or
intelligence that connects you to the
sky right and it's always as well it's a
portal to another world and instead of
another world of our imagination or of
our Collective psyche it's an an other
world generated by companies and by
other people so it's um you know I I
think of these modern devices and the
modern technology as being kind of
Outsourcing our memory so instead of
sending the tendrils of our memory out
um we are are being kind of severed from
that that connection and that memory I
mean one of the things I think in terms
of Acts of worship and in terms of what
dreaming teaches me more than anything
is that the point of a human being is to
create biodiversity on Earth and and and
celebrating life life because life is
creating energy and working magic and um
so you know one of the things I really
love about being in Greece is there's an
a archaic NY on on my road and the
little wild tortoises gather around
there and butterflies and for me it's
like well the nymphs are still alive
because the wild tortoises are nymphs
and the butterflies are nymphs and the
birds are nymphs so I can feed the
nymphs and honor the nymphs still and I
think that and I've Got Friends that
work with nature connection and
psychedelics and they talk about nature
appreciation and uh one of my friends
Sam gandi talks about a shifting
Baseline syndrome where as modern humans
we can't really appreciate how much
biodiversity has um changed in you know
the last few Generations because you
know uh passenger pigeons used to
blacken the Skies over America and
they're now extinct you know things the
like the amount of Life the density of
life and I think the density of life is
is more about more than just about
living organisms it's about Spirit
nature spirits and the more um we look
after and cultivate and culture life and
biodiversity the more nature Spirits
we're creating and the the denser and
thicker and more connected that Web of
Life can become and we will feel more
part of it the more nature that's around
us the more we can feel like we're
We're Dreaming With the planet I mean I
would argue that the humans are
profoundly confused in asserting their
separation um conceptually or their
Supremacy over nature uh more it seems
much more to me that um our capacity for
memory and intelligence floats on an
ocean of biodiversity and as we burn
that down we get dumber and what the
problem with getting Dumber that way is
the first thing you lose is the capacity
to tell that you're getting Dumber right
like if you're being
if you're being deprived of the
faculties that you need to understand
that you're being deprived of something
it quickly just becomes a Cascade and
you can certainly we one imagines that
to exist in the ancient
world surrounded by
largely
unaffected just oceans of biodiversity
right memory and dreaming were probably
a wildly more astonishing exper
experience than what we moderns will
usually experience not that it's
entirely unavailable to us but I think
what I'm trying to get at is the humans
seem to think ah you can just kill up a
bunch of stuff over there and you you
still got your house and your car and
your shot gun and your whiskey you know
we're gonna be fine it's not true like
this is one our planet is one being and
that being also has relationships and
Friends and as the humans I mean for the
Earth the interval over which the humans
have been decimating the environment is
very tiny right it's like one eye blink
or something but if she wakes up and
gets upset about this and her friends
get upset about this things are not
going to go well for us let's be really
clear these beings are not we are
nothing compared to these beings like we
are little dust specs floating around on
the surface so I think our Health
Vitality intelligence memory capacity
for um Transcendence or awareness or
learning all of these things absolutely
depend on biodiversity and we just been
burning that stuff down and converting
it into dead objects and machines and
artificial intelligences and so forth I
mean the idea that the universe is a
simulation is hilarious um the idea that
the brain is a computer or that the the
that the mind is just the brain doing
stuff there's no chance of those things
being true yet they can be mechanically
compelling um I want to be careful about
not doing too much Doom singing on the
other hand I want to sing the Praises of
the living planet that I adore that we
both you know live for the sake and in
the womb moment to moment of you can
imagine an embryo that just starts
attacking you know the the uterine wall
with machines right like what what do
you expect what's the outcome there I
mean is who what do you get out of that
so I understand I always think that like
the most the most kind of great thing
you could ever do in life is be a
gardener you know because I I've had
like a little garden uh and I've got a
little garden now in Greece actually and
I I love having a little garden and when
you grow things um you see all these
relationships and you love the plants
and I think you know a big issue with
people feeling lonely these days is
they're not able to extend their love or
their feelings for anything
beyond human interpersonal relationships
but you can love the land and you can
love plants and you can love animals and
you you wouldn't have to feel lonely if
you can develop those feelings for
something that's nonhuman yes and
um uh yeah I I just found like gardening
is one of the most healing things we can
ever do and and human beings I mean I
don't know how things are there but in
England you know people are living in
increasingly small places on their own
no human contact let alone nature
contact and it's very easy
to feel disconnected from the throbbing
pulse of life and one thing that helps
you to release a fear of death is
feeling that you're part of this fabric
of the cyclical nature of Life Death and
rebirth and regeneration so I think you
know this is something that the people
in the who took part in the lfan
Mysteries must have felt in in a very
real
embodied sense and I've been to the site
of alfis during
Springtime you know and I and also I've
been to a theatrical performance like a
um at the great theater at epidavros as
well which is a theater that was part of
the healing treatment so you'd go to the
theater to be engaged in raptured to
experience emotional catharsis like that
is why you went to theater because it
was healing it was like a healing right
and um even with the
diminished um stripped back chorus and
scenery which at the time you can
imagine would have been like incredible
with like 50 people in the chorus um
extravagant sets and costumes and
designs and like rockus possessed
musicians I can't even imagine you know
it must have been wild um and even
without that degree of like religious
fervor you can get a sense of how
healing
it would have been to have had that
cathartic experience in an ancient Greek
Theater you know with especially with
the natural Acoustics so I mean that's
another thing that I'm really interested
in is the appreciation that the Ancients
had for sound design um and the theaters
are the theater at epidavros is one of
the the best in the world it's like
acoustically perfectly designed and um
there's another structure in the
sanctuary called the Thell which I think
is uh an architectural Divine instrument
that people would enter into to become
one with the the performance with the
korus so that structure is called the
them and the most common use of the word
Thell in ancient Greece is for the alter
stone that was at the center of ancient
Greek theaters um that was dedicated to
dionisis because all ancient Greek
theaters double as a temple of dionisis
as a shrine to dionisis and um it's
where the conductor of the chorus would
have stood to conduct the chorus so the
fact that this whole structure is called
a themeli and is quite un unusual in
that sense uh suggests to me where a
performance took place that was
considered to be cathartic and uh
papanias the Greek uh travel writer he
he was present when it was kind of um uh
Still Standing or part of it was still
standing and there were two paintings
inside one was of AOS putting down his
uh bows and arrows and picking up the
liar and the other one was of the
personification of drunkenness like a
drinking wine and so they're dionan
overtones to that and dionisis is a
figure of healing and he gets forgotten
about um you know his role there but to
to have the catharsis that religious
ecstasy that frenzy is a way of
releasing and purging um negative
feelings or um
uh frustrations or anxieties it's just
an opportunity to release blockages
emotional and physical
mental okay so many so many amazing
things in my mind again from everything
you've shared um but I'm going to circle
back to a couple questions that I had
earlier in our
conversation I know I am blessed by
knowing a number
of EX unusually insightful and
intelligent women um and one of the
first uh of these women that I met is a
woman named Catherine Ironwood I think
it's like y r n
e w o d and she used to be one of the
Publishers of eclipse Comics she lives
in Forestville now is something of
a a hierophant priestess
um and she told me a story in which she
would dream about a a sort of a a
village or a
town and she began to draw maps of the
town and eventually she met a man there
and they would go to the cafe when they
met and they would sit down and they
would have coffee and they would talk
and they would talk about the fact that
they're both aware that their dream
and that they know that they're dreaming
the same place over and over again
together and
eventually she says and I trust her that
they exchanged contact information and
met in the waking world have you ever
had any experiences resembling something
like this or heard of things like this I
have had exper I have heard of uh a
couple that met in a dream and then the
they' both seen each other in dreams and
then eventually met one another at a
conference and uh the guy was looking in
various places for this woman and I
think he because she's Greek and he's
Mexican and because she doesn't look
typically Greek um he was looking in
some wrong places but then they
eventually uh came across one another I
can't remember where they were in the
world but they were at the same
conference they are um they
are uh holistic
Architects and they have a um company
called GE ailia and they work with Dan
Winters do you know Dan Winters and
kareim and uh yeah they're they're very
much into sacred geometry and things
like this so yeah they were they were
sharing dreams before they met and
passing messages to one another and I
can't remember I can't remember now the
details but it's it's a big part their
story is that they saw each other first
in dreams and then eventually met up in
real
life
um all right so there's a couple of
things I want to touch on are you
familiar with the Traditions from South
America that are oriented around the
concepts of the nogal and the tal and
their relationship with dreaming no I I
was talking to a friend uh the other day
actually who's uh really interested in
Mayan dreaming and uh has been doing
lots of research into that but I don't
know much about that tradition since
I've been a kid I've like found um you
know anytime I find a book on dreaming
I'll read it but the something I'm very
passionate about is you know I really
feel my roots in the sort of Western
esoteric tradition like going to some of
the places in Greece I feel like I'm
from here like I've been here before and
um and I think it's really important to
recognize that in England in Europe in
America in Canada we have these
tradition these deep mystical and
mythical traditions of our culture and
and one thing that I love because lots
of Americans and Canadians come on the
retreat actually and sometimes it'll be
the first time they've come to Greece
and it's this amazing feeling of
homecoming for them like this amazing
wave of
familiarity and love for this land like
and they just and Greece has this
amazing sense of home for everyone I
think like it just
the Greeks have got like making people
feel at home down to a absolute Fine Art
so I it's like nowhere else I've ever
been they know how to make you feel at
home I mean I moved there within a week
and I had no doubts whatsoever and
everyone has been completely delightful
and welcoming and lovely my home feels
immediately like my home Everything
feels perfect I just feel like um uh one
thing also and one thing I was going to
say about biodiversity actually is
something I'm very interested in is how
you know we consider ourselves to be uh
separate entities or this this new um
way of viewing the human organism as
being like a separate organism inside an
environment whereas actually I think in
ancient times there was a greater sense
of we are part of the fabric of the
environment that we're in so if you take
someone out of a shitty environment an
unhealthy environment and you put them
in a healthy environment then they can
be healthier because that influenced by
that environment and you know I I see
this a lot with people that live in uh
messy clutter dirty houses their
hoarders they'll start to become ill
they'll start to have like um blockages
or uh health issues or mobility issues
because their environment is getting
cluttered and as that gets cluttered you
know it's like funu you you start to
mirror the environment in your body and
there are all those studies in terms of
um addiction and how like rats that live
in an enriched environment just you know
they easily give up whatever drug the
scientists have been pumping them all of
and uh so I think this is something that
the Ancients really understood so this
is why they recognized it was important
if you wanted someone to heal to put
them in a beautiful place and it seems
like absolute common sense and intuition
that you would do that but I mean the
state of hospitals in most Western
countries in the world are crazy because
there's no appreciation whatsoever that
um you need a beautiful environment with
nice lighting with airflow with healthy
delicious food with Gardens with
beautiful things and friendly kind
people um helping you you know I mean
people do their best in these Health
institutions but they're they aren't
considered unless they have an
extraordinarily Visionary Rich wealthy
sponsor
that recog recognizes the importance of
the environment but the environment is
really important as well and I think we
we are extensions of our environment and
we should be very careful about uh if we
want a place to be healing of
beautifying it and making it a healthful
place yes so this brings up um problems
in cognition and concept which is one of
my specialties actually um
specializations so we tend to think
either that we're separate or we're part
of something and I don't mean to
criticize the language you were using it
seems to me more that um I'm not sure
there's an outside of us
right we think that that things outside
of us are outside but yeah I think we
are instances of the universe the solar
system this world the place we live the
home we live in the living places the
entire history of life on Earth um and
also whatever the humans in their mad
insanity you're doing to and around us
so yeah I absolutely agree with you
about hospitals it's the worst the worst
thing that could happen to you is to
have to be in a hospital it's it's the
least healing environment you could
possibly imagine if anything it resembl
something like Purgatory or a prison
it's just absolutely awful I was there
briefly just
overnight um one time a couple years ago
and I was just like you know what if I
have to do this again again I'm not I'm
not doing this again right like I'll
just whatever you know I'll expire if
necessary yeah I feel like that I
haven't got a doctor and uh the thought
of going to a doctor's or hospital is
really horrifying to me and uh yeah I
mean I think I'll just lie down and die
in an
orange you're so beautiful um okay so
back to the South Americans uh because
this leads to a thread I want to explore
um I studied the work of Carlos
casanada there's a discipline in in that
branch of bizarre probably mostly
fictional
Mythos there's a there's a branch of
their disciplines called that they call
dreaming they don't necessarily mean
what happens to you when you go to sleep
um
and some time ago perhaps four years ago
now I was scrolling around on YouTube I
came across an interview between this
guy Alan Steinfeld who's the interviewer
he's now something of a friend of mine
in fact I met him shortly after watching
this video through a friend and I was
listening to a guy who I think his name
is Sergio Mone or Mone and he is a um
you know like a like a a toll Tech uh uh
teacher hey wow what did my oh I see I
just um I just accidentally did a
gesture that my camera
understands anyway so I'm watching this
video about Sergio and he's talking
about uh dreaming exercises and
experiences and
he he he he gives a couple of
instructions um thankfully I tidied up
my room a little bit before the so now
that you can see the whole thing it's
not just a mess
um
so the thing that I want to talk about
briefly is that one of the practices
that these
uh Sorcerers or magicians undergo is a
series of practices with
mirrors and specifically obsidian
mirrors and more
specifically a a a bowl of obsidian in
which there is water placed and this is
placed on the stomach and you can
actually see
Aztec uh carvings of these nog walls
which is a is is a very complex word but
in a simple translation would be shape
changer right these beings who can
change shape they can become animals or
they can become a place or they can they
can transform and um the practice is to
gaze into the
mirror and cause your reflection to
disappear right and he was saying that
um if you find yourself in
Lucidity one of the most powerful things
you can do is to to swap your
perspective from the one that you're
used to in which I am in me and I'm
looking out into the world to I am the
world looking into me and he says that
what you'll discover if you manage to do
this is that there's nothing there and
that moment of Discovery will liberate
you now you have abilities that you
would not normally have even in a lucid
dream so I found all the interesting I I
was familiar with some of the Traditions
um and a few nights later I found myself
oh he also said you know if you try to
do that and you don't succeed if you try
to turn your perspective around and you
don't succeed then just look at your
hands right which is a well-known um
what something we're often instructed to
do in dreaming if we want to become
Lucid so a few nights later unexpectedly
I found myself on the roof of my flat
while I was dream
and I remembered what he said and I was
very surprised that any of this was
going on it was night and I tried to
turn my perspective around and it failed
and then I looked at my hand and it was
weird in fact what I remember is that
the thumb was on the inside of both of
my hands right and they were and they
had like extra fingers and were blurry
and weird the moment I did
that something very strange happened so
ordinarily in my
dreams I'm still kind of myself right
but what happened this time was I I
simply started flying and I don't mean
flying like Superman or or Darren flying
through the air I mean
um I became
flying the action right and I went to a
strange Place weird things happened I
won't describe here I went to another
place where I committed myself to the
Eternal protection of two elderly women
who were there um and this happened
twice basically the same kind of thing
over a period of a few weeks four or
five weeks after that I was on a call
with my friend and the guy who did the
interview joined the call and I was like
you're you seem familiar to me oh did
are you that guy that interviewed Sergio
mcol he's like oh yeah yeah and I was
like that's really weird now what I'm
trying the reason that I introduced
these things there's two threads here
one is mirrors and particularly obsidian
mirrors but the other
is in the cadan Traditions that are
sometimes referred to as toltech which I
I think is probably wrong or confused um
there's a lot of discussion of what they
call the
other which or the
double what are your thoughts or
feelings or knowledge about anything
related to that now I I often think
before you you answer I often think that
I try I'm trying to understand what took
place in those two specific experien
I've had lucid dreams before um and I've
also flown in dreams but as myself right
like kind of like Superman or something
right um but this was a completely
different experience this was like I
became an animal that flies I went and
did a bunch of animal things and then I
went and and to women in both both
experiences the same sequence of events
happen and I went to some women in the
first case elderly women and I and I was
like I am your protector I will always
be there don't worry you know and in the
second case it was a young woman at a
deli and I was like I got your back no
matter no one's going to ever hurt you
again which is confusing and interesting
to me why you know both these things
happened
but it seems that there's another aspect
of our ourselves and I want to ask you a
lot of questions about souls but it
seems there's another aspect
and this the other which is a concept in
Casten and perhaps some South American
traditions what do you know of this do
you have any experience of it what are
your thoughts I did read those books
when I was a kid I didn't realize that's
where this top
Tech pardon when you were a kid yeah
those the castator books I was really
into that sort of thing when I you know
when I was what age
uh I don't know I got like any books I
could find about dreaming I was reading
like JG Ballard books and stuff when I
was 10 because he had this book called
the
unlimited you were reading Ballard when
you were 10 no wonder you're so Weir
well I didn't like under really get it
but I liked weird surreal from a very
young age me too and um yeah I was
probably a bit older than 10 when I read
Jo ballad but I basically used to go to
um there was a local library and I used
to get any books that like surreal
covers and read them and because JG
Ballard himself was a massive fan of
surrealist art all of his early uh
Publications had surreal art cover so I
started off because the first book I
read of his was the unlim unlimited
dream company um and I didn't know what
it was about it just had a surreal art
cover and I read it and I loved it I
just thought it was weird I loved weird
stuff from a very young age um so I read
everything that JG Ballard wrote um and
um
so and castanada the books that of his
that I found in the library they all had
cool weird interesting covers and
related to Dreaming so I read those and
um one of the things that I find
interesting about this idea of double or
perspective is something that brings up
kind of ancient Egyptian ideas about
self and soul and uh dimensions and
qualities of the human being and how
we're more than just the material body
we also have this Spirit body the bar
the car the act the Sha the all the
different aspects of the human body and
um one thing I like to consider as well
have my notes about the oh you've got
nice yeah
yeah so um the ren the bar the car the I
the sh the S the AR yeah I'm trying
to remember that one one of the one of
the really F I mean I I tend to just
think about the the car Yak the Sha the
re Ren is name so it's a bit of a
different concept of self it's like but
remember remember with um telis foros he
said you need to yeah right so you can
there's something very important about
name right name is because you know I
was thinking about like I think everyone
kind of becomes their name and uh it may
not be in a way that you is immediately
obvious but there something always like
the name is the first spell it's like
the spell that conjures you into the
world and you know my name being Sarah
when I was a kid in the in the 80s
literally every other girl in my class
was called Sarah so I was one of about
nine Sarah and um we all called each
other by our full names because it was
the easiest way to disting that's why I
call myself Sarah James all the time
because my surname is James but it
sounds like Sarah Jane and everyone
called me Sarah Janes at school so
um uh I I've always thought Sarah was
really boring and I'm very unprincely
and the Hebrew name Sarah means princess
and that's not really like me but when I
started studying uh hieroglyphs ancient
Egyptian hieroglyphs Sarah as a name
would mean uh child of the Sun and I'm
born on June the 22nd so I'm a summer
solstice baby and I am a complete son
Adora and I like waking up at dawn and I
love the Sun so I feel utterly like a
child of the Sun
and ra right yeah yeah it's a it's a
duck and a solar disc is how I'd write
my name and actually it usually means
son of the Sun but um the Sarat it would
have to end in a t to be the feminine
Sarat but uh really like the essence of
my name is like child of the sun which I
love so I do think there's something
about that like the even if it isn't the
obvious eological roote of the name
there's still something like that you
can find where your your name makes
sense for you so um one of the things I
like considering looking at this
different aspects of the human being in
Egyptian conceptions of reality is
that uh all of these aspects pretty much
dwell in the i in the heart they don't
they're not in the brain they're not
behind the eyes so this idea of where
are you emanating from where is the
center is the I is the heart which
really transforms the way you navigate
the world if you think you're emanating
from the heart area as opposed to behind
the eyes which is generally I think
conceptions these days tend to be the
brain and the eyes it's always
fascinated me that um you know when I
was running my lecture series down here
I had a lot of neuroscientists and uh
people that are research in psychedelics
from a
neuroscientific um perspective and they
would do things like brain scans to work
out what psychedelics were doing and I
was like that's really limited because
you're a
holistic organism
system and there are there's like um
serotonin receptors in the heart in the
gut uh there are brain cells in the
heart like the whole integrated so to
just scan the brain and think from that
you can really know what's going on is
weird to start
with so I work with Aur scientist um
who's you know had some experience with
psychedelics and he would
say wait a minute you're taking Still
Still photos of states of the brain are
you taking still photos of the flow of a
river where's the flow you don't see the
flow and yes the oldest I mean the brain
has been around for
17th of the history of organisms on this
planet right so if you take that and you
divide it into seven you know for this
many there were no brain brains and the
primary organ of knowing was the gut and
if if anyone's everever done
psychedelics they're going to notice
that the prime the beginning of the
changes happen down there right they
don't happen here you feel your gut
undergoing some kind of trans or at
least I have perhaps it's not the same
for everyone undergoing some kind of
transformation right and then that leads
to cognitive and sensorial
Transformations which I think you know
the the the neuroscientists were EXP exp
in to find oh yeah this leads me back to
a bunch of other topics we're expecting
to find
hyperactivation and what they found was
inhibition right yeah they found like
stuff that normally keeps stuff clamped
down to reduce feedback across systems
loosens up right and that feedback is
probably what we're experiencing as
psychedelia and I want to Circle back um
so first of all do you flying dreams
have you had flying Dreams yeah and
actually talking about flying is
interesting so um there was something
that I wanted to say just quickly on the
Egyptian thing actually is that the
Egyptian word the ancient Egyptian word
for brain is Skull aful it translates to
something like skull off so they did
know that the brain was important
especially in terms of like motor
functions because there's reports in
some of the papery about uh people
having their brains exposed because of
head accidents and certain motor
functions um not not working or being
like obviously related to particular
brain injuries so it wasn't like they
thought the brain didn't do anything but
it in terms of where they thought
intelligence and uh the soul was was the
heart but um so with regards to Dreaming
yes I do dream in I do flying dreams had
this really embarrassing experience once
when I was watching a a morning
breakfast show with my dad and uh
Russell Grant who was the um the show
astrologer and dreaming interpreter was
doing this kind of casual thing and
interpreting people's dreams and uh
someone phoned up and said oh I dreamt I
was flying and Russell Grant me and my
dad were both like yeah we've had that
dream and then Russell Grant said this
is a sexual dream and me and my dad were
both
like
okay okay
so sorry no no this is super important
um so I was very surprised by what took
place after I became flying in the
specific way that happened after you
know I saw Sergio Mone I think that's
his name because in both cases I went
somewhere had a bunch of sex and then
went somewhere else and said I'll
protect you forever right to these women
which I didn't understand at all it
wasn't like I was I'm like what was
going on here first I'm flying then I'm
remember I said I'm doing a bunch of
animal things right so I'm doing these
an things right and I was trying to you
know keep it on the down low but there's
there's a there's a a variety of threads
here that I think are important to our
conversation that I would like to draw
into it um in in the best kind of way
possible and I understand why both
especially if you're sitting there with
your dad right and like oh this is a
sexual thing right you both just said
like oh yeah I have to like this and
then you know you're looking at each
other like wait you sex um but
uh okay I'm trying to organize the
threads so
sty
right and it's you know the humans are
us modern humans I often do this I'll
say like the humans as if I'm not one of
them but it's because I'm not merely
human whatever we might be it's got to
be so much more than just a human being
and similarly whatever our soul is it's
not like a possession it's not like a
thing in a jar right it's some kind of
wild amazing constellation of histories
and Brilliance and awareness and beauty
and like the virtues and all of these
things right it's not we we tend to have
in in in America and and we speak
English we have this sort of problem
with one thing mind right a thing is one
thing right that's a tree this is my
soul you know my soul's inside my body
and if I die it goes outside my body you
know and and whatever and I think it's
very confused
because whatever a soul might be it's
not
Darren right it's something really
astonishing and even if we take things
without any metaphysics at all okay and
we just think of
beings organisms organisms around this
star here this organisms on this world
animals humans this human well most of
me is everything right and then there's
you know then then we can sort of unopen
the Matuska doll and take out each doll
and we eventually get to that little
tiny thing in the middle called Darren
right so I think it's really important
if we're going to think about something
as astonishingly
unimaginable as what a soul might be we
better be really creative right we
better not just be thinking like I got
this thing you know and I also think
like the you say again like Casper the
Friendly gist yeah right I also think
that like it's as if okay imagine a
child who's like flying a kite right and
the kite goes up in the sky and the
child's like it's almost as a part of
the child is in the sky it's very
exciting when you're a child not
necessarily when you're an
adult but I kind of think like the
universe
is is sort of fishing in material
reality like myriads of beings and
forces and histories and such they form
this little thread that comes down and
gets incarnated as Darren and
and you know it's
like oh wow that's terrifying hang on a
second my camera's doing something
stupid um anyway I'm gonna try not to
pay too much attention to it
um so there's there's so much going on
here that is beautiful and
astonishing
um I just got really distracted my
camera's painting eyebrows on my faces
can you see this no I can't see it it's
it's totally ridiculous um and it's just
it's some high tech nonsense that
accidentally got turned on let me see if
I can turn it off really quick I'm not
going to spend a lot of time on this um
so ecstasy dreaming orgasm Lucidity I
want to ask you a few questions that I
often ask people
um do you recall ever having seen the
sun in a
dream the sun oh that's something I'm
very interested in uh no and it's
something I think about a lot it's like
um the things of the dream world are
self-illuminated they're not illuminated
from a solar Source or an outside Source
they like glow from
within oh that's the best answer
anyone's ever given to that question
which doesn't surprise me at all given
who you are or what I know of you um wow
okay um have you ever seen the moon in a
dream that you
remember I have stood on the moon and
looked at the Earth turning on its axis
in a dream and so I have seen the sun
actually but uh from the perspective of
the Moon where the Earth is turning on
its axis like it was different because
it still had that uh that um that dark
quality of life
wow but to ask you again have you seen
the moon like you would see it from the
earth no okay what about
stars yeah I've seen stars and uh nebula
a lot actually oh wow um how about a lit
candle can't think of a specific lit
candle now
a
fire yeah I've definitely seen fire in a
dream have you ever had a dream that
takes place in the room that you're
sleeping
in I've had uh an outof body experience
that I was in a dream and I was in the
room that I was sleeping in yeah I I had
a lot of false Awakenings loads and
loads of false Awakenings as a kid when
cuz I had a a cabin bed that my dad made
and I think he was drunk when he made it
cuz he didn't have a ladder or anything
to stop me from falling out of it so I
think part of the reason that's how I
got really good at lucid dreaming
because I'd have to lie in it like this
to make sure I didn't accidentally kill
myself in the middle of the night and uh
another thing that I think helped was um
if I needed to go to the toilet in the
middle of the night it was such an
ordeal to get out of my bed because I
had to like lower myself carefully down
stand on my desk then get out and I was
a bit scared to do it and didn't want to
do it and I'd get cold doing it so if I
needed to go to the toilet I would just
lucidly remind myself that I mustn't wet
myself in the dream because I was still
in bed um and so I think that helped
strengthen my lucid dreaming Powers as a
child okay so when I mentioned having a
dream in which you're in the room you're
dreaming you immediately said I've had
an out of Body Experience talk about
your first any what what are your first
memories of an experience that is out of
body like
that there Pro there might have been
ones before but it's the ones of uh
being woken up to go to school or the
Vivid ones there may have been ones
before that but I can't remember those
uh as well the The fce Awakening things
were like out of body experiences where
one of my parents would come in and tell
me that I had to get up and so I'd kind
of dream that I was up and I'd be up
getting dressed for ages and then I'd
realize oh no I'm actually still asleep
and I'd see myself still sleeping and
then I'd have to start all over again
and sometimes that would happen like
five or six times in a row um and so
yeah they're the first ones I remember
and I really
remember um having won one time where I
saw a disembodied wolf's head standing
in my
doorway okay that's really important so
um as somebody who's paid a lot of
attention to Dreaming I know some very
strange things about dreaming that I'm
I'm not sure that I'm the only one that
knows them but I rarely hear other I
never hear other people discuss them so
since I'm with someone who knows about
dreaming I want to ask you some things
um the uh the head in the doorway or the
the bad black uh cloaked man with a big
hat right um the homunculus that sits on
the on the chest and is one is
suffocating um have you experienced
sleep
paralysis no I have had something the
other side of um I can't wake up out of
the dream um and that's only really
happened to
me strongly twice so I had one dream
Once where um it was a lucid dream where
I was standing in the garden of like a
beautiful stately home I remember it was
painted the color of duck eggs and I was
on a gravel path walking through the
garden and I was just ecstatic and so I
started to jump up and you know how you
kind of float when you jump up in dreams
like the gravity is different so I was
like just floating above the Earth but
then suddenly everything went black and
I was just plummeting into an abyss and
I tried to wake up because I was scared
and I couldn't but I could feel the
weight of my body on the bed and it was
like my soul was a was like a a smoky
Spirit trying to click back into the
right position so I kept trying to twist
back into the position to wake up and
eventually did and was like in a sort of
panick um and the other one I remember
is an amazing like Dream Within A Dream
Within a dream where every tearing of
the layer of the dream would result in
just another layer of dream and it took
me ages to get out of it um and that's
I've only had one experience that that
was like that but it was I'd wake up I'd
think I was in the bed I'd think I was
awake and I was not it was I was must
have been in a really deep state of
dreaming might have even been carbon
monoxide poisoning or something it was
kind of uh I remember my friend did have
a dodgy boiler and I did always have
really deep sleeps at that house and
don't usually have problems waking up I
I normally wake up quite uh quickly and
um so this was quite an unusual thing
it's possible there was some reason for
me having those but it was like layers
and layers of dreams that just went on
for ages you know we're inclined to
think that um and I think part of the
problem here is the uh privacy of
language nouns and Concepts in
Consciousness which is very deceptive
we're inclined to think that um if I say
the word dream we always mean the same
thing a dream is that's that thing we do
when you fall asleep right we think we
know this but actually it seems obvious
to mean I suspect you'll agree with me
here but there are a broad there's a
broad Continuum of forms of dreaming
isn't there yeah and so there are many
different kinds of dreams and one of the
things that distinguishes a specific
aspect or mode of dreaming for me is um
having a dream in the room I'm sleeping
in I Dream and you could call this we
might use the language you know false
Awakening right because it usually does
involve something like that um I get up
out of my bed uh I you know walk around
the room try to do something which leads
me to another question I want to ask you
have you ever attempted to turn on a
light
source in a dream uh yeah I have because
uh one of my best friends was really
into Waking Life and he didn't have very
exciting dreams himself and when I would
describe them when I would descri
describe my dreams to him he'd be like
that's really weird I never dream about
like stories or places I just dream
about shapes and there are hardly any
colors in my dream so it was a really
weird thing that our dream lives were so
different and when he watched Waking
Life he saw other people had lucid
dreams and he learned you know about the
light switch and I think the hand
looking at the hand is in that and
looking at clocks and various things
like that and oh one of the things so
one of the things he said to me is you
can't turn on a light switch in a dream
or nothing happens or what you expect to
happen doesn't happen um and the other
thing he said that you can't read in a
dream so this propelled me to do loads
of Dreams where I was turning on light
switches all the time or turning
switches on and reading a lot of stuff
and and so I had a run of Dreams where I
were writing down words that were coming
you know that was reading in dreams and
looking them up online and um I like
reading in dreams but but text does seem
to morph like does tend to morph or uh
be nonsensical or the form um
communicates something to you that
doesn't necessarily relate to the actual
form of the word it's like it it stands
in as a sort of metaphor or a symbolic
suggestion of
writing wow okay there's so much there
um so what happens do you have memories
of trying to turn on a light switch and
what
happened um I think all kinds of stuff
happened nothing happens uh things other
than light switches happening happens
and lights go on so it could be anything
and I think it's to do with uh
expectation context of the dream all
sorts of
stuff so usually what happens to
me is and it's not the same every time
um I'll try to turn on I'll go I'll get
up out of bed you know I'll turn on the
light switch nothing right doesn't go on
and so then I'll be like oh the power's
out so I'll go get my flashlight and
I'll you know hit the button in the
flashlight and when the flashlight
doesn't go on now I know like okay this
something's weird is going on right and
usually there's some kind of a
a very profound
weird um encounter with a non-ordinary
force that takes place after that so for
example one time um after having the
light having tried to turn the light on
it doesn't go on I walked out my room my
room and up up my hallway there's a
bathroom door the bathroom door was
mostly closed and fascinatingly for
reasons I would love to know why there
was a small paper lunch bag
in the crook of where the door Hing
would would be and um I reached out to
to
hold or or to open or close the bathroom
door and there was this force on the
other side that was monstrous and
profound and electrical and like
chaotically VI like shaking the door
back and forth very violently and I've
encountered this Force um
hypnogogic and and you know it's
interesting the difference between
hypnogogia and hypnomia in Human
Experience because in my experience
hypnogogia um it can it can involve
things like false Awakenings or um
bizarre sounds or visions or so forth
and
hypnopompa tends to be different it
doesn't I don't usually have visions I
can experience sleep
paralysis um in fact that's the most
common thing that happens although
although I rarely have hypnopompic
experience or I have hypn experience
very
regularly um though I'm not here to talk
about my experience
so what do you
suppose Sarah is the source of
Illumination in
dreaming I've been really interested in
this idea and one of the things I did
think is bioluminescent in the actual
human organism itself um or
accessing um
the
collective experience of the world like
residual light coming in through the
collective but this I've written I have
written articles about this a long time
ago because I was really interested
because there is actual bioluminescence
in the human organism I discovered um
and it is one of the reasons why you
know um James Cameron it was inspired to
create all the bi luminescent scenes in
Avatar because of a lucid dream and I
think that bi that experience of
bioluminescence there's something really
um prebirth
remembering about that I think there's
something to do with bio a
bioluminescent experience of reality
before
birth yes often when I ask people this
question
they haven't I mean most people find it
very
surprising um and by the way you you
spoke of both you and the woman with um
tic
memory having white dreams and I I I
think that's amazing um but have you
ever had black
dreams I had one black dream when I had
an out of body experience once and uh
you know I've read a lot about uh
Tibetan dream yoga and this meditating
in the abyss but I'd never it's one
thing I'd never experienced and then uh
I did some remote viewing experiments in
a Shepherd's Heart in the Brecken
beacons and I actually had a kind of um
it was it wasn't quite a panic attack
but it was like a kind
of a weird Panic where you you know when
you sort Panic sometimes you it's like
you pop out of your ordinary timeline I
had an experience like that during the
day basically where it was um uh driven
I had like a an episode of fear a very
sort of sudden brief episode of fear
that made me I I kind of collapsed on
the floor in a bit of sort of overly
dramatic way but when I did it was like
I just split off a bit from my body
and um and then when I got my senses
back had a drink water felt okay again I
felt revived really revived in fact like
I felt like I could have walked had so
much energy I could have walked all
night and um then that night I had an
outof body experience that I was
floating next to my body sleeping on the
bed and uh I could move my fingertips in
micro movements and I was creating these
kind of like uh snowflake patterns by
moving my fingertips in the Blackness
and then I was medita I was in an abyss
and I was meditating and it was just the
abyss and whilst I was there I was
thinking oh this is the abyss this is
what I've been reading about in tobet
and dream yoga and I don't think it it
was a Timeless experience because it
didn't last any perceivable period of
time um but that's the only time I've
had that
experience brilliant I I mean I
underwent um um a
problematical transformation of my sleep
and dreaming at the end of 2018 which I
thought was personal to me but after
talking with many others it turns out
that it wasn't personal to me which is
very concerning and troubling um but uh
first I stopped dreaming as far as I
could tell and then I started having
dreams that were just black there I was
having like a dream and relating with
situations and people and stuff but
there's no visual
information um
and I learned so much by questing to
understand what the hell was going on
right and one of the things I'll just
give a couple of the things very briefly
um dreaming seems to me at this point
now we're aware that we have what we
call circadian rhythms
right and I think again you know we have
one thing mind so we think oh your
shadian Rhythm it's one thing it's just
your you know your body's relationship
with time and the light and blah blah
blah no no no no no it's way more
sophisticated it's like an orchestra of
things right A Chorus actually and
there's a conductor there are there are
multiple conductors actually of your
cating rhythms and what never occurred
to me
before before things messed up in my
dreaming was that there are onic
rhythms right and normally your
circadian rhythms and your onic rhythms
they synchronize right so when they're
synchronized things go well but what
ended up happening to me is my onic
rhythms split off from my Cadian rhythms
and so my body was wanting my I don't
know what was wanting some aspect of my
being was expecting to be dreaming at
like 1 2 3 4 5:00 p.m. meanwhile I'm I'm
not asleep at that time right if I fall
asleep at that time Ved dreams if I'm
not asleep at that time no
dreaming so these
say again that's really interesting so
I've learned so much and and I you know
I'm really interested in um
like I'm really interested in the
knowledge that you carry and the insight
and your history and all these things so
I'm resistant to just going on about
what I've learned but I did understand
that we have aeric
rhythms and that under circumstances
that cause them to desynchronize and
let's be really clear about one simple
thing if you viciously Slaughter the
environment the living environment it
messes up the features that synchronize
human
dreaming right now each person humans
themselves are like a topology so
there's like people who are so sensitive
that in the early days of the problem
they're going to sense it right away and
there's people who are so un not
sensitive or or their faculties are so
richly um endowed that they're going to
keep dreaming and me and their memory
will stay you know brilliant and they so
humans are a topology right they're like
mountains and valleys and I suspect that
you're given your history with dreaming
and stuff you're you're a mountain right
so you might not have the same kinds of
experience that I would have even though
many people that I know um and actually
mostly men have had a similar experience
at the same time right around the end of
20 18 started having problems with sleep
dreaming motivation all kinds of things
that's a that's a story for another time
um so the thing is are
dreaming there are these is there an
event in the real world that you
attribute oh yeah I mean the devastation
of the environments the devastation of
the remaining ecologies is huge but
there's also things like computation
which humans think is just free as much
computation as you want like just get
they just give that stuff to you you
know there not going to hurt anybody
there might be did the humans ever think
that there might be like a constant
about the amount a constant in nature
relating to the amount of computation
you can get away with on a living world
before it starts collapsing the
relational Integrity of the organisms no
the humans don't they don't think about
things like that ever there's not one
person thinking about that me maybe so
there's and you know was it the Large
Hadron Collider those physicists are
doing dangerous stuff with them machines
I don't trust them much but um now there
could be 10 different things changes in
the Sun a transformation the sun is
pulling the Earth through time space and
the humans think like oh time space is
just the same everywhere you go no it
isn't time space is it's energetically
different as you travel through it and
the sun is actually doing something
other than just making light and warm
which the humans you know think oh
that's just a big explosion in space it
makes light and warm um it's really
disturbing what the camera is doing to
my eyebrows but anyway I'm going to
ignore that so yeah we could be in a
different like the sun transforms and
that certainly affects our dreaming um
the relationship between the Sun the
moon the solar system itself um where we
are in relation to inside the Galaxy
where our galaxy is in relation to other
galaxies a lot of these things have
hugely long timelines but we can move
from a place where dreaming is much more
easily um um sort of funded
energetically to a place where it's much
less easily funded and those people
probably like yourself who are well
practiced and sort of their dreaming
muscles are very vital may not even
necessarily notice although if they're
paying very close attention to their
dreams they might notice a
transformation not not the same way as
like the sudden cessation of dreams that
I experience um but yeah there are onic
rhythms they are very complex it's a
symphony it's a chorus right and there's
a variety of conductors when they are
synchronized with our circadian rhythms
things go well under certain
circumstances that synchron those those
things can split off right
um oh there's so many more things and I
know H how are we on time let me just
ask you how are you doing yeah I'm I'm
okay I mean I probably um can't do too
much longer because I have to watch the
Storyteller okay I like to watch Fairy
Tales before I go to bed beautiful um
what what are you gonna watch
tonight well I don't know there's this
uh 80s TV series that we've been
watching called the Storyteller last
night we watched hands my hedgehog which
is one of my favorite like it was a
fairy tale collected by the brothers
grim and my dreaming last night was all
me being H the Hedgehog it was
ridiculous I love this um okay so do we
have like what 20 minutes half hour what
do you think yeah sure 20 minutes
there's so many things I want to talk
about um and and I hope maybe we could
have a second conversation sometime soon
because you're like you're like a
library and I'm not going to be I'm not
gonna be satisfied with a chapter I'm
sorry I want a lot more whatever you can
share I I want more of it um
so so many threads um
do you think why is my camera oh my
camera's trying to focus on my God this
camera and then I have to really
carefully set this up before I do
another interview
um all right there's a bunch of little
notes I've taken
here oh yeah this one's really
important so I strongly suspect that our
distant an that for our distant
ancestors experiences that we might
think of as psychic were very common
much more common than they are now and
they were probably partly more common
because the biodiversity of the Earth
was vastly Superior to what it is now
and also there were no machines right so
there's nothing machines just dump
entropy into living environments and
organisms do the opposite right they
they are neant Tropic so they they they
do something sort of thermodynamically
possible and they do it together with
and for each other it's kind of a chorus
thing and and you know Corey is is
involved here I think um but
uh so you know we have two problems and
one of them is humans tend to think that
we they tend to think of of human beings
they mattify what it is to be human
according to the machines they built so
like
they eventually people were like oh the
heart it's it's just a pump it just pump
stuff you know it's nothing like what
the heart is brain that's just a
computer you NOP sorry nothing com
brains made computers and without Hearts
you don't have brains there are no
brains without Hearts Let's be really
clear about that so I think the
Egyptians and the Greeks and and the
ancient peoples were right uh not just
right they were insightful about what is
the core of us what is the core for us
right and um well they learn all of this
as well by very close observation of
nature which we are deprived of now
because most people don't grow up with
that the luxury of an incredible close
observation of Nature and when I was
little although I lived in a bit of a
crummy area in Cen which is like a
suburb of South London I did live next
to this field where the gypsies used to
keep their horses and animals and things
and um
I had a sort of weirdly kind of fantasy
nature childhood even though it was a
kind of on a Main Road next to
Industrial estate I had this little
pocket of wild nature next to me and I
would spend hours just looking in a pond
or a spiders we and being on my own or
being with animals and cultivating
relationships like the gypsies left
their goats there so I used to be
friends with the goats and I'd go over
there and I'd have all these goat goats
around me and I would talk to the goats
and you know and I like to think of
myself as well as being in film talking
to these goats and my mom and dad used
to call me Heidi because all these goats
would follow me around all the time and
um and I had an appreciation for you
know an innate and intuitive sense for
that as above so below and I think what
you're saying about the cosmos is really
interesting because um I was thinking
about this just the other day when I was
meditating I had this kind of sudden
feeling of really acknowledging that I'm
spinning like a thousand plus miles on
the axis of the earth you know like we
have calibrated to feel still in an
incredibly chaotic time space in reality
like the amount of Galactic movements
Cosmic movements rotations Spirals and
we're also spinning
anticlockwise and you know and so in my
my um when I was meditating I was
thinking about the fact that you know
we've constructed this clock and this
way of viewing time as moving forward
the way a a clock hand moves o over a
dial and um that the Earth is turning
anticlockwise and when we sleep at night
when we lying our beds we're just
surrendering with the movement the
natural movement of the earth and like
you say the that kind of uh Symphony of
the movements of the cosmos and we're
part of that chorus and the
dreaming the state of dreaming allows
you to kind of re-calibrate to that
Cosmic time space which is why I think
dreams can be so healing because you're
naturally aligned to Cosmic time space
as opposed to trying to live in this uh
relative time of existing as a human
being in this planet that um is subject
to clock time and subject to you know
hours in the day and and whatnot
uh it's why I really do enjoy waking up
at dawn because you get this sense at
dawn of this great uh communion between
the heavens and earth that uh and you
know I was I was mentioned having that
dream where I was standing on the moon
and when I was standing on the moon
seeing the Earth turn on its axis I had
this fantastic
embodied nosis about the fact that I
live on a planet that moves through a
universe and not the Sun rises above the
Horizon like I felt it in my body and I
read later on about how astronauts when
they go to into space and they see the
Earth from a distance they get this
overview effect it's like a psychedelic
it's It's associated with a psychedelic
experience as well of having this
overview effect that helps you release
your fear of death because you feel that
you're part of something much bigger and
just recognizing like this is what I
think prophecy is about ultimately and
the healing events that occur in the
telesterion and the teles ferion is that
um prophecy and the um apocalypsis of
Revelation is that sudden awareness of
the fact that you're part of the cosmos
and that's all you need to be okay
because you'll never stop being part of
the
cosmos yes we imagine death to be an
ending and it certainly is the ending of
this animal body that I am familiar with
that part is real that thing comes to an
end
um but it could be a waking up it could
be a waking up from this dream I mean I
have yeah no I have so many crazy ideas
about this especially um over the past
few months I've been fascinated by death
my entire life as I am fascinated by
dreaming as I am fascinated by
organisms um but I I want to be careful
because I know our time is limited and
there's so many more things I want to
ask you I'm like a kid in a library
right I want I want like nine more books
um so I'll tell my publisher that yeah
yeah please
um I will say a few things briefly it
occurs to me
that
um as
if I the word god is so valuable Laden
but I'm going to be clumsy and use it
anyway as if a ray of the light of God
falls asleep or even dies and wakes up
in a human body and then lives out this
this you know this Continuum of material
existence and can actually do things
with stuff right which is pretty
exciting to have hands and those
consequences if you make a mistake and
all that stuff that's pretty amazing and
then um and and while in the human body
this ray of light or this Splinter of of
of the Divine or origin if we don't want
to use the word god it falls asleep in
dreams right how incredibly beautiful Is
that ah and then when I die that aspect
of origin or the Divine or God is
resurrected right so my death is the
resurrection of something else and you
know we seem to think that um come from
before our life right because we think
in timelines and we know we were
conceived and born and I I come from
before but I I think it's important to
at least entertain the possibility that
we come from after what if a life is the
wisdom of our death leaking back into
time day by day Moment by moment and our
dreaming is actually the sort of flower
that that attracts that that the bee of
the death death the intelligence of our
own death and and R and like vitalizes
it into our lives day by day Moment by
moment there's so many other ways to
imagine the the majesty and the beauty
and the creativity of existence that the
humans are not very creative when they
they just stick to like the the rote
puzzle the jigsaw that they were given
right they gave you this piece you start
over here you die over there that's all
you need to know son there's nothing
like that going on what's actually going
on is so ecstatically beautiful and
mysterious and orgasmic right it's like
it's ECA ecstasy literally like unprison
and you know when in my own glimpses of
of insight and of wander and awe at the
nature of existence and I like you have
I've been this way my whole I was born I
was a problem right I was the same kind
of problem that I think you've been um
you know I'm fascinated by all of these
questions and
quests so yeah I think there's some
other ways to think about death I don't
think it's the end of anything except
this human body and I think we become
confused and we think like this human
thing is me I'd be really surprised if
anything ceases to
exist well I think a lot of it does have
to do with our perceptions of time and
the Ancients perceived time differently
they weren't um limited to like the
24-hour clock they thought in these
great greater cycles of planetary
movements of
generational
um uh
lifetimes they had understandings of
ancestors and grandparents that went
back you know hundreds and hundreds of
years they had that oral storytelling
tradition for a very long time um
whereas modern people are lucky if they
know what their great great grandparents
did that tends to be more record in the
ancient world of yes people have gone
before of honoring ancestors of
recognizing and you know there's a a
concept as well which I find very
interesting of like death Medicine of
actually eating of dead things you know
not just killed animals but of corpses
or of mummy wrappings as a medicine as a
kind of um AP apotropaic magic to
protect someone from death but also one
thing that I've come to sort of
understand or feel about life is that
life and death are actually always
entwined you know we're a bit living but
we're also always a bit dying there are
always cells dying and there are always
cells being born and that as above so
below as within also as without so I
think that um by appreciating time as
cyclical and Cosmic intersecting cycles
and spirals which ancients do seem to
record their view of time and space as
being Cosmic
terrestrial um spirit and material uh if
you have that sense then going to sleep
every night is a small death that you
wake up from in the morning so when we
die it's an it's a greater cycle of
wakefulness moving to death and so I
just think it's going to be cycle
spirals within Spirals and that we're
like life and anti-life all at the same
time our DNA is kind of like woven with
life and death so there's always part of
us that's dying there's always part of
us that's living and there's um you know
rudol Steiner's book knowledge of the
higher worlds there's exercises in that
where you try to cultivate your what he
calls uh spiritual organs to sense life
and death and one of the exercises is
that you sit with like a dead plant for
example um and contrast it with the
experience of sitting with a living
plant and you become sensitive to the
emanations of life or the the aura of
life that comes off a living plant and
the kind of nothingness aura that comes
off of a dead you know plant that's died
and it's interesting doing that you can
walk down a road and you can uh walk in
front of people's drives and if like a
drive is totally tarmacked over no life
it's like this Vo void and when you walk
through a a much more biodiverse Garden
or something you get this sense and Aura
of of life so I think that like life is
the Matrix that kind of holds the planet
together so as you said like the more
biodiversity the more life the more
diversity there is the Greater Life
Force this planet has and um the more
power there is to life and Consciousness
and I I think it's one of the things
that
um has skewed our idea about life on the
planet as well like you look at you know
there's these ideas of Law of Attraction
and abundance thinking and all this kind
of stuff and one of the things I noticed
when you live in somewhere that's very
biodiverse that if a seed drops on the
floor from your plate you know uh
suddenly there'll be a tomato plant
growing you know you live somewhere like
that things happen more quickly because
that Spirit of generation is in the land
that uh sense of life being uh life
flourishing is actually the land itself
the soil itself and so
um creating biodiversity helps to just
increase the density of life and makes
energy flow more quickly for for
everything and everyone I think that I
think that it's a great gift to be able
to cre create biodiversity and I hope
that people will sort of just naturally
return to it and recognize it after a
while because it's a it's actually like
a treat now a treat to be in nature
experience
biodiversity yeah it it's you know it's
so bizarre the time we live in right you
see um commercials for SUVs escape to
Nature right in an SUV which is what's
destroying the nature you're escaping to
um the irony isn't lost on me so many
things there so I want to Circle back to
something I was talking about briefly
when I introduced humans medify
themselves as machines the hearts a pump
brains a
computer so radio I think replaced or
actually the telephone replaced
telepathy and radio replaced group
telepathy and television replaced group
dreaming and this is why I think this is
one of the reasons why I think you're
such an amazing being um because you get
people together to dream together and
that is so important that's that's so
crucial in this time this is the thing
we're not doing and the one of the
reasons I was mentioning the South
American practitioners is that they were
brilliant at this they knew right they
would form a tight little pod of
Specialists each with a unique
specialization and they would go on
dream missions right they weren't just
asking like what to do about something
some problem they would go on missions
together like a like an intelligence
like like a like a Green Beret team or
something except the dream version you
know what I'm saying yeah and so I think
we were born for all of these things
that most of us moderns have never
tasted we we never even imagine they
were possible and group dreaming is so
important you can imagine people used to
live in in a cave together a long time
ago they would go to sleep at exact
pretty much exactly the same time they
would dream in the same space together
every night inside a cave ins like a
womb like a womb in the earth an ancient
womb in the earth like It's Made of
Stone and stuff right and and it's just
it's a completely other Universe of
possibility in human intelligence
awareness and capacity faculty
senses
um I've always felt there's something
like Robert Moss talks about this as
well of being like a dream detective
there's something naturally about dreams
and the way we experience them which I
think is always trying to reveal things
to you and you know often we get caught
up in what is trying to reveal to us
about our personal life or situation but
I think it's trying to reveal something
bigger like a bigger mystery to us and I
guess that's one thing that is missing
from um modern Human Experience is a a
real sense of mystery of what is still
mysterious and I think often of mystery
being being an actual kind of sense and
feeling that people had up until
relatively recently like you think about
we now know what outer space looks like
what all other countries look like we've
seen photographs from everywhere we
there's you know we think we can't
imagine there's nothing that is
unimaginable to us like we know that
there are hidden depths to the ocean but
nothing's really surprising or truly
mysterious and I love thinking about um
you know Sailors that embarked on big
voyages and they thought they might drop
off the end of the Earth because stories
told of sea monsters and dropping on off
the end of the Earth and that really
very few people find themselves in a
situation where they do not know what's
going to happen at all they have no
expectation of what kind of beasts they
might encounter in foreign lands for
example so there's um there's a really
there's a kind of art that I really love
which is Sailors that went on some of
these early voyages and Drew pictures or
made paintings of the animals that they
saw before without having the framework
of context of previous photographs or
any expectation or anticipation so
that'd see a tiger and their painting
and drawing of it looks weird probably
not because they're not a specially
skilled artist but because their
perception of it is completely different
to our perception which has a framework
and an expectation of what a tiger is
supposed to look like has a photo
photograph as a reference point but
encountering something like this for the
first time I mean it must have been
truly magical and mindblowing to
encounter an elephant without having any
preconception about what an elephant
could ever look like or that it even
existed in the world and not having
names for things you know like talking
about how uh words and names for things
act as anchors for us to build ideas
about the way reality works and um you
know this is one of the things I find
fascinating about mimini because she's
the goddess and personification of
remembrance and I think that kind of
remembrance that refers to is the um
remembrance of the fact that you are a
product of the earth and Starry Heavens
as they say in the you know the oric
gold tablets minimini is a psycho pump
in that tradition and she reminds people
when they die when she takes them into
Hades that they shouldn't drink from the
Waters of Oblivion so they forget their
Divine Birthright they need to wait and
drink the Waters of memory so that they
can remember and I think there's
something like the Tibetan dream yoga in
that that you're supposed to remember
yourself back into
the the kind of the all the cosmic
Source wow um so one of the things that
stood out I just want to mention before
I
forget we have a broad library of
faculties senses that we don't develop
because we think there's just five
senses you know thinking you think
things you smell them you taste them you
see whatever it's nonsense we have
Myriad faculties there's this whole
we're born with like the thousands of
seeds of these faculties that don't get
developed and
dreaming there's a there's there's a
whole library of dreaming faculties and
we don't even think about that right as
moderns so you're you're like such an
your work is so important Sarah because
you're helping people to
resurrect these intelligences these
faculties these possibilities you're
getting people to dream together and to
um organize their intention around
dreaming together oh it's absolutely
brilliant I think that's so important
and and the thing that you were saying
about the the
tiger you know photographs normalize
novelty right they just cut the novelty
right off they just snipped the novel
part off and this is a photograph of an
orchid now you know every orchid in the
world you don't have to go see orchids
or relate with them or you know anything
so there's a there's a huge problem with
in humans with representation and in a
sense representation especially explicit
representation dreaming has many enemies
one of them is explicit identity and one
of them is
representations right that's very
interesting because um one of the things
I really miss uh about children's books
is that they have photographs in them or
um uh digital illustrations rather than
paintings and drawings and I think
there's something about a painting of an
animal uh or like I had this animal
encyclopedia that I was obsessed with as
a kid um Hamlin's Encyclopedia of
animals and I absolutely loved it and if
I ever see it in a shop I'll buy it
because I love the paintings in it and
it does weird dreamlike things so for
example it has paintings of herons but
it shows all different herons the Heron
Family Tree in One Tree and that's the
sort of thing that I find in my dreams
all the time I think because this book
inspired me and this painting and
drawing is like the Poetry to Pros it's
leave space for your imagination to fill
the gaps and if you're not leaving space
for to fill gaps you don't have
imagination yes yes that's so crucial um
you know I like role playing games
because I was exposed to talk when I was
a kid oh wait this and um I used to play
a text based role role playing game
because you had to imagine everything
there were no
pictures
um all
right the space for the imagination
that's so much okay the other thing I
wanted to get back to is you know the
the I think the Greeks they did not
think of seeing as passive they thought
of of a gays as like r
no wait I I I
misspoke certain enlightened people
among the ancient Greeks who actually
thought carefully about these matters
and maybe it was common for everyone to
think this way but but it was as if rays
of light were coming out of the eyes
right and I'm pretty sure there's some
research that shows that our our eyes
actually produce
photons and possibly when we close our
eyes the play of those
photons um the phosphines on on our
eyelids um May Seed the first moments of
dreaming experience and in my own
experiences of hypnogogia which if I've
got it right is the beginning linal
space and hypnomia is the lad of waking
between dream and waking so I wanted to
mention that I I think your
bioluminescence thing it's important and
could be could be real um I'm going to
look for that encyclopedia and send you
a copy of it I want to make sure you get
one of those yeah
I'm um
and I don't want to keep you uh much
longer if if we're running out of time
what what's your how's the time thing
there yeah probably do need to go now
because I'm I'm getting I like to not
look at a screen for too long although I
will watch TV it's a bit
different no I would I would love for us
to have a second conversation because
there's about 19 billion other things I
want to ask you but right now I just
feel so grateful what a privilege it is
to have this time with you and I so
celebrate your work in the world you are
like one of those you're you're a force
of nature Sarah you're doing the most
amazing work you could possibly do and
you're you're helping the humans to
remember the Primacy and the Vitality of
dreaming together and even to practice
it you know on on Greek Islands and
things right so that it's just pretty
good pretty lucky I'm I'm such a fan of
what you're doing and I don't mean a you
know in the trivial sense I just really
believe in what you're doing it's so
beautiful it's such a privilege to have
this time with you I'm so grateful oh
thank you so much it was a pleasure I'd
love to talk to you again as well you
know I know you're really interested in
linguistics and language and actually
hieroglyphs is something that I'm super
interested in and how Egyptian
hieroglyphs kind of change your
perception of the world because you know
the the hieroglyphs of the medu ner
God's words and one of the things I've
thought about quite a lot is how
uh for a literate person a scribe in
ancient Egypt when certain
configurations of real world things
would manifest in their waking reality
they could actually read them like the
real things of the world could uh
organize themselves into a readable word
which I just love that idea so uh
hieroglyphs is a really good way of um
of changing and influencing dreams
actually and it could be a really good
Tool uh because I think uh there
something about for me like micro
movements of writing proper pen to paper
pencil to paper painting and drawing and
I think there's there's perhaps
something in the brain where the areas
associated with those kind of micro
movements of writing of craft of making
things a friend of mine said to me that
she recalls her dreams much better when
she's knitting in the morning there's
something about the act of knitting that
helps her remember things so I think
there's something about um uh WR
and as you're doing as you're enacting
it it seems to help you remember so it's
interesting to me that mimini is also
the goddess of eloquence and eruditeness
so she's a goddess of sense making which
I think is really important so she helps
you to make sense of the vastness of
life and the cosmos um and as she's a
product of Heaven and Earth as well
she's the daughter of oranos and
guia and she's the source of all
inspiration in the world because she's
the mother of all of the muses so yeah
dreaming's like dreaming can take you
into all kinds of avenues and I'm
disappointed that it isn't more studied
as a Avenue to sort of explore
Consciousness because I think it's
fascinating especially with regards to
dreaming and memory because memory is
obviously vitally important to our
experience of dreams and there seems to
be like almost a dreaming memory um that
is only accessible within dreams um or
in these special States Of Consciousness
and that's something I think should be
studied a bit more um but then who cares
about scient scientifically studying
stuff what does it prove where does it
get us just live a better
life yes there's so much here because
like we suppose that outer space is the
really interesting crazy amazing thing
that we don't know anything
about there's no reason to believe that
we can't explore it with dreaming right
and there's and really we also suppose
that out there's space out there and
then inside here is just the regular
stuff that's not true like there's some
way in
which in the way that we are beings and
in the way that we are intelligences and
in the way that we are members of a
common origin right it's as if we can
use the dreaming senses to do something
that
resembles
both like
paleontology
archaeology right the Ancients are alive
in us and the dreaming senses can
contact them
directly and we can also do something
resembling time travel right which is to
see the future oh God what am I it's
very interesting to me that like all D
um ancient dream interpretation is
preoccupied with predicting the future
or Reckoning with the future and that
that isn't done in terms of like direct
visions of the future it's done because
the entire world is oracular the entire
world is revealing itself all the time
just by existing and um if you can read
the signs and the patterns in the world
at any moment in any configuration in
any arrangement of things in any area
that you can read the future so you know
that for example like that sort of
material cultural aspect of dreaming in
the ancient world reveals so much about
the perception of time and space in
ancient Egypt in ancient Mesopotamia
that the future is readable always in
the now and the past is always a dream
so we can always explore the past in
dreams and I I've always felt that
there's something about um
in a dream you
can scale and time become irrelevant
really and perspective and perception of
time has to do with your position in
time space so in the dream your position
in time space uh changes from being you
know behind the eyes looking into the
world to All Eyes viewing from every
conceivable angle so you have this
omnipotence where you can see close
close up and far away at the same time
um and so the experience of time space
expands because you aren't you aren't on
this kind of linear trajectory through
time space you are time space uh so you
know this is why I've thought that you
can exist in a dream forever because
time is uh detached from your ordinary
linear Journey Through the
world oh my goodness um so you know I
have I've been very curious about lucid
dreaming and I have experiences of dream
Lucidity I don't chase it too often it's
not like I these days but I'm really
curious about one thing that I that I
just want to leave with you which
is lucid dreaming seems to be this
gentle intrusion of the waking mind into
the dreaming context gentle enough that
it doesn't cause the bubble to collapse
and one of the things that I heard a
moment ago when you were talking about
seeing in dreaming was an answer to the
question what is the source of
Illumination it is the many it is the
chorus of
seers right the chorus of Sears and yes
the nature of oracles is fundamental to
this discussion and our future
discussions
um so what I'm really I think what
happened over time is the same same
thing that happened to us in a single
human lifetime which is that we used to
be dreaming while we were awake as
children and that was slowly getting
evicted by language and enculturation
and object relationships and all of
these things it was just getting pushed
away and part of what's causing I think
the the damage in the dreaming manifold
of the humans in our time right now that
I and others have
experienced
is that thing that kills dreams
it's not satisfied with evicting them
from our waking World it wants to make
them go
away and I want to talk about that in a
future
conversation so I'm going to leave you
with a couple of se you know a little
bit of food for thought here because I
think a lot about this what is it that
destroys the imagination of our
childhood as we get older and thankfully
you you obviously keep yours alive
you're going to go watch Fairy Tales in
a minute which I think is awesome well I
think that's it I think playing um and
stories are are two really good things
to keep
dreaming um so the the thing that I was
really curious about is that I think our
ancestors our ancient ancestors were
dreaming while they were awake I think
there wasn't such a strong distinction
between dreaming and waking I agree
so I would Des describe
that I'm it reminds me wide Camal mind
Julian James is by Camal mind ideas um
that yeah there there wasn't a hard
there wasn't so much black and white in
terms of awake and asleep and especially
bringing back in this idea of mystery
there were a lot more
unknowns and
unknowns um tend to invite the
imagination so you create and fill the
gaps with unknowns so I think about
something like Lilith and the nigh hags
and the scre chars and how SS you know
even now given given the sort of lack of
biodiversity we don't see SS quite so
often but SS tend to be um you know not
too fond of being seen by humans
sorry I was just getting a a package
that I had to sign
for
um so I missed the last part of what you
said um I was just going to say you know
I think about there are a lot more
unknown quantities in the dark for
ancient people for example lots of half
seen mysterious things um that that
nowadays we can photograph in high
definition with night cameras and all
sorts of stuff but things like just
something as simple as an owl um the the
night demons the Lilith types or the
litsu the the the entities that came as
spirits of air and possessed people at
night um the owls viewed suddenly
mysteriously surprisingly just glimpsed
and only seen you know the sort of
glitter of their eyes and their sounds
would have been experienced in a
different way because they didn't have a
high defition photograph of them during
the day you know it's a complete oh
there's so much there so the sun
actually
declares identity to our perception
right it tells you this is blue this is
a cup it's this and this and this right
and this is very similar to The Waking
mind's experience of cognizing identity
and the linguistic experience of that is
a tree right I know what that is it's a
tree when actually everything that we
look at has infinite qualities so so the
idea of deriving an
identity it's useful I understand it
pragmatically and we'll have longer
conversations about this later but what
I want to say
is Moonlight doesn't do that Moonlight
suggests and it's it's almost hypnotic
right it's paradic it produces paradia
if I'm pronouncing that word that I've
read a lot correctly and so it suggests
um strangeness and what you were saying
about the owl right you're you're you're
walking along and suddenly for a brief
moment from the Blackness of of the
night right a white thing just appears
suddenly before you and then just as
suddenly disappears like go ahead Glides
you know if you ever seen an owl in the
middle of the night it kind of Glides
silently silently lter it is uh like a
spectre and one thing I was going to say
about children and why children tend to
have such vivid dreams as well is
they're learning language still that's
they're being instructed uh in the
framework of how to perceive reality so
how to Perce you know to and and I think
one of the really good ways of uh
encouraging that kind of dream
Consciousness is to try to forget the
names of things you do some exercises
where you forget the names of things or
you try to suspend your um knowing of of
stuff I remember having an experience uh
a few years ago This brilliant
experience I was in the British Museum
and opposite the British museum uh is uh
swedenborg's house and swedenborg is a
Christian Mystic who had a lot of
amazing dream experience as you probably
know and um so I went in there to have a
look I knew about his experience with
dreaming and I was reading the Bookshop
and then I saw there was a talk upstairs
about um South American magical realist
no novels and I love South American
magical realism novels so I was like I'm
going to go to that talk and then the
guy given the talk was this uh guy I
know called William rolinson who I had
seen talk at the Psychedelic conference
breaking convention like the year before
on elves and fairies and perceptions of
elves and fairies and so after the talk
I went up to him and we've got mutual
friends and I was saying oh I saw your
talk at breaking convention about elves
and feries and he said oh you're the one
that's inuve dreaming and we were
talking about dreams a bit and he said
to me oh I don't know know that you know
I'm Dreaming I might be dreaming now
everything all those little badges in
your jacket they may represent like
scenes from my life and I was like
that's weird because all these little
badges on my jacket they represent
scenes from my life and um and then we
had this moment of standing there like
thinking maybe we are dreaming like
properly thinking maybe we are dreaming
right now I think William's quite famous
for doing this to people actually I I
later discovered anyway at the exact
moment I'm thinking this could this
actually be a dream a woman in the front
of the audience turns around and on her
cap is embroidered is this a dream and
then I had this um like full body
experience of I'm actually in a dream
like this is amaz it felt incredible and
then you know you get like a sort of
charge of I don't know what it some sort
of neurotransmitter chemicals that just
made me feel amazing and um and then I
was sitting on the train on the way home
later on in the evening and I just
decided to um stop knowing what
everything was called and thinking I
knew what I was seeing like I just I
just looked and I had everything went
weird and um kind of fluid and moving
and I saw the train as being like a
serpent instead of a train I saw the
seats become the Tuton car Moon uh uh
gold and blue fingers like nothing was
the normal framework of what you see
even though I was seeing the real world
at the same time as well and it was it
was like I recognized it was the way
like a child sees the world before they
know the words for things and they know
what to expect and then years and years
later I mean this is 15 years
later um I started this project called
dream palace Athens where we did this
10-day residency with artists coming to
Athens and I started working with a
woman who runs a studio in London um
who's very into how dreaming kind of
moved through the Arts and how you know
uh collectively dreams can produce art
and people can work together through
dreaming and um we started working
together and and we were communicating
on Facebook and I looked at an old
photograph of her on Facebook and I
realized that she had been the woman in
the audience that day with the cap that
said is this a dream embroidered on it
and and the whole exper you know those
moments where you feel like you're
living a dream Dre they seem to hint at
that's the true nature of reality though
that it seems to be
this uh the something about dreams where
it's trying to tell you all the time
that it is all a dream and that in
Waking Life every now and again you
encounter these things that test are
trying to show you that
actually there's a lot more sort of
reality is a lot more malleable a lot
more dreamlike and um dreaming is a very
uh fertile Arena to practice
magic oh that's so beautiful and it it's
right with a topic that I was just about
to briefly introduce which
is I've come to understand that the
nature of lucid dreaming involves the
gentle intrusion of certain aspects of
waking awareness into the dreaming
context if it's not gentle
it it collapses the manifold right it's
the difference between like a
penetration and a sort of um circum
circumnavigation right um or it can be
seen that way and the one thing that
always surprised me was that I'd never
heard a single person ask about lucid
waking what's the experience over here
that is the the converse of lucid
dreaming and that would be something
like what you've just described where
the dreaming aspect enters into the
waking mind but doesn't collapse it into
dreaming right and so I'm fascinated by
the possibilities of lucid waking and
you seem like one of the best people
I've ever come across to have a longer
conversation about this with very
soon let's do it then let's do it
absolutely next time next time I'll be
in Greece so that will be even better
yes um when we get done somehow let's
see I think you have my email address so
I'll email you a question about where to
get that encyclopedia to
you okay cool a thank you so much Darren
it's great oh Sarah just what a joy I'm
so grateful for this time and I can't
wait to learn again together more um
just what a fabulous path I very much
look forward to to you talking to Maria
as well because she is she is a true Mr
Gog that woman she's can't wait and and
thank you so much for introducing me to
her very grateful all blessings wise
dreams you too love you lovely to meet
you bye bye good night sweet bye bye for
now
