nice to
see nice to see
you I've got my coffee how about you
I've got some water but I'm G to refill
it since we might be here for a minute
so give me just a sec I'll be right back
sure
let
me this should be
fine you look beautiful
today thank you putting on these um so I
won't get this uh Echo sometimes so oh
yeah can you can you hear me can you
hear me well yeah everything's
perfect all right yeah I'm so excited to
have this chance to talk with you
today oh it it is it I was um we should
have done this a long time ago I guess
yes yes we should
have so uh yeah the topic you you want
to introduce the topic or H how how do
you want to go about this little
chitchat um I think I'm going to just
shut my window here so there's a little
less background noise I like the fresh
air but uh there's going to be some
traffic and stuff and it's raining so
get the preliminaries out of the way um
and I'd be very grateful if you wouldn't
mind introducing the
topic you want me to introduce the topic
if you feel comfortable
yeah well um you know I left Los
Angeles uh under a very uh weird
circumstance back in
74 and I wanted to study
architecture uh and everybody said are
you crazy why are you leaving Los
Angeles I mean you could go to the
school over there and I was in high
school but I I didn't like uh the life
there and some of the things that you've
mentioned in your videos everything so
Square everything's so square and
because of the houses you know the the
frames the way the houses were built uh
I thought people were very paranoid and
that this whole uh
environment uh uh inside the home around
the homes around the neighborhoods the
whole uh Suburbia no
there was so many things that I found it
uh weird and and and I would visit my
grandmother in Mexico City and
everything was just hustle and bustle
and the city's very very old very very
old it's you
know like 7,000 years
old so so the the there's things that I
I could sense about mexic
that were not in this modern uh Society
where I grew up so I thought I thought
um no um I need to study architecture
with the pyramid
Builders so that that set me off into a
path of understanding what people were
thinking when when they designed things
when they create things and I was very
disappointed with uh the whole um aspect
of the University because well it trains
you
to always be on on alert for business
you know business opportunities right
right the the primary motive is
not is
disoriented right the motive that is
supposed to be there which we might
imagine to be things like um
learning uh actual
developmental uh efflorescence flowering
right um growth development in the in
the uh virtuous sense of what
development
means um seeing better together for each
other and our ancestors and the future
all of these things have been paved over
with one
value cash dollars or possibly um the
preservation and
distribution of power in human
hierarchies uhuh these two things
exactly
yeah exactly and and the thing that that
always caught me uh was this
phoniness and and and mind you I I was
one of those people who
admired a lot of the movies and
storytelling and things that I enjoyed
uh while I was in uh Elementary School
was these uh times that we went to uh
Universal City and and and we got to see
how the movies were made and this was
something that I was I I just wanted to
know how how these special effects were
done and of course everybody was very
shy and very good and everybody behaved
very well but I had to raise my hand and
and ask and they're like okay little
girl what do you want to know how do you
make those
cobwebs on the monsters and and all
these other things that I I I loved all
these old movies with monsters you know
the dripping of the eye and and all the
the special effects on makeup and and I
knew it was you know I could watch the
movie but I was just in ing how do they
go how do they make it so real how I
mean it's the acting it's the lighting
it's all everything and then you know
kind of like that early
interest of uh the making of or or the
back part of uh who does the decision
making how do you know which side of the
door is the monster going
to you know the writer and and how
they're they're they're thinking like oh
no we it's too expensive let's do this
then you know so so there's this uh
economy added to to the to the fakeness
because they can't afford to be too
realistic you know well I just want to
mention something that I think may be uh
both relevant and
unexpected
um like you I grew up well uh I'm not
sure we we don't have to discuss our
actual ages but um I I way back when yes
many moons ago right you know back when
there were dinosaurs
uh but um I grew up watching uh films in
the 60s and
70s and we saw things like um Journey to
the Center of the Earth there were
dinosaurs in
there yeah a mysterious island there
were some giant you know Crab Monsters
and iguana
monsters um the the the ocean thing I I
was very into that uh H how many Leagues
Under the Sea Under the Sea that was
just like oh my favorite movie because I
was enchanted by the ocean I I was just
an oceangoing person and you know uh
talking about homes I could feel the
moment I stepped into the beach on the
ocean this sense of hope home a real
sense of home it was just like entering
into a different dimension but it was
so compelling and so those movies are
the ones that really you know stir me up
that's funny because you picked so um I
was exposed to Jules Vern when I was
very young my parents were reading me uh
just a second I'm going to have to
actually grab this since I have it
nearby um
we have these
books uhuh right oh yeah at the library
I spend a lot of time at the library I
was and I would go on my bicycle and
just sit
there this
book is from
18766
1876 and uh this is uh every boy's
library right put some dust on it but
yeah so my parents were reading me this
book this is Journey to the Center of
the Earth when I was you know
four right and I saw um Journey to the
Center of the Earth on
television um I
saw uh the seven Voyage the seventh
Voyage of sin bad right a lot of anim
animated skeletons and you know genies I
think there was a and I'm going
somewhere here I think there was
a a film
about uh the Greek
Adventurer
um was it
odys that meets the
Cyclops oh oh the what's it called um
Odyssey the
yeah it's it it has to do with uh the
Troy and Helen and this
um oh ules
uliss that's it yeah yeah that's what
that's where where they get lost and
they go all over the place and it's just
you know and there was a giant uh
Cyclops that they fought yes yes yes yes
yes and and then when when I saw and the
makeup wasn't that good either uh no it
n great but I I still I've got something
to say about all this so and then I saw
20,000 leaves under the sea and that
completely captured my heart totally I
was like I want to I want to be Captain
Nemo when I grow up I want to protect
the oceans those people shouldn't be
doing they shouldn't be using the ocean
for war that's a bad thing Captain Nemo
is great he should he's a true hero I
believe in him he's right um and by the
way I don't know if you know this but uh
his name
Nemo it comes from
neosan the mother of the muses the
mother of memory the ocean is the memory
right of the origins of life so exactly
yeah it's the protector of neosan womb
essentially right saying you're not
going to make war on this surface of
this ever right oh no so that was very
powerful for me um those that story
particularly set me on a path of kind of
uh what I would call like extreme
altruism or possibly heroic
altruism um but what I want to get is
this you know modern
movies I cannot watch
them the effects that are done with
computers they mess up my brain I can
feel something is wrong like if they the
ocean in the background of a ship right
I can feel that it's wrong there's
something
mechanically um
unnatural it's like a form of comp it
doesn't Sparkle the the right way yeah
and the Wes are wrong they don't have
the budget to do it right they got it
they have to let AI fix it for them yeah
I don't know exactly what it is but I
have the same problem with like LED
lamps I can't stand the light comes out
of LEDs it it feels the vibration you
can feel the vibration the frequency
biologically messes it messes me up I I
have to run from the supermarket or any
that has these uh Stupid lights blue
lights especially oh God the vibration
is just utterly I I don't know here we
uh for for some some idiot decided to to
replace all of the street lights with
LEDs and they make terrifying Shadows
from the trees they're all Jagged and
multi-linear and it's just awful I mean
it just makes me it's it's like
physically repulsive to me it's it it's
it's actually torture I think it's
torture it's a form of torture visual
torture it must be really bad for the
animals and insects too because if
they're even slightly more sensitive
than I am they must be just miserable um
because that stuff is just terrible so
we you know again we have the same
problem where something that's posing as
advancement or development is actually
torment right it's very bad it is it's
physically bad the whole city the whole
city is is designed to to uh eliminate
any real stimulus you know like the
stars why why do they have so many
freaking lights outside I would always
say well can't you see it it no no no
safety you know in the name of safety
this idiotic thing that they think that
people all they want is to be safe and
I'm
thinking you don't you've never asked
anybody what they want they just slam it
on you yeah safety convenience these are
two of the selling points of Doom right
um it's safety quote unquote that caused
our government here to record every
single phone call that everyone makes in
the entire nation um and to invade our
privacy and to spy on us essentially
it's for the sake of safety right we're
trying to keep safe well no they're not
they're not giving us any safety and
they're not getting safety either what
they're doing is learning because they
they're so empty see the thing is that
they are empty and they have to suck
every bit of information that we might
you know uh
share so there's a feature here that I
think's important to highlight which
is and and I want to go about this
somewhat delicately but also relatively
quick quickly so I'm not
lecturing what we have are not societies
these are not societies also we did not
Forge them we didn't make the
agreements and set at the
motivations uh that our societies
enact and we have actually nearly no
voice in what they do or how they do it
um the the sort of dead ghost of voting
pretty much useless right um it's it's
like a it's sort of like a red herring
to distract us from the fact that we
have no voice at all so they give us
this this sort of um you know little
Morel exactly they give us like a like a
fake lottery ticket right yeah you each
get one ticket right okay but um we
never forged actual agreements together
so there is no we this we that we hear
all the time that I'm going to say this
word it doesn't represent anything it
represents the
absence of the possibility of an actual
us right and this is so prevalent in our
modernity
absences of
society of nations of humanity of
intelligence of the
University of of actual learning in
education these absences present as
presences right and I just want to say a
couple of other brief things about this
there is a feature that
arises in the
absence of human Collective awareness
and mutual concern
an agreement there's a there's a thing
that arises there and it's I don't think
it's a being it's like the absence of a
being and the absence of a being is
infinitely
hungry and it's also infinitely
vulnerable and the reason it's
infinitely vulnerable is because there's
nothing there and if anyone discovers
that there's nothing there they will
destroy it right they will fill it with
something and it will die The Emptiness
will die so what it hat hates it
despises anything that is alive anything
that is vital anything that has
relational Integrity it despises love it
despises Humanity or organism or living
places or beings or actual relationships
or real agreements because all of those
things are a fundamental
threat to
its to the
necessity of its absolute
sovereignty over all
phenomena and so this this is what
happen yeah that's that's why they they
they create the control grid you know
because it's it's important to them that
nothing escapes they're they're they're
controlled because you know if you if
you're
not paying attention to them they they
they they feel they feel worse it's like
oh it's like stabbing them you know
you're you're actually stabbing them
because you're ignoring
them right and
so um
fear and
outrage uh and Desperation and Agony
these are ways to get you to pay
attention to them right oh yeah right if
you're terrified they will squeeze you
and destroy you and do absolutely
everything I mean the first thing they
do is take your money
or
your your your ability to make money or
to make a living part of how they do
well that's why they take you off the
land you know if you have a piece of
land even if you have a pot outside your
door they don't want your pot to grow
anything they will put a a wall so the
sun won't get to that little plant
you've got you know that they're going
to torture your ability to be in
dependent in any way just breathing is
already something they've been polluting
nonstop since they created these stupid
uh things with
wheels yeah I mean there were already
things with wheels all over the place
and many of them could you know they can
work with water but they had to get rid
of those you know it's bad for
business inventors are something they
kill on a daily bases you know how dare
you invent something yes in um in t Pera
in
chiaus uh which you know there's a I
have a little
mural it's up above my door you can't
maybe I can turn this to just see it I
can see oh up up so
like that tiny one that is a mural from
T Pera and um the chapen people were
being killed build there they were
poisoning the Army was poisoning the
river the river water to try to kill
them to take their land because they
have land and they can grow things on it
right they can live right how dare you
live exactly one of my close friends
Jeff Conan in the 90s he him and a group
of people from countries around the
world they went to tny Pera to try to
help the chaken people there um and they
brought them
medicine uh they brought them um medical
stuff all kinds of seeds to grow
food um they brought them water
purification systems they brought them
um things to teach them how to make
aqueducts so that they could get water
that wasn't poison the Army was just
sitting Upstream from them dumping stuff
into the river to kill the chopan
Indians right because they need water
right so it's really easy just poison
the water water all the people di um
eventually the Army surrounded the
village with tanks like they rolled in
there with tanks and they said like give
us the Gringos or we're going to just
kill you all right now you know and so
they talked with they talked with my
friend and the people who were with him
there were about 40 people from
different countries that went there and
um my friend and his you know his cohort
they were like okay yeah don't we don't
want them to kill you so we'll we'll go
you know we'll go with them and they put
them in a bus and they chained them to
the seats and they drove them out in the
middle of the forest and every should
bury them out there you know and then at
the last moment they got a call from the
government said no no we can't that's
going to that's going to cause these
people are from like Spain and Germany
and the United States this is going to
be a huge in there's gonna be yeah if
you just gear them yeah right it's not
like uh what you can do with the people
of Guatemala or Mexico where you can
just bury them and you know the world
doesn't really pay attention so to speak
I mean what a horrible idea so um they
they shipped them out and they told them
you know under you can never return to
Mexico under any circumstances right but
this is just an example of I I want to
be really clear about
something the
they is a really weird thing because
it's an inhu it's an ARR it's a library
of inhuman
processes that are enacted by
humans that these processes have
captured it's as if the people who do
these things have been internally
colonized by money
power and some kind of
like historical inaction of these
functions right someone did this before
they got away with it we can do it again
so it's as if these people are intern
like their soul has been colonized their
mind has been colonized their body has
been colonized in the sense that they
are now the
automatons that carry
out the uh
atrocities in the name of
something that isn't human humans do it
but it's not human it's very strange oh
know it's it's it's it's the in the
realm of ideas you know so in the realm
of ideas these ideas are so toxic and
but that doesn't mean they can't
reproduce you know they can reproduced
just because they're toxic you know like
deadly poison they find a substance that
that will transform you've probably
heard of
transmutation you know uh the the the
the ability of uh let's say chickens to
produce eggs you know that has a lot of
calcium that's more calcium than they
actually eat how do they come up with
that much calcium well the body has this
magical power to produce and transform
whatever nutrients they have into
whatever things are necessary so this
transmutation is also apparent in in the
ability to stick to to to an idea that
that it's a belief system so this belief
system is is just as powerful as the our
belief system in in life and so that
that uh there's a trigger that it's
calling for death they don't like life
but they're calling somebody come kill
me please come kill me because I hate
life and so they do all these atrocities
and nobody kills them and they keep
doing worse things and nobody comes and
kills them they're just like feel pity
for them they're like oh this poor soul
is lost or whatever you know you make up
excuses for the stupid idiot that's
doing worse and worse and worse
atrocities day after day hour after hour
and he he he wants to end his life but
he can't he doesn't have the courage or
the ability to do it himself he's that
small or that empty or that useless for
for
all all sorts of words to to describe
this uh horror inner horror that they're
living because they don't like
themselves and not just don't like them
themselves they don't like the fact that
their life is going to end but they want
to know when it's going to end so they
create these situations where they are
at risk and it it becomes like a
pedestal or a crutch that they will use
over and over and over again I mean guns
think about guns for a
minute guns and and all the stupid
things that they they've come up with to
to create that situation where they can
do away with this life that they don't
understand and they and they can't
appreciate because if they did they'd be
like
this so okay there's some things I want
to touch on here first of all um in his
book which I'm also going to grab since
I have it here and it's really very
important this book um it's one of the
most important books I've ever come
across and I'm I'm a lover of books uh
in his book The Master and his emissary
The Divided brain making of the Western
World Ian M I have not read thatan mcris
talks in in a deep way about um and I'm
so glad he wrote that book because it
saved me from having to write it I was
writing about the same topics you know
over 20 years ago now um he proposes
that there are certain features
of the style that we associate with the
left hemisphere right side of the body
right that um it doesn't it first of all
it doesn't care at all about things that
are now let me be really clear the
hemispheres form unity and they're
connected by the Corpus colossum and the
Corpus colossum also separates them they
have to be kept separate or you get
feedback which produces seizures so it
has a very complex job and again this
won't be a long
lecture um the right hemisphere can be
understood is sort of the the Primeval
Forest the origin of the possibility of
identity for the left hemisphere but it
when it's by itself it would destroy
this thing if it could get away with it
it can't stand the idea that there's any
extrinsic Authority other than it and it
will lie through its
teeth um if you we used to have this
thing called the water test where you
could
anesthetize uh the right hemisphere left
side of the body right and then you can
talk just to the left hemisphere and you
ask it questions like
um can you move your left hand it's like
that's not mine take that away my mother
left that here tell her to come back and
get it right it would just make stuff
straight just makes up that's a piece of
wood that's not me make it go away it
can't stand when it's on its own it it
hates life it just lies like crazy any
threat to its absolute sovereignty is
met with uh devastating intent of
Destruction right just kill that thing
get rid of it it would literally kill
itself just to get rid of the side of
the body that isn't it right exactly yes
yes yes that's that's like uh you know
the story of of the two wolves right but
but feel free yeah if for people who
haven't heard it the weird thing about
the two wolves is that the the sort of
you say it you you you you tell the
story so that people will um basically
it's a very simple Trope you have two
wolves inside you you know one
is one is it's the grandpa talking to
the grandchild oh you and and the
grandchild is is saying why are you so
quiet uh grandfather and he says they're
fighting who's fighting grandfather
there's two wolves inside me they're
fighting and and the kids like what the
hell's going on you know and so after a
while the kids's like all right tell me
who's winning I want to know if they're
fighting who's winning and he says the
one I
feed but he describes this the Wolves he
describes one is kind one is uh always
there always uh helpful and it has all
the
virtues and then there's the other one
who's nasty and fine and and bitter and
constantly bck in about absolutely
everything so he describes the two
wolves and then he's quiet for a while
you know and then the kids kind of like
well yeah but who's winning and so he
says well the one who I'm feeding which
one am I
feeding right right so what's
interesting though about those wolves is
that they they also have another feature
that maybe the grandfather doesn't
actually state which is that the gentle
wolf is easily satiated by a small
meal the other wolf cannot be satiated
by any amount of food it is infinitely
hungry it will eat the world if you let
it and still be
hungry um so we live in a world where
these forces are at play and actually
I'm not sure it's the people who are a
they it seems like it's something
the people get captured just like um the
Spaniards were colonized before they
landed in South America and just started
laying waste to the culture there they
were internally
colonized before they became colonizers
I'm not asking that we um pity them
right or even that we have merciful
thoughts about them though it could be
useful to do so I'm not asking for that
though I'm trying to get you you know
about the promised land right do tell
you know that uh Columbus was actually
Jewish there's a book there's a number
of books uh about a year ago I I did a a
video I I think you know I do a lot of
videos but in Spanish and I did this
research because it was going to be
Columbus Day it was October last year
and uh I found this interesting um
researcher from Spain and she did an
exessive uh and came to the conclusion
that he was Jewish
because he would write to his son and
had these little symbols in in uh in
Hebrew okay it's it's it's very
interesting it's very interesting the
whole yeah the
Hebrew and so uh the thing is that the
the The Story Goes that uh Queen
Isabella uh took her jewels and and
helped them build a ship so that that he
could go off and and and and uh and
explore this uh the possibility of a new
route that they were looking for a new
route according to Commerce hahaa no
there was these Jewish uh guys that paid
all this money two of them and she found
the
receipts how much money he paid he got
paid and he was given the money to do
get the ships and and it's all there
it's all there very interesting
research and and he he
promised the Jewish people that they you
know when he said off the day the Jews
were expelled from
Spain all right so that's when it was
the last day they could be in Spain
without getting their throats cut other
the other Jews turned into Catholics
yeah because a lot of people say well
I'm not going to leave my business I'll
just switch religions and everything's
fine and they changed their names and
they Chang everything and the thing is
that by that day they had been expelled
from I don't know 200 different cities
all over the place and and and who
expells who they expelled them because
they they were money lenders and
according to their religion they don't
have to follow uh God's will they are
the chosen ones and or can do whatever
they can raise your interest then or
take your child or you know a little bit
of that Rumple still skin is is is in
there you
know all these things are true they're
all true and for two or three th000
years they kept ruining city after city
after City because they got them in debt
they promis this they promised that you
should you buy this here I'll lend you
the money and then next you know
everybody owes them money and so this
whole thing keeps repeating and
repeating and repeating but they didn't
care how many lives were
ruined wherever they went you know
because it was a scam they were scamming
people over and over so they had to move
and they had to move and they had to
move took place they weren't known so so
they they were out Columbus was was in
charge of finding the promised land so
one of the reasons all these people were
so Savage is that oh we found our
promise lab and
you are not welcome because we just
don't want you here and so they kill
just about as many people as they could
and until somebody says no no no no no
let's let's be good uh Jesuits and use
them convince them and and and find a
sold for them because well they're not
maybe they're not savages the way we
think anyway the thing is the story the
story that they believe where they are
special where they can do as they please
and they're allowed to kill others is
perfect just perfect for them not for
all the rest of us the rest it strikes
me that most modern cultures have a kind
of a similar story and um I'm cautious
about I just want to say for myself I
don't I'm not trying to deny what we
have records of historically although
the people who write the records are
also have
motivations but um oh yeah let let me
just be very
clear uh personally for for myself I'm
extremely cautious about indicting whole
ethnicities
um I'm sure there were Jews who were
money lenders and I'm also certain that
there were Jews who were not right so I
I don't want myself I don't want to say
for example well the Jews are just bad
people but that's not oh no no no no no
no just to be clear right because some
of that no no no of course not and and
mind you I have a cousin who's married
to a rabbi lives in Nazareth all right
yeah many of my close friends I have all
sorts of connections and dear dear
friends I love the jewi people to do I
love the Jewish culture
yeah yes yes we have to clarify someone
watching could come confused this little
thing about Columbus was a big eyeopener
for me as well because he didn't speak
uh Latin he spoke Spanish because he
grew up in Spain he was actually from
the Spanish Peninsula and and he he he
he had nothing to do with with Italy or
uh any of the things vene he wasn't
Venetian the way they said he was
Venetian and all these things that were
made up around him well it turns out it
wasn't true so you know and and and
that's not the only book written by uh
these and and they're Spanish of course
and they wanted to get to the bottom of
the whole thing they they a lot of
researchers have done a lot of stuff on
on Columbus anyway uh but what I'm
saying is uh to back up what we were
saying about being
colonized the word colon means
Columbus okay so that's how famous
Columbus was that he got to have this
whole
idea idea the idea of
colonization a way of uh uh giving him
this this special uh notion he became a
notion from coming from being a person
to being a hero to becoming this whole
notion of colonizing so now that we
colonize our our everything is is is
really really interesting I've always
been fascinated how you you use words
and because I was a an interpreter for
my my mother since I was I don't know 3
years
old I I started dealing with a lot of
words as well so to make my mother
understand what things were going on
because she couldn't speak any English I
I I had to learn uh a lot of vocabulary
and a lot of ways to make her understand
what was going on so I paid a lot of
attention to words as well I haven't
read read as much as you but I've been
uh very observant I observe things and I
do you know like life gives you the
opportunity to be in the right place
with the right
person for some unknown reason and
certain books fall into your hand and
you're like oh where did this come
from that's been like so much in my life
and and uh so I never questioned the
fact that today I'm G to learn something
new today I'm gonna something's gonna
happen
so
um I want to talk a little bit about
what it is that captures people because
we when we uh first um
recently we conceived of getting
together and making this recording I
think uh the idea was that we would the
idea was that we would talk about ideas
um yes
and you know I had an experience that
was very profound and quite shocking and
it lasted a long time it lasted for many
months um during 2002 and that
experience
began with me writing I was writing an
essay I was sort of on fire out of the
blue right I was inspired I just started
writing and I thought for the first time
I had sort of a a vision if you will or
or an idea and the idea was that the
network of human Minds on our world is
an environment just like the Earth is an
environment right this network is an
invisible environment it's a layer of
what's going on here that we can't see
directly but we see its
effects and in that environment there
are things a bit like organisms except
they're not
alive and unlike
organisms they are extremely
Darwinism and they compete for dominance
over Terrain in this in this network of
mines and they compete for dominance
over the transports between
mines the transports that connect humans
to ideas and they compete for
Reproductive uh resources just like you
were talking about earlier right and
they are really most of them they're not
all malignant
but the dominant ones are malignant
they're not like organisms they're more
like cancer right they want to
metastasize and mutate and just cons
cons continue their dominance and this
is one way of thinking about it's not
the only way I'm not even saying this is
real I'm just saying it's useful to
think like this um this is one way to
think about what it is that captures
humans and creates this the Monumental
problems that we face in modernity these
things we call Nations
corporations the military industrial
complex
um you know
uh political and religious ideologies
these are these things which I I have
you know I call them
thrp right call them
thrp um and when I had this idea the
moment that I had this idea about the
thrips at that moment something touched
my mind and just started teaching me
incredible things about language and
knowledge and the history of human minds
and all these things I'm not going to
launch into a long discussion about I
just want us to notice
that it is as if certain forms of
ideological
structure dominate the network of human
minds and they capture they colonize the
humans and then those humans go and
colonize living places and human peoples
and Destroy them right and turn them
into slaves Graves banknotes gold you
know Square things
cars War guns pornography advertising
you name
it oh yeah oh yeah so so the the thing
with me is is
this I bridge between languages and then
I I I finally you know I get the courage
to move and and and learn as much as I
can about
civilizations and what was here before
before uh the Spaniards because well
they they did their utterly best to
erase as much as the old civilization
but guess what the people are still here
they're still here they're breathing
they're walking and they have all their
baggage with it including my grandmother
my uncles and all these other people
that I have been very privileged to um
enjoy and it and that move was like the
best thing I could have done and and so
many people criticized me and said
like how can you disdain modernity and
all the the Comforts of life that the
the United States were works really hard
to provide their citizens and you you
how dare you go off into the Wilderness
and that you know uh who knows what the
hell's going on in the other side of uh
the the the Colorado River the Rio Bravo
they don't care they're just scared
that's where the world ends and I would
I would talk to people because my my
mother and my sisters and everybody
stayed in Los Angeles except me I
decided no no no no no let let's go
explore let's go find out let's let's
learn let's learn and then I found the
language uh the the native language and
then I I I keep discovering things that
are just fantastic and of course the
spirits in everything you know people
here have the habit of talking to things
you know they'll say like where are you
I know you're here I I know I left you
here somewhere they're talking to the
broom or something you know and I
realized that there we go again the
transmutation I can turn into the broom
and
appear to the person and
say I'm
outside come outside and I can hear the
broom calling
me you're you're looking in the wrong
place I can hear the broom calling me
say no you're looking in the wrong place
come out
outside that is communication that idea
that it's possible really bothers a lot
of people they don't want to know oh no
you must be some sort of witch how dare
you you can't communicate with things
not with rocks not with water not
nothing you are just this blob of amino
acids and extem and small extremities
that's it that's what you are don't try
to be anything other than that well see
that that's part of the
um that's part of the domination
strategy of this this thing right and
it's not the left hemisphere it's weird
it's like it's like the ghost of of the
left hemisphere's origin in the right
hemisphere in in its nature right it's
like this it's like a ghost and and part
of what it does is it tells you what's
impossible and what's impossible is
anything it can't control commodify and
slave grip and manipulate like a tool
all that stuff is impossible so
telepathy is impossible healing each
other is impossible right dreaming you
really shouldn't do that don't do that
don't what are you doing that's that's
crazy making don't be dreaming don't
have Vision how dare you how dare you
don't step
right I call it perception that's
something studied very much because mind
you architecture was something you know
there's these huge churches here and
every single church here uh Cathedral
size there was a whole civilization
around that they just spli the stones
and turned it into a church but right
there there was a whole civilization and
and it didn't go away they just tore it
apart and created their their their
Cathedrals and what have you and so
people would not uh run from from from
these uh Miners and all these people
that were mining places and and they
needed the people to to to uh provide
for them whatever so so that they needed
to keep the
people under control and so they said
okay well we'll just let things go in in
in a certain point where we can
manipulate them to the point where
they're they're not uh they're not
harassing us back they won't kill us but
they were always suspicious that we did
not want to be conquered we did not want
to be colonized we did not want to be uh
invaded by the silliness of of of
looking for gold and silver and thinking
that's that's it
that's what you do that's that's it
that's what you do accumulate this stuff
and so it's very bizarre to to to our
culture yet a lot of people start taking
on the same habits the habits of lying
the habits of pretending they're better
than the other ones well you're you
you're poor you know you you you can't
afford this or you can't afford that and
so this this thing is starts growing in
in the middle of everything in this in
the jungles and and they're being
poisoned by these freaking uh
mercenaries have no skills no ideas no
personal ideas of course because they're
disconnected and for the rest of people
like you and me who have a connection
especially to creatures like birds and
animals and little things
insects we feel rich we feel uh
incredibly well and and and the wellness
comes from just being
open so there's another feature of the
perverse shadow that dominates the world
and it is the idea of an
individual right you're a separate
person
you're the important
thing your soul is at risk and we've got
the formula for immortality for your
soul we're going to keep we can keep you
alive forever upstairs in God after
death right if you just you know it's
weird because they've got they've got
this thing that that reinforce they've
got a a sort of a a protocol or a
program that reinforces our separateness
as and our value as Darren which is the
worst part of me right the Darren part
of me the part that's really concerned
with Darren and darness and all the
stuff that's nothing like what the
goodness of me is right the goodness of
me is Way Beyond Darren it doesn't care
much about Darren Darren's a sort of a
peripheral thing like I don't know like
the dust pan is to my kitchen or
something right the dust pan has a
purpose but it's not the kitchen anyway
so the first thing is the separate thing
and then the second thing is you're
either us or them you're either with us
or you're the enemy right if you're the
enemy yeah you're gonna burn right
you're gonna go to hell so their version
of
collectivity is fundamentally poisonous
and I just want to mention one brief
thing about this
bizarre people of the book problem right
and particularly I mean the Jew you know
the Torah is one thing the New Testament
we can think of it as a separate thing
that new testament thing is very very
strange and there's a bunch of weird
interpretations of that thing but one of
the things that happened is there were a
bunch of traditions in Greece right in
Greece and in other places in the Middle
East that had to do with undergoing
death while you were
alive so that your
passions right your capacity to be
captured by
desire died and you were introduced to
the virtues of
origin so that when you were resurrected
in this lifetime while you're still you
now you would be oriented by this
relationship with these virtues and you
could not be frightened by human
authorities you could not be frightened
by war or death or threats of any kind
because you had seen Beyond the veil of
life you knew what you knew
essentially what we come from why we're
here and where we go and how that
happens each person perhaps uniquely and
so there were these uh mystery religions
like the linian religions of Greece
right where they would literally take
you through an
initiation um you would have an
experience of death and just at the at
the edge when you could you know when if
you're left alone you're going to you're
going to actually die they could
resurrect you you and bring you back
into your Human
Experience and this was stolen by the
idea of Christianity and projected into
after you die right you only get
Resurrection if you accept the blood of
Jesus and you become a Christian and
they switch the word
eternity you will you you will uh this
is this life is
nothing you're here to be tested for the
next level
right right that's where that's that's
where they play the tricky part the
tricky part is we decide if you will be
uh a candidate candidate because we can
we can situate you in limbo for a
eternity and you will never never go
beyond that limbo because that's part of
your punishment for not being just like
we want you right so so there's these
conditions always creating the
conditions to obliterate your
possibilities there is no possibil we
decide the possibilities you just get to
obey and wish for you know that other
eternity who knows when because maybe
you might be dumped and in and you know
the the Dante uh situation of of all
these infernos it's not just one little
place it's like seven different right
seven different te um so this is the
other thing right
uh these religions utilize
fear and judgment now I'm not saying
there's nothing resembling evaluation in
the in the sort of origin world there's
nothing resembling I don't know Karma
I'm I don't claim to know about that
but what I do know is that it's very
unlikely that if there's something like
God um that it's like a
fiercely severe jealous judging hateful
punishing vicious evil being that just
seems
wild right when convenient how
convenient you know right how convenient
when I look at nature that's not what I
see that's not what the sun does that's
not what the Moon Mo does the forest is
not doing that the animals are not doing
that I'm not saying they don't eat each
other and stuff like that they do but
overall if I just look in nature I
rarely see violence when I look at
humans I always see violence so there's
a big difference there um but my point
is uh they made the Divine into
something terrifying and terrible
something you should fear and cower from
and I will say that in my own experience
of the Divine whatever that may be in
whatever however that may be
valued the thing that is fearful about
the Divine about
origin it is not its
judgment what is fearful about
origin is it is so explosively beautiful
that you will die of ecstasy by
interacting with it you will die you
will expire of Joy that's what's
frightening about it it's not violent or
judgmental or like the Thunder thing I
mean it's it's ever more ecstatically
beautiful in each moment that you
interact with it's like an explosion of
ecstas of ecstatic loving joyful Beauty
which is nothing like call it I call it
the State of Grace yeah fair enough when
you enter that State of Grace it is
nonstop you you you're in a state of
grace and and there's many ways of
entering there are many doors to that
state of grace and and and yes Grace is
something
Divine it's funny because
um there's something very
important that has become I become aware
of it over the past few years as I
explore more deeply my concerns with the
origins of Injustice and the problems
with the humans in modernity
and it has to do a lot one of the
features of it has a lot to do with
absences and
strangely that word again
absences oh absences right absen
especially absences that his presences
but there's something I notice which I
think is quite profound and that is
that the way in which the divine
may be
palpably absent in our
experience is expressed as Beauty and
love and kindness It's like the absence
of the explicit presence of the Divine
expresses itself as like the Glorious
flowering beauty of any organism or
living place right whereas this other
absence that is very upset about that
kind of absence right because that's an
absence
that is it's mystically sacredly absent
right and this other
absence can never do anything like that
so it wants all that stuff gone that
stuff has to go away by at any cost like
as soon as you can just kill it just
kill it off um and What What
mcgilchrist In His book was argu was
suggesting was that you know in our
minds the right hemisphere interrupts
the fictions of the
left right it it's watching when the
left starts to confabulate a fake world
and it'll interrupt that and cause that
to all breakdown so that it has to be
remade hopefully better than last
time when the right hemosphere is shut
down or missing is
stroke yeah you're you're you're
breaking up you're breaking
up yeah let's see you're breaking up a
little bit
you okay I think my my my internet was
um
broken no but you know the what you were
saying lacking lacking when something's
lacking it's
and
just channeling all these
things and I feel even have uh seeds and
make more little
to give them to the others are
lacking I don't know if you remember
that movie of amadel and saleri the the
the guy that was there MH
oh okay I I think you stopped the video
I stopped the video because it was so
broken uh and now that I've stopped it
Le we can hear each other I'll start it
back up in a moment okay well but it's
still being recorded that's all right
you can leave it like that before the
part before where you started talking
about amadas was very broken so I'm not
sure if that got recorded I wonder if
you might resay
it then and then we what I was saying
was about the lacking I was talking
about when things are
lacking uh the absence that you you name
it you call it absence I I call it
lacking where where there's not enough
uh energy or light or whatever it is to
uh
instigate the ability to
and it goes the other way feels it from
other places you know like uh protons
and and neutrons you know they come
together with other molecules and they
will share their their uh electrons and
and create a new uh element right so I
think everything is in a state of const
creation yet when there isn't enough
electrons to go around and and the
energy
dissipates what's little left is is
always
yearning to steal from other people
whatever they can it and they don't care
about the quality they don't care about
the quality and and that's when I uh
that image of uh saleri and that movie
Amad is very interesting because he has
this little dialogue with God and and
and he takes the cross and the and and
he's talking to God and that you know is
angry at God because how dare you create
this creature uh that has so much talent
and that he's only you know like in a
prison suffering and
watching uh God Speak
through the talent of of this MOSI to
the point where he uh decides to
destroy uh God's Little Creature
talented creature and that's that's I I
remember that so
well as do
I it's a
common it's it's a common can you see me
now I can but still um the quality is
very poor so something is wrong with the
uh with the
connection all right so for the moment
let us continue without
video okay I'll I'll turn off my video
unless we want to try to
reconnect um at least this way we can
hear okay well uh
do you want to comment something about
what I just said and and the it's very
similar I find I find it really really
important I do too um but it's tragic
for everyone involved uh as I said
before one of those wolves is infinitely
hungry and the other wolf is easily
satiated by even a small morsel of
food right and this is important and I
think there's something very tricky
about these wolves
identities um if we think of one of the
Wolves as
a we think of one of the Wolves as an
absence and the other one is a presence
or one is lacking and one is
plentiful I think if we actually look
very carefully at the Wolves we will
discover that The Hungry Wolf the
infinitely Hungry Wolf
isn't actually a wolf at all he's the
other Wolf's right
paw right he's like one
extension of the of the good
wolf and he's trying to be a whole wolf
and he
can't now normally it's not a problem
right to be the right hand of a
being but if that hand wanted to
dominate the whole body and was really
angry and tried to attack for example my
face or my torso or something right then
you would see a phenomenon similar to
what we are what we are witnessing you
know what if what if
mulieri was actually a feature of
Mozart but it could be it can be you
know that uh that dark side that we all
have I I always uh had this thing with
my kids when you know they they're
fighting or doing something stupid and I
said okay you two better shape up and
they're and they keep going right and
they said okay kids you you guys don't
want to know my dark side because my
dark side's RAR dark and that's when
they stopped then that's when they
stopped okay Mom uh we believe you we
believe you we'll stop they they think
they're plain they're doing harm and
they don't know how much you know
somebody's going to poke somebody's eye
out or do something really stupid
whatever it is I'm trying to avoid it
but then I I call my dark side to lurk
and and and and show a small little bit
of how dark my dark side is and and
don't want to know they don't want to
know so yes yes we are both at the same
time you know the
um what what mcgilchrist is arguing is
that our cult what we call our cultures
which are not actually cultures and what
we call our societies which are not
actually
societies they are like left hemispheric
style constructs that have no right
hemispheric aspect that can correct them
at all
right so they're just they're doing the
thing you were talking about earlier
they're trying to arrange their own
death but no one's coming to kill
them that's what they're
doing you see it's the same thing I
could see it I've seen it so many times
I've seen it so many times and and
people say oh no no you're you're you're
Mis misinterpreting and no I'm not
misinterpreting that's something that I
have not just the skill but and the
intuition but it's just like 100% of
everything I
do this is very important um this notic
when
I want me to turn on my camera we'll try
we'll see
we'll try you know the the the thing
about how much of a
coward a person can be I'm going to turn
it off again yeah I want to I want to
make sure that the at least our
communication is clear you know I don't
think it's cowardice I think it's
something weirder I think it's
like a
soullessness right there soul has gone
dim so it's not just it's not cowardice
it's a kind of a vulnerability perhaps
what do you
think well I I I really think there's
like six elements working here and and
one of the I mean there's like on the
positive side the the positive sensible
Common Sense fortitude is um the ability
to learn
the ability to uh have initiative so
that you move outwards you know you have
this force that goes
forward uh
despite many odds and then there's the
admiration because you've seen it in
other people or in other things that
that all three of those elements create
this Force a benevolent force that will
carry just about anything into action
into a a benign State or the State of
Grace once those three elements are here
but their
counterparts what are the counterparts
of of uh admiration is Envy so the sense
of envy that and and I'm not talking
people that are jealous because you know
the difference between being jealous and
being being uh envious is is a great
deal I mean if you're jealous it's like
you know see somebody with a nice car
you know if you work hard you can buy
that nice car but if you see somebody
with certain attributes let's say a good
voice you know that no matter how much
you practice you're never going to have
that voice and so yeah so I admire
people with a beautiful voice and I and
I don't Envy them because that's
something I will never have yet I have
my own talents but when when it comes to
uh being dependent or uh
reliable I rather be reliable and than
dependent so that other people depend on
me because I think I can uh do what I
what I say I'm I'm going to do but the
opposite of dependent is useless oh I
can't do this I can't do that you know
they they they they dig their own grave
because there's just like no I can't oh
I'm too afraid over this so so they they
create the situation where you're saving
them and they're hanging on to you and
so those dependent people can be really
really negative because they're always
nagging about something right so that's
that's the opposite of uh learning that
you say well I don't know but I can
learn and I just need practice the more
I practice the better I'm going to get
at it but that other person's going to
say oh no I can't do it so what happens
with the controller the person with
initiative the one who's like the
politicians who talk and talk and blab
and blab uh they don't have the skill
set but what they do have is that they
recognize the the ability to to go
forward they're going to need the other
two but then they will depend on people
with those other skills but what does
the other controller the negative
controller is the
Destroyer you know no nothing can exist
except me me and me alone because if
somebody sees somebody else they're
going to compare them and of course I'm
never going to be as good and in all
three uh uh situations the Envy the the
belittlement of of self is going to pop
up and and and reinforce the sense of
I'm bad but I'm incredibly bad and
nobody's going to know just how bad I am
and so they have to be like incredibly
bad and every day you know they'll have
children and they'll teach them oh
you're going to have to learn to cheat
this is how you cheat and you and if I
catch you that means you didn't learn to
cheat right you know there's all these
fables about
uh Kings teaching their their uh their
children how to be
evil which is really silly um well
that's how I feel that there's the
counterparts that are working against
this
uh this other uh Trinity of of uh skills
and and the other ones are just plain
lazy you know laziness and postponing
and you know even magical thinking or
positive thinking for that matter which
is a whole School of
Psychology positive thinking which I
think is horrible because I think the
the capacity of us to see the horrors is
also important
yes I agree you can yes we should not um
that you just think everything's nice
and Rosy all the
time I mean on the one
hand okay this these matters are very
complex and they're not easily
encompassed in
simple um proclamations or simple
declarations I want to say a few things
though that relate to the history of the
conversation that we've been having
today and one of them is that
um it seems to me that the elements that
represent the absence of our Humanity
they're very good at organizing they can
organize um incredibly effectively so
that they don't have to not be
lazy they can get away with lazy
evil because there's 15,000 of them
doing it together right so they can get
away with being lazy and evil um and and
again I'm not sure that that it's
actually people right it's like
deerson humans it's dehumanized people
you know if you go to a job every day
even a job that isn't necessarily evil
right you go work in an office you're
sitting in front of a computer at a
rectangular desk everything around you
is rectangular it's all a bunch of
squares there's some fluoresent lights
above your head killing your soul every
moment that you're there it's basically
like one of those tears of Dante's Hell
right it's a terrifying thing and so
what happens is the people become dead
inside and then they just um they enact
the functions I remember writing a poem
a long time ago when I was in a poetry
class about the Disappeared in Guatemala
after seeing um a show about this on
television and being so moved by it and
one of my friends in the class turned to
me and said you don't understand evil
Darren I was like what do you mean like
evil isn't it's not a thing inside
people when they interviewed those
people who killed and buried the people
in Guatemala those people weren't evil
when they asked them why they did it
they didn't say because I love torturing
humans they said I did it because I was
just following orders I was just doing
what I was told I was doing what I was
told to do by the guys above me and here
we come back to this
uh we come back to the hierarchy
right hierarchy of human
power
um so yeah I think the my video is too
it's probably too high res let me see
here one second I can make the video a
little bit less
myis I'm I'm I'm fine it comes and goes
it's just it's a little unstable
but um yeah you're very blurry on my end
so I'm going to I'm going to give up my
bandwidth for moment um all right
so we'll see how it how
it
yeah I'm going to stop your video too
because it looks pretty
choppy um so we'll just do it this way
for the
moment Let Me Wait for a
second yeah it looked bad yeah there we
go all right so the thing is there is
something like culture and there is
something like Society
but it's not the big culture and the big
society that we that we think of when we
use these words it's like when you go to
the poor people in some City or Village
and you get some of them together to
start making
art that is
culture you get some of them together
and you teach them new skills and they
learn them together for each other with
you that is a society that's what a
society looks like not like this other
junp right not like the enacting of a
bunch of dead inside rules what do you
think well of course um I I I don't know
if I ever uh told you but uh back in
2008 I I started teaching a u art class
in skid Road over there in Los Angeles
and uh the police Precinct there asked
me if I would uh give all these uh
people uh something to do and and I said
what do you mean he said well they they
need to pay their tickets but so they
have to do a social service but we have
no social service for them to do could
you could you uh take them as your
students or something or do something
with them and I'm like well I'm going to
need tables and chairs and paper and oh
no no we'll give you absolutely
everything you need and so this
community which is skid row it's a it's
a it's an important Community mind you
there's people that have been living
there for 20 30 years and there's
newcomers every day of course now it's
grown
exponentially uh but back then it was
pretty big it was like uh maybe 17 th000
people were in that area uh camping at
some given time and they all had all
sorts of issues but the main issue is
that they had to do their social service
uh so what I did as an art teacher uh I
told them you know and as soon as
everybody arrives just have this piece
of paper and write your name on one of
the corners whichever corner you like
doesn't matter just write your name and
we'll get started and then once the
people gathered I would tell them okay
we're we're going to do these uh series
of drawings and
L and so
on and some people were very can't do
this and I
thought did you write your name on the
piece of paper and they said yes of
course well that is a Trine
and they they they would just go
cathartic because they like what and I
yeah you drew your
name the word written
writing is is just another form of
of name on a piece of paper you can draw
the lines and you can draw the whatever
and the thing is I would um give them a
a little series of exercises and then I
would have them Turn the Page and draw
the person in front of
them and they
did and they could but it was a funny
little thing happening right there
Darren the person that they drew was
themselves with the features of the
other person
in say they had a little hat or thick
eyebrows but the face all the
whole
drawing was them what are you looking
that what are we seeing oh well it's a
picture of him with a with a mustache or
something and it's like wait wait a
minute what's going on here and I said
well thing is that we have been trained
not to look at others we have not been
allowed to look at it into each other's
eyes and
observe the the person in front of us
what we see is the person in the mirror
when we brush our teeth that's who we
know we know the guy or the lady that's
in front of the mirror and that's all we
know so of course you're going to draw a
face that looks like yours but this time
I'm going to give you a new sheet of
paper and this time we're going to study
the face and he's going to study your
face and she's
St study your face and we're going to
observe carefully and you're not going
to take your pencil until I say so
you're going to spend 15 minutes
studying the features on the person in
front of
you and it's okay because them so you
can draw them so you're going to check
and see just how far their eyes are
apart how big is their jaw and and I
gave them a little bit of advice and
then they drew everybody there and every
single
person made a portrait of the person in
front of them exactly with the features
that they had to and that was a 2hour
session okay so the ability of people to
change and to turn into a community and
to acquire new skills is some I did
every s
Saturday right there in downtown Los
Angeles see this is what I'm speaking
about so you gave those together with
those people you all
experienced something that would seem
impossible right I'm sure none of those
very few of those people who you were
working with probably thought that they
could actually make a
portrait of someone who in front of
them I think they probably thought they
could not do that that's just not
possible um and yet you gave them a
direct
experience of doing
something that shouldn't be
possible that they thought was
impossible and you gave it to them you
you gave them this together right they
they were doing it together
not just one onone not just one person
you know everybody had to do their
social service and and here's the the
the crazy thing because well these are
all adults and they're not you know not
well all sorts of uh M bad habits
whatever their health it might not be
good their mental state definitely crazy
of course and uh some of them would you
know be really nasty like oh well H how
is this a social service how is this
going to be make anything better and
then I would say don't don't you see you
just taught your hand to respond to
something your eyes looking at that
created this little Channel inside your
uh nervous system where all your muscles
are are con concentrating on that pencil
and that paper to proceed relating
something you're looking at and they
would still like say so what so what
what if so what if I learned to do that
and I said see from now on you can train
your eye to see your
problems and now you can solve any
problem because now you can see it now
you can see it before we were not taught
to see anything like you've mentioned so
many times people don't see the squares
everywhere right they're everywhere but
they don't see them because they're not
taught to see things and it would just
bring tears to their eyes because I
would say now you can create the life
you want and you need and solve your
problems and that makes you a better
person
see you teach
them people this is a better world you
teach them something about the
connection between their capacity to see
and their capacity to act and their
capacity to do something beautiful with
their
hands and that connection that three
that three-way connection is in a sense
what you were talking about earlier when
you spoke of
transmutation yeah that that's the proof
they've got the proof in their hand
they've got it and the person in front
of them is like you made my
portrait and sometimes they would
exchange portraits I mean it was so
cathartic to the whole class everybody
was just really happy and they would
return and they would give me updates on
their lives and it was just a lot of fun
but it it's something think that allows
people instantly to take control to
learn to see because we've been so
damaged like you said these vibrating
lights and all this
disconnection how can they connect well
they just have to let go for a moment
and and they were obligated on top of
that this was an obligation this was a
civil service obligation they had to be
there they wore their Sunday best and
they had no idea what they were getting
into something really beautiful here and
this is one of the things that I've I
always have um respected and loved about
you is that uh you know you are a really
beautifully harded human being and
woman and a thank you always uh felt
very privileged to to know you and to
see um the beauty in your heart and your
skillfulness and your
art um and I still feel this way today
but one of the things I just want to
mention is
that you were mothering those people
Natalia you were mothering
them they may have been adults
you were like
being
um like one of the people who might
guide you
across the river Le after you die right
but except you were guiding them back
across the other way you were guiding
them to an
anamnesis to a resurrection of their
humanity and their spirit and their
capacity to heal the eles and each other
and meanwhile they're asking how is this
a social service what I'm just drawing
pictures right yet you can see that this
art is
medicine and is
powerful and is beautiful and
profound and I just think that's it it's
really it's really important what you're
saying because everybody has the
capacity to be awful or to be wonderful
it just it's always there it's always
there but it's also very
painful to be
deprived of our
humanity and our
spirit and our origin and our mothers
and our fathers and our living places
and our siblings and our aunt
and our
creativity and that that's what leads to
addiction the the humans are trying to
repace
something that is absolutely crucial to
their
existence and has been essentially
vampiric stolen now I'm not saying they
have no role in its
loss but it's very easy to become
to become absent to
oneself and one's
potential once enough of what is crucial
has been sucked away by our by the
opposite of what I would call
culture and so one of the things I love
about the story that you just
told is in a way you're just doing I
think what comes naturally to you you're
playing um you're doing like the thing
that the woman in Greece who initiates
people into the Mysteries and she leads
them through the death and Resurrection
thing you're doing something that
actually resembles that you're
resurrecting
them in the midst of Los Angeles right
you don't have the ancient Greek temples
and stuff to to lean on right all you've
got is some tables and paper and maybe
some you know art
supplies but that's really beautiful and
I I just um I want to
celebrate the spirit with which you you
have
brought humans and places back to life
through your
art and your love and your thank you
thank you that that that's um I I
welcome
uh the kind
words because sometimes uh we we get so
involved in in in giving and doing and
and appreciation is always welcome I
think it's very important to
to do what we're doing right now because
I'm I'm sure there's going to be people
listening to this and I'm sure there's
hundreds of artists out there thousands
of artists that if they did that what I
did that that little exercise in their
Community or maybe on Thanksgiving or
between their siblings and uh I don't
know go places and and do just that
little exerc size and give people back
their sight and their ability to see
reality yes I think reality is fabulous
I'm not saying there's no horror stories
in it there's tons of horror stories in
it but what but without the beauty
without the ability to see and open open
people's eyes and and you mentioned it
many times how can we get together
well they don't see each other that's
why they don't get together they can't
they can't get together because they've
been taught to ignore absolutely
everything and around them and and
especially people they they run away
from people they're always scared they
watch so much television so much
stupid things I mean I I had a
production company at at what point in
my life and I realized how important it
is to
produce the right
content to get to stimulate in a
positive way and I I always wanted to
have an
animation and I didn't I now now that
the the chat chpt thing is just moving
right along taking everything it can and
I think it's too bad it doesn't have any
ideas there don't
Jus that's Such a
Pity I wish they did so there's there's
something I want to share about this
again there's a problem where
um all
right see when you and I come
together I I am lucky in that I am aware
of a lot of the features of our possible
Humanity that we may not commonly
experience
um and one of the things I would point
out is
that for one thing I I love the humans
I'm not a missing throat right which a
lot of intellectuals are they criticize
the humans I'm really sad about what
happens to the humans at their large
Collective scales but I actually love
the humans and I believe in them as an
organism the Earth has invested more in
humans than probably in any other
organism that is a complex one anyway
I mean the amount of investment that it
takes to just keep the humans alive is
unimaginable moment to moment um and
probably
unsustainable it's probably not
unsustainable to keep the hum alive but
it's unsustainable to keep a billion
machines going that's for sure um that's
for sure yeah I agree with you yeah yeah
I mean everybody's arguing like there's
too many humans well actually there's
too many objects right um there's you
know seven billion cars or something
thing and 12 trillion guns and who knows
what but anyway um so the humans they
are like
uh okay the humans are a topology
there's amazing humans and there's
amazing groups of humans and then
there's really bad groups of humans that
are you know deprived in like the like
the bad wolf or whatever or The Hungry
Wolf
but there are a bunch problems that are
really simple we're not
shown features of the nature of our
humanity and we're trained to a
colonizing mindset that poses us as
individuals what do I get what does take
what's being taken from me that's what
molieri was upset about molieri didn't
thank God for producing a Mozart in his
lifetime who he could study and learn
from and adore and
enjoy right which would be just as
natural a reply to the existence of
Mozart as any other reply I would
argue moeri decided that he was alone he
was a separate
person and what I'm reminded of
is a sort of a fairy tale that I made up
where there was a world that was made
for birds
but there weren't any birds on that
world what there were were separate
wings and they flapped around on the
ground a lot
complaining and and they had stories of
flight but none of them ever flew
because they never put two of them
together and formed a bird between them
and I think our nature is to actually be
thus we are an animal that needs each
other to explore and discover and to
block to to like fertilize and to
nurture our Humanity it's not a thing of
individuals it's not a thing of separate
persons and when you and I come together
to speak and explore and learn and
remember every time we do this we make a
beautiful bird together right my you
join your wing to my wing I join my wing
to your wing and there's a bird between
us and it's the bird of concern for our
planet and for the people and for the
sky for the living places and the
animals and the creatures and everything
everything alive right it's this really
beautiful spirit bir right and I believe
in that bird and I I don't believe in
the
individual and on top of that there's
there's this thing about feminine and
and and
masculinity that I can never think like
a man and and I tried because I had two
two precious sons and and they're
they're both boys their with their
boyish ideas but I discovered this
masculinity was was um threatened by
their own masculinity I mean men against
men that was
something I I couldn't I
could understand and and it keeps uh you
know your point of view enriches so much
of the things that I can't perceive
because of my femininity that is just I
can't stop it that's who I am you know
it's my Essence is this uh like you said
mothering nonstop nurturing is is just
something that uh comes out in an in
without any effort I mean it's
effortless I don't have to think oh I
should do this in fact I'm going to say
something here that's going to scare
people people but I don't think I think
I just do and it just pops
up pop up in my head I I can't say I
thought about them they just pop inside
my head and and like in architecture I I
can see the building already finished
inside my head before I even start
drawing and and those that's why I can't
say I think or I believe because the
things just pop in my head they're
they're already there or when you say
something immediately something uh this
Association or the capacity to associate
so many things like we were talking
earlier about the scary movies or the uh
Captain Nemo I mean we're going to have
to talk about Captain Nemo because I
have a lot of stories around this whole
thing I want to do
that what was a little was was related
to an Ocean City so we'll talk about
that some other time Darren we will but
want to get you started talking about
words and meaning of words yes yes okay
there's a few your your
masculine focus on this whole uh aspect
which is I find uh find important and I
find that I need to learn from you all
these uh sounds and vibrations and uh
yeah you got a lot of uh things up your
sleeve that I want you to
share so okay I want to go back over a
few of the things you just said and one
of them was that you thought it would be
frightening if if you told people that
you don't think and I just like to
suggest something here that I have
recently discovered so first of all I
don't usually think either the stuff
that I write it's not because I thought
it I wasn't sitting there trying to
figure something out like a math problem
and when I draw or when I write or when
I make music whatever it is I'm doing
I'm not thinking and also I would argue
that we moderns we are very confused
about what minds are for and and I'm
going to suggest that minds are not for
thinking minds are for
communion minds are for coming together
and making a third way of seeing that is
both of our hearts and our Spirits
joined together in a beautiful mission
that our ancestors and our children
would be proud of minds are for that
thinking is what happens to Minds when
they're being tortured by being isolated
and separate then you have the M
problem then you have
not it's it's
sal sal my bad yes thank you for
correcting me saleri yeah that's the
character no no no just just wanted no
that's an
important confused that you're
saying is another is another character
from another uh correct yes my my
mistake I'm getting old I been here for
about um two two
hours we we should get together again
and and we will wind down soon yes we
let me know when when you're available I
will we will wind down momentarily I
just want to share a few can wind down
and
uh I adore yes please the way you enact
your femin inity and I adore your spirit
and way in the world and I
honor and respect uh this about you I
think you're just a beautiful being and
I'm so grateful to learn with you and
see with you and hear your
experiences and your
insights um it's it's really a
treasure I'm so grateful for this time
together we will do this again sometime
very
soon um and I'm happy to hear anything
you care to share before we we wind down
for
today well uh it's been a great pleasure
every time uh We've uh encountered a few
words and uh maybe we'll make it a habit
of uh doing this I um I admire so much
the way you manag to create uh all sorts
of things it's just uh I I really I
really uh you've always inspired me a
lot to keep going you don't know this
because I I don't express it enough but
it's uh it is the the the the world of
ideas is the world of words and if we
don't use the words properly we can fall
into that category of uh
misunderstanding or
misinterpreting so much so much so that
people uh take paint their life with a
um this sense of hopelessness and I
think your work is full of Hope constant
and radiating with this sense of
togetherness and hope that is is out
there and uh it's being obliterated by
so many forces but you know like I said
they don't want to know my dark side
because I will use my light side with my
dark side to approach and uh set them
straight because this is too much too
much they're getting on my
nerves I understand and yes we should
fear the anger of the
mothers I think we will soon be
subjected to some of it as humans
because we've been as a species we've
been wildly misbehaving in the nursery
for a long time
now I think there will be some answer to
that I hope there will be some
answer Natalia you're amazing I'm so
grateful thank you time I'm grateful as
well thank you Darren it's really really
really uh a wonderful talk and we have
to do this more often all right we'll do
this again very soon I hope that you
have a beautiful rest of your time there
and I wish you wise dreams and amazing
experiences same here take care you too
bye bye for
now bye bye till next time my friend
till next care yes
