[Music]
how are you doing man it's been such a
it's been a long time it's it's been a
while yeah yeah it's been a while yeah
I'm I'm I'm continuing to improve it's
you know this
um I the long Co really did a number on
me so I'm still still recovering it's
been years but I'm still recovering but
a couple doctors contacted me um from
Australia okay and said that they they
thought from my symptoms they heard me
on a podcast and they said they thought
from my symptoms that the heart wasn't
the primary thing that had been attacked
but it was my gut that the um the virus
is a
bacteriophage and that it destroyed the
the bacteria that produced Gaba and
serotonin and other calming kinds of
things and and promoted bacter IA that
produce amines that sort of overdrive
the heart and lead to the failure that I
had and so that's so they put me on this
really strict diet vegetables and and no
basically almost no it's almost like a
total no carb kind of diet see that has
that have you seen an
impact yeah it's it's completely changed
my gut and I I actually it's making a
huge difference so so this is I mean the
virus attacks you wherever I guess
you're weak um and it it got me in the
gut in the heart geez man I'm glad
you're doing better though it's it's
always great to to know someone's doing
better and I mean we need you out there
to continue doing such great work well
well thank you and and we need you to
continue to do this great podcast and
and of course the medical work that you
do thanks so much Don I mean we've
covered so much we've chatted twice
already and both both times we went
through various different aspects of all
your work and the first podcast we spoke
about is interface theory of perception
we spoke about conscious realism uh we
touched on conscious agents but in the
second one we went very in depth
conscious agents in the subatomic world
we went into that paper we dissected it
people loved it by the
way yeah it's been it's it's been quite
a hit uh for this podcast I thought let
me curate a bunch of questions from the
audience so far from the first two and
we'll try each of them um but before we
do that I think since conscious agents
of the subatomic world what's happened
since cuz I'm assuming you guys are
having a lot of fun and it's it's always
exciting to when someone jumps and gets
outside the box to know what's what's
really outside the
box that's right so we have made a
couple for me very fun discoveries so
one has to do
with the notion of
observation what does it mean to observe
what what will it mean in our Theory to
for one system to observe another
in in you know classical physics The
Observer um is not much mentioned and if
they're mentioned at all they're assume
to be objective and don't really
interfere at all with whatever it is
that they're so they they don't disturb
whatever they're observing in quantum
mechanics um there isn't a theory of the
Observer but but it's it's known that
you know somehow the measurement process
um is a destructive process I mean
things are different when you measure
than you know when you don't and and so
there there this feeling that you know
the Observer has to play a role but it's
not formalized right the their
measurement is formalized you know some
kind
of there is a formalization there in
terms of positive operator Valu measures
and so povms and so forth but but you
know even someone like Chris fuks who's
saying you know that the that quantum
mechanics is really just um a
description for the agent how it should
up update their beliefs in in in light
of experimental data and so forth but
when you ask him so so what is your
theory of the agent he says I I don't
owe you a theory of the agent I'm just
telling you that quantum mechanics is
the manual that the agent should use and
I don't know what an agent is and I
respect I mean you can't do everything
and he's doing quantum mechanics and
he's not doing the agent he's not doing
the Observer but he does say that the
agent's important so so then in our
Theory then you know the question comes
front and center because we're talking
about conscious agents all the way down
so we we we can't avoid so when we talk
about a measurement we have to actually
have a theory of what does it
mean for one system of conscious agents
to make a measurement on another system
of conscious agents right what what does
that
mean
and we use so I have to be a little
technical to to explain the idea I'll
try to be as untechnical as possible but
we use marvian kernels so a markovian
kernel
basically says suppose you have um a
system that that can see three colors
red green and blue that that's what it
experiences there's a kernel that we
call the qualia kernel that describes
the sequence of color experiences that
this Observer might have so maybe if I
see red now the probability is that the
next time I see a color it'll be green
but maybe it's maybe it's half and it's
also a third that I'll see blue but it's
also you know whatever is left over
probability that I'll see red so I can
say for for each color I'm now
experiencing what is the probability of
the next color I might experience and
you can so when you write down a matrix
a a table of all those probabilities in
mathematics we call that a mark of
Kernel and it it's it's actually a
linear operator um and and you can
actually study the properties of the
linear operator it can rotate vectors it
can exchange you expand and contract
vectors it can do all sorts of things so
so that's the one of the models we're
using to represent observers and the
conscious experiences that they
have what we discovered
was and this is a new contribution to to
marov chain Theory apparently to the
mathematics of it is
that well first first what I'm about to
say is not a new contribution it's a
standard notion but we're going to use
it for the for the new contribution if
you take one markof chain like it has
three colors and and you've got the
markof chain on but then you say what
what if I you know don't look at the red
I don't care when the red I'm only going
to look at the green and blue and I'm
going to look at those two colors um
what Markov chain gets induced on those
two colors from the bigger Markov chain
on red green and blue right there's some
probability of going from red green blue
but what happens if I only can see the
green and the blue I'll get some chance
you know if I'm see if I see green now
that I'll see blue next for I see green
now I'll see green next so so I can
actually you can intuitively you can say
well yeah you should be able to induce a
marov chain on the smaller number of of
states right just from the but it would
somehow respect the bigger the bigger
Markov chain right so that's the idea of
a tra it's called a trace
chain well what we proved um this is
work with jayton Pros uh so he and I
worked on this together and what we
found is that the relationship of being
a trace chain to another markof chain is
a partial order that that means that it
we found a this is an entire Logic on
the space of all Markov chains all
Markov kernels so this is a brand new
logic one one
in one chain entails another if it's a
trace chain of the other that's that's
so I can the actual definition is simple
once I've told I can actually say the
def so one markof chain p is less than
or equal to Markov chain Q if and only
if p is a Trace chain of Q and you can
prove that that is actually a partial
order and it's a logic so it's actually
a logic on the space of all Mark of
Chains It's not Boolean it's it's more
General than Boolean it's more General
than
um Quantum Logics Ortho complimented
luses this this is more it's more
General than that it's locally buo so
every particular Markov kernel if you
look at all the ones that are less than
it the ones that that that are less than
it they form a Boolean logic so this is
a locally Boolean logic of
observation and and then we
proved that this if you
take so so by the way then this is our
notion of observation if one
observer's kernel or marov chain is less
than or equal to another then it
observes the bigger chain so that's so
that's how that's what so notice no our
notion of observation is not this
objective you're you're outside the
system no no you're you're immersed in
it you are part of the system you're an
integral part of the system that you're
observing so so at the top level that's
the the take-home from this our theory
of observation is the Observer is no
scientist that's separate from
everything and not involved in anything
and completely separate and can't and
can be ignored no no no no you are
intimately part of the system you must
be understood to to get a real theory of
observation in science you have to
understand what an agent is and how it's
embedded in the systems that it's
observing and this is this gives a
mathematical Logic for doing that so
it's really we're pretty excited but but
then each Markoff
chain
um if if if if you have Markoff chains
that are like recurrent communicating
class so they're some sense they're
they're nice they're nice Markov chains
I'll just use the word nice as a
non-technical term but I gave you the
technical for those who want the
technical recurrent communicating one
recurrent communicating class they have
then a probability measure that tells
you long term what are the probabilities
of the different states that you'll see
like what was the probability of seeing
red maybe long term you see red a third
of the time blue twoth thirds of the
time and green you don't see hardly at
all maybe maybe that's the longterm Pro
that's called the stationary measure of
of the of the marov chain and so it
turns out that when you have a big
measure and then a trace sorry a big
chain and and a trace chain that the
stationary measure of the trace chain is
exactly the Restriction of those of the
of the stationary measure of the bigger
chain to the that subset of states in
other words it's all compatible so you
have a big measure for the stationary
measure of the of the big guy and maybe
three of the states are what you trace
on well if you look at the the big guys
probability measure on those three
states
that's exactly what you get on the
little guy just renormalize so that it's
probability measure you have to
renormalize it so it's probability so
all of these stationary
measures are they follow through this
logic and so and it turns out this then
means that there's this this um logic
that we discovered on probability
measures that that I published 30 years
ago um and it's it's it's um I published
it with Bruce Bennett who's he's now
dead but a brilliant mathematician and
Parish mty who was a graduate student of
mathematics so it's two mathematicians
and and a flunky me working on this and
and well we published it in the Journal
of mathsy and what we what we proved is
that there was a logic and probability
measures where one probability
measure um implies another or entails
another probability measure if and only
if it's a normalized restriction so I
get the bigger probability measure I
take a subset of it States renormalize
the probability on that and that's the
probability of this guy down here it
turns out that's so it's a simple idea
you know I'm just a normalized
restriction of the bigger measure but
then I that's the implication relation
that gives you a non- bullan logic that
that's it's um there's no Global
complement just like in by the way this
Trace logic there's no Global complement
okay locally there is because you have a
local
Boolean um logic but globally not so it
turns out now this last thing I'm about
to say we haven't proven yet but we're
going to try to do that there's a
homomorphism of the Logics that the
trace logic is essentially homomorphic
to the what we call the leeg logic of
probability measures so this gives us
the trace logic gives us a formal theory
of
observation and the leag logic of
probability measures gives us a formal
theory of um probabilistic
belief and so putting them together with
this homomorphism shows how
observations are formly related to
probabilistic beliefs okay so this is
for us a major breakthrough in terms of
the formalism and and we had to go after
this because you know you mentioned our
our paper on the subatomic world you
know so conscious agents in the
subatomic World well we have
to say what we mean when we're talking
about modeling observations of quirks
and gluons inside the prot what what do
we mean well so now we have this we we
mean that we're going to be positing
some bigger Markov chain and our
observations will be some Trace chains
right of that bigger chain and the trace
chain will have two two ways that it's
doing this observation one is um the
number of states that it's tracing on
right so that's going to be one
parameter the more States you trace on
in some sense the the better spatial
resolution you've got right right so the
so if if I have you know if my big chain
has a thousand states that would be a
very big chain um at least for my
computer um and and suppose I I have a
trace chain that's only 10 States versus
another one that's 100 States versus
another one that's 500 substates of the
Big Chain right the one that 500
substates is in some sense a higher
resolution observation than the one that
only has you know 50 states that the 50
state one is is observing the big one
the big thousand State one is it is
observing it but not nearly with the
resolution of the you know 500 statement
almost like quantifying that sort of
objective it's it gives you complete
quantification and and for the physicist
this is this would be our quantification
of what they call Q squ which is their
technical thing for um spatial spatial
resolution it's tied to the amount of
energy that they use when the higher
energy leads to better spatial
resolution so what we're basically now
doing is identifying higher energies
with greater spatial resolution in our
Trace chains which is that that itself
is a non-trivial
statement there's there's a lot there's
a lot that said there obviously because
it's very complex and a lot of people
find it very difficult I've noticed a
lot of people find your theory so
fascinating and and want to jump on
board so badly but the math and the
physics become so complicated that they
just can't do it and right the only way
I can is when is by first obviously
chatting to you watching reading your
content but then chatting to friends who
are physicists trying to get their
opinion on on all of this and trying
from their perspective to understand
what you're talking about and the more I
do the easier it gets it gets to sort of
understand it but I still feel left in
the dark knowing that you have access to
more information based on the base of
knowledge you have within physics and
Mathematics have you felt that it's a a
bit of a struggle to try and get this
out there because of the complexity of
this topic you feel people find that
you're hiding behind these sort of fancy
words CU I've noticed a lot of people
comment about that um saying that okay
once you mention decorated permutations
or permutations or W you mention Mark of
blankets um you're just trying to sound
smart but but that's not the case
because when I chat to my physicist
friends they seem to know what you're
talking about a lot better than the
lay if someone thinks that you can we
have a paper called fusions of
Consciousness so you can just go look at
the paper fusions of Consciousness and
and we don't just mention the word
decorated permutation we actually we
actually create an we we actually create
a new mathematics of decorated
permutations for marov chains so so it's
it's not just handwaves we're I only
talk about it because we're using it and
we're using it to to to good purpose
I'll put a link to fusions of
Consciousness and I think that that one
came out in January if if I'm not yeah
in January that's right that's right
so I'll just mention that so I agree
with what you're saying that it's it's
difficult and I I try to talk about this
stuff in a way that's generally
accessible but the but the problem is of
course if you do that then people say
well that's not it's not serious and if
you and if you do it seriously then I
can't understand it he's just throwing
out these technical words so you're it's
a catch 22 but my my attitude is well
you know I do get um graduate potential
graduate students and this is one reason
why I do these podcasts and young people
I'm interested in getting young people
who are young enough that they can start
to learn the math and and and make
contributions get them excited and get
them you know studying this stuff I
spent an hour and a half with one
student potential student yesterday
talking about and gave her a bunch of
math to read and so so you know so
that's what I'm doing it for is to
actually get graduate students working
on their phds in this field um that's
that's my
goal I've noticed someone else has this
problem because when when I chatted it's
call friston we when I chatted to call
and and we spoke about his approach to
the free energy principle he has exactly
the same issue he's often accused of of
hiding behind fancy talk they sort of
say h so so it's you really are stuck
between a rock and a hot place you can't
how do you dumb down something that is
so complex do you find that there's a
there's a there's a specific way you
think that's best to approach the so far
have you hacked the code yet
well for for communicating it
um probably the the best approach that
I've seen so far to get people to take
this idea seriously to not just dismiss
it is to point out the failure of
physical his series yes yes right right
that that's that seems to I mean because
I'm I'm someone might say look you know
the brain does it forget all this stuff
about conscious and so forth mean look
at all the physical
it's clear we have all these neural
correlates of Consciousness um we're
we're almost there we're you know we're
getting these neural we got lots of
neural cor of Consciousness we have all
these nice you know we have integrated
information Theory we have orchestrated
collapse of quantum states of
microtubules we have you know attention
schema Theory uh
there's I it I think I already mentioned
integrated information so there's just a
bunch of these oh Global workspace there
is another another big one right so
Global workspace Theory so so um you
know why do we need someone who's is's
clearly often mov land talk saying
Consciousness is fundamental and and so
forth and so for me the thing that I
think is is the most grabbing thing to
say
is if you ask any of these theorists
proponents of these theories okay you're
integrated information Theory this is
the theory about conscious experiences
okay so you're you're starting with some
substrate maybe it's physical or some
other substrate and you have this causal
architecture that's got the right
pattern of integrated information and
you're saying that that will explain the
the qualia of specific conscious
experiences the color green the taste of
chocolate the smell of garlic um the
experience of um auditory Space versus
the experience of visual space or the
experience of haptic space as as as
conscious experiences so
which so clearly you've been at this for
a couple decades so you must have a
whole bunch of conscious experiences
that that you can now say this is the
pattern of integrated information that
must be um the taste of chocolate so so
so give me what what have you
got zero yeah and you go you go to Every
Theory and you ask them so what have you
got how many qualia have you given me
the global workspace architecture for or
the orchestrated collapse of quantum
states with neuron microtubules or
integrated information you know Q what
they call the q- shape how many how many
do you have zero in every case so we
have these theories that have been out
there for decades decades now that are
batting
zero and I'm saying they're batting zero
for principled reasons SpaceTime the
physicist the high energy theoretical
physicists are telling us SpaceTime is
not fundamental and reductionism is
false these theories are failing because
they're not listening to Modern high
energy theoretical physicists that are
telling us that that game is over we're
playing an old game it's like someone
after Einstein trying to play the
Newtonian game in understanding
chemistry yes good luck you can't
understand chemistry using Newton you
have to use quantum mechanics I'm sorry
I shouldn't have said Einstein so there
some Quantum so don before you move on
from that I've because one of the
questions one of the questions from the
audience so I gathered a bunch from
YouTube Twitter Etc um unfortunately
sometimes I forgot to actually write on
the person's name so I've just left them
all out together so I'm just going to
ask you them at random but one of the
questions was directed at one of your
statements because you've said this
before you you talking about the taste
of chocolate talking about the smell of
garlic this person says that whenever
you mention those specific States they
want to know why do you want such a
direct
portion of Consciousness so let's say
when you're asking for that qualitative
qualia experience of the taste of
chocolate why go after a specific State
because everything in the mind is so
blurry so mismatched there's so much
going on there's so much let's say
heuristics
involved wouldn't that be a bad approach
to trying to provide proof of a
theory well all I'm doing is is saying
to the people who are off offering these
theories like the integrated information
Theory or Global workspace whatever
they're the ones that are saying we will
start with neural activity or this Q
shape or and we will give you conscious
experiences like that mean we will give
you these experiences I'm saying okay
that's what you're promising to do so
I'm just asking you yes since that's
what you said you're going to do yes um
I'm just asking you how how how's it
gone and by the way I asked Julio ton
this back in late 1990s he came to UC
Irvine to our hel Holtz club meeting and
I asked him that and um he didn't have
any then and then I asked him a few
years ago in Canada at at a conference
asked him again and he admitted he
needed to offer one and he and he
couldn't and and i' same same with um
you know Stuart Hammer off I mean I had
him at a conference in front of four or
500 people I asked them you know so
steuart how's it going I mean you're
promising that we'll start with these
orchestrated collapses and you'll give
us specific conscious experiences so
which ones I mean that that's what you
claim that you're doing so how many
conscious experiences have you nailed
down and I had to push him for what
three or four minutes before he finally
said because he was Heming and hming and
I said no no no steuart give me one no
steuart give me one and he finally said
no I can't give you one so so I'm
just now if if if they want to say you
know we have these wonderful theories
integrative information Theory and they
have nothing to do with the taste of
chocolate and the smell of garlic
fine then then I won't ask you the
question but if they do say that then
hey this science is science where's the
beef so that's that's why I do Don I'm
curious about your opinion was it about
it was about two months ago I think
about the
IIT Suare I mean that was was such a
major issue within the philosophy
community and science community in
general what were your thoughts on that
uh just for the context for the
listeners it's it's the whole debacle
where IIT was a accused of being
pseudoscience right that's right and and
when I looked at the um the letter that
was put out there and the references
that they gave one of the things they
referenced was Michael Graziano in a
paper of his on um attentional schema
Theory where where it basically says a
theory of Consciousness is either
mechanical or it's magical and so the
the signers of that were basically
signing on to look a theory of
Consciousness is either mechanical
presumably neur mechanical but maybe AI
kind of mechanical but but most of them
are thinking neuromechanical
right um or it's magical and so what
what so the argument is that
IIT is claiming some kind of substrate
Independence there is a substrate so
that it doesn't say that Consciousness
is fundamental it says there is a
substrate to Consciousness but the
substrate might not be physical of
course they're they're thinking it's
physical right that's I mean if ask him
so what is so how many non-physical
substrates are you you know have you
concentrated have you thought so what
are you going to say ectoplasm I don't
know what so so but anyway they're
they're they're saying that there's a
substrate but they're not committed to a
neural put it this way there not
necessarily a neural substrate it could
be some kind of computational
architecture that's completely non-
neural so so I don't think they're going
non-physical but they they could be
going non
neural
and so
that means that they're they're dealing
with something that is it looks like a
disembodied mathematical causal
structure right although the IT people
would of course say it has to be
instantiated in something so the
substrate is is is
important but
somehow they think that because it's not
they're not
tying they're not starting with
neurons they're not starting with with
neural circuitry or something like that
and trying to show that that leads to
conscious they're starting with
something more abstract and and not
necessarily mechanical it's it's not
like this fires and that fires and we
have this circuit and so forth it it's
more abstract mathematical kind of thing
so I'm TR just trying to explain the
kind of get in the heads of the people
that are there worried about this
they're
and so they're they're concerned
about that now my my attitude is I think
that all of these
theories have the problem that I just
mentioned which is there's no beef
there's no no success in in the in terms
of specific conscious experiences and
and and what's happened is all the
physicalists I think that they're
starting to understand that they're not
they have nothing in terms of concrete
conscious experiences that they can
explain without handwave they're zero
they're forming a circular firing
squad right they're they're shooting at
each other and and everybody's
vulnerable to the the the objection that
I just gave yeah the objection is you
claim that you I start with integrated
information or I start with you know
higher order Theory now now we're doing
the neural stuff high order theories or
first order theories or Global workspace
Theory and I'm going to give specific
conscious experiences which one oh I
can't give you any right now how long
have we been doing this decades we've
been doing this for decades you can't
give you one so so at some point people
get impatient and and and go you
know now now I should say I'm good
friends these are these are my friends
and colleagues right I so they're
brilliant some of them are geniuses all
of them are brilliant and some of them
are
geniuses why are they not making
progress there're is not because they're
not smart they're brilliant they're
they're not making progress because
we're not listening to what the high
energy theoretical phys physicists are
telling us SpaceTime is doomed and
reductionism is false we have to listen
to our best current science it was fine
30 years ago to assume that SpaceTime
was fundamental and reductionism is the
way to go in fact it was the right
approach given our current science at
the time but it's no longer it's no
longer feasible it's
ignoring it's it's frankly just ignoring
our best science and that's not what we
want to do so my prediction is as soon
as these brilliant colleagues and
friends of mine really understand that
we need a new framework and they switch
I think all of a sudden we'll make some
serious progress on this field and we'll
look back and and realize that we're in
sort of the Flat Earth period of of this
field and as as long as you consume Flat
Earth you can't do a space program as
soon as you let go of Flat Earth then
you you start to have the tools that you
can that you need to actually start
doing a space program so you mentioned
Michael Grano he was actually when he
was the first person I interviewed on
this podcast and this it feels like ages
ago but I remember him saying that if
you take attention schema Theory and you
plop it on top of um Global workspace
theory he believes that together it
actually would provide a very com
complete
Theory Of Consciousness but I can't help
but think based on the fact that he's
saying that based on the fact that they
used is either mechanical or magical do
you think it's it would be similar to
compare Michael's Theory and Global
workspace if they continue to do as well
as they do separately and maybe even
together to be the Newton's theory in
physics or Newtonian physics of the
brain and then while you guys are going
on to sort of do the Einstein's theory
of Consciousness do you think you guys
are going to approach Consciousness in
that sort of
way well yeah now I should be very very
clear that I think that the work that
they're doing on getting models of the
neural corelates of Consciousness is
brilliant and useful and that will
survive right but it's not a theory of
the generation of Consciousness it's
it's a a theory about how we see
Consciousness um correlated um with
parts of brain Aria
but so so so I'm all all for that now my
understanding about Graziano is at least
in some of his writings I've gotten him
I gotten the impression that he thinks
that that conscious experiences is in
some sense an illusion we have the it's
not you know there aren't really qualia
but we have the illusion it's a car he
calls it a caricature he he actually
intentionally avoids the word
illusion right so so if if if yeah so if
he doesn't want to use the word illusion
um Keith Frankish does so Keith does use
the word illusion and and if you know
Michael wants to use you know caricature
that that's fine but as a scientist my
my feeling I'll say first about the
illusion
approach with and I've said this to I
mean Keith is a great guy I really enjoy
talking with him pH he's a friend and so
forth but I i' I've pointed this out to
him and he hasn't demurred um that you
know saying that it's an illusion
doesn't get him off the hook
because we now need a scientific theory
about what specific pattern of brain
activity must be the illusion of the
taste of chocolate and could not be the
illusion of garlic so so you might think
oh well now that they said it's an
illusion they don't have the problem
that Hopman bring up no no no no no they
have you we have to do science here if
you're saying it's an illusion I want to
have a precise scientific theory about
why that has to be that illusion and
couldn't be you know the this other
illusion I would for they call it the
illusion
problem that's that's right and I would
say the same thing you know um from
graciano if it's a caricature then why
should this particular brain activity be
the caricature of the color green and
not the caricature of the color red I
mean I want to again as a scientist I
don't want to handwave and I don't want
to say because I called it a caricature
I don't don't owe you a scientific
theory I mean I'm I'm I'm not
interested I'm interested in results M I
want a theory whether it says it's an
illusion or a caricature or the real
qualia I want a theory that that gives
me the beef and says this pattern must
be this caricature and it couldn't be
that caricature
otherwise I mean I'm philosophy is fine
I have a joint appointment in philosophy
I love philosophy but I'm talking
science here and so I I want a
scientific theory so so that that's sort
of my attitude about that whole thing
yeah and I think but what I was trying
to get at was it will still be very
useful and and it will actually work in
the sense that in in the same way
Newtonian physics works because we still
use it it's still very practical it's it
it's just doesn't go away so in that
sense it will still be very very good at
its
job I I agree and and and but also
you'll have some with Newton you have
some misconceptions you have the idea
that well I should be able to get the
position and the momentum at the same
time to arbitrary accuracy when I'm
looking at stuff right so so you're led
to believe certain things well that
turned out to be false and and so so the
so the absolutely Newton is great if you
want to send a rocket to the moon it'll
work and and for for a lot of everyday
stuff but but sometimes it leads you
into conceptual errors like position
momentum I and something like these
physicalist theories I think they will
be very very good for the neural
correlates of Consciousness and so forth
but they're going to lead to some they
are leading to what I think are
fundamental errors and I'll I'll name
one that I think is is a crucial
error they want to make a distinction
between which circuits of the brain or
which physical objects in general are
conscious which ones are not so they
they want to they want to use IIT in
hospitals to determine whether someone's
a vegetable or not you know should we
pull the plug or not so that that's
something that you as a doctor are quite
interested in I'm sure yes and and so
they're making they're making the
assumption
that some physical
systems are associated with
Consciousness and others are
not that's that's their assumption okay
now if if it turns out that SpaceTime
isn't fundamental and objects in
SpaceTime are not fundamental in other
words if we listen to what the high
energy theoretical physicists are
telling us and they're saying that there
are structures outside of SpaceTime and
they're finding them like amplitud
hedrin and decorated permutations
what is spacetime it's not the
fundamental reality anymore in objects
in space time or not so now we have to
understand what is that and so what I'm
proposing is that SpaceTime and objects
in SpaceTime are just a
headset just an interface so think about
it that way so here I'm I'm I'm using an
interface to talk with you and I see I'm
using zoom we're we're talking via zoom
and I see a bunch of pixels on the
screen and I see pixels of you know T's
face and I see also pixels of a of a of
a wall behind you now I'm getting a lot
of conscious input from the pixels on
your face I mean I can see your
expression I can see if you're
interested or not the pixels on the wall
not much now I could say aha so I want
to have um the the the pixel corelates
of Consciousness aha so these are the
conscious pixels the ones on and those
are the conscious pixel and and the ones
in the wall those are not conscious
pixels and so now I'm going to have I'm
going to have my little mathematical
model these pixels are conscious and
those pixels or not because these have
some complicated pattern of interaction
and those do not well that's completely
wrongheaded pixels are pixels period
some p and they're not conscious or
unconscious they're they're a merely a
headset an interface some pixels give me
access to a conscious conscious behind
the zoom and others don't and and so
when you realize that that's so that is
a fundamental difference here right if
if we use something like integrated
information Theory which is saying
certain physical systems are conscious
and others are not I'm saying that claim
is absolutely
false and it's dangerous to assume it in
in hospital settings so this is this is
no academic yeah so now this goes beyond
this is very practical this becomes very
important for us as society and and
that's actually the main when I started
the podcast um one of the one of the
description layers was this podcast's
function is to show just how difficult
intellectually and practically the Mind
Body problem is because the moment you
do finally figure out whatever Theory Of
Consciousness you want to develop and
grow it has so many practical
implications and in this case I mean
you're touching on on a very very big
one I mean death we're talking life and
death at this point absolutely and
pulling the plug or not and and it's if
if the foundation is so wrong that it's
actually it's it's at the level of
saying these pixels are conscious and
these pixels are not is that that kind
of error then then we we have to be very
very careful about it so so so this is
not just academic anymore saying that
SpaceTime as a headset has real real
implications moral implications and
technological implications ations and it
it also has implications for the whole
debate about can AIS be conscious right
this gives you the standard way that
that's considered and and again it
brings up all sorts of moral questions
that people are worried about but the
way it's thought about is we have a
physical system that a priori is not
conscious somehow if we give it the
right kind of complexity computational
complexity it will be
conscious well that's exactly the same M
AK is saying if I get the right kind of
complexity in the zoom pixel activity
it'll be Consciousness no it's not it's
just so certain Zoom pixels give me a
portal into tev's Consciousness and
other Zoom pixels on my screen don't
give me any portals into T's
Consciousness the pixels are not
conscious or unconscious it's about the
headset and how it's engageed to what's
beyond SpaceTime what's outside the
SpaceTime and how
it's effectively or not effectively
giving us access to what's beyond
SpaceTime the whole point of a headset
is to simplify things and at some point
you're going to simplify things so so
much that you can't really say much
about it right when I look at you my my
interface has given me um a portal into
your Consciousness that's that's good
not not perfect even if you've lived
with someone you've been married to
someone for 30 years you find out that
there's things you don't know right so
it's not a perfect portal but when I
look at my cat the portal is even worse
and when I look at an ant it's even
worse and a microbe it's even worse when
I look at a rock my my headset is given
up because headsets are there to
simplify things at some point it has to
give up so it's not that the rock
is it's not that like the T human body
is conscious or not conscious and the
rock is conscious or not it's just that
these are symbols that give us portals
into a pre-existing Consciousness or not
in the case of the rock my idea is that
we're interacting with Consciousness all
the time but when I see a rock I'm not
getting much insight into the
Consciousness that I'm interacting with
it's not so I'm not saying the rock is
conscious it's not pan psychism so I'm
not I'm not a pan psychist headset is a
headset Consciousness is consciousness
I'm not saying that you know see most
pan psychist are thinking that that
SpaceTime is
fundamental particles are fundamental
but behind the equations of physics and
behind the particles breathes fire into
the equations and life into the
particles is consciousness inside
SpaceTime but but we'll keep the same
laws of physics and so forth you know so
Consciousness is sort of almost along
for the ride but the the laws of physics
are really doing all the I'm I'm I'm
having I'm good friends with Philip gof
and and we we have good discussions on
that and Philip has said to me that he's
he's willing to let go of SpaceTime but
but we we'll see you know I'll push push
to to let go of that and if he does I
think we'll be very very close in our
views but so you know I think that well
I think I'll just stop there I'm going
to Chet to Philipp and I think Jan of
Feb I can't remember when we scheduled
it but I'm going to ask him about this
I'm going to see how close he's gotten
to to that sort of conversion but I'm
glad you're touching so as it stands
done you're touching on some practical
stuff at the moment and and this is what
I sort of premised a lot of these
questions on which is great because I
think that these practical implications
of understanding this headset or
understanding this virtual reality this
matx whatever people want to call it
it's pretty much the same thing you are
saying that this this world we're living
in is a sort of simulation in that sense
it is a virtual reality some people love
using the word Matrix just to be clear
it's not the same type of Matrix as from
the movie but nevertheless the word
Matrix seems to be now synonymous with
simulation in this virtual reality um
let me just go to this question that I
have for you how do mental health or
mental disabilities
work within this sort of framework does
your work now give you a sort of I know
you have to now almost become a
philosopher and and sort of maybe even
guesstimate certain aspects of this
because it's very difficult to go
outside this box already uh and to go
even further Beyond SpaceTime to Now
give me mental health theories is going
to be even more difficult but just out
of curiosity what what is it is it a bug
in the actual virtual
reality what's on
you
well so the way I think about it is that
there space and time and what we see in
space and time is just a headset and
behind the headset is this realm of
conscious agents so that's that's
another part of the antology that we're
proposing I'm not saying I'm right I'm
just saying I'm trying to be precise and
got to say something specific so I'm
saying that there's a vast social
network of conscious agents that in some
sense probably are ultimately I'll
realize that there's one conscious agent
and this network is just a nice analytic
tool that I have to use as a scientist
so I'll talk about there's one conscious
agent but I'm using this network because
that's what I need to use to do
mathematics so that one conscious
agent what is it up
to and why right I don't know so we
guess but one one possibility
is um it it's a theorem that no system
can ever understand itself completely
MH if I have a computer system and it
wants to understand itself it has to
build a model of itself well as soon as
it builds a model of itself now it's
more complicated so now to understand
itself the new self with the model is
going to have to model itself with a
model and you get in this infinite
recursion so so maybe what the maybe the
the the one infinite consciousness which
transcends any particular instantiation
Like A Spacetime instantiation or
whatever you know we have a three
dimensions of space one dimension of
time what about a 50 dimensions of space
in in in one dimension of time I I can
see s million colors why not 20 trillion
colors and new in other words this is
just one possible form
instantiation that the Consciousness can
use out of it out of an infinite
potential to to look at itself so what
what Consciousness is up to is looking
at itself from different
perspectives and then losing itself in
the perspective ident so identify so I'm
I I'm now identified with the Hof and
body I think I'm only you know I'm just
that I'm nothing more and I'm afraid of
death and and the whole bit and then
slowly waking up and realizing oh no no
I I now know myself because I know I'm
not Hoffman and I'm not I'm not so all
the stuff that I thought I was and I
immersed myself you know both feet I
jumped in with both feet on this
thing and spent 70 years 80 years 90
years and then woke
up and and now I know myself because I
know I I know myself better because I
know I'm not
that knowing Yourself by a bunch of
negations and and so now so now from
that point of
view the one can know Itself by being a
paraplegic or
having um you know Alzheimer's or you're
having you
know all you know any any kind of mental
disease you want some kind of nervous
breakdown I just have nervous breakdowns
all the time or you know whatever it
might be or I I also experience myself
as being uh you know the the world's
fastest Olympic runner yeah know and and
and the world's Einstein I'll and then
I'll wake up but I'm not that either I
that's so in other
words essentially even behind someone
who looks completely
debilitated is this infinite
Consciousness just looking at itself so
so in that point of view everything
deserves equal respect right so there's
there's a moral aspect to this which
which says when I see someone who has an
IQ of
50 there's no difference between me and
that when I look at my cat it's I am the
same one Consciousness that's also
looking at me through the cat those are
just different avatars of the one
Consciousness from this point of view so
what what happens from this point of
view
is there is no grounds
for putting barriers between me and
anybody
else this actually says I am that just
looking at it through a different
interface and this I think is the
foundation for a genuine love that love
is recognizing it's not just loving the
other as yourself it's recognizing that
the other is yourself it's you the
infinite Consciousness looking at
yourself through a different Avatar yeah
it's it's you see this sort of play out
in a lot of ancient cultures as well
where let's say someone goes out and
hunts for food they kill the animal and
they sort of pray to it um hug it uh do
a sort of sing songs around it because
they know they have to eat this being
that is sort of still part of them and
this this is quite a quite a recurring
theme um with religions with with sort
of spirituals uh
spiritualists and I've noticed a lot of
idealist theories in general tend to
lead to this
uh that's right I was I didn't intend to
go there which is quite
fascinating
I mean I I was just sort of led by you
know if I'm going to assume that
Consciousness is fundamental and I start
it's one step after another and I sort
of LED Kicking and Screaming to this but
but now that I've gone there it it it it
starts to make sense it's so
counterintuitive but but but that
counterintuitiveness might just be the
the you
know the one jumped in with both feet
and it it let itself get completely lost
in it in other words if you're really
going to know that you're not that you
have to believe that you are it for a
while to really let yourself believe it
and then wake up and then you really you
you took that very very seriously you
really understood what it meant to be a
t or a Don or or you know
Michael Graziano or whoever it might be
you know you learned what it meant to be
that and you realize I'm not that I I am
this Consciousness that transcends that
it's it's like when Bernardo talks about
this dissociated altars I mean of a
universal mind berado castr when he says
it's pretty much the same thing that
Universal mind and we're just these
avatars or dissociated altars of the
same sort of entity there is no
separation here at
all that's right so I'm pretty much on
the same page with Bernardo on on on on
most things one little wrinkle that we
add though and it may not be just a
little wrinkle is that this Trace logic
that I mentioned at the
start is the first formal structure I
found outside of SpaceTime about the
structure of the one
and it's a non- Boolean logic and
there's no Global
compliment so this is the first hint
I've gotten of of a structure and I'm
not saying that our our this is the
final word about the structure of the
one absolutely not it's but it's the
first baby step and the first baby step
in terms of a mathematical model of
quote unquote God yes the one uh is
already blowing my mind because it's not
clear what the word one even means if
this
thing is not a Boolean logic there is no
like one top Marian kernel so so I I use
the word one but right now when I use it
already my math is telling me Don you're
gonna you're gonna have to think deeper
that the word one doesn't there that
that whatever kind of unity that is is
not a trivial unity and it's not a
bullion logic by any means so what do
you mean by the one so so already the
math I might be using the same words
that the religious people are are using
have used for thousands of years yes but
already the math is telling me this goes
way way deeper than I'd ever imagined
and and probably way deeper than the
human mind because of the interface
limitations we have yes could ever
understand that look because that's
another one of my questions at some
point I mean how how far do you think
you're going to get done knowing that we
are limited in
and we're never really we never really
evolved the capability to perceive truth
I mean we know the difference between
proofs and truths um if radicality how
close do you really think that this will
take
you
well weakness sorry I was gonna say
that's always a tough question I mean
when we know that we're so limited it's
it's so difficult for us to really go
beyond anything further and deeper um
does that does that ever keep you up at
night well
um I think about it quite a bit um I try
to do it during the day
um the here's one important aspect of it
though and that is what is the nature of
scientific theory building what are
scientific theories what what do we mean
by scientific theory a theory in science
says please grant me these
assumptions and if you grant me these
assumptions and I can make them
mathematically precise so I'll make
these assumptions mathematically precise
then I can derive and predict all these
wonderful
things and and so that's and and and if
you do it right the mathematical
description of the theory will tell you
the scope of those assumptions how much
that they can really do their power and
they will the it'll also tell you the
limits like Einstein's special Theory
and general theory of relativity they
they tell you it's great scope the
mathematics tells you it's incredible it
predicts black holes and all this it's
amazing Stu it works really well it also
tells you when you combine it with um
Einstein's contribution to Quantum
Theory E equals H new um when you
combine that with that it tells you that
um SpaceTime is doomed at 10 the minus
33
centimeters so it tells you that
Einstein's theory his beautiful Theory
it tells you the scope and the limits 10
Theus 33 that theory dies 10us 43
seconds it's over so now you might say
well of course that's true of any Theory
but I can now give you a deeper theory
that explains those assumptions of of
the theory that you just so I'll give
you a deeper Theory absolutely you can
always get a deeper Theory but your new
deeper Theory will have its own
assumptions and this goes on ADD
infinitum so my my take on it is science
is one of the best tools we have and I
do I'm doing science I love science
and
science after billions and billions of
years if we continue to do it for
billions and billions of years the
fraction of knowledge that we would have
about reality is precisely measure
zero precisely measure zero and yet we
have to do
it we can never with science write a
theory of everything so when we talk
about a Theory of
Everything real scientists do it with a
win and
yes right it's it's a theory of
everything so far and and so far is
pretty
trivial so so I I think it's in
principle the case that scientific
theories can never be a Theory of
Everything But but they can tell us
their limits that's what's powerful
about science the the the theories of
science tell us their limits like the
theory of evolution by natural selection
actually entails that space time isn't
fund Al and Einstein's theory of space
time entails that space time isn't
fundamental these theories tell you
their limits right because evolution of
natural
selection the way Darwin was thinking
about it is talking about organisms in
space and time competing for resources
in space and time and when you look at
evolutionary Game Theory it tells you
that the very categories of space and
time and objects are not the fundamental
reality those are just headset
categories so it tells you its
limits I think what our theories
do that's That's essential is they do
tell us truths about the particular
perspective that our headset gives us so
science can give us truths about our
headset there's an infinite reality of
Consciousness that transcends any
scientific theory but we can look at
different perspectives on that
different possible headsets right now
all of science has been looking at a
particular space-time headset three
dimensions of space one dimension of
time 10 Theus 33 cm it's over with it's
a fairly cheap headset we thought it was
the final reality it it just turned out
to be a knockoff cheap headset and and
but now we've learned the tools inside
the headset we studied the headset we
thought we were studying the truth it
was just a headset but now we have the
tools we can step outside the headset
and imagine other headsets and imagine
and and that's all my theory of
conscious agence is it's just a
projecting model of of Consciousness
it's no longer taking SpaceTime as
fundamental it's taking Consciousness as
fundamental but I'm recognizing I can
never get a theory of the ultimate
Consciousness let me start off with
little networks of conscious agents
because I can model that and that's just
G to be a projection at Best of the
deeper reality so that's what so every
question you ask I mean the answer is
not
trivial
we science can never get a theory of
everything but we can get good theories
of projections of of reality yes and
then just to put a a spiritual Twist on
it but you are that reality you are from
this point of view and in some sense you
can know it firsthand by just letting go
of any Theory and letting go of and just
being so when you just sit you know in
meditation that is the closest you're
going to get to what transcends any
scientific
theory it's it's incredible because you
because I obviously I've chatted to you
many times and I know how you think and
I can tell well I don't know exactly how
you think but I know how science-minded
you are and how much it must perhaps
annoy you when you're clumped into
categories of thinkers when you are
actively doing science because I know
that I there are many people are on this
channel who have the same problem the
moment you step outside any sort of
status quo you you're automatically
grouped together as as either some sort
of a hippie scientist or a spiritualist
thinker and they give you these labels
that I think are unwarranted and for the
most part unfair um and someone who has
a similar issue is is Thomas Campbell
because when I spoke to him your
theories are very similar and one of the
questions I wrote down here and he he
really hates this because he's trying
his best to not be Associated any form
of religion um sort of Dogma because he
does try and explain things outside of
the realm of what we say quote unquote
is normal um the question I have here is
and this is not from me this is from one
of the
viewers where does Thomas Campbell's
Theory start and Donald Hoffman's Theory
end it's they're just trying to ask
what's the difference between these two
different types of virtual realities you
guys are talking about CU they're both
very similar and yet they are very
different I think this person obviously
does not see the greater detail in
them right so I I did have a
conversation with Tom and so I could
actually point out there is a podcast
where Tom and I go into this in great
detail so I I can link yeah yeah I'll
give you the link to it so so so I'll
just give a short answer because that's
um there there I mean Tom and I go at it
for an hour or two so it's very friendly
of course very friendly but but but um
so he has he calls it my big toe Theory
Big Theory of Everything and so I just
given you
my theory of everything what that means
and so so I at the very end of our
conversation I I I pushed him on I said
look there is no such thing as a Theory
of Everything wouldn't you agree and he
ultimately he he he agreed there is no
Theory of Everything so initially I
thought that that might be a big
difference between us but um but I I
really wanted to find out I mean do do
you really believe Tom that you've got
the final word on truth with your theory
because I don't if if you if you do
believe that then then my theory is
utterly different from yours because I
think all I've got is a little tiny baby
step um outside of our headset and
that's all I've got and I'm I'm never
going to have a theory of everything um
so so
we
now the difference I see between US just
in terms of practical Theory building is
he's using a lot of quantum theoretical
ideas is in in his approach right A lot
of it is using he's got Advanced um I
guess he didn't get his PhD but he's
done Advanced research and and advanced
study graduate study in physics you know
I think he does I think he's in new does
he have a PhD yeah in in in nuclear
physics yeah okay so he does have a PhD
nuclear okay good so so he's he's he's a
genuine you know PhD in physics um and I
think that that his he's trying to use
um Quant
Theory sort of quantum ideas are
foundational in in in what he's trying
trying to build and from my point of
view again the high energy theoretical
physicists in the last 20 years are
telling us that not not only is
spacetime doomed quantum theory is
doomed that they're saying that quantum
theory will arise joined at the hip with
SpaceTime and and
so
you might say well you know there's all
this weird stuff about quantum mechanics
there's no cloning theorem you can't
clone Quantum bits there's superposition
there's entanglement this is all weird
weird stuff and and this this is surely
showing us something deeper about maybe
a conscious reality Beyond SpaceTime and
the answer appears
that from the work of Chris fuches on
Quantum basanis and and Roberts beckin
his
model of quantum
physics all of those weirdnesses of
quantum theory no cloning theorem
superposition entanglement all that
stuff is simply a symptom of incomplete
information if you have incomplete
information about the state of a system
those those all follow as theorems well
when I say that SpaceTime is a
headset that means incomplete
information your headset is there to
chop down the information that's the
whole point of an interface is to it's
it's too complicated out there so let's
dumb it down well so quantum mechanics
in all the weirdness of quantum
mechanics is merely a symptom of the
fact that SpaceTime is
doomed so it's not going to give us so
quantum theory by itself is not going to
take us outside SpaceTime quantum theory
has its weirdnesses because it's tied to
the limits of SpaceTime so what's
different between my Approach and and
and Tom's is and and most by the way
most um people who are trying to use
some kind of modern physics to do some
kind
of exploration of of Consciousness
they're tied to many of them are are
quantum is it right and and and I'm
saying not if you believe the high
energy theor theoretical physicists it's
not it it's going to arise from deeper
structures and and and by the way it's
not a handwave
so they found like the amplitud hedrin
yes is the structure outside of
SpaceTime it's a real structure it's
published you can go read about it its
volumes give you the scattering
amplitudes of real processes in in
SpaceTime much easier than doing findan
diagrams in SpaceTime hundreds of pages
of findan diagrams two or three turn
into two or three terms you can do by
hand and there are no Hilbert spaces to
be seen anywhere in the amplitud hedrin
and therefore there is no quantum theory
and and the physic like Nar con hemed
and these guys who were doing this are
very very clear there is no quantum
theory here this is beyond SpaceTime and
quantum theory unitarity which is you
know one of the key things we can talk
about unitarity I mean there there are
some who argue that unitarity is not
essential to Quantum Theory but most
physicists would say it it is unitarity
and
locality um are
are products of this thing but they're
not built into the thing they they can
give it to you in the projection but
they are they are outside of of
SpaceTime and they're outside of quantum
theory so so it's you can see that the
difference maybe at at some level Tom
and I are our concepts are similar but
the spirit in which we're doing things
is very very different I'm saying I'm
I'm letting go of quantum theory
entirely I'm letting go of SpaceTime
entirely and I feel like that Tom is
still saying let me use the tools of
quantum theory and and the most advanced
physics we have of of
SpaceTime get my model of Consciousness
I'm
saying we really have to jump outside of
the headset all together yes now I agree
with you because I I I found that
question quite redundant in the sense
that there are clear differences in the
way you guys approach it I think where
you guys do start to sort of become
similar is when it starts becoming a
virtual reality and when and when you
start talking about that but but then I
have another question from someone and
this question is directed at both of us
actually um of a critique for the two of
us it says in our last conversation on
conscious agents and the subatomic world
uh tev tev you and Don do not Define
information and this should so the
person's basically it's a very lengthy
comment goes on to say that we didn't
clearly Define the term information and
since your the work eventually goes so
much into a sort of a virtual reality a
a sort of Matrix simulation information
becomes a key word here do should we
clarify that for this listener just to
make sure they
understand right um I use Shannon
information that's so people who've
studied information theory if I have um
it's it's it's all about probabilities
and and it's basically if something has
probability P then it's minus log p is
so Shannon information now I've been and
then when I use entropy I'm using the
standard you know Shannon notion of
entropy from information Theory so so
this is I'm just using standard and and
um standard information theoretic stuff
I I've
explored Solace entropy so there there
are
generalizations of Shannon entropy that
that and and some arguments for this so
I've been exploring them but I haven't
used them yet and I if I'm forced to I I
may there are Arguments for for showing
that that the notion of entropy that's
used in in Shannon information Theory
may not be as general we need in certain
cases and and there are are more and one
is called Solace entropy I think so so I
am playing with that but but in in my
conversations with you when I've said
entropy or or or information it's
Shannon okay good the next one is if
we're just
avatars within this virtual
reality what is the concept of
procreation what what purpose does this
serve in the creation of other avars and
does this even work inside of
SpaceTime right
so what what's what's interesting is
that from this point of view our headset
gives us certain portals into the deep
Consciousness Beyond that's what the
headset is for too so right now I my te
um icon on my headset is giving me a
portal into T's Consciousness or that
that that projection of the one
Consciousness the T projection of the of
the one Consciousness so we know that
our headset does give us portals into
Consciousness and the question is what
technologies might there be that we
could use to create new portals into
Consciousness right well we have one
technology that we know and that is
having babies that is that's one
technology for opening up new portals
into Consciousness
so so why would from
so there a couple questions related to
this so why would the one Consciousness
use this procreation kind of approach
toward toward toward you know doing this
and I would say that
it's first I should say I don't know but
but I'll give you some ideas right right
um humility is is is required at every
step of this right until we have a
scientific theory where we making
predictions you know disclaimers every
but
at some point I think we will be able to
reverse engineer the headset and
understand this notion of portal that
I'm talking about quite precisely and
we'll understand a little bit more how
procreation Works in terms of boting up
new new new portals and we'll be able to
build artificial portals we we'll get
technology to build artificial portals
to the Consciousness behind we we'll
actually understand what kind of
networking of conscious agents is
required to effectively Bridge into our
interface into our into our common
headset so but but at the top level why
is the one doing this it goes back to
what we talked about before which is the
one is trying to to know itself and it
can only know Itself by knowing what
it's
not so so to keep having experiences and
having and opening this up to a sort of
Multiplex of different um experiences
overall which goes into the other
question that I have here which is did
in this framework then with dinosaurs
and all sort of extinct species and
creatures fall into this sort of process
have these all been avatars as part of
an experience of the one of the one
exactly they would be you might say well
why did the know the one do that and
then throw them away and you know what a
waste of time and and that gets the
whole notion of time itself is an
artifact of our
interface so in our so so a lot of our
intuitions are tied
to artifacts of our headset so in our
Marco dynamics of conscious agents the
Dynamics need not have increasing
entropy there need not be an arrow of
time in the Dynamics outside of our
headset but it's a
theorem that if you take this marov
Dynamics in which the entropy is
constant it doesn't
increase and you make a projection by
conditional probability so you're losing
some information you you see the
Dynamics you see a dynamical system but
it's lost some information over the the
deeper dyamics the projected dynamical
system will have increasing entropy and
so it will have an arrow of time as a
not as an insight into reality it's it's
not an Insight it's entirely an artifact
of the loss of
information and so and by the
way time is the fundamental limited
resource in evolution if I don't get
food in time I die if I don't make in
time I die if I don't run away from that
dinosaur in time I'll be eaten so so
time is the fundamental limited resource
and what I'm saying is that time is an
illusion it's an artifact of the headset
so the entire so on the one hand I I've
I've published papers on Evolution and
evolutionary Game Theory where I I love
the theory of evolution it's an
incredibly powerful Theory evolutionary
game theory is beautiful and inside the
headset there is no better theory of
biological organisms than evolution by
natural selection it's
brilliant that's being
said the theory itself all of it is an
artifact of the projection none of it is
deeply
true it's only true in our headset and
for understanding Dynamics in our
headset there is no better scientific
tool than evolution of the natural
selection and I've used it but but our
mathematics tells us that the whole
thing is an illusion so and so I should
maybe stop there there's a question some
people ask me which is I you know I use
Evolution to show that we don't see
reality as it is but then that means
that Evolution wasn't true so how am I
not shooting myself in the foot yeah so
if if if we have time at the end we can
go after why I'm not shooting myself in
the foot so don't within this headset
and having this headset on can I take it
off
I think yes how and I think in the
meditation process when you when you
literally and and
most myself included are not great
meditators
but I try my bit I hear about yeah I try
a bit but I do hear about people that
that I trust that
that go to places where you you let go
of the headset for a while you just
literally let go
death the near-death experiences that
people report uh you know the Raymond
Moody I guess and
and the tunnel the light tunnel and Life
review and that common thing I'm not
saying that that's that's right but but
it's suggest suggestive that um and it
certainly fits in with the ontology of
this conscious agent dynamics that that
that I'm working on that in some sense
um everything that perceive is just a
headset and death is just taking the
headset
off that's all it is you we I I tried
that but you know if you're playing a
virtual reality
game and you believe and and it's a it's
you've got an avatar in the game you so
it's a first
person perspective in the if you
identify with that Avatar if you really
believe that that Avatar is you you're
going to be nervous and and scared and
everything that happens to the Avatar is
going to be but if you if you don't
identify with the
Avatar um you can enjoy the game and if
you get if your avatar gets shot up who
cares um you just take the headset off
and so so I think that it is possible
maybe in meditation maybe Hoffman hasn't
done it so I'll just tell you up front
I've not gone there I've meditated quite
a bit so so maybe I'm just a you know
spiritual flunky who
knows science flunky and spiritual
science and
spiritual people that I trust
seem to have had those experiences and
my own Theory says it's possible even
though I I myself haven't experienced it
let's say within this kernels of or or
from from the physics from this from
your mathematical side let's say you
leave the headset now would you have to
first go via each pathway in order to
get to sort of the one or like would you
see someone else between them I'm not
sure if you if you understand what I'm
trying to say that's a really great
question and I've really wondered about
that myself because there are some
spiritual Traditions which talk about
mean I was I was I was some tutu warrior
in in my previous life or something like
that you know and and so I've wondered
if there's any way that I could make
sense of that in my my framework of of
conscious agents is there some kind of
like if I take the network ideas
seriously are there parts of the network
that I could say that are sort of closer
to this particular headset the the
Hoffman headset maybe there are other
headsets that are closer to that headset
and that's it may it may be possible
that there um and even though ultimately
time is an illusion it could be like we
might be able to explain that illusion
in terms of um projections of these
headsets and so forth so so I can't rule
out the possibility that our Theory will
eventually take these um non-precise
ideas and make them
mathematically um precise and and maybe
even um interesting so so I can't I
can't rule that out that's uh that's
very fascinating a that's that can be
quite a rabbit hole to go down
through do you think that well another
thing that could lead to is sort of
reincarnated experiences in general I
mean let's say you just you sort of
leave that headset and maybe just enter
another one altoe um I mean it it opens
up the door to sort of all those
spiritual claims that let's say Hindus
or Buddhists sort of have it kind of
Prov a scientific grounding for these
beliefs in a
sense that's right it's it's basically
the the what I was saying earlier is
what what you're saying is basically uh
the one looks through the headset of an
amoeba and of a virus and of a bacterium
and and you know of of a Hoffman and a t
and and and every possible headset a cat
they're all and they're all legitimate
ways of the one looking at itself and
enjoying that view and then
recognizing I'm not that I'm more than
that and dant how would you
differentiate between something that's
an avatar and something that isn't so
like a virus for example we're not a lot
of doctors can't even well people can't
even agree whether it's life living or
dead um at what point is an avatar and
Avatar in this framework would you say
what is the what is minimal amount
needed to be an avatar that's that's a
great question because it really exposes
an important concept here and that is in
this framework the distinction between
living and
non-living is not
principled just as the distinction
between conscious and not conscious is
not a principal distinction the
distinction that we make between living
and non-living is an artifact entirely
an artifact of the limits of our
interface okay it's not principles so
I'm always interacting with living
Consciousness I'm always interacting
with it and my
headset in is dumbing things down
because I'm not that's what I'm doing
I'm looking at myself through a
projection so when I see a
rock it it's fair enough within my
headset to say it's not alive it's is
perfectly fine you for everyday
practical purpose I'm not going to try
to eat the Rock and so forth I'm not
going to worry about the rock chasing me
and so for practical purposes I can say
it's it's not alive but it but the
distinction is not principled I'm always
inter when I interact with a rock I'm
interacting through a headset interface
icon namely The Rock I'm interacting
with
Consciousness I'm not saying the rock is
conscious this is not pan psychism of
that kind the rock is not conscious The
Rock like the Zoom pixels right the the
zoom pixels are just zoom pixels they're
they're not conscious or unconscious
they're just zoom pixels the rock is
just a rock what am I interacting with a
living Consciousness always so now
my my
interface can give me more or less
information about someone else's
interface with with with other humans
yes I know firsthand what a human
interface is
like this interface so I have some some
idea what it's like to be you and then
you as a doctor if you're dealing with
patients with psychological problems you
have some insight whereas if if you're
dealing with a mouse um you might not
trust your insights from The Human
Experience in terms of understanding the
psychology of a mouse right you just
don't have the insights into their
headset that you have into the human
headset well so when I see something
that I call a virus I have some hint in
my interface of something that that's
like alive but my my interface is giving
me almost no information about another
interface so so interfaces have
information about other interfaces that
is more or less
complete um and so with a rock my
knowledge of interfaces is is basically
gone to zero okay yeah so so that that's
just beyond that
interface's um access at that point
right that's exactly
right that also Mind by the way things
that look really stupid to us like I see
some worm crawling around it looks like
really really
stupid Hey for all I know what I'm
interacting with there if I could
actually if I could get inside and
understand what it was experiencing what
it might it might I might just want to
fall down on my knees and worship it
because it's so much smarter than me and
and Brilliant than me yeah again what I
can see about others is just due to the
limitations of my own headset and they
what they are in themselves and what
they're experiencing could possibly blow
me away if I if I ever so so you can see
this this this point of view leads to
all sorts of radical
took me decades to even understand what
what it could mean because I'm so used
to thinking inside the headset I know is
very very mindbending it's it's almost
like sort of a taking the blue pill at
some point
and like leg sort of leaving reality
altogether because as someone as people
two people who firmly love science so
ingrained within it um and if someone
just has to pop in right now and just
Shadow and watch us I mean they'll think
completely out of it um right this
conversation is completely out there
will be and all you you can think is is
that you just haven't taken the blue
pill
yet that that's right but What's led me
down this this blue pill path is the the
mathematics and the science I've been
LED Kicking and Screaming the whole way
Ian I but and and so I understand when
when anybody has an objection I
completely understand I had that
objection and the only reason I'm saying
when I'm saying is that um I had to go
with the
science it's just plain the fact that
our best science tells us A Spacetime
isn't fundamental and when you wrap your
head around that SpaceTime and objects
in SpaceTime are not
fundamental that's what our best science
when you that is the start of the rabbit
hole and that's not an LSD induced
rabbit hole that is a scientific based
rabbit hole and I've been chasing the
mathematics and going wherever and
that's what you have to do as a
scientist you have to be Intrepid
and be willing to let go of Flat Earth
be willing to let go of Newton be
willing to let go of Einstein be willing
to let go of quantum mechanics and be
willing to let go of SpaceTime you've
got to be willing to let go of all of
it and go into
it yeah at what point you mentioned that
the the one I mean you spoke about this
earlier and I think we should at some
point round back to that and just touch
on it more because it seems like quite
some fun work that's happening at this
very moment but you you mentioned that
it at that point you and Bernardo just
diverge a little what at which point
exactly does it happen why is it that
your version of the one within this
Trace chain is something that would make
you two guys clash in your
views
well I'm not sure that we would Clash
too much but but I Al I'll say where we
might have some some differences and and
again you know bernardo's a brilliant
and a good friend and if if there's
something where we differ
philosophically I I defer to him because
he's he's a real philosopher and I'm not
right um
but Bernardo has recently um been saying
that there is a way of interpreting
integrated information theory that would
be compatible with analytic idealism his
his yes his View
and and I I I I'll look forward to
having having a conversation with
Bernardo about this because you know
he's he's brilliant and and so I'll
probably stand corrected with what I'm
about to say but but it seems to me that
that integrated information
Theory um does assume that there's a
substrate and they're very explicit I
mean one of their in the for their IIT
4.0 paper I I looked and and substrate
has mentioned dozens and dozens of times
so not just it's not a minor thing
substrate is is front and center
now if I gave you a theory of SpaceTime
and I said but there's a
substrate to SpaceTime then then I would
assume from that that you're saying that
SpaceTime isn't fundamental because
there's a substrate to it right so if if
if I if SpaceTime is fundamental then
I'll just talk about space time I don't
need to talk about anything deeper than
that no substrate to it so if I'm
talking about a theory of
Consciousness and I want to say
Consciousness is fundamental well then I
don't need to really be talking about
any substrates I mean Consciousness is
the final substrate in that theory so so
this is what I've like to talk with ber
Bernardo about and I'm sure I'm sure
he'll have some something that will you
know make me think deep but so I'm so so
with all you know he has a good friend
and he's brilliant so I'll be interested
to do it but my attitude right now
is a theory of Consciousness that's
scientific and in the spirit of analytic
idealism doesn't need any substrate for
the Consciousness you just
posit the the nature of that
Consciousness and no you don't posit any
substrate and you don't need to posit
some combinatorial properties of that
substrate like the integrated
information causal properties of that
substrate that quantify how much
Consciousness there is
Consciousness is
conscious you don't quantify it's there
you can quantify how much access you
might have to the Consciousness through
a particular headset but Consciousness
itself is just Consciousness it is
fundamental and so so to to so in IIT
there's always this thing we talked
about earlier that um these circuits
there is no consciousness in them and
these brain circuits and these circuits
maybe they do have Consciousness that
whole thing of assigning Consciousness
to substrates neural substrates in this
case is wrong-headed it is is just
completely wrong so so that's where
again I'm I'm sure I'm going to learn a
lot when I talk with Bernardo about this
I I really just learned about his views
in the last couple three last month or
so on on this so that's why I haven't
had a chance to really talk with him I
also it also cot Me by Stone because I'm
I'm scheduled to chat to him I think in
in a month's time and and we spoke about
a few months ago and when we spoke it I
had no idea that he would that that view
I also had no clue that he would go down
that viewer either it was quite strange
to me as well and and I'm curious and
I'm Keen to ask him as well yeah I'm
gonna ask I'll ask him as well I'm sure
he'll have something really good to say
and I'll I'll try to push back on this
you don't need a substrate and see what
he says I I'll try the same and I'll
also let him if if I speak to him first
I'll I'll I'll let him know without
causing any sort of debate but Bernardo
loves to debate by the way he he he
prefers when when someone actively
debates in a respectful manner though in
a respectful manner right exactly as
long as it's respectful he loves he
loves the debate he he enjoys it he he
actually told me the last time please
actually be more more Stern and strict
to the
questions well well I like sharp
discussion in the sense that that it's
intellectually on point and and and deep
yeah having it be personal I don't I'm
not interested in having it be personal
that's at all me I told him I'm I was
trying to just be nice and relaxed for
the podcast I just try and make it a
nice calm environment um but I'm Bern
I'll just say that he's brilliant
mathematically and I've I've asked him
to join us and work on the mathematical
side of this and I I I want to do that
I'd love to get Bernardo because he's
got the mathematical jobs to actually
work with us on the serve conscious
agents and show analytical idealism
through the through the math of
conscious agents but we'll see I mean
yeah I mean to get a PhD in engineering
and philosophy you must you must know
your stuff there there must be something
going on there that that you're able to
kind of bring these two Fields together
and give you and give people quite a
unique perspective at least um abolutely
on reality feel unique yeah I think he
he's very busy with the Essentia
foundation so I see them doing quite a
lot of work lately so um probably just
like you probably a lot of on your
plates uh don in this virtual reality in
this reality is there anything you want
to call it by the way um do you prefer
calling it the virtual reality what do
you prefer calling it I just I think
headset is the easiest for most people
space time it's just a headset and I
think that that I say that because it's
everybody can sort of relate to that
okay within this headset with how does
this headset account for I mean we know
time now based on this is an illusion uh
but then how do we count for the
beginning let's say let's say the Big
Bang within this
headset how is that conceptualized
within this
framework well so the time itself of the
Big Bang is an illusion so what we have
is a mark of Dynamics in which the
entropy is not
increasing then we we say so we have
this big Markoff chain there is no time
but now let's look at it from a
perspective let's let's do a trace chain
so I talked about we started off talking
about so let's take a big change let's
do a trace CH well we've lost
information well so now we're going to
you know um we're going to induce an
arrow of time and it's going to look
depending on which Trace J use might
look like the big bang and then you know
lifeless evolution of of galaxies and
stars and so forth and then life and
then Consciousness and might look like
that um but
that's the entire story is an artifact
of the projection and it's not a deep
Insight it's it's it's fascinating
because me trying to ask you what
happened before the Big Bang is kind of
like me asking you
what may what happened before the one or
what what is that something you're even
thinking about at any point well
absolutely and and by the way I should
say that what I was the answer I just
gave about the projection and big bang
just being artifact I actually want to
actually do that I want to actually
write down a big Marian konel in which
the entropy is not increasing choose a
projection and then show wow when I look
at it through this projection look at I
I do get this weird thing seem to be
evolving and and growing in other words
this is not a handwave I am proposing
computational model there is this there
is a marov Dynamics Beyond SpaceTime
which the entropy is not increasing take
any projection of it where by
conditional probability you're Trace
chains or something like
that the the entropy will be increasing
study those study all the different ways
that that can happen our universe with a
big bang will just be one of the
possible kinds of ways that the univer
so in other words we can study cosmology
from this point of view we can we can
understand you know right now if you
take SpaceTime as fundamental then the
notion of the the big bang and the
singularity is is an unsolvable problem
what do you do with it but but if you
realize oh no no that that's just a
headset projection of a deeper thing in
which there is no Singularity I've
erased the singularity that's what this
mathematics is I've erased the
singularity and showed you you get the
singularity because of a projection not
because of the deeper the truth of the
deeper reality so this is not so I don't
want people to think it might have sound
like it was just a hand wve no I'm
offering a technical computational Yes
program the same yeah exactly that's I
mean that's the biggest difference
between a lot of other idealist
theorists is that you're you you're
using computational I mean you're using
mathematics and physics in a in a very
precise manner to try and show people
what you're talking about I mean
conscious ages in the subatomic world
you you came with that very strategic
knowing that this is the core layer of
reality according to us and the way we
perceive it and that's why you guys
wanted to touch that base reality um and
you said you don't want to go straight
for the neuron because that that is a
bit it's a lot harder there's a lot
there's probably a lot more that's going
to have to go into that do you have a
sort of a hierarchy of what you think
you want to go after um from the
subatomic worldall I mean we just
mentioned going into cosmology at some
point anything in particular that you're
kind of taking these mats into at some
point or or spearheading into in the
future well yes right
now what I'm working on is
a specific technical problem which is
we've mapped a marov Dynamics into
decorative
permutations physicists have mat
decorated permutations of positive grass
monion into scattering amplitudes so um
I want to tie that whole thing together
so what I'm working on right now is
interfacing our decorative permutations
with the decorated permutations and the
gr monans of the physicist I I've got
got to get that map absolutely precise
So and I've been working on that and I
gave two proposals to my colleagues in
the last three weeks and and they're
both wrong but they're both a piece of
the puzzle but but I put them out
thought I thought no no it's wrong so so
I'm work so I'm realizing I have to dig
deeper I'm G have to really study these
positive Grass monans more deeply and
write down a more serious so that's what
I'm working on right now is is because I
then want to be able to Once once we
have that then we can do our
computational um experiment about quarks
and gluons we have we have to show how
we can go all the way from the Dynamics
of conscious agents through the
decorated permutations to scattering
amplitudes and properties of particles
so this so that's why I'm focused on
this technical issue right now markof
decorated permutations mapping to gran
decorated permutations clean technical
problem and I'm working on it and I'm
not a mathematician so I'm I'm having to
learn about positive grass onions and
I'm I'm just learning as I go but but
I'm motivated so that's what I'm going
after now but then I my guess
is I'm a cognitive neuroscientist and I
would love to be going after the brain
but the brain is I don't know 10 to the
50th or 10 to the 60th quirks and gluons
whatever is maybe I should start with
two or three quirks and
gluons yeah you know and work there and
then and then work up to you know
protons and and protons
electrons do the nucleus and atom and
then maybe some simple molecules um then
maybe by the time we get to molecules
maybe we'll know enough to actually know
for example about
neurotransmitters what what what does a
neurotransmitter mean in terms of the
Dynamics of conscious agents and but
ultimately we'll have to get then to you
know axons and and neurons and synapses
and and you can see we have a we have to
reverse so the problem is we have to
reverse engineer a headset we thought so
Neuroscience is far harder than we
thought we thought that we look inside
through microscopes and we see billions
of neurons and syap trillions of
synapses and that's really complicated
we think that that's the truth no no no
that's a thin veneer on the complex the
true complexity is far far greater let
me give you just a taste of the
complexity if I have a conscious agent
that has just 10 color
experiences I'll say say 50 color
experiences 50 color
experiences you can actually you can
perceive six million or 7 million
different color you can discriminate six
or 7even million so this is Trivial 50
50 colors is nothing compared to what
you can
do in our theory of conscious
agents the the the set of of possible
Markov chains for Consciousness is
dealing with just 50 colors is the mark
of polytope on 50 states okay it's
called a mark of polytope in 50 states
and this is a pol it's a geometric
object that we have to study to
understand the all the Dynamics of
consciousness and it has little vertices
on it like a diamond it's got little
points on it right on it's got facets
and edges and and
points you know how many points this
with only 50 colors you know how many
points this geometric object has it has
10,000 times more points than the number
of particles in the known visible
Universe wow that's incredible that's
only for 50 so so um I'm going to need a
bigger computer to to simulate this
stuff but so so conscious so we thought
that the brain was complicated it's
trivial compared to when we when we let
go of the head see the headset was there
to really dumb things down and it
succeeded it really dumbed things down
we thought we were seeing truth that in
all of its
Glory we we got the really dumb down
cheap version as soon as we start taking
little steps outside of our little
SpaceTime headset holy smoke the thing
just blows wide open consciousness is
unbelievably complicated and I'm going
to need a new desktop computer and I
think the worst spot about it is that
even as you go on because I mean the
irony is that you'll probably need
quantum computers to to try and help you
prove that you can go beyond Quantum
which is is quite funny but uh I think
something that's that makes it even
worse is that you have people like Mike
Len who are even showing you that you
don't have to even go to a neuron to
show people what intelligence or a
possible even is in that sense I mean
he's bluring the lines completely with
his
work his his bioelectric fields are are
truly stunning it's amazing his work is
so fast
brilliant I've enjoyed talking with him
I have a couple podcasts with with Mike
and now you you're lifting this position
where these Biel electric networks also
have to sort of some at some point be
explained now absolutely it and he's
leaving you with much harder task I
would
say that that sounds like a little a
very fun task to understand the bi
electric fields and how they would arise
as an interface projection of dynamics
of conscious agent networks right so so
absolutely this is it's going to be fun
to reverse engineer our headset our
SpaceTime headset and bi electric Fields
will be part of it neurons will be part
of it DNA all all that so all in some
sense science is just now taking off the
the headset in some sense we're just now
beginning the real task of science right
now we just polish the tools on our
little headset we thought we were seeing
the truth no we were just sharpening our
tools now it's time to take the headset
off and really get to work on on what's
beyond it's pretty exciting yeah it's
almost like a post realism um it's a
there's going to be some term for it
post realism there's going to be
something uh where people are now moving
beyond this headset if they're going to
try and figure out reality in this way
something sorry or maybe it'll be Pro
realism in the sense that we thought the
headset is not the real thing that's
just that's just a headset now we're
getting into the realism but but but
even but see but our discussion on on
the limits of scientific
theories means that even though I'm
saying we're going outside the headset
and science is really just begin
still scientific theories will never be
a Theory of Everything humility is going
to be required at every step because
yeah we're stepping outside the headset
but effectively we've just moved to a
bigger projection yes of the one all all
we can never deal with our our bigger
and bigger projections of the one and no
matter how big our projections are they
will be literally measure zero of the
one so so is required I'm glad you
brought I'm glad you brought it back to
that because I wanted to ask you I mean
you started off by talking about the
stress chain figuring out the one and
and this new
information if you can just try and sort
of conceptualize this what you think
this is the one what what type of is
there any way for you to wrap your head
around this do you think you
can
um in a way I think we all can in in the
following sense if it's true that you
are the one experience itself through a
headset and the reason that you
don't feel that is because
you're in with both feet on the headset
you you really believe that you are the
Avatar in the headset and that's part of
the whole game I mean the part of the
whole game is to completely for the one
to completely lose itself in in the
headset and to slowly wake up if if I
don't really believe it for a while it's
not going to be real for me to say I'm
not that because I never really took it
seriously so I need to take it seriously
and then let go
so I think it is possible
even while we're still having these
avatars in the
headset through meditation to let go and
but but to the mind so this is now where
it starts to sort
of go with what spiritual Traditions
some have said and that is that the
truth can't be understood by the mind so
no words are adequate no scientific
theory is adequate but you have another
access to that realm that's not a
conceptual access it's direct you are
that infinite intelligence that's what
you are and any concept that you
have of yourself is only a
projection necessarily so the only way
to answer your question is
to of course I do my science and But to
answer your question to really go deep I
have to let go of all of my Concepts
including all of my scientific theories
completely no no
thoughts at all so literally a space of
no thoughts no conceptions and just
aware of aware awareness of
awareness and then I think that's where
you then begin to know yourself not as
you know an external object but you know
yourself directly and my guess is that
that goes infinitely deep in other words
if you do that for five
minutes you you experience that for five
minutes you've not scratch the surface
yet try it for 500 years you've not
scratched the surface yet that's how
deep you go so that so somehow the the
Deep answer to your question is on the
one hand we know the one by looking at
this projection and doing all of our
science and we know the one by doing
that really really carefully and then
saying I transcend that I'm not that I'm
that is a lower limit on my capabilities
and I that's not that's not the limit of
who I am then we can go beyond that by
letting go of all thoughts and just
being the awareness of awareness and
that goes infinitely deep and so you can
know it directly but the mind will
say because there's no concepts for the
mind to deal with so the intellectual
mind will say that's the there's nothing
there but but frankly my own experience
is that if I want new ideas to do my
science I need to go into the space
where I let go of all Concepts I need to
actually tap into that infinite
intelligence and just be in absolute
inter interior silence that's where all
the good ideas come from then you bring
them back in so so the mind really isn't
I mean it has its own little limited
intelligence and you can do you can do
mathematical computations and so forth
but if you
want deep insights you got to let go of
the mind yeah so we so we are one
infinite intelligence yes yes well when
sorry Don I'm not sure if I I haven't
really picked up on you saying this much
but when did you start calling it the
one uh I was influenced by federo
fine so so Federico is a good friend and
and and and
really he's a wonderful man and and he
helped support this research for and he
talked about the one he didn't give a
mathematical model of the one um and of
course you can't but he talked about the
one and and and I you know at first I
didn't use the term but then I I I
realized
that AR my mathematics was pointing me
toward the idea that there was going to
be not just a network of separate
consciousnesses but I was going to have
to recognize that yeah they can combine
and ultimately there there's some notion
of one and so I
decided that that was sort of the least
tendentious word that I could
use and but I don't think right now that
I have a mathematical model of the one I
have a mathematical model of projection
of the one in terms of conscious agent
networks um so so that's why I started
using the the term the one maybe the
last few years I sort of of filtered in
when I was started thinking more and
more about the deeper structure of this
network of conscious
agents so do you think the there is so
so the ultimate purpose at this point
then is the one the one sort of
experiencing while having multiple
experiences via US the avatars in this
infinite sort of some Essence Beyond
SpaceTime that's right enjoying those
experiences and then learning what it is
is by by learning that no matter how
exotic and impressive those experiences
are they're trivial compared to what the
one is yeah and then do you think done
with that in mind if you had to take
take certain other theories that are
physicalist like the mult well they go a
bit beyond that when they think about a
Multiverse would would a Multiverse in
this context to be the
others and maybe there's one in this
universe and then there are others in in
sort of other universes do you well one
could interpr
so there's of course a technical meaning
of Multiverse um you know that phys some
physicists have and also many worlds
there's different kind of technical
thing there but one just at a top level
one could
say the the idea that I have of multiple
headsets could be sort of like multiple
un
mul Multiverse kind of thing possibly
but
um when you get real technical about I
mean like Max tegmark has you know his
level four Multiverse which um he so so
so it's it's different now from what I
just said right I was saying we could
think informly about all these
multiverses being just different
headsets and there's an infinite variety
of them so that that's top level
connection to your idea but but getting
down more to Brass tax like what what
real physicists are using Multiverse for
like one concrete example is Max TEEG
Market at MIT his level four Multiverse
he's he's saying that mathematics is
fundamental
reality okay so the fundamental nature
of reality is is entirely mathematical
and there's an infinite variety of
possible mathematics and so there's an
infinite variety of mathematical
universes and so he and and I I agree
that there's mathematics is endless it's
it's it's infinite but I don't think
that
mathematics you of course I think
techark is brilliant and know in this
realm I would probably be set straight
by him but anyway here's my idea as as
as it is that when it comes to the
nature of reality
Consciousness what is the relation
between mathematics and
Consciousness my feeling is
that mathematics isn't the whole thing
that the Consciousness the living put it
this way the living organism of
Consciousness has mathematics as like
the bones but the bones are just the
bones they're not the whole living
organism and and they're they're
essential mathematics I think is
essential but it's not the whole of the
living organism of
of of Consciousness so that's sort of my
feeling about how conscious my My Views
fit with like Multiverse kinds
ofs it's fascinating to me how
it's becoming so poetic over time I mean
the more you you're obviously talking
about this so much more lately and
you're trying to get people to
understand it and it's it's starting to
slowly develop its own sort of moral
practical significance as you have to
build on it and apply it um did you ever
foresee yourself becoming someone who
will sound so spiritual almost Guru
likee in in your
life no I mean it's it's sort of I've
been push Kicking and Screaming um I can
tell this kind of thing by by the
mathematics and but but on the other
hand you know at some point it's it's
time to quit kicking and screaming and
and just say hey this is what the next
step in I mean physics is telling us
SpaceTime is over and quantum theory is
not fundamental so get over it move on
and so physicalism is dead okay get over
it you know we it's time to get over it
and and now on the other hand might say
am I jumping in full you know with both
feet to spiritual traditions and Des
buying what they say absolutely not I'm
having respectful conversations yes so I
listen respectfully and and carefully
and I I treat what I hear from spiritual
Traditions the way I treat what I hear
from scient scientists yes I listen
respectfully with a big grain of salt in
science and in spirituality that there
is nonsense in both Realms and there is
deep wisdom in both Realms and it's up
to us to take what looks good turn it
into so spiritual Traditions I think
have a lot of insights and there's CLE
clearly a lot of nonsense mean they
they're famous for Wars that kill each
other for for thousands of years so so
they have deep insights and there's deep
dysfunction and the the issue is to
understand which is which and to and and
maybe for example it may be that many of
the spiritual tradition traditions
themselves are very
deeply onto something but the
practitioners don't understand and
they're the ones that are doing The
Killing right it's not the it's not the
philosophy or it's not the insights that
the gurus have had it's the misuse of
them by the the followers that that's
the problem so we have to be very very
careful and don't dismiss the philosophy
based because some some followers start
doing some nasty things so so there's
pitfalls everywhere see so as a
scientist what what what I want to do is
to listen respectfully to the
ideas
um then look for mathematically precise
statements of the ideas ones that look
interesting
right and then turn them into testable
theories
ultimately spiritual Traditions tell us
that their words are just pointers right
like the TA Ching the very first
sentence in the TA Ching says the to
that can spoken is not the true
towel once you understand that then you
can go ahead and read the rest of it
because now you understand that
everything that's said is not the truth
it's not to be taken dogmatically it's
to be taken as a pointer for you to
explore for yourself so it's not about
so you better say it exactly this way or
you go to hell kind no no no no this
these are all pointers take them in the
spirit of pointers you you have to
explore for yourself
so so the spiritual Traditions have said
that but wouldn't it be nice to have
pointers that tell you their own limits
right and that's what science gives you
yes you have SpaceTime it's
mathematically precise and you know what
it falls apart at 10 Theus 33 cmet we
can tell you where that pointer falls
apart this is the antidote to dogmatism
so what I would love to
see is that this the Precision that
we've got in science is brought over to
spirituality so that we now can have
pointers in the spiritual Traditions
that are that that are evolving it's
it's it's it's nothing to boast about
that I'm using the same pointers that
they used 3,000 years ago I wouldn't
brag about that I would say that's a
problem I mean we we would like to have
this thing evolving and get get better
pointers and pointers that in themselves
tell you the limit the the scope of the
pointer how it's going to be useful to
to you and the limit of the pointer so
that we don't then fight over the
pointers and and kill each other over
the pointers you don't believe my
pointer well you go to hell that kind of
thing I mean d this is a this has been
such a fascinating conversation because
I mean it's different from the first two
in the first first one we we went into a
lot of detail in all the theories second
one we went into a paper directly as I
said I tried to make this one as as
practical
or almost a moral philosophy aspect of
all
and uh I mean you even you you're brave
enough at this point clearly from all
the work you've done to even mention the
word The L Word I mean the love word in
science people you know how some
scientists get when you say the yeah um
just talk to me about this this bigger
picture meaning and how people can take
all this information because now we've
got two podcast episodes they can look
at they've got all the others you
mentioned as well you speaking to Tom
you speaking to Bernardo um everything
else how can they bring all of this
information together and and fulfill
this purpose of the one or or or make it
a more let's say a better process for
all of us
together right I think
that one way to think about what's
happening with humanity
is part of humanity for thousands of
years has
said this is just a headset the
spiritual part they they said you know
space of time is not fundamental
Consciousness is fundamental but but but
they've said
that with only the tools of natural
language they've not had
mathematics then there's another group
of people who have been saying no no no
the headset's everything there is the
physicalist right this this is this is
it and we're but they developed these
mathematical tools and and careful
experiments and they gave us the
technology so we have one group but then
but then the group that's developed all
this technology and and all the
mathematical stuff and all of a sudden
their own theories came back just in the
last couple decades and slapped them in
the face and said wake up SpaceTime is
just a headset it and it's a cheap
headset it falls apart at 10 Theus 33
centimet so so so now scientists very
few right now but but some and I think
more as as as we really understand the
slap in the face that SpaceTime is
doomed a lot of scientists are going to
be waking up going well we need to
okay we have to go outside of SpaceTime
well there's this big group of people
that are already out there they're
saying well welcome late comers we've
been here for a long
time they've done a lot of exploring
there but they don't have the
tools that science has so there are two
groups that have half of the
puzzle this one group has a big part of
the puzzle they've been doing meditation
and they have in informal descriptions
this group is just coming late to the
party but they have incredible
tools and precision and
experiments let's get the two together
and
let's spirituality and science are just
two aspects of human exploration it's
all human exploration and understanding
who we are they're not separate we've
assumed that they're separate there's
been this division you know especially
since Galileo you know his house
imprisonment by the the Catholic church
right there was been this huge division
it's it's it's time for us to grow up
and bring the two halves together it's
going to be
painful any marriage like this is going
to be painful
because there's
dogmas many I think the spiritual gurus
don't have dogmas but the followers do
many followers of spiritual
Traditions get tied up in the pointer
saying that pointer is the truth this is
the this pointer is the truth no no it's
just the pointer to the Moon is not the
moon the Buddhists will say is just a
pointer to it's not the
moon but the many followers just don't
get it and that's just human nature so
it'll be painful on both sides because
scientists are going to have to let go
of physicalism and for most scientists
to let go of physicalism is to not be a
scientist yeah but but but science is
not a particular Theory namely SpaceTime
it's not a Theory science is a
method of
careful experiments and careful Theory
building and testing and a cycle of
experiment and Theory that's what
science is physicalism is one theory
that was helpful for several centuries
and has outlived its usefulness it's
time to let go of that and you don't let
go of Science by letting go of
physicalism in fact if you don't let go
of
physicalism then you do let go of
science because you refuse to go where
the science is telling you to go you've
got to go beyond SpaceTime so it will
it's
painful um because something that we've
both sides have deeply believed will
turn out to be deeply false and other
things will turn out to be true and
we'll have to pick what are the true
things or or I wouldn't say true the
next the next useful steps you know
ultimately the truth is just you without
any concepts that's just the only truth
I can talk to is you without any
concepts about it
but in our efforts as human beings to
put together pointers on the spiritual
side and on the science side the two can
work together and so that's that's to
integrate what we've been talking about
I would say that that's the top level
picture let's
let have respectful but but but not
credulous so so you know not not stupid
but a respectful conversation and to to
find what are the good insights from
both sides and what are the stupid
things from both sides and bring the
good good insights together and have a
scientific spirituality that's that's
rigorous and and human yeah now I
completely agree and I've I've always
thought that as well I mean East Meets
West almost y y you have to sort of
bring these Concepts together because
there's so much different types of
knowledge and bodies of knowledge that
even the general Western science just it
did not understand a lot of Eastern
science or Asian philosophy African
philosophy there's a lot to it that a
lot of them just have never had access
to and don't get but but they all have
profound things to say I I I agree with
you I agree and I think that in the
dialogue the informal natural language
descriptions of these Traditions can be
translated into
mathematics and at that point then we
can start to get the real power of of
the
ideas right I like to use the example of
of Einstein when his developed the
theory of general relativity the big
idea came like in 1907 where he realized
if if I was in an elevator standing on a
a weighing scale and the cord of the
elevator was cutless went a freefor all
all of a sudden I would weigh nothing on
on the scale I would weigh nothing that
was his big Insight that led to general
relativity but it took him years and he
was Einstein so he was brilliant it took
him years to turn that into mathematics
but when he turned it into
mathematics a year later or you know few
months later Schwarz Shield some German
Soldier actually but brilliant solved
his equations and proved that there were
black holes well Einstein had no idea
that his equations would lead to he
didn't like it he didn't believe in
black holes yes so what happens
is your theories become smarter than the
person who wrote them down you become a
student of your own Theory even if
you're an Einstein you're not smart
enough to know everything that your
theory is going to teach you and you so
so that's what's going to happen with
spirituality does not have that yet they
don't have the benefit of taking the
ideas making them so precise that you
can become
students of those ideas where where even
the teacher who wrote them down doesn't
know all the implications and has to
become humble before their own
mathematics and let it teach them yeah
that's that's when when spirituality
gets to that point sign me up I'm really
interested well sign me up too Don um
I'm also Keen to go on that Journey as
well listen Don it's it's been another
pleasure a pleasure for me it's been
such an amazing journey chatting to you
is always so much fun and and I still
can't wait for us to have many more
along the way anything on your mind
anything else you you want to say
one one thing I like to say and that is
one question that people all always
bring up is you use theory of evolution
to show that we don't see the
truth right we don't the reality we
don't see reality as it is but then that
means that Evolution isn't true and so
you shot yourself in the foot and so I I
I should address that um just briefly um
the idea is
this this is the way science progresses
this is nothing special about me this is
the way you put down a scientific theory
and you make it mathematically precise
and when you do that then the
mathematics tells you what the theory
can do but it also tells you where the
theory ends Einstein's theory ends at 10
Theus 33 cmers well that's all I've I'm
not doing anything weird or special this
is just the way science works you take
the mathematics of the theory and you
ask the the mathematics what's the limit
of this Theory and the mathematics comes
back and says here's the limit 10us 33
cmers well in the case of evolution It
also says the same thing the limit is
the very Assumption of SpaceTime and
objects in space know organisms in
SpaceTime competing for resources in
SpaceTime that ain't
true and but in the Einstein's case the
mathematics comes back and says
SpaceTime that ain't it it's not the
it's not fundamental in fact it falls
apart at 10 Theus 33 you're going to
need to find a structure outside of
SpaceTime evolution is saying the same
thing so we're not shooting ourselves in
the foot you have to understand this is
the
way science progresses the
mathematics doesn't prove that the
assumptions are right the mathematics
tells you the limits of the
assumptions that's that's so so I just
want to really it's not a minor point so
is how science progresses it's almost
like going back to the old way of
thinking like falsification in a sense
it's it's kind of you're looking for
that sort of that that cap that that
that end point where does right end
yeah well and in fact if you think about
it that's what scientists should be
looking for all the time is like we know
that this is not the theory of
everything right we know it if I can
write it down it's not The Theory of
Everything so do I want to be
a an idiot and and and just or do I want
to be the Explorer so let me be the
Explorer where's the limit so let's find
as soon as possible what the limits of
this Theory are and then go to the next
one and then explore its limits that's
that's fun um it's it's boring to just
get stuck in the same Paradigm the whole
time yeah and I would just say one one
short thing too and this question always
comes up take your time done I've I've
got time don't worry
okay I won't I won't perseverate though
just one last thing a lot of people will
say
um look you're you're saying
that the Moon is just an object in my
headset and it doesn't exist when no one
looks and you create it when you look
now give me a break everybody goes give
me a break so suppose I I um take
um I don't know an apple and I stick it
in the ground and and leave it there for
for five weeks and then you come and dig
it up you're going to find a rotten
apple well doesn't that prove that the
Apple was there the whole time and it
and it it existed even when you weren't
looking right and and and rot was going
on when you weren't looking and and and
so this all nonsense well and and all I
can say
is if you questions like that one and
there's many many I get dozens of
questions all the time I can imagine
right in all those questions the way to
answer it for yourself is to just put it
into virtual reality so imagine you're
playing a virtual reality game a
multiplayer virtual reality game and try
to put your question into that realm and
then you'll see how it how it works so
so so for example um I'm playing
multiplayer um tennis
and I hit the tennis ball to my my
partner over on the other side and um
and I say you know the the tennis wall
only exists when I look it's it's just
you know pixels in my my headset and the
other guy says oh no no no the the the
tennis ball is is real so and he takes
so the both guys are in virtual reality
he takes the tennis ball he drops he
looks away say I can't see it but Don
can you see the tennis ball I said yeah
I can see it so that proves it really
exists no I just that doesn't prove that
I I turn my head and I'm rendering it
because I'm looking at it so it doesn't
exist well well then he says well but
but when I hit the tennis ball to you
you hit the same tennis ball back to me
so it it proves that there's just one no
no I I have a tennis ball that I'm
experiencing in my headset you have a
tennis ball that you're experiencing
your headset those are so so all the
questions that people have before you
before you write me an email about about
it first try it out yourself see if you
can solve the problem yourself putting
it
into virtual reality a multiplayer game
and see if you here's the key here's the
key idea there is something that exists
independent of what you see in your
headset there is something in that
analogy it's some supercomputer that's
coordinating the game but there's no
tennis ball in that supercomputer
there's nothing green or or fuzzy or
round in that you know so there is
something that exists independent of you
but it's utterly unlike anything that
you see or experience utterly unlike
that
that's the only thing you have to wrap
once you wrap your head around that idea
and use the VR and supercomputer analogy
you'll be able to solve your own puzzles
and then you'll see how fun this this
approach is but until then I see people
they they can't really start to explore
it because they just see these obvious
contradictions that they think are are
are make the whole thing a non-starter
so just put it into virtual reality and
then you can start to really explore the
space and another way to sort of see
that
uh well another way I I had a question
on and I forgot to ask you about that
was was also when as two perceivers are
sort of seeing something the the fact
that they're able to render the sort of
same thing in in within your theory is
actually because in essence this is
still coming from one sort of the one so
so it's not it's not like they wouldn't
have access to the same information at
some point it's kind of like you do have
this shared access to information Within
yeah reality that's that's absolutely
right it's like the supercomputer on the
VR analogy is is the shared access and
the one the one little Proviso I would
give is that we actually don't know that
others are perceiving the world like us
right there's something called
synesthesia yes yes where where where
you know about yeah you probably know
better than I do where where people
have experiences that you know like
Carol Steen everything that she hears
bit of music that she hears she sees a
geometric object with a specific shape
and a specific um texture to the
surfaces and colors and so forth and
I've actually met her and talked with
her in person about about this so I mean
she's living in a world that I wouldn't
have imagined was possible she hears
music and every time she hears the same
piece of music she sees the same object
doing a
complicated movement with a beautiful
surface on it and so forth well and and
there was guy named Michael something
rather who who everything he
tasted with his mouth he felt with his
hands so mint felt like a tall cold cool
column of glass yeah you get some
patients who can who when they read they
they can smell it or or hear sound it's
it's it's incredible some of the
synesthesia patients that's right so so
so you're you're right that because we
we share this the one we can have some
expectation of understanding what the
other world what what the other person's
world is like but I just want to put out
this Proviso that don't think that you
know everything it it may be that their
world is very very different that you
you would ever we have good experimental
reasons to believe that our Visual and
sensory worlds vary from person to
person and sometimes
dramatically I was going to say because
in that case someone who's schizophrenic
or has fully blown
psychosis has has almost left that
headset in a different way or yes how
would you sort of explore that within
this like a fully blown psychosis where
the person is completely out of touch
there is no link at all to what you and
I are experiencing within our
headsets how is that sort of explored
within this analogy of course now now
I'm I'm a complete amateur I'm not a
psychiatrist or anything like that so
everyone knows this is a philosophy
slash podcast that's not really a mental
health podcast directly exactly right so
so so then then I'll speculate given
that so I'm not a professional
psychiatrist but it seems to me
that going back to the idea of the
one and the one plunging in with both
feet and losing
itself but giving itself we didn't talk
about this but I think the one gives
itself little nudges to wake up and and
that's that's the suffering that happens
when we when I get identified with
myself and I'm trying to be important
and I and my ego is trying to clash with
other people I'm trying to show them I'm
smarter than you or better than you or
faster than you or have more money or
better cars all all that competition
that that we do is painful it causes
causes suffering it it's it's the the
very Act of of
me being in any way hostile to anybody
else it causes me suffering and and to
be competitive in any way like that is
is is causes me suffering and that
suffering is is the wakeup call to the
truth which is that person that I'm
competing against that I'm angry with is
me that is me under a different
Avatar now but and I'm gently I've got
the suffering as a gentle way of and
sometimes not so gentle as later on of
getting me to wake up and and and and to
but that's part of the whole thing of
waking up to who I am and so the
psychosis I think are cases where the
suffering has G in many cases now
sometimes it's you can say this person
had a tumor and that's why I mean we
look in there and there's a tumor right
so so that that the tumor is sort of the
headset version of saying that there's
something wrong in the network of
conscious agents something went you know
something went haywire in that the
headset construction but in this other
approach I'm thinking about is that the
the the extreme psychological pain that
you get with extreme psychiatric
patients is really the
one using suffering of an extreme kind
to wake itself up to wake that
particular itself in that Avatar to wake
up and to
recognize um that there's nothing to
worry about right if you're in the
virtual reality game and you believe
you're the avatar if someone's shooting
up the Avatar it's scary as hell but if
if you if you go into the game and you
oh my avatar is just an avatar you know
they can shoot it up all it's a
completely different game there's no
reason to be upset so so that is that
kind it's it's waking up to oh this is
just a VR
game and the psychosis patient the one
I'm talking about is the one who hasn't
who's who needs to wake up but is is
still so identified with the Avatar that
they're in they're in a world of pain
and a world of of fear the world so
that's again Amateur hour from Hoffman
I'm not a psychiatrist yeah just kind of
no I don't worry I always put at the
bottom of my videos a disclaimer to let
people know that this is more of a a an
educational podcast rather than a and
something you apply to your life this is
not us trying to be gurus everyone so
just do not exact right yeah and as a
doctor myself I'm I'm not this is not me
coming out trying to give people advice
either this is my intellectual Pursuit
trying to understand these questions
that I love so much so just so everyone
knows that's just I would disclaimer for
the moment Don do you not professional
advice yes this is not professional
advice at all Don do you ever get
worried or concerned about the fact
maybe even I don't know do you even like
it but that maybe that you maybe
Bernardo all you guys within this
idealist it's almost like a new wave of
idealism that's taking place right now
it's quite fascinating to see as well
from from my perspective uh doing this
podcast and taking part in these
conversations do you ever get concerned
that you guys are slowly growing a a
cult or maybe that there's that people
are going to take some of this and and
take it Way Beyond you guys like to to a
point where they form their own sort of
Dogma type groups do does that ever
concern you in any
way
well that's a very question I know but
yes it does in in the sense that my
efforts are to make it a mathematical
science which still
doesn't preclude a cultish kind of
approach but it it really helps to avoid
it when when when you don't just have
words that you're pushing around but you
have a
mathematical theory that can slap you in
the face when when you misinterpret it
right when it actually says no to you
like when Einstein thinks that there are
no black holes and the Theory comes back
and slaps them and says no there are
black holes live with it so so that's so
that's what I want is is a
mathematically precise um idealism I
call it conscious realism because of
some philosophical baggage that idealism
brings but so I call it conscious
realism but it's
just a version of
idealism I want a mathematically precise
my goal is to get this thing launched
with enough mathematical rigor and
enough momentum that it will take off
and and be a real science a real
mathematical idealist science I see
idealism in the
past has had something of an
anti-science um flare to it I mean
Barkley in some sense brought up his
idealism as as a a reply to the the
physicalism that he perceived of
Newton's science it was was and and
Barkley had God as part of as his main
sort of core to the to
theis that's right and it was sort of a
an Oppo it came out of an opposition to
the the Newtonian science and and many
idealist theories in fact I'm not really
sure if I know of
any like idealists who have said now
let's let's go and make this a
mathematical scientific theory this is
this is not yeah there are there are
some Quantum physicists who early on who
interpreted quantum mechanics in
idealist ways Bon neyman and others gave
idealist interpretations but that that's
not what I'm I'm talking someone's
saying let's take idealist ideas and
make a mathematically precise scientific
theory yes out of idealism and you know
K of course did a lot of deep
philosophical ideas about idealism but
that's different from making
mathematically precise theories and and
so there there's been this
anti-science flavor to a lot of idealist
thinking and and this it's I think not
necessary and in fact it's it's it's
it's not helpful I think that's idealism
is the next step and we need to make it
mathematically precise and show that
physicalism um emerges as a as a headset
as as a projection of a much much deeper
Theory so by the way we don't throw away
our physicalist theories we show them as
special cases of deeper theories and we
use our their physicalist theories as
tests for you know we're making new
theories Beyond SpaceTime how do we test
them we test them in SpaceTime we test
them like with scattering experiments
where we know the physics of the
scattering so so we don't throw away old
theories we are grateful for Quantum
field Theory and general relative we're
grateful for the evolution of a natural
selection these are wonderful theories
they are going to tell us when we make
mistakes with our theories outside of
SpaceTime they will come back and slap
Us in the face because we have to
protect them back into their domain and
they say well now you're in our domain
and I say no or I say maybe maybe you
you you can continue in that direction
you're not wrong
yet so so so that's the the so
ultimately I think
idealism needs to be and and I'm trying
to work toward that Tim to make it a
mathematically precise science and then
I won't have to worry about the cult
thing that we talked about earlier and
so forth The Reason Why Us done is
because you see it when when you look at
the comments and the way people talk
about um your work Bernardo Etc I mean
the way some people are really really in
love with it you know they it it it is
their anti-anxiety cure they listen to
you guys to kind of get their to to get
themselves out of tough situations they
they use this as a spiritual escape and
I've seen comments and I like them I
always tell them like it's great it's
it's it's great that you guys have such
an impact but at that point you do come
with a lot of power um I recently read a
paper by someone it I can't remember who
it was by but it was about Bernardo
cast's idealism and and and and I can't
remember who wrote it but it it very it
spoke about this it was it was against
it of course but trying to dissect the
fact that it's almost cult-like and it's
kind of like a
uh a group of thinkers um coming
together forming this new wave it's
almost like the new age atheism movement
that happened with Dawkins dennet back
in the day but except in in a shift
towards a positive movement so like love
um universal mind is one very very
cult-like now I'm not accusing you of
this but I'm just saying you can
actually see it in the comment sections
you can tell people do really love your
work and and there's a big there's a big
need for it and want for it clearly
well I would I would say for those who
who who love
it the best thing that you can do is if
if you have the talents is to study the
mathematics of it and contribute to the
mathematics and push it forward or if
you don't yourself have that talent and
few of us do find a friend who does get
them the way to really to
really help
this is to move the science forward and
as we move the science forward if it
continues to give us psychological
Comfort F fantastic if it prods Us in
ways that we're not comfortable with so
be it we have to go
wherever truth leads us or at least the
projection of truth that we can see
leads us so that that's what I would
suggest is is I absolutely will say my
thoughts on this are B baby steps and
everything that I've said baby steps
it's in just a few years hopefully even
within my lifetime everything I'm saying
will be seen as trivial compared to what
we've discovered let's move the science
forward beyond my trivial ideas right
now let's get this thing into a real
substantial
science and I mean it would be crazy I
mean the more you guys find out the more
you see you you could almost be seen as
as the link between us and the
one because you're GNA take us closer
you're G to take us closer to us all
together no it's just the one talking to
himself yeah pretty much you you're
taking us closer to us that's right it's
it's beautiful Al together and don't
thanks so much man it's always a
pleasure so much fun anything you want
to say anything else that you think that
you really just want to put a no I think
I squeezed in all the all the extra as I
wanted to at this point um but but next
time I'll probably have some more things
that you know I got emails where people
ask questions so next time absolutely
I'd love I would say that I would love
to talk with you again absolutely yeah
no I'm I'm eager and every time I'm G to
try to do something different and
obviously next time if there's any new
papers if there's anything else you want
to chat about specifically we go back in
do another dissection it's it's always
fun done it's it's it's such a
fascinating Journey for me personally um
watching from the outside watching your
work it's uh it's always a pleasure and
I appreciate it thanks so much thank you
and t i I just love the way that you
guide the conversation it's it's beyond
expert well
[Music]
done
