Orson Scott Card Orson Scott Card is a
science fiction author he wrote the book
Ender Game It's A classic sci-fi book I
have read the book I don't remember if
I've recommended it in my book
recommendations but if not it's a book I
I certainly would have been comfortable
recommending because I I do think that
it is a very powerful book in a number
of different ways and and it is it's an
entertaining book as well it turns out
that Orson Scott Card is anti-gay and
now this is the subject of quite a bit
of controversy back in 2009
he joined the board of the National
Organization for marriage which as we
know is a um disgustingly anti-gay group
he also said that married PE he wrote on
a uh in the Mormon times I don't know if
he's actually Mormon but he wrote in the
Mormon times married people attempting
to raise children with the hopes that
they in turn will be reproductively
successful have every reason to oppose
the normalization of homosexual unions I
mean it's the the type of vocabulary we
hear from the most extreme and anti-gay
nuts now Orson Scott Card has found out
that there's actually a boycott planned
of the movie version of the book Ender
Game there's a there's a movie that is
in the works um of of Ender Game the
book and when he found out that there is
actually a boycott being planned because
of his anti-gay points of view he said
that actually the gay marriage issue is
completely moot now because the Supreme
Court rulings have made it moot how I
don't don't know and he also says that
gay marriage supporters need to show
tolerance towards those who disagreed
with them when the issue was still in
dispute basically saying those who are
in favor of equality need to tolerate
those who are in favor of discrimination
I have a couple thoughts on this number
one the idea that we have to tolerate
discriminatory bigots does not make
logical sense to me legally speaking we
do tolerate intolerance it's called the
First Amendment uh Orson Scott card or
whoever wants to can make whatever
claims they want they make whatever
statements they want but they are not
free from the repercussions of bigoted
speech and we've talked about this when
it came to Dr Laura's nword rant and how
she thought because people didn't want
to listen to her show anymore that it
was a violation of her first amendment
rights it of course wasn't it was just
the repercussions of her exercising Her
First Amendment rights so legally
speaking we already have tolerance of
bigotry that doesn't mean people need to
to at discriminatory views by any means
now that doesn't mean you you are
intolerant by committing violence of
course we have laws and statutes that
prevent that but you can be against
those points of view and boycotting
Orson Scott Card is absolutely within
the the the realm of what would be
normal to do but I want to talk about
the other thing which is people have
been asking me given that a lot of
people know about my uh uh somewhat uh I
I don't want to call it extensive
knowledge but certainly I've read a lot
of kind of classic science fiction books
like Ender Game does it make me revisit
whether it's a good book or whether
Orson Scott Card is a good writer and I
actually think of Theodor do dooi
Theodor dovi was a known anti-semite
that does not mean that his books are
not worth reading or that his books are
in some way not writing that is at the
same level as it would be if we didn't
know him to be an anti-semite I've read
a bunch of Theodore dostoevski there is
no question that when I read it I am
aware of the fact that he was an
anti-semite I'm aware of that but I
don't think that that means that the
literature is no longer worth consuming
although I could see people being so
offended that they say I don't want to
read anything Orson Scott Card writes
and they're entitled to that uh you know
that's that's their prerogative I'd have
to agree with you um can I still watch a
Mel Gibson movie and and enjoy it you
know can I still watch Braveheart and
enjoy it yeah I think I can and uh you
know I've never read mine comp but I
have to admit I think it might be a
fascinating read so uh some people can
separate those things other people can't
and either way that's okay really yeah
although I have to admit I don't watch
any Mel Gibson stuff anymore just
because the the look of him just his his
physical appearance and his physical
pres presence makes me a little bit
nauseous but that's kind of to each his
own you know
facebook.com/ David Pacman show join us
on Facebook we'll take a break Dennis
Campbell is next and then still plenty
more to talk about glad you're with us
today the David Pacman show at David
pacman.com
[Music]
