howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut
[Music]
show listeners have asked us to provide
pointers to some of the resources we
talk about on the show we now have links
to books and articles referenced in
recent podcasts that are available on
our website we also offer full
transcripts go to Jim row.com that's Jim
row.com
today's guest is Jonathan rouson
Jonathan is the co-founder and CEO of
perspectiva well what is perspectiva you
might ask according to their website
perspectiva is a community of expert
generalists working on an urgent
100-year project to improve a
relationship between systems souls and
Society in theory and practice a nice
modest ambition you can learn more about
them at the N too succinct URL
systems-
soul-
docomo all the domain names mentioned
and references and such can be found on
our episode page at Jim row.com
previously Jonathan was director of the
social brain Center at the Royal Society
of Arts where he authored a range of
influential research reports on Behavior
change climate change and
spirituality welcome back Jonathan such
a pleasure Jim good to see you again
yeah we've had several excellent
conversations over the years back in
current 041 we had really interesting
conversation on the long essay uh
Jonathan wrote called our metac crisis
pickle it was really a lot of detail I
thought it was a great conversation back
in episode 127 we talked about on the
moves that matter the other interesting
thing about Jonathan's background is he
was a chess grandm still is right last
time we chatted you were just getting
back to doing a little bit of tournament
play right I still play a little bit
yeah it's a sideline now but once a
chess Grand Master always a chess Grand
Master somehow yeah it's funny I played
chess for the first time in 12 years
about two weeks ago and I am by no means
a grandm in fact I always tell people
I'm in that very weird place I'm a very
good barroom chess player I very seldom
lose in a barroom I can usually Beat
Street Hustlers but if I play with even
a crappy tournament player they mop the
floor with me cuz I don't have opening
books I don't have much any Theory I
just build an extremely complicated mid
game that most people can't follow and
then hope they make a blunder right
that's basically my my Approach you lure
them into game B exactly into a swamp of
complexity that they can't understand
and then hope they make a mistake but
anyway we talked about his book which uh
basically takes a lot of the lessons
he's learned from chess and turns them
around on how those things could be
actually be useful in our lives and
thinking about the future and then we
had a a short episode but an interesting
one where Jonathan again talked about
Chess and particularly the cheating
drama between Magnus Carlson and Hans
nimman nean nman Happ to fusure I don't
know how that actually turned out but it
was interesting so we've had several
good conversations over the years today
though we're going to talk about a
project that Jonathan and perspectiva
have been working on what two three
years something like that about three
yeah and that's on something that they
call the anti- debate so let's start
with the converse and you guys do talk
about this a little bit you know why do
we need an anti- debate what about
conventional debates these days suck so
bad right that was really the premise at
least the approximate premise for the
project there was a bigger picture
analysis about the metac crisis and the
need for new social practices and so on
but sticking with a simple problem
debate no longer Being Fit for purpose
so there's different aspects of this one
is that debate is a form requiring
typically two people typically with some
kind of proposition or
contention and it calls upon this skills
of reason and argumentation and language
to explore an issue in theory with a
view to seeking the truth and having
your ideas tested by an opponent or an
opposing view and that somehow through a
convivial dialectical process you would
Converge on an edifying and entertaining
experience in which everyone was
somewhat the wiser that's the theory and
at its best it is like that and it can
still be like that we didn't want to
throw debate out completely we're merely
recognizing that the world has changed
and that now in the social media
architecture where polarization is built
in by Design where people connect with
each other and find their tribal
Affinity as much in what they're against
as what they're for and they're actually
encouraged to think that way and act
that way in that kind of context debate
has often become a kind of spectacle of
endemic polarization in which people
come out with strawman arguments to sort
of attack the other side and win the day
with the soundbite of choice there's a
lot about debate that could be great and
good but we came to the view that it was
irredeemable that actually the world has
changed so much that in most context
it's never going to be adequate for the
problems of our time and that's not just
the function of social media and
cultural polarization it's also because
the nature of the things we need to
discuss now are no longer issue specific
we're a little bit beyond the world of
should we bring back capital punishment
or not what should be the the number of
weeks for an abortion to be legal these
kind of single issue questions are still
very contentious and very alive but
mostly people recognize that all of our
problems are somehow interconnected and
so you're looking for a means of inquiry
in which you the group as a whole can
actually see the bigger picture and see
how everything is connecting and that
relates to the last thing I'd want to
say in the first answer that we're
looking for multiple ways of knowing the
another limitation of conventional
debate is it's pretty much about
propositional logic mostly it's about
knowing as proposition it's not knowing
from somewhere it's not a kind of
perspectival knowing it's not knowing
how to do something procedural knowing
and it's not kind of participatory
knowing you're not actually feeling your
way through it as you do it so for all
of these reasons we wanted a much richer
Fuller more inclusive practice and
that's what we sat about to create yeah
very good in one of your materials you
quoted the guardian is describing the
Trump Biden debate of September 2020 as
the debate apocalypse I remember I
watched that it was like totally useless
and then the Democratic debates during
2020 were also less than edifying as I
recall and of course the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] show
debates of 2024 been even worse so at
least at supposedly the top of the food
chain I think your premise that debate
is a broken artifact seems true on the
other hand I point out there is still
some more serious debate uh the Oxford
Union for instance still has some very
interesting debates on a regular process
and organization I helped start called
the MIT free speech Alliance also does a
series of debates we actually use
modification of the Oxford Union process
where we have ours as two person teams
each get quite long periods of time to
talk and rebut each other Etc and then
of course we have high school and
Collegiate debating which is actually a
weird thing I did it a little bit in
high school and it was it's not really
debating it's some obscure Point scoring
method that is uh I wouldn't say not a
good model but you know kind of the
stupid ification of debate exemplified
by the presidential or the uh do they
have those kinds of hideous debates in
the UK when you all have elections where
the guys just like throw mud pies at
each other for an hour and a half pretty
much yeah we have versions of that
although these days it's no longer seen
as essential politically for someone to
take part in a debate it used to be that
the crime of cardice would be so great
that you would lose lose lots of votes
by not taking part but it no longer
seems to be the case for what it's worth
where you mentioned debate apocalypse
2020 was the year we began the project
and it was very much in the atmosphere
of those failed debates that we thought
okay time to build something else in
terms of the other forms that you
alluded to I partially accept that I was
a student at Oxford myself I attended
the Oxford Union I took part in the kind
of debates you mentioned in which you
have small teams and it's designed in a
way that you're
building on prior arguments and you are
responding to opposing views nonetheless
it still has its design constraints it's
still principally about verbal dexterity
Under Pressure it's still principally
about impressing the audience it's still
principally about defeating the other
side very rarely do you feel that
there's a genuine Mutual search for
truth mostly it's about a kind of tribal
cheerleading I want my children to grow
up being able to argue well I like to
watch people you know thrash things out
but in terms of our responsibility to
society there's a case for trying to
create something new and better if not
to replace debate at least to exist
alongside it yeah and we both know Ian
mcgilchrist right he would describe even
if it's done well like in the Oxford
Union it's still extremely left brain
right it's like you say it's about words
and being clever and speaking to the
left brain a whole lot so Ian would
probably say that I think not to speak
foran directly but I would imagine he
would also like to make the point that
debate is very important he would be the
first to admit that a healthy Society
relies on critical engagement with ideas
and sort of friendly and timely and
suitable opposition a big part of his
book I think the best chapter in his the
matter with things is where he speaks
about The Coincidence of opposites and
the creative power of resistance and
opposition so while he would say it's
left brained I think some extent it also
has its value as as this sort of
energizing creative process but what we
feel was you can still have that you
know you can still have that edge but
lose some of the limitations before we
move on into the details of kind of the
history and and the work of the anti-
debate one final thing from history and
context I uh just for fun looked up the
famous 1858 Lincoln Douglas debate and
people hear about the Lincoln Douglas
they always assume it was a presidential
election of 1860 but it wasn't there
weren't any debates these seven debates
were when they in the senate election
for Illinois in 1858 and Douglas and
Lincoln ran and Douglas won interesting
so so interesting for lots of reasons
for the history of that and so on but
what did it mean to say he won exactly
well not the debate he won the election
all the election I see you always think
of Lincoln as this famous dude he won
the presidency in 1860 also against
Douglas and two other guys it was a
four-way race but in the famous debates
it was for the Senate and here's the
point point the framing in the debate it
was it opened and it was by flip of a
coin each time or maybe they alternated
across them the first Speaker got to
speak for an hour then the second
speaker got to speak for an hour and a
half and then finally the first Speaker
got a 30 minute rebuttal how well do you
think that would go over in the age of
Tik Tock yeah maybe but you know it's
the age of Tik Tok but it's also the age
of the long form podcast you of course
exemplify that to some extent although
there there are conversations online
that go on for much longer 3 four 5
hours and they often get you know
significant numbers of views I don't
think the length by itself is the
problem the deeper problem I see is the
kind of elitist aspect of it the the
sense that what Society should be doing
is having one or two people on a stage
and then a 100 or so watching or
multiplied by many orders of magnitude
online that somehow there are the
performers and then there are the
viewers I think to have a healthier
democracy whatever your social practice
whether it's the B anti- debate or
something else you want a much more
participative engaged electorate and
citizenry and for that you need
practices where people can feel at home
and for that I doubt you'll really find
one that works if you're required to
speak for an hour or listen for an hour
and then speak for an hour and a half or
listen for an hour and a half I quite
admire it though for its old world charm
it is interesting and you know of course
there's other people work on things uh
James fishkin famously has been working
on a concept he calls participatory
democracy they draft groups of people
together and talk in a series of
meetings about issues and things like
that there's a lot of interesting work
going on there now back to the history
of your idea you reference a 2019 paper
from Peter Lindberg and Connor Barnes
that was titled what are politic needs
now anti- debates what influence did
that have on on this project yeah so
that did have a big influence but I
think it's only right to say that quoted
in that article was a reference to
something that William mcast had written
William mcll is one of the more famous
sort of long- termist effective altruist
people who wrote a book called what we
owe the future and somewhere along the
way I think maybe a year before that
like 2019 or so he had posted something
online about the things that he thought
philanthropist should be funding if they
shared the long- termist view and this
is another conversation for another
podcast but in outline the long- termist
view is a sort of hyper utilitarian view
it's it's a view that
we should make our moral judgments based
on a clear sighted assessment of
consequences and try to do the greatest
good with whatever money we have um and
he was like in that context what would
you put your money behind and he
suggested something like the anti-
debate because he said it clearly isn't
in our interest to have these failed
debates that we were witnessing all the
time it's better to build an alternative
that would actually help to inform the
kind of choices that he felt were
critical however this is quite an
important point the effective altruists
and the long- termist are basically
rationalists their view of the world is
that you rely on the power of reason to
make more or less beneficent wise
judgments but there are many people who
doubt rationalism as a modus operandi as
a as a world view as an orienting
principle and I think what we've ended
up with in the anti- debate is very much
Beyond rationalism I mean it's it
includes reason and it includes logic
and it's intellect grounded but we did
think it was quite important to bring in
other ways of knowing other ways of
valuing so I say that as the kind of
prehistory of the project Peter picked
up on William MC casal's post and
thought well what would that look like
and that was in the context of the 2020s
that you mentioned and wrote this long
post where he it was a very political
piece imagining how it would be
different if only you could get the
candidates to actually properly listen
to each other find the best in their
argument generously reinterpret it in a
way way that even the opponent would be
impressed by and through a kind of
intellectual humility both sides would
come to some kind of Common Ground the
audience would enjoy it it would be
original and surprising and and
heartfelt and convivial and all the best
of civil society would be on display I
don't think anyone really believes that
that could happen it's very hard to
manufacture such a thing and I I say
that as someone who has sort of tried in
the early days of the anti- debate we
did set out to create something like a
onetoone
conversation in which our job was to
inhabit an opposing position something
that we disagreed with and to do our
very best to really look at it
sympathetically and to try and see it
from within that world viiew including
all of its root metaphors and hidden
assumptions and implicit commitments and
values and core ideas and then try to
speak from that place and it wasn't
without its value it had its kind of
cultural education to it it was quite
interesting but as a spectacle as
something to watch or as something even
to take part in it felt very synthetic
it didn't
feel fully human it felt like a
performance and an
artifice and we believe that will always
be the case if you're doing something
with a public audience in which you have
a vested interest in persuading critical
parts of it that you and not the other
person is the one to get behind so we
kind of felt that the form of the
process needed to be more plural and
that was one of the critical decisions
we took early on yeah I think you
referenced in one of your writings what
you called the dialectic fallacy yeah I
think it's important to you know get
beyond the cliches basically because
there is this view that and it's broadly
a hegelian view you could say but
there's a point a Counterpoint and then
a synthesis and debate at its best gives
rise to that in a succession of moments
like that person a says we'll never deal
with climate change the and is n the
world will collapse and Civil War will
break out in multiple countries because
of resource shortages there'll be
conflict between countries and
civilization as a whole is doomed within
the next 50 years and the other side
will say what are you talking about
we've never made as much technological
progress we are on the brink of solving
the fusion problem we'll soon have
abundant clean energy we're treating
medical conditions with never treated
before AI will be will solve so many
efficiency problems that we're about to
be renter an age of abundance everything
will be grand and then somehow these
different views meet each other and in
the middle let's say the the one who's
the climate realist or the pessimist
depending on how you look at it comes to
think well maybe I have slightly over
egged the pudding maybe there is some
hope here and the other side says well
yeah maybe I have overstated the
optimism there is some real worry here
and everyone goes home thinking both
sides have a point my senses were a bit
beyond this now I think that this is a
20th century way of looking at discourse
that actually most of the time there are
more than two views and even within a
view there's a great deal of internal
contradiction and tension that most of
us on most issues that matter are
conflicted and a little bit confused and
that part of what we have to do in
public is actually presence that
confusion and find a way to enter
together into a space where we're not
desperately trying to defend one side or
the other but actually admit that there
are things here Beyond us that we need
to investigate together yeah this calls
back to something you mentioned very
early on and that is that you are
perceiving this as a practice right a
practice that the conclusions if any may
be less important than doing the work
for the people involved right yes it's
very much a practice I mean technically
you could say it's a practice you know
Theory meets practice it's an attempt to
bring into form bring into social form a
method that is informed by a theoretical
view of the state of the world and the
form of inquiry we need today and you're
right it's not the end of it the outcome
of it is not to reach some acceptable
midpoint position that people can then
proceed on it's rather to have a shared
experience of inquiry such that we know
ourselves and each other better it's
partly about disagreeing with other
people but it's also about being more
comfortable about disagreeing with
yourself it's about recognizing your own
internal contradictions and realizing
that that's actually a shared experience
and it's part of the world now okay so
that actually quite interesting right so
would you say that probably the idea
what we talked about earlier is one of
the aspects of debate spectacle audience
may not be appropriate for this so this
may be a participants only thing we have
recorded some of these and as you know
there's a few online it's not easy
however once you get multiple parties
moving around in space and we think the
movement is important by the way the
body's moving in space matters
so getting that recorded in a way that
makes sense to the audience is not
trivial I believe that the optimal form
of this we currently believe I should
say first of all this has been very much
a team effort over three years although
I've been at the center of it I have a
great many people to thank and I've
thanked them in the video that's just
come out and in all the posts that are
built around it but basically the
perspective a team and Associates over
the last three years have come up with a
form now that can be flexibly
interpreted but is ideally about 25
people and is ideally about 3 hours long
and we believe it can be up to a day
long quite comfortably and it could be
probably 40 people or 15 but we think
that it's sweet spot is about 25 people
for about 3 hours and even better if
those 25 people know each other a little
bit already we find that quite an amount
of time is needed just for people to
settle into the social space not not to
feel threatened not to assume the worst
about the people they're seeing and
actually if people already know each
other a bit you can more quickly get to
the interesting bits yeah when you have
a practice or uh you know ceremonial or
something the facilitation or the
priesthood is really important how did
you develop your facilitation skills
guide book people Etc right it's
interesting you asked that because uh
part of it was about me getting out of
the way and that was an interesting
moment so it went through these phases
like his say the two-person phase and
then it was a kind of there was about
six of us on stage interacting with the
audience stage that was the first public
anti debate and then we went fully
participatory so it was the next anti
debate was actually too many people it
was about 80 people in one room speaking
about whether war is natural or not and
basically over some time I realized that
there was a source energy problem and a
a Founder syndrome problem and two
colleagues kylin and Michael both said
do you mind if we try this ourselves you
know and Michael took the lead and you
know looked at what we wanted to do and
I found it actually suddenly I saw it
differently and it was really alive and
working much better in some ways because
I was a little bit
overinvestment I'm more interested in
the challenge and the tension of the
issues I'm very drawn to that and
because of that in the first few anti-
debates I think people just felt it was
too much was asked of them and it was
often tiring for example they had to
stand for a long time to show their
their view of different issues in space
through a process we call tblo where
they stand on a line and then you would
ask them to show variations on that
Theme by standing on the horizontal axis
and so on and after a while people came
along and said look you're asking a a
lot of people they're standing a lot
they're relying on the plenary too much
you need more small group activity and
so through various successive revisions
we honed it down to something that by
the end had all of the elements that I
felt were essential and we reached the
point where we could say ah we've
created something I looked it I think it
turned out it was actually the same
event you had two videos one that you
put up in your most recent essay what's
the name of your current essay that you
just put out so the most recent video is
a 25-minute documentary created by the
wonderful filmmaker Katy Teague and
she's done a few videos with people in
our sort of liino webs space that are
worth checking out but this one's called
the anti- debate experiments in the art
of sens making for a world gone slightly
mad and that was a way of trying to get
people's attention to experiments in the
art of sense making because that's what
this is really we wanted that
documentary not so much to be a how-to
Guide to the anti- debate we weren't
saying look here's a step-by-step guide
go and do in your own town hall we might
get to that in fact we plan to but right
now we wanted to tell the story of a
small group of people which is
perspectiva and its associates doing
what we could to bring a new social
practice into being so that 25-minute
documentary is really a story of the
effort to create a new social practice
and as a result as a journey quality of
is this thing worth doing or not we do
of course describe the main elements of
the process as we go and we try and give
people a strong feeling for what it
amounts to but the actual howto guide is
coming later in a book that will be
published later this year cool yeah I
watched that one and I thought it was
interesting but I will say when I
finished reading I said well how does
this goddamn thing work wasn't clear to
me right and then I dug around and I
found another video called is war
natural and other questions which was I
think the same event that was the core
of the experiments and sens making video
but it was a bigger chunk it was 50 some
minutes and I will say at least for me a
kind of left brainy kind of Erector Set
kind of dude I was able to extract more
signal on what this Beast actually was
by watching that thing that's okay Jim I
think that's understandable there's a
few things going on there so we did nine
anti- debates in total one of which was
online and we quite quickly decided this
wasn't going to work very well online so
we did eight main anti- debates and
there was a journey quality to that as I
say but by the end I can talk you
through roughly what it is step by step
yeah let's do that the is war natural
and other questions video is one
particular anti- debate that took place
at an event called the realization
Festival that perspectiva co-hosts every
year in St jal's house a beautiful
Country House endorse it and it was a
plener event so everyone at the
conference was invited to take part and
it was in a massive room but everybody
came or almost everybody and so we had
our task cut out for us because that
number of people moving around in a room
it's inherently somewhat chaotic
nonetheless it was kind of beautiful and
there were lots of moments in that
process that worked well which is why it
features quite heavily in the 25-minute
documentary but there is quite a lot of
other material in the documentary as
well from the other anti- debates um all
right so with that background I would
say they're both worth watching if you
want to learn more so with that tell us
where your current canonical
state-of-the-art process is so this is
like you could say the the blueprint or
the template or the default we feel
there will come a point quite soon
within a year roughly where we're
sharing the material of the art form and
it's a kind of art form it's important
to understand the steps I'm about to
mention it's not quite as simple as just
doing step one step two step three and
hoping for the best there's quite a lot
of tacit learning in the process of of
doing it and that's what we try and
convey in the the book that's
forthcoming anyway with that said the
first issue is is just the social
dynamics of a group getting together so
if you invite roughly 25 people into the
room of course there's a brief
introduction about what to expect in the
following three hours there's a chance
for people to briefly speak to at least
one other person to settle themselves
into the room ask any necessary
questions I'll be it quite briefly
because you're trying to get on with the
process and then there's a chance for
people to set a sort of positive tone to
get away from the sort of criticality of
the dialectical process we want people
to speak about things that they find
meaningful or things they find beautiful
or things they find worthwhile things
that give them hope we ask them to do
that quite early on but then later we
get them to resist more and speak a bit
more about you know what matters to them
more critically but we set the positive
tone and then we get them to to begin to
choose a question slowly but surely
before that we we set aside time for
everyone to spend a few minutes by
themselves just reflecting on why
they're there like what they care about
what they're hoping to get out of this
process so that they have we move
between small group individual large
group throughout the process the next
phase is choosing the question this is
quite an important variation on debate
because in debate typically the question
is a given but we feel you can demarcate
the area of the question by saying it's
about climate change or it's about
technology or it's about democracy if
you want to or you can leave it
completely open depending on the group
we did both the last one we did was
about climate but before that we kept it
completely open the group comes up with
a question and the way they do that is
by discussing with each other and
spending time alone they ask themselves
what they most want to talk about and
then they get into smaller groups and
they they write down try to articulate
what is this as a statement and we give
them some guidance about what makes for
a good statement It's relatively short
it's something that you can agree or
disagree with it usually has a degree of
depth and richness in it so it's it's a
little bit ambiguous it shouldn't be it
should be clear enough to talk about but
Rich enough to disagree about and then
once they've chosen their own statement
they write it down and stand beside it
and everyone does that and then we ask
people to actually explore the room and
let let go of the question they've
helped to create and begin to converge
on the one that seems most alive to them
most juicy most exciting something times
even because they disagree with it so
for example in the last anti- debate the
statement we ended up discussing was
humanity is too weak to address the
climate crisis right that was the
statement we ended up going for um but
that was partly because quite a few
people disagreed with it so vehemently
that they really wanted to talk about it
right so that process happens and people
just show that by by clustering around
the question and if you get to the point
as we did a few times where there's some
like very close like almost the same
size of group in each question sometimes
you have two or three then people start
trying to make the case for why they
think that question is the one to go
with or that statement is the one to go
with and that usually resolves itself
people move to a new question and it's
obvious which one to go with if not the
facilitators decide and that that whole
process of introduction takes about an
hour so if you get from the the social
side the personal reflective side the
introduction the questions the choosing
of the question then you're into one
hour you have a short break you come
back from the short break and now it's
like okay now we've got this question
We're In It Together what's it's Al
usually a statement rather than a
question that's quite important because
a statement is more open-ended and uh
allows for a greater degree of inquiry
rather than a question which can often
be limiting because it lends itself to a
yes or a no with the question we then do
what we call the question bomb process
and the question bomb process is the
kind of recognizing the multitude of
questions lying within any given
question so in the video I take the
example of is war natural right some
would see that as a very interesting
question but anyone who's been trained
intellectually or just a thoughtful
person will say well what do you mean by
War and what do you mean by natural and
if you say something's natural does that
mean it's good and uh how do you
distinguish between war and conflict
where does war begin and conflict end
and when I say something is natural
isn't everything natural I mean give me
an example of something that isn't
natural you know this kind of thing so
that the question bomb process is one
where the room gets to hear the full
range of perspectives on the inquiry at
hand and the point there isn't that any
particular Authority answers those
questions but just that the whole room
is aware of them in the same way that a
jury jointly hears statements from the
lawyers um the whole room gets to hear
oh my goodness this question is actually
very rich and if I want to have a view
on it I have to Grapple with a lot of
these hidden issues from that moment of
the question question bomb we then move
into something called tblo and table is
a process by which on the existing
statement people show where they are
with it to the extent that they agree or
disagree they move to different ends of
the room a question for you there so how
do you go from the question bomb
presumably lots of questions could get
thrown out in the question bomb to some
practical curated list of questions that
you're going to do the Tableau on that's
where the facilitator has a role and
that's why you do need a degree of
facilitation because usually we'll
before the question bomb kicks in we'll
have a tblo process about where people
are on the existing statement that
people have chosen to get a kind of
sense check of the room as a whole and
then through the question bomb we may
then ask them to again do it now that
you've heard what this question is
really about what the statement's really
about or all the questions hiding within
it do you still feel the same way and
you can do we call this Dynamic T
because you can show agree and disagree
on one axis but then you can introduce
agree because of particular things or
disagree because of particular things on
the horizontal axis so the extent of
your agreement and disagreement and the
reasons for your agreement and
disagreement can begin to be fleshed out
and again the purpose of this is to show
the room the degree of variation and
what is eliciting changes in that view
so it's a kind of dynamic process of
disclosure through which a social
organism gets to see itself more clearly
under a kind of epistemic frame that's
the kind of principle just gross range
question bomb how many questions get
thrown out then how many do you then
take on to the Tableau stage that's a
judgment call but in the is war natural
video that you saw we ended up having
lots and lots of questions to the
Explorer and the way it went was the
question is war natural quite quickly
converged on the question of what is
natural the room was very interested to
understand that question they felt there
was a lot at stake politically in that
and then then it moved into judgments
about how you decide that someone saying
really I make decisions on what's
natural to do with how I feel because
somehow as an organism I feel that my
feelings are somehow a valid test of
what's natural and what isn't others
would say no no that's just a kind of
prejudice you've got to think your way
through this based on principles and
what we've learned from history and so
the question then became are thinking
and feeling equally valid and then
someone else would say well actually our
thinking and feeling even different
we've learned from cognitive science
that thinking feeling are very
coextensive we have the embodied mind
hypothesis the extended mind hypothesis
and so on and so then someone stood up
and said hang on I just want to say
thinking and feeling are different and
then people would swarm around them and
say no no this person's right thinking
and feeling are different and that's
what got me to say and you'll see this
in the video trying to get the Tableau
straight again trying to get back to the
discussion I said I want to say this
thinking and feeling are both the same
and different right and at that moment a
lot of people moved moved into agreement
and they said okay that's right that's
where we are of course they're the same
and of course they're different and we
have to hold that tension and that
Paradox and only then can we move on
with the discussion and that's kind of
where we got to and we did move on and
we got back to the issue of okay now
that we've established that can we come
back to that is war natural now that we
have a fuller sense of what we mean what
the room means by natural and a fuller
sense of how you would go about it in
terms of the inquiry interesting that's
about where it ended in the 50-minute
video I didn't ever see it make a turn
towards answering the question is war
natural right because really it's not
about answering the question the
question is the shared conceptual object
for the social process that matters and
we do engage our intellects to try and
answer the question and through that we
understand a great deal about ourselves
about difference about how we form views
and how others form views but the aim is
not not so much intellectual progress as
a kind of socio epistemic progress we
want people to feel what it's like to
think together and to see each other as
agents worthy of our attention other
ways of thinking and knowing that we
might learn from so that the question is
there as a kind of prop for the play to
unfold yeah this goes back to the
concept this I think really reinforces
the fact that this is a practice rather
than an analytical process to get an
answer yeah although I do want to
iterate one of the things I had to fight
for in amongst the group process was we
went from the beginning of it being an
almost entirely intellectual inquiry and
at some point we we almost lost the
intellect completely I had to sort of
fight to bring it back at certain points
because it does matter you know I
remember the writer Oliver burkeman
who's quite well known to a lot of
people wrote a famous book on time and
so on he was in one of the anti- debates
and he said look I do understand what
you're trying to do here but it's quite
hard for me not to feel
frustrated by the fact that these these
terms are dangling there and we can
never exhaustively decide what they mean
and I say look I understand that it's
frustrating but it's also a simulation
or a simil acum of what the Democratic
process is like that actually this is
what happens all the time we coexist
with these living
questions and we have to and we have to
make decisions in the context of the
never being fully answered so it's not
to sort of Revel in the ambiguity and
confusion of it it's just that the
inquiry can only go so far before you
get to a kind of decision point of like
okay how do you feel about this which
way do you want to go on this of course
if it elicits interest for example the
question is war natural is still a
question and tomorrow anyone could go
and write a wonderful essay on it but
the purpose of the anti- debate is
different it's what does that question
do to your understanding of Democratic
possibility so I guess just to clarify
did you ever call the question was there
ever a tableau on the question itself at
the end at the end there was agree or
disagree but it was no longer of the
form the Oxford Union form of of as I
remember it from the union days you
would walk out and the way you walked
out was the way you voted we didn't want
that what we what we did instead is you
know to what extent has your view
changed and we we got people to say my
view has changed a great deal my view
hasn't Chang much at all and then we got
a separate question which was about did
this process make you feel hopeful about
our capacity to answer questions like
this in future and and some said it
didn't and some said it did and one or
two were in between what's your takeaway
from this what's this thing good for
this is a tool every tool has a thing
that's good for just to let you know Jim
this is not quite the end this is still
only about halfway through the table
gets to the point when you ask did you
take a view on it it's better than that
it's better than that because what we do
once we've had the Tableau process and
inquired into people in the line why are
you here what do you have to say to the
group we ask people about what's going
on for them as they're moving around we
then get to a critical stage of the
process in part three that's called
swarming and swarming is a process by
which is a little bit mimicking what
happens on social media with kind of
people with large following setting the
agenda and then people getting behind
them in terms of likes and comments and
so on
and the swarming process is is actually
a process of something like epistemic
seduction it's a way of trying to
recruit people to your view but the way
we do that is not with a wishy-washy
statement of opinion but rather through
moral and political commitment So when
you say what does it all amount to once
you've shown the range of views once
you've had the social experience it
doesn't end there if it just ended there
it would just be more discourse about
discourse about discourse and so what no
we're actually trying to get people
people to the point of taking a stand
right on this issue what not so much I'm
yes or no but rather what is the thing
you feel called to speak on behalf of
because of what you've just been through
and in this we're sort of eliciting some
of the history of the Quaker movement
that those who feel moved to speak the
most when the spirit moves you you speak
and there people come out with all sorts
of things that weren't expected again
are not directly related to the question
but they they're adjacent to the
question some sometimes so for example
on the the climate question when we were
the contention was that Humanity was too
weak to deal with the climate crisis you
know someone was taking the stand for
this being you know
absolutely know kind of like a fascist
question like you know we shouldn't we
shouldn't ask this question because if
you're saying that we're uh too weak to
deal with a climate crisis you're
implicitly invoking the need for
strength which is a principally a
fascist kind of virtue and they were
saying I take a stand against the very
idea of the question so these kind of
things come out and what matters in that
final process is that as far as possible
people are encouraged to find their own
voice and to recruit people around a
smaller cluster of Youth what happens is
you have four or five statements and
then quite quickly one or two of them
combine into clusters and then they're
sort of competing with each other for
what is the most important thing to take
away from this what stand really matters
and as that's happening another critical
thing occurs a lot of people disengage
right which is exactly what happens in
the real world too this is the moment we
speak about the
enigmatic and the enigmatic are the
group who just feel like whatever that
was I don't want any part of it and
that's that's what happens today what
percentage of the electorate barely
knows what's going on politically barely
bothers to vote doesn't really get
involved in public life we're interested
to know what what it would take to bring
them back into the game so part of the
process is those who are trying to
recruit each other suddenly stop and say
hang on you think you're the game but
actually look at each other to them
you're all part of the same thing you're
all part of the same problem can you now
try to bring those people back in and
that's where they try to recruit those
who've been disaffected and disengaged
and bring them back into the
process and only right at the end of all
of that do we get to something like a
kind of closing Circle where people just
leave with the critical question they're
left with and they take away from the
process ah very interesting now cuz as
you know in the United States we're
probably the most degenerate case a very
good election turn out 60% so 40% don't
vote and then here's the scarier thing
if you actually talk to Serious
political scientists they'll tell you of
the 60% that vote 30% or half of them
30% of the electorate are essentially
noise voters that have no clue about the
issues and they vote because they like
the cut of his hair she's taller or like
she's got blondee hair you know idiots
basically and so basically the elections
are are determined by 30% of the people
who are at least somewhat politically
engaged I would expect the yield was
higher in a community that was selected
by you guys for this process but give us
a sense of how many people ended up
disaffected from any of the propositions
yeah it's often about it's between 10
and 20% typically it's usually and it's
partly the propositions and partly the
process and but then we do want to have
that moment of bringing them back on
board because I think that's part of the
problem with where democracy is reached
it's this sense of giving up on people
who don't like the two-party system
don't like the way public conversation
happens don't see anything in it for
them and I agree with you you know the
the the level of first of all political
engagement being very low and secondly
even among those who vote it's really
rather troubling to think why they vote
the way they do because in principle we
have a legitimacy of the government
rests upon a democratic mandate which is
based on an informed electorate making
judicious decisions at a critical time
the reality is very different it's a lot
of very suggestible people being more or
less manipulated by an infosphere that's
often backed by Capital interests okay
the anti- debate by itself won't counter
that it's it's much too big a structural
problem but we want to begin to create
forms of experience that are somehow
more enchanting than the scroll of the
smartphone it wouldn't be hard well you
say that but you know the dopamine hit
is still there and Y it's true
behaviorally for sure but what a
lowquality signal most of that stuff is
just just the worst [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I mean I had
very interesting experiences you may
know I go on a six-month social media
sabatical each year from July 1st to
January 2nd and uh so I got back
re-engaged on January 2nd or 3rd I don't
remember when I actually came back and
after 6 weeks Facebook in particular I
this time I just had a horrible allergic
reaction to it particularly because
we're moving into election season the
United States and it was all team red
versus Team blue people I knew in real
life to be thoughtful nuanced people
they were just smacking each other with
rubber stamps and I'm somewhat unusual
in that I know plenty of people on both
sides of the political spectrum and my
Facebook feed has people from both sides
probably a little bit more team blue
Democrats in the US and it's maybe 6040
something like that but man the
stupidity was at all-time highs in my
experience despite having been on
Facebook for whatever hell it's been 15
years and so I after six weeks said I've
had enough I'm off Facebook again for at
least uh another month to come back toci
want to come back as a as the coyote
arsonist do I want to the other
possibilities I delete
4,200 of my followers and just do the
people I actually know in real life I
mean it's a really interesting question
on whether there's anything of value L
it is and it's and it's a relatively you
know one that we haven't had a lot of
historical time to contend with it's
happening so fast and you know before we
know it these are defining features of
Our Lives the opinion of of the world in
our pocket and so on but I think the
challenge is it's it's basically much of
cultural formation is now taking place
through technological and capitalistic
powers that are effectiv
engineering addiction and addiction that
manifests as distraction in which the
distraction is fueled by
entertainment which is parasitic on the
underlying
culture and this is a disaster this is
why Democratic legitimacy is in Peril
and why a lot of the younger generation
aren't so sure about democracy and
whether it's worth preserving and so you
know I'm not saying the anti debates any
kind of Panacea for that but only that I
think it's incumbent on those who care
about Democratic dispositions including
curiosity empathy you know intellectual
engagement and so on that you actually
try to create things that are worth
doing that feel like worthy of the
challenges of our time and prefigurative
of a kind of culture you want to live in
that's what we tried you know goodness
knows if we actually succeeded but it
was something I'm proud to have tried to
bring into the world at least and we
hope to keep on iterating it and
eventually allow it to be something that
anyone can try and you know who knows
where it will go very interesting now
let's get to the question that many of
us that are fool around with social
change always have to confront is this
thing scalable I'm going to stipulate
after watching it and hearing you talk
about it this will not make for riveting
TV right there will not be too many
30-second takes going up on Tik Tock
from these things on the other hand I
could see being a participant in this
being being a quite significant life
event right it's the kind of thing that
you don't normally encounter in this
fractionated artificial remote virtual
world of ours actually getting down with
it with the folks face to face sweaty
arm pits the whole thing for three four
or five hours right right right right
right right yeah how do you scale sweaty
armpits sweaty armpits gosh that it can
actually have a impact on the world
right so it's an interesting way of
framing the
the challenge so yes there's a challenge
of scale but in some ways the need to
scale things and the way we think about
scaling is part of the challenge here so
I agree with you that it doesn't lend
itself to the kind of digital
amplification that leads to millions of
people changing their attitudes values
or behavior anytime soon on the other
hand few things do you know I think it's
important to understand that even videos
that are watched many millions of times
may have a negligable impact on culture
we shouldn't confuse volume for for
actual transformation I would also like
to think although I could be wrong that
we're entering a phase of disaffection
with ambient internet that we're
actually beginning to feel that while
the online world is of course enchanting
and engaging in all sorts of ways
there's a lot to be said for not being
online I was speaking with a fellow
publisher a few weeks ago and we said
the defining feature of the book the
best quality of the book today is one
thing that it doesn't have it doesn't
have hyperlinks and that's really what
makes a book so invaluable it's
precisely that it can't take you
anywhere else yeah no rabbit holes no
rabbit holes right yeah yeah in the
anti- debate I would like to think that
it's sufficiently variagated and
interesting and edifying such that when
you go through it you get a lot of flow
experience a lot of you know flow States
coming through it and also that you
learn things from it that people begin
to set it up themselves Now by scaling
an achievement would be that in multiple
countries in the world there were
several sites of this thing taking hold
and people doing it by choice doing it
because they want to do it almost as a
kind of Civic Leisure of some kind as we
used to show up for Town Hall meetings
and so on but do less so now that's my
hope but I also think that the anti-
debate as such you know I do think it
has its own dignity and and power but
it's more the principle but we want to
model an attempt to do something like
this it's not necessarily this as such
but we want to get people creatively
experimenting with different forms of
social inquiry to actually encourage
more of this quality of being together H
and finding power finding agency in the
collective again and not being dazed by
the hyper agentic spectacle online
anything that does that is it push in
the right direction I'll give you an
example of something that it's I think
it still exists in the United States I
was actually went to one about 10 years
ago something called The Toast Masters
Club and this was in a small town
Winchester Virginia I got invited to
give a short little talk but the main
event each month I think it is is
everybody has dinner together there like
30 people in this small city of maybe
40,000 folks and one person volunteers
like a year in advance to prepare a
formal 45 minute talk on whatever topic
they want right and this guy's talk was
about the temples of Greece and he knew
he was going to go to Greece he and his
wife and his family and they toured a
bunch of temples and they did a bunch of
book research then they put together you
know a PowerPoint and you know I'd give
it a B+ not bad right and this is just
you know car salesmen and nurses and
school teachers and construction workers
who have the purpose is to improve your
skills in public speaking right and this
thing existed in America for I don't
know 100 years probably at the high end
maybe you somehow uh turn anti- debates
needs a sexier name right probably a
positive name rather than a negative
name into something that people choose
to do you need of course very good
guides and videos and all how to do this
and get people to do it you know scale
it by a parallelism where you have to
push the string all the time right well
that's definitely the aim so from quite
early on we wanted to create something
like that that people could do
themselves there is like I say an art to
it so it's quite important that we feel
that the time we release it to the world
is something for everyone else to do
that we've done our bit that you know
we've tried to make the code as clear as
possible it will of course evolve and
people will do their own thing but at
least we can say look this is this is
what we came up with with and this is
the Integrity of the thing I would also
say on the name anti- debate is there as
a framing device to help us locate it in
the best of debate but trying to go
beyond it in some way but it's also anti
as antidote it's it's getting at this
idea of we're not sure debate is sort of
fit for purpose in the world as it is
for all the reasons I've mentioned that
the question is given that there's only
two people that it's a kind of top- down
activity in which most people are
passive and so on but we I agree that
there might be a future name for it as
it evolves I love the idea of of it
being a generalist practice this is
quite important too so I mentioned
earlier visa mascal and the origins of
this that I think it's gone beyond being
a rationalist practice to being
something epistemically more
plural but I also think it's gone beyond
a debate which is typically quite an
elitist practice of those with
extraordinary verbal fluency thrashing
it out on the stage and everyone else
watching to something that is more truly
inclusive and allows people to take part
and those who take part can show what
they think without having to speak as
well which matters I like that a lot
because not everybody is a fluid speaker
right I mean there guys like us are
natural-born bullshitters right but I
know lots of people particularly in
public are very shy but they can vote
with their feet which is very important
that you can address different psycho
types that's right and also that they
can sometimes speak in smaller groups
too that it's important that we don't
rely on that verbal fluency being the
defining quality with which you find
your agency in a social group so for all
these reasons we did think it through
and hope it has some potential yeah I
thought I you know will say as I was
reading it and following down your
rabbit hole so you need to pull all your
documents together into one long
statement we do we do we do they're like
I think I must have read five or six
different pages and this and that I'm
grateful for your due diligence G
appreciate it like I say there is a boot
coming out later this year that' be
great so I do see some potential here
and I certainly encourage more of this
kind of stuff CU as you say getting
people with them sweaty armpits
interacting as humans that alone is a
vast value compared to saying yes yes he
did no he didn't on [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Tik Tok or
on even worse Twitter or Facebook Etc so
I want to thank you Jonathan rouson for
a very Noble effort so far I look
forward to see where this thing goes
brilliant well thank you Jim it's been a
pleasure as always so again Jonathan
rouson thank you for yet another very
interesting conversation thank you Jim
next time all
righty audio production and editing by
Andrew belven Productions Music by Tom
Mueller at modern SPAC music.com
[Music]
