you got your PhD from Harvard how do you
feel given the most recent
Fallout these open your questions are
incredible
um
it's it's amazing it's amazing that it
came to this
and um as a person I know studying at
Harvard said I
wonder
if we are the last generation who will
continue to see Harvard as this
shining um city on a hill
uh and that's you know that's somebody
who's there now um I I think it's a
disgrace and we can't talk about it
which is the fascinating part that we
are effectively losing our society
because we're afraid to say certain
things because we're being made afraid
to say certain things what do you
mean well okay so it as a Harvard Alum
you get the Harvard magazine and this
this thing is incredible because it's
just always uh Harvard people promoting
other Harvard people in the sort of PR
um the nepotism magazine yeah H PR Fest
and I think I remember that the article
introducing Claudine gay was entitled a
Scholar's scholar and I knew from the
get-go that this was not going to go
well
because you know
I don't think people understand what
Harvard is and how it functions and why
it's
different um Harvard is really the
fusion of two separate institutions um
one is about Brilliance and one is about
power and so you can think about this as
the sharpest minds and the sharpest
elbows and the sharp mind
crowd gets
uh tons of resources because the sharp
elbow crowd makes sure that power is
used to perpetuate Harvard's place of
privilege and the sharp mind crowd
contributes um Prestige to the sharp
elbow crowd and so by virtue of the fact
that you can't Decon flate the sharp
minds and the sharp elbows Harvard
continues to have this very special
place now what is this special place why
isn't it just a univers like any other
um I
think sort of two or three principal
reasons one of which is that uh Harvard
is sort of an extension of the US
government the government Department
which is sort of Harvard's version of
polyi is kind of an extension of the
state department at times the economics
Department uh ends up setting economic
policy in many ways for the United
States
and above
all there is
this concept that in every field there's
usually one institution that sets The
Narrative so for example in journalism
the New York Times is different than all
other newspapers and news organs because
of its focus on what we sometimes hear
of as narrative driven journalism now
people now talk a lot more about
narrative but 15 years ago I don't think
this was common knowledge that the
editorial room at the New York Times was
a place where people thought about what
the long arcs of stories were and you
figured out what the Arc of the story
was before the facts came in so for
example Hillary is
inevitable uh was a long Arc in
narrative-driven journalism it wasn't
true but all the information that came
in when Hillary was running against
Donald Trump um
was fed through this prism of the
inevitability of Hillary
Clinton in the same way Harvard
practices narrative-driven academics it
tells you what is happening what the
grand arcs
are and those just like the 2016
election are very often
untrue and so that's a way in which
Harvard serves power it it uh it brings
people in who are brilliant and then it
takes the ones of those who are willing
to play ball with the engines of power
and it uh it enters into the
storytelling mode in which Harvard sets
the tone for
everyone um so when you lose Harvard
it's very important and very different
the last thing that I would say that
really distinguishes Harvard is that
Harvard
um there's the open part of Harvard the
classrooms and there's the cled part of
Harvard that you can't see at
all and it's sort of a system of star
Chambers um and I don't think people who
have not Tangled with Harvard would
would comprehend how much of what
Harvard gets done it gets done behind
closed doors because it can't be done in
the
open like what do you mean I'll give you
a a crazy
example uh I was not allowed to attend
my own thesis this
defense
now you're not an academic by
training if you tell that to an academic
they don't even understand what you're
saying they think that you're making a
joke or you must not have understood
something or maybe you were sick that
day and you had to zoom in or who knows
what but I don't mean that at all I
mean when I tried to get my
PhD the Harvard math department instit
Ed a rule that said you could not attend
your own thesis defense you could
not determine who would uh present your
thesis your
dissertation so basically what happened
is um if you had an adviser which almost
everyone did your advisor presented your
thesis behind closed
doors nobody's ever heard of this in the
history of
academics is this how Cline gay got away
with it no I don't know Claudine
gay was taken down for two different
reasons um one reason she was taken down
was for not having crisper statements
about the uniformity of application of
rules of codes of contact when it came
to uh Jewish
students um so it's one thing whether
you have a free speech policy or maybe
you have a um code of conduct where you
say we can't tolerate certain kinds of
speech whatever that is there's
certainly a question about the
differential application of that on
behalf of different groups so that was
one of the ways that she got into
trouble the other way she got into
trouble was the vulnerability of
plagiarism in a weak academic record
and you know let me just say this early
and you'll come everyone will come to it
late plagiarism is the tip of the
iceberg
of uh attribution bullying where
effectively you have these people who
determine who did what in the narrative
driven storytelling that is
academic and what what papers get cited
which papers don't what discoveries are
named for certain people is determined
largely by a tiny number of Institutions
Harvard preeminent among them and so
Harvard just plays games morning noon
and night
with writing stories that put Harvard at
the center and particular
individuals um at the top whether or not
those individuals have earned it or not
and what's hard for me is most people
are now thinking okay Harvard is just
full of it but it it isn't it's half
full of it and half the best place on
Earth to do anything important and th
that tension is not is what's not
recognized now
power has to take a backseat to
academics and to Discovery and to
Brilliance if this game is to be
maintained you can't constantly just
exercise power and tell stories so
in in my history with this University
I've tried to figure out why does it
behave so differently than every other
institution of of
research is Dei the boogeyman that
everyone is worried about
you know
I'm this is so hard to to even get into
it are universities won World War II
uh in large measure I mean when if you
need codes broken if you need new
weapons developed you're supposed to
have SEAL Team Six of the human mind
that you can call on and that's supposed
to be MIT Caltech Princeton Harvard it's
a very small number of Super prestigious
universities um part of the problem is
if you think about I don't even how to
say this exactly if you think about a
university as akin to a an exotic car a
lot of people buy a McLaren or a
Lamborghini or Ferrari because they like
the
styling
status but the sole of all of those cars
is
racing right and the people who buy the
cars for the racing sometimes are really
annoyed by the fact that the cars are
status symbols and that's what a
research University is to me I'm
interested in the racing and other
people are interested because it it sort
of uh what you do to show that you got a
$2 million bonus uh from your investment
banking job uh if you don't race it I
don't know what you're doing there and
I'd prefer that you'd leave um the
purpose of a university is not teaching
purpose of a great
University is training and
research and we can't afford to lose
that I I don't think people have any
idea how important it is to be able to
call on your own nation's top academics
when you need the truth you need
something done you need help and so
whatever it is that is denaturing our
universities that's turning this into a
nightclub where you the whole trick is
to get past the bouncer for the cool
kids uh has to be stopped but what does
it say that the ex-president of Harvard
is someone whose academic bonafides were
found out to
be
plagiarized largely I'm trying to say
the balance between the sharp elbows and
the sharp
Minds is wildly
off and and why is
it nobody wants to say what everybody is
thinking which is this person is not fit
to be the president of Harvard
University and why is that because
they're going to get called a name this
was made all about
race oh what you can't tolerate
scholarship of this quality from a black
female it's
like you're starting I wasn't even
questioning this before but now you're
saying a Scholar's scholar me thinks
that does protest too much
we'll get back to talking to Eric in one
minute but first I need to tell you
about element stop having coffee first
thing in the morning your adenosine
system that caffeine Acton isn't even
active for the first 90 minutes of the
day but your adrenal system is and salt
acts on your adrenal system this is the
best way to start the day and I've done
it for over three years now it's got a
science backed electrolyte ratio of
sodium potassium and magnesium which
helps to curb Cravings improve brain
function and regulate your appetite best
of all there is a no BS no questions
asked refund policy so if you're not
sure you can try it completely risk-free
and if you do not like it for any reason
they'll give you your money back and you
don't even need to return the box that's
how confident they are that you love it
right now you can get a free sample pack
of all eight flavors with your first box
plus that no questions asked refund
policy by going to the link in the
description below or heading to drink LM
nt.com slod wisdom that's drink LM
nt.com
slod wisdom there was a quote from
Howard Jacobson that said I hope
Claudine gay marks the start of people
who know nothing losing their
jobs
look we need to bring back
exclusion we're talking way too much
about inclusion inclusion and exclusion
are two halves of a normal
process clotting gay needed to be
excluded from that office not
included now if you told me that
condalisa Rice was the president of
Harvard she's black she's female and I
don't agree with her
politically but I don't think many
people would have a qualification issue
with cond Lisa rice or let's say James
Gates is a black man a distinguished
physicist this has to do with people
coming from ER subjects particularly
activist subjects subjects that didn't
exist before the late 60s early ' 7s
when all of these things were created
you know to an extent when you had I
don't know if you recall the the
pictures of what is it Willard straight
Hall at Cornell with the black students
emerging with
weapons um you know there was a
revolutionary fervor at the end of the'
60s early 70s and you have people
creating women's studies uh you know
black studies African-American studies
and these these departments were
basically born of activism more than
scholarship I'm not saying no
scholarship gets done there but
scholarship and activism are essentially
fused and many of us think activism is
great just don't do it next to our
physics and math and computer science
and music
departments you know if what you're
really there to do is to ignore certain
things and accentuate others and not
search for the truth
um that's not an ignoble Pursuit it's
just that's not what scholarship is
scholarship is about understanding
things and getting them right and we've
we've gone down a terrible turn but you
know just
consider I think your listeners uh might
enjoy Googling the
string um um cook cook something up to
ease him out that was a phrase that was
used uh internally in documents within
Harvard when um a Kenyon was ejected
from the Harvard economics
Department um back in the
60s and what had really happened is that
this guy had had passed all of his exams
he was fully qualified was working on
his dissertation to become a Harvard PhD
in economics
and the university I think decided that
it didn't like an African man sleeping
with white women in in
America and it got rid of him even
though he was in good standing that the
only reason we know about that is that
turned out to be Barack Obama
senior so Harvard
conspired 100% with the state department
to destroy the career of Barack Obama
senior and that's how Harvard worked in
the start Chambers it cooks and what
does it do it Cooks things up it Cooks
up stories it Cooks up um attribution it
gives people credit for things that they
didn't do first it takes credit away
from other people um I was there in the
mid90s when it destroyed my wife's
career um through something the Star
Chamber called the Harvard jobs uh
Market meeting and all the economists go
into a closed room they lock the door
and they say who's got a good student
and my wife was the student of a Nobel
uh Award winner in economics and she had
um done something which was to bring an
entirely new kind of mathematics into
economic theory to replace something
called the marginal Revolution a new
form of differential calculus called
gauge Theory and a guy named Dale
Jorgenson who recently died said
nope so even though a Nobel level
Economist was promoting her and saying
this is great stuff she should go
anywhere in the country a woman of color
from the developing World
um an old white guy just said no and you
know in a second uh she her position in
the world is reordered in the pile and
why were they doing this because they
wanted to fix the
CPI uh and I don't mean fix as in Cur it
I mean fix FES in fixing a baseball game
um because the CPI is used to transfer
wealth what's CPI the Consumer Price
Index and the reason it's important is
that mostly what the government does
after its military is uh entitlements
Social Security payments Medicare
payments and those are indexed to
inflation and the way in which it takes
in money is through taxes and those tax
brackets are indexed to inflation so
it's very funny everybody focuses on
like Central Banking in the FED but the
Bureau of Labor Statistics maintains a
statistic that transfers billions and
billions of dollars and if the CPI is
overstated uh it pays out a lot of money
and takes in very little money and if
it's if you can get it to be
understated uh then you get to take in
much more money you don't have to pay
old and sick people and that's what the
Harvard Department was doing there's a
single figure that mediates everything
that gets squeezed through how funny and
and so what we we were doing
as a collaboration was showing the right
mathematical framework to calculate the
CPI but that would have allowed less
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it would have allowed less yeah
to use the technical term sir so uh but
but the point being that the Harvard
jobs Market meeting inside of the
Harvard economics department is a Star
Chamber the way the uh immigration um
status of Obama's father was a Star
Chamber as was the way in which my P PhD
was over and over again Harvard closes
its doors and it makes stuff up this
sounds unsalvageable as somebody I don't
know it sounds like it sounds like we've
got the people leading it have gotten in
through some combination of diversity
Equity inclusion nepotism gameplaying
harsh elbows seems like the people they
just hired a guy named Daniel S Fred
who's one of the greatest mathematicians
alive in my
area um Dan and I might disagree about
String Theory we can have scholarly
disagreements just had lunch with him in
Austin
Texas um that guy's a scholar through
and through I can disagree with him I
can fight with him uh I can I can have
my
differences I would support him 100% as
a scholar to take over uh you know as a
as a Provost or Dean if they were
interested there's no shortage of
absolutely fantastic people at Harvard
but if they're unable or unwilling to
play the political games know that are
required unless they're prepared to file
their elbows down to a sharp Point well
this is what Bill Amman is doing this so
confusing I just I have the feeling I
don't know this guy at all don't have
positive negative I thought you would
have cross paths with him at some point
you would think there are various people
who I don't cross paths with for
whatever reason um I don't even think we
follow each other or maybe I follow him
but I don't think he follows me
um I think that the problem is is that a
lot of these people don't know how the
research Game Works they think about
this in terms of the Harvard Business
School the law school the undergraduate
Alumni network they don't see the part
of Harvard that actually produces the
Mystique you know the analog of the
racing for the exotic car and I I worry
that the right thing to do right now is
to appoint a
kinly research oriented person in a
super rigorous field it doesn't even
have to be stem like music is an
incredibly rigorous field
but what we need right now is rigor we
don't need another person from uh the
social sciences at this moment we need
somebody to reestablish that Harvard is
an intolerant place that it has the
highest possible standards it's
unabashedly elitist it's unabashedly
American
and it cannot live with Dei Dei is a
parasitization of our best hopes and
dreams and we have to recognize that Dei
has to be
destroyed so that goals like diversity
and getting the right people into the
room are not sacrificed on the altar of
mediocrity and lack of Ethics it's
interesting that at places like Yale
they had made some changes to the ways
that grades and diversity account for
admissions but they didn't get rid of
legacy admissions which kind of tells
you everything that you need to know
about what's being
protected no I don't think it
does is this not another way to ensure
that the
people just to ensure that power is is
held in the people who already have it
but very soon this thing isn't going to
be worth very much I don't think that
people care I think this is the same as
looking at why Marvel are going downhill
yeah say
more there are a lot of movies coming
out at the moment I think the most
recent Star Wars director openly said I
enjoy making movies that make men feel
uncomfortable to John
story Star Wars
yeah maybe one of the most male
dominated audience
movies that I can think
of yes it's self-destructed so what I'm
trying to say is is that you can you can
say oh we're going to keep things open
for legacy admissions right but very
soon you're not going to want to be
associated with I mean already Yale has
mismanaged its research University for
years it made a very bad decision not to
go hard on on sciences and stem uh and
focused in my opinion too much on on
softer Fields um you know so what
happens when Harvard is no longer that
prestigious if people start laughing at
Harvard uh what good is it going to be
that you can get your kid in I don't
disagree but I think people are so out
of touch
the people who are in
power are unable or unwilling to see
just
how just
how quickly the stock price is
plummeting I don't think that they're
able to see this thinking about it
especially using the the Marvel example
again or some of the things that are
coming out of
Disney you have a quantifiable figure
what was the opening weekend at the Box
up
you know exactly where this
is there are fewer places to hide when
it comes to that here's the number what
did it cost what did you make opening
weekend right and you have projections
and you have targets presumably that you
want to hit if that number doesn't cause
people to
think maybe we don't need
another narrative about an all female
cast that is better than the men without
over you're not looking at
is um you know
if you look at Mike Hopkins work on the
con karian variant in the mathematics
Department that's like
opening opening weekend
statistics man great stuff happens at
Harvard make no mistake about Harvard is
an amazing and horrible place and we're
going to all now focus on how dumb it is
and how horrible it is and like then
you're not seeing the
tragedy you're not
seeing
look I didn't have an adviser I one of
the only people you'll ever meet with a
PhD that had no advisor um but the guy
who saved me was named RL bot and rul
Bot discovered something that's so
important called bot periodicity that if
I could convey it to you your mind would
be uh you you'd think DMT was for
children uh it has to do with the fact
that there are only four systems of
numbers that have particular property
and one of those sets of numbers spins a
Maro around with the other three with an
eight-fold sort of symmetry who knew
that this thing was even possible it's
just it's an incredible fact about the
world um I associate him with
Harvard that's UNF
fudge there's no there's no one in the
world who can tell me that bot
periodicity wasn't one of the most
important things that happened in the
20th century and to have a person like
that you know just feet from John Tate
uh I could go on and on about all the
real things that happened in Harvard
what we need right
now look I would love to run for
president of Harvard if Claud and gay
can be president of Harvard so can I and
what we need is somebody who's been
wronged by Harvard you need somebody who
has not been on this kind of escalator
to power who's constantly shown Love by
the system there are all sorts of people
that represent what I call Black Sheep
Harvard you've got white sheep Harvard
and black sheep Harvard and black sheep
Harvard is no less important but it's
the people who are not loved by the
system who don't know when to shut up
the people who will take a stand and who
will zig when everyone else zags why
would that be
useful because we've got to purge the
University of the things that don't work
and it's going to be ugly it's going to
be
unpleasant it's going to be a civil war
on the faculty
I was learning about an idea the abalene
Paradox one of my one of my one of my
favorite ideas from last year the abene
Paradox is a situation in which a group
makes a decision that is contrary to the
desires of the group's members because
each member assumes the others approve
of it it explains how a number of
accurate individuals can become idiots
when they get together kind of like the
emperor new clothes an acquaintance
invites you to his wedding despite not
wanting you there because he thinks you
want to attend
you attend despite not wanting to
because you think he wants you that at a
business meeting someone suggests an
idea that he thinks the others will like
recruiting a trans influencer is the
face of the brand each member has
misgivings about this but assumes the
others will consider them transphobic if
they speak out so everyone app proves of
the idea despite no one liking it abene
Paradox yeah um I like it uh it has a
lot to do with Timor Quan's theory of
preference
falsification I think that that's not
exactly how it happens how most of the
way these things work is that you're
afraid to
speak like Le let's predict what's going
to be said when this
debuts sour
grapes uh grifter
charlatan uh Eric doesn't like women
Eric doesn't like black
people oh uh such snobbery what has he
ever done you know we know what every
action
brings about in terms of its
response and that's kind of why we don't
speak up it's just not worth it there
these horrible people that follow you
around looking for you to say anything
like I don't know I don't I don't know
if she's
qualified it's like did he say it can we
get our knives out that thing has to be
driven out of the University we can't
have these people it's not just in the
University though right no no but I'm
saying the universities are special
because the if everyone is going to take
power later passes through them you
can't
afford to lose them you can't afford to
lose your news media you can't afford to
lose your universities you can't afford
to lose your political parties three for
three at the moment that's right
yeah but look it's worth fighting for so
you know they'll call me a bunch of
names they'll try to deface my Wikipedia
entry that's what they'll do
what do you make of the most release of
Epstein documents you tell me oh man I
mean surprising to see Steven Hawking on
there in some ways but
why I wouldn't know what Jeffrey Epstein
would want with Steven
Hawking what are you
assuming is so terrible about Steven
Hawking being in these documents I
didn't say that it was terrible
okay I'm like that answer that's
interesting I'm surprised that Jeffrey
Epstein would have an interest in Steven
Hawking Beyond him being somebody that
is well-known influential powerful and
potentially
leverageable which is that makes me
think what he took an interest in
physics and I don't know why and you do
at least you have an idea about why he
took an interest in physics Jeffrey
but I don't know why I don't know why
Jeffrey Epstein was interested in
physics well what would you
guess there's some special mathematics
there that allows him
to or the people that he is associated
with to better be able to predict things
to be able to use it in some sort of a
way around financial markets around new
technology that's emerging to just be
able to see the direction that the
future of technology is moving in
perhaps h
you know more about this than me one
well
I look I I'd go back to this conference
that he held I think it's
2006 or 2004 called confronting
gravity so he holds a conference I don't
think he holds it on this island on his
Island I think he holds it on uh St
Thomas
maybe
um and this is entirely consonant with
an earlier meeting that he had with me
where he wanted to know about what I was
doing with mathematical
physics
and I have to
say look why gravity gravity is in some
sense about the fabric of space
time and if there are things about the
fabric of SpaceTime that you can unlock
that are not contained in general
relativity nor in the standard model how
much power do you think is in that you
saw what the neutron did to unlock the
strong
force um you can take out a city with a
little bit of
physics I'm going to turn this around
Chris because we had a great Dynamic the
last time and I I want to see you play
with ideas too
um tell me what what you imagine might
be the power beyond the standard model
in general relativity if we can already
destroy all of
humanity uh albeit with some com
complications you have to engineer a
bomb what do you think might be on the
other side of the next great discoveries
well I mean this gets into sci-fi and
and speculation around that probably
fits the next Marvel series they should
use this as the as the
tagline I would guess things to do with
being able to move across
space okay wormholes
time if there
are other higher Dimensions if that
allows you to access if the Multiverse
Theory holds uh if that allows you to
access different universes and to move
between
them it might be Limitless
power it could be Limitless power in the
form of energy could be Limitless power
in the form of travel
um what if what if it allows you to
control neutrinos in a new way I mean
like people don't think about neutrinos
it's very hard to send a particle
through planet Earth unscathed but
neutrinos do it right so in some
sense if you were a a Sovereign
Nation wouldn't you be focused on
physics I mean here's the thing that I
just don't understand I'll be totally
honest about who isn't interested in
this
stuff you have to be crazy to do what
we're doing with physics we're running
physics into the ground physics is
you'll go to a Marvel movie about some
guy trying to collect Rings or stones to
get infinite power over the universe
that's physics that's not
Stones when you see somebody talking
about Limitless power think physics
don't think money think
physics physics is the source of
infinite power and is Jeffrey Epstein
sufficiently versed in physics to know
that he needs to be at the Forefront of
this
no but this is what we dealt with last
time so kids if you haven't seen last
time's
episode I don't think it was jeffre EP I
don't understand why we're so focused on
this man why aren't we focused on on
whatever created
him like this is really weird we can't
think
take half of all the time you spend
thinking about Jeffrey Epstein talking
about Jeffrey Epstein everybody talking
about and spend half of that time
saying what do we what do we think about
whoever was behind Jeffrey
Epstein whatever was behind Jeffrey
Epstein is what I think cared about
gravity cared about SpaceTime cared
about physics and you get to use this
supposed financia as a wedge to be able
to start to break this open well this is
the thing if I'm
looking you know there there's a picture
of Lisa Randall at this conference
nobody's worried about the sexual
depravity of Lisa Randall this is stupid
Lisa Randall is an amazing
physicist he was interested in
physics Jeffrey Epstein whatever he
represented cared about
physics does that make him more or less
nervous well you have to appreciate I
have no idea why my country the United
States of America doesn't care about
physics anymore it canel the SSC in
1993 superc conducting super
collider it's bet the farm on string
theory which is completely not worked
out we're now this is the 40 so we're
now in 2024 this is the 40th year
anniversary of the green Schwarz anomaly
cancellation which basically handed the
Keys uh to The Liquor Cabinet of physics
over to the string theorists and they've
been uh drunk on these stories about the
first Super string Revolution the second
Super string Revolution um all these
things that they're going to do the
theory of everything and they just had a
uh panel discussion at the world Science
Festival with Brian Green moderating
between David Gross Edward Whitten and
Andy Stringer and this thing is
delusional why I don't know I mean
physicists I know are calling me up and
saying you're right Eric I can't believe
how crazy this is because they're
pretending that they didn't flush 40
years down the
tubes um driving physics into a ditch in
other news this episode is brought to
you by Shopify the reason that you
started a business is not to learn how
to build a website or to code or to do
inventory management it's to sell the
thing that you care about and Shopify
helps to move all of the other stuff out
of the way so that you can focus on the
thing that matters most that's why we
use Shopify for new tonic so if you've
ever bought a can of this from our
website you've bought from Shopify also
they power over 10% of all e-commerce in
the United States including huge Brands
like gym shark so if it's good enough
for them it's probably good enough for
you whether you're selling scented soap
or offering outdoor outfits Shopify
helps you sell at every stage of your
business Shopify also helps you turn
browsers into buyers with the internet's
best converting checkout 36% better than
other e-commerce platforms right now you
can sign up for a $1 per month trial
period by going to the link in the
description below or heading to
shopify.com
mowis or lowercase that's shopify.com
wisdom to grow your business no matter
what stage you're in can you explain in
an accessible way what the problem is
with string
theory
sure it doesn't
work we can go a tiny bit more more that
level of advancement a little bit
further explain it to me as if I'm two
yeah yeah or a high IQ golden
retriever
um the problem with string
theory is its sociology not its
equations the sociology of a string
theorist
um do you mind if I play you a recording
absolutely yeah yeah yeah the following
uh clip is from uh a podcast which
probably has the highest IQ guests of
any podcast on planet Earth called the
universe speaks in numbers nobody
listens to this podcast but this uh this
is Edward Witten
um and he is uh talking about um is
being asked about String Theory by
Graham
farelo back to string theor do you see
that as one among several candidates or
the preent candidate or what I mean what
do you see the status of that framework
in the landscape of mathematical physics
I'd say that string slm the is the only
really interesting direction we have for
going beyond the established framework
of physics by which I mean Quantum field
Theory at the quantum level and
classical general relativity at the
microscopic scale so where we've made
progress It's been in the string slm
theory framework where a lot of
interesting things have been discovered
I say that there's lot of interesting
things we don't understand at all M but
you've never been tempted down the other
roots of other options for I'm not even
sure what you would mean by other Roots
uh L quantum gravity those just words
there aren't any other
Roots there are
words there are no other Roots there are
just words that is the world's leading
theoretical physicist
opining about strength can you imagine
anything less scientific coming out of
the mouth of Edward
Whitten and and by the way this is the
world's scariest individual to go up
against and I've had it I've just
absolutely had it can you imagine being
a scientist and
saying there are no other Roots When ask
are you ever tempted by other
Roots they're only they're only words no
other
Roots I I don't even know how to respond
to that what's the difference between uh
dogmatism and
conviction you tell
me a fifth of Jack Daniel
ah the guy sounds like he's
convinced why you so sure that he
shouldn't be I'm convinced the geometric
Unity is
correct
and I am open to being
wrong I am open
to ethical colleagues talking to me
about their
misgivings this is an unethical position
to hold what's wrong with string
theory I'm going to say the same thing
again first of all if you if you ask me
technically what's wrong with it I would
say to you that uh let's say the
explanation for three generations of
matter uh based on an index of six on a
cab manifold at every point in space and
time is not the right explanation you're
not going to be able to handle that I
understand that so we can't have that
conversation um the problem is you have
a group of people who don't feel that
they have to listen to anything else and
if anything else happens then they say
well we'll just call that string theory
and you're thinking so heads you win and
Tails I lose and and that's science the
these people need remedial ethical
training
in
science I'm convinced of my own
theories I have to be open-minded that
I'm
wrong their theories have had all of the
money all of the minds all of the years
the conferences everything the praise
the pr articles you name it for 40 years
straight and it's done what it's
destroyed physics you can't have this
ethos look there's no one more
accomplished in Quantum field Theory
than Edward
wh he doesn't belong at the lead in the
lead position in a science he's doing
math fine but you can't you can't be a
leading physicist and say there are no
other Roots there are no your dog
doesn't hunt we're not allowed to see
other dogs I I don't understand your
dog's been dead in the back yard for
years and you're still talking about how
you know you're going to go take it
hiking so this been in 40 years
basically no progress in string theory
no meaningful no useful internal to
string
theory but functionally outside of that
yeah I mean in that's 40 Years of string
theory in 50 years the standard model of
particle theory hasn't
moved there are no
young people who have ever walked on the
moon and there are no young theoretical
physicists who have contributed to our
picture um of the universe in a way
that's been
confirmed if it's the case that the
underpinnings of string theory aren't
accurate if it's also the case that for
such a long time there hasn't been any
progress that's been made why are so
many people continuing to cling to
afraid of that man that one guy oh yeah
he's the Tyrant that's pulling the
strings behind string he's the string
theorist no no no
no everybody who's gone up against this
guy in essence has
lost he's
terrifying when you mean when you say go
up against what do you mean you'll bring
up a
point um well
you might have an argument with him and
he'll solve the problem you've been
working on for two years in an hour if
it takes him that
long
uh you have to understand how vertical
human achievement can be and this guy is
at the very top of the human
mind I
mean he's he's
just he's utterly amazing
and he's completely scientifically uh
outside of his ethical boundaries with
statements like this you you can't do
that to science even Edward
Whitten is not so great of a
mathematician that he's allowed to take
out theoretical
physics and you know if you ask me like
about my own
Theory
um in in terms of like what has happened
to me talk trying to talk about for 40
years more or less the field says well
what does Ed think what does Ed say what
was Ed's feedback because everyone was
afraid of
him you have to understand how dominant
a single individual can be in order to
understand this effect there was a great
string theorist named Joe
pinski and Joe once said to me Eric you
talk a lot about String Theory but I'm
not sure it exists sometimes I think
we're just running sub routines for
Ed that's how dominant this person was
is that even one of the top figures in
the string theory
movement uh guy who basically introduced
brain Theory uh above
strings um his point was we don't even
quite know what we're doing Ed just
tells us to do
things and it's it's time for Ed Whitten
to actually face the other theories that
are out there and stop drawing off about
how it's only just words outside it's
it's
it's it's almost hysterically funny will
that ever
happen do you think that Ed where does
he hey Ed if you're out there you want
to have a chat love
to won't happen
why because it's a
spell because he's casting a
spell because if he actually had to face
a real critic somebody who has some
knowledge of what the history of string
theory
was he would have to take into account
all sorts of things he doesn't have to
take into account when he appears on a
stage of colleague look he has a right
not to
face unethical people he has a right not
to face people who are badly informed or
not trained in the subject that's
fine but I don't see these people as
having gone up against their technical
critics you know feeman was a huge
critic of String Theory Sheldon glasha
who won a Nobel Prize for symmetry
breaking was a Critic of string theory
there are string theorists who have
defected like Dan fedan there's no
shortage of very competent people who
have said what the hell is going on why
are we doing this this is madness I've
never heard Ed Whitten face one of these
people when I think about somebody like
Brian Green sure he doesn't strike me as
the sort of guy that needs to bow at the
feet of this person Brian Green's got a
a successful career he's books he's
hosting these events so on and so forth
is everybody dancing to the tune of
some super smart tyrannical string
theorist leader it's not
tyrannical look I I don't know how to
say this right because I'm obviously a
Critic I I Revere this
person this is very painful for me to to
say you know if you if you ask me of all
the people's minds on planet Earth that
I I Revere the wonder that is Ed wht's
brain is beyond almost anything I can
communicate at least when you have a
Beethoven or or or a I don't know an art
Tatum or a a Picasso or modon you can
see what it is that they're
doing this guy has done so much for us
and he's done so much to take
science out of physics and it's it's
almost impossible to talk about the the
the profound nature of his contribution
and the enormity of the destruction he's
caused it's you know it's like he gave
us everything he took away
everything because you see Quantum field
Theory under Ed
Whitten with help from particularly
Michael AA and Graham
seagull was revealed to be just math we
thought Quantum field theory was about
the physical universe but it's much more
General than that and Ed Whitten is
largely responsible for showing us what
Quantum field Theory really is but in so
doing he also divorced it from
mathematics and so what Ed Whitten did
is he effectively showed us that what we
thought was the physical Universe was
just like calculus just a
framework but
you
know keep in mind that my view of it is
if if the universe is traversible the
only way to get there is through the
study of physics guntin and
uh these guys are guarding the
exit to me a previous
generation through a lit match into a
room filled with
kerosene and this is the generation
that's blocking the exit so you know
teller and
ulam uh gave us the hydrogen bomb it's a
geometer and a particle
theorist and I would expect that Ed
Witten was taking responsibility for
trying to figure out whether the cosmos
are traversible and whether we can leave
Earth is there any way we can get access
to more energy is there any way that we
can reveal SpaceTime to not be
fundamental so that we maybe we can do
something that would be confused with
going faster than light maybe we can
reach the Stars through methods that we
can't understand using what we
have why is Ed Whitten guarding the
exit Ed there are other theories there
have been theories for 40 years I met
you in your office in 1984 85 in
Princeton on a snowy day and you threw
me out of your office for what reason
because I started talking to you about
the fact that I didn't think you were
right about three generations for for
particle theory and you claimed that um
Kusa Klein Theory couldn't work U
because of chirality considerations you
were wrong you have one claim as to why
they're three generations I have another
do you want to meet let's
talk nothing will happen they they don't
show up how long can the world of
physics be captured by an idea that no
meaningful progress is made inside of
before more people say it's time to look
at something else um that's an
interesting question the problem
is that
um there isn't going to be much of
physics left when this group
dies it just retired I believe from The
Institute for advanced study because it
has a capped age of 70 and he was born
in
1951
um no I there isn't much physics left
people have forgotten what the original
problems are
he swapped out one set of problems that
we all agreed on why is nature Left
Right asymmetric why are there three
copies of matter rather than only one
why the particular set of symmetries
that uh generate the strong weak and
electromagnetic
forces uh all of these problems that are
all about the physical world in which we
live and he swapped them out for
different problems like how do we
quantize gravity as if that's definitely
what we have to do those were sort of
mathematical analytic problem problems
rather than physical problems and so as
a result two generations of physicists
have been brainwashed into not caring
about the physical world and being
they're totally devoted to various
abstract areas of mathematics how long
can the legacy of that continue for well
how do you rebuild theoretical physics
when almost nobody's doing theoretical
physics and I don't
mean look there's some technical wiggle
words that if I don't say them um my
colleagues will go crazy but in the
field of fundamental physics Beyond
general relativity in the standard model
there isn't much of a field left you go
on a random day to the archive where
people post papers and the papers aren't
really about Charmed quirks or muons or
realistic models of the universe they're
about weird esoteric topics and
Mathematics and that has everything to
do with uh a transition between
198 actually 83 through through 86 8887
where the field lost its
mind rediscovering the problems of
physics can't be as hard as discovering
the problems of physics if you're not
paid to work on
physics the way they've got us is by
their they've got their hands wrapped
around our our wallets we can't afford
to do physics it's it's as if there's a
force that says if you want to work on
the world's most important
problem we're going to make you poor
we're going to discredit you it's almost
like there's a force
field trying to get us not to unlock
this power and I've been very curious
about why that
is and nobody like with all the rich
people in the world nobody's funding the
stuff at the level that it needs to be
funded this is the most important
funding priority on planet
Earth because otherwise you're all
sharing one atmosphere with a bunch of
idiots and really powerful toys
it's unless we can somehow channel the
technology of interdimensional space
beings please never say those words hey
look the interdimensional space
interdimensional space beings David GES
didn't say extraterrestrial he said
interdimensional Yes But Eric Eric and
David talk and this is not fair to David
grush David grush knows that he's a
physics ba he knows he's not a PhD he's
repeating things that have been said to
him he had the presence of mind to try
to give an example of what
interdimensional might mean and he used
holography and so as a result everyone's
making oh David G says holographic
interdimensional
beings this is absurd and it's not fair
to David
grush I'm telling you I mean we can call
David up right now and I promise you
he's not going to back this madness and
stupidity so what's going on with this
most recent update about aliens which
one well I saw this frustration that
lawmakers had because they were getting
compartmentalized if you don't ask
precisely the right person precisely the
right question in precisely the right
right way you're not allowed to get an
answer you don't get an answer but you
couldn't even look if you don't know
what a Romanian manifold is if you don't
know what a determinant line bundle is
there's no way you can ask intelligent
questions about alien
visitation how did they get
here there are no
scientists there are no relevant
scientists in the story does anybody
find that at all odd even this the
situation with David grush is fantastic
um he goes into a a hearing he says a
bunch of completely batshit crazy stuff
right can we agree on that all right
and then weeks
later some Representatives go into a
skiff and they
say Well it certainly uh seems like it
confirms some of what grush has been
telling us and you're thinking okay so
you you've separated the
confirmation which you did abstractly
because it was inside of a skiff but you
you can only talk to people who've
emerged from the skiff who are willing
to say vague things and the crazy claims
now what is this really all about we
nobody knows now what I've been saying
for about four years is there's way more
to this story than I had understood I
thought UFOs were total nonsense I
thought this was a waste of
time and I was wrong I was just wrong
why what do you mean in what ways were
you wrong why are you now convinced in a
way that you weren't
previously well I didn't
know yeah I'm not convinced that UFOs
like shiny metal craft are real at all
what I didn't know is that there almost
certainly
are large programs inside the federal
government that are
denied that are labeled UFO sh don't
tell anyone now whether those programs
contain anything about non-human
intelligence or aliens or spacecraft or
anything like that is anyone's guess
because I haven't seen
anything however the programs almost
certainly
exist what gives you that impression
talking to four million people who tell
stunningly similar stories
in other words there is a
weirdness and the weirdness is
tremendous circumstantial evidence that
these programs exist have existed for a
long time and have involved
extraordinary uh in particular
physicists way back in the
day and on the other hand that there is
no credible proof that there are craft
or aliens or anything like that how do
you square that Circle how would you I
can't look the coordination problem of
all of these people is
immense there's that but Secrets have
been kept more much more effectively
Than People
imagine say more I don't want
to no but I mean that there are
organizations that you cannot Google
there are organizations that have
clubhouses and members that you cannot
Google
um so I know that secrets are
durable uh what we don't know
is what these secrets are
about
see let's create a decision tree which
is there are little green men shiny
spacecrafts and all this kind of cool
stuff and there aren't
okay if there
aren't what's the best explanation for
why there's so much energy and activity
and so many claims around this and I
would guess and again this is a this is
a guess and not a particularly good one
that there was a Clearing House program
for everything under the sun if we
needed to retrieve somebody else's plane
Behind Enemy
Lines we had a UFO cover story if we we
were trying out new Aerospace equipment
we had a UFO cover
story uh if we were trying to get our
Rivals to misspend their uh precious
treasure on weaponry and strategic
countermeasures we had a UFO cover
story um if we were up to no good we had
a UF cover story whatever all these
things are imagine there was a kitchen
sink approach and that's what UFOs are
all about it's about a black sap
specializ Access program as waved and
bigoted as it could possibly be that
um basically was a one siiz fits all uh
story for all sort it's an in
extraterrestrial scapegoat yeah an
extraterrestrial scapegoat program okay
now whatever that
is if you imagine that that leg of the
decision tree is real it's it's all very
funny because now you're like all these
people have Tak it seriously but it was
the Russians and the Chinese and the
Iranians who were supposed to take it
serious like I on the UFO F you know
it's like people are going to blow this
beautiful cover story that we've created
for everything so that's one
possibility another possibility is that
we're on the other leg of the decision
tree and that we have no programming for
it and so everything about it seems
impossible what's what you said about
physics physics physics is science
fiction the physics that you just
learned is almost always about science
fiction what if you have um multiple
time dimensions and people can circle
around in time and if you find out about
them they can Circle back to the point
where you didn't know and you have a
neuralizer built into the successor to
SpaceTime Is that real I don't know all
I know is that physics will always blow
your mind it will always do something
that seems impossible and that's one
that's why it's the coolest subject
around
now I don't know what's going on but I
can tell you that the circumstantial
evidence that there's been a program
that has been
um long running and involved very high
level
people it's almost impossible to imagine
that this is fake there's a 1971
Australian document from the uh
Australian intelligence service that is
been Declassified made public which
clears up all sorts of uh mysteries
about what was going on with physics in
the 1950s and 60s and it names names it
says that Freeman Dyson John archal
Wheeler Pascal Jordan the
Nazi
um all of these
people were working on
anti-gravity and the only reason to be
working on anti-gravity was is that
there was reason to think that something
had gone beyond einsteinian
relativity in other words mostly we we
learn about physics from colliding you
know it's like breaking rocks together
you're going to smash two rocks and then
maybe you'll see a little spark and
you'll study that except we do it with
protons this would be like some
different thing where there was a more
advanced species and
you're looking at its machiner
to try to figure out well what science
does it know that you don't how much
truth do you think is in that I've seen
rumors on the internet of leaps forward
in technology throughout the mid
1900s that people suggested was due to
reverse engineering of something that
had been discovered do you think that
the technology movements that we made
through the 1900s were self-created I'm
not clever enough to solve the UFO
puzzle there's almost no topic where
can't generate multiple
explanations this is the only topic I've
ever met where I can't generate a single
explanation for what the hell's going
on nothing I can think of makes
sense look I'm very focused on this
because if if there are aliens here I I
might be the only guy who knows how
they're
here how
so I don't think
it's practical to Traverse the cosmos
using general relativity in the standard
mod you can use time dilation you can
hope for wormholes you can imagine
generation ships there's a whole bunch
of stupid stuff that people talk about
when they talk about interdimensional
interdimensional travel and all this
kind of
nonsense why because they can see the
night sky and they can't get
there so you think okay in terms of the
science that I've seen Carl Sean
discussing or on cosm
with Neil degrass Tyson how would I get
to a distant
planet using the science I
know and then you have to sort of do it
with masking tape
and you know chicken wire whatever uh
whatever that
is um doesn't
really appeal to me they're not here if
they're here using standard physics now
I've tried to make a list of everyone on
Earth who has a distinct Theory of
physics right so you have you know um
Julian Barbour has a theory or Steven
Wolfram has a theory or Peter white has
a theory so I go through all of these
other theories and to the best of my
knowledge nobody else does
that like we've stopped talking to each
other we stopped thinking about this so
in the world of theories about how
something might be here there are very
few theories of the
universe and why is that it's because
the constraints are so profound there's
no room to move to imagine to
let you know human creativity take over
we're in a straight jacket that is so
tight nobody can think and we're there
because our theories are so
good the standard model and general
relativity are astounding theories but
they're also a straight
jacket so I'm very interested in
you know if you're Obama you just Reach
Out grab it and kill it yeah exactly
um yeah I'm very interested in this
topic specifically because the universe
is either traversable or it isn't and if
it is it's not surprising that anyone's
here and if it isn't we die here in
short
order so it's a huge consequential
question um but there are almost no no
theories I can't imagine like look Chris
in part I I'm almost reluctant to do
podcasts anymore because I don't
understand why we're behaving the way
we're behaving what you mean when you
say
we no one on planet Earth is behaving
rationally with respect to physics and
UFOs you have a claim that is being
heard at the highest levels in Congress
that we've lost control of our
airspace you either clear this thing up
in an
afternoon or you call in Seal Team Six
yeah that's a really good point how is
it that we've got such an outlandish
claim which is
being
accepted not necessarily accepted which
is being received without the Justified
Fanfare it's like either this is
completely crazy and needs to be thrown
out or this is absolutely wild and we
need to do something about
it why is it why is it the case that's a
really great Point that's a really great
Point why is it the case
that that this has made either it hasn't
made more Fanfare in terms of people
mobilizing governments and such or
hasn't made way more criticism in terms
of it being thrown out I don't know why
does the diffuse proposal from the Ecco
Health Alliance not get properly
adjudicated scientifically I don't know
what that is um the Eco Health Alliance
is this group run by a zoologist Who got
$50 million from the defense department
to help a lab in China work on Corona
virus and making them more humanized I
mean like we should be able to
adjudicate did we start Co but we
can't all of these very simple things we
don't
adjudicate look Bureau of Labor
Statistics claims that the Consumer
Price Index is based on a cost of living
measure I claim that's not true in order
for that to be true you have to take in
consumer preference data and you claim
that you don't work with consumer
preference data I'm either right or I'm
wrong it's hugely consequential in terms
of billions I claim that the Bureau of
Labor Statistics is completely lying
that it's working on a cost of living
framework and that the academic
responsible for it a guy named Irwin
Dart uh his theory of superlative index
numbers is hogwash doesn't work it's
based on homothetic
preferences that takes an afternoon to
adjudicate I claim that there is no
labor shortage of scientists and
Engineers despite claims that it's been
going on since the 50s because large
market economies don't have Labor
shortages that's a feature of centrally
planned
economies there is no possible way
that's that's a 4minute
discussion we are just
lying lying lying lying is the substrate
of our society we're lying about physics
we're lying about economics we're lying
about Finance we're lying about Corona
virus and biological research we're
lying about uh monetary Aggregates how
many different Hills are you waging a
war on there's only
one it's called managed
reality this is all managed reality
what's
that you know I have I have this image
of
a of a
tanker that is flipped over on a freeway
and there's a bodies scattered and
people are bleeding and the tanker on
fire
and there's a cop maybe a special forces
guy with an automatic weapon says
nothing to see here folks Move Along
you're like nothing to see there's like
a severed hand on the pavement and
you've got a tanker and it says you know
danger flammable Hazard and it's is it
about to blow and tell tell me what's
going on like nothing to see here folks
well the nothing to see here folks is
managed reality we all know what that is
policeman is actually saying act as if
there is nothing to see here and move
along it's an instruction to
pretend so we are being given
instructions right now to pretend on
everything pretend that you don't
understand the CPI Eric oh okay pretend
that you don't understand immigration
and labor markets Eric okay pre pretend
that you don't understand physics
pretend that you don't understand
plagiarism pretend that you don't
understand
um biology and
gender well you it's one
Hill it's enforced pretending by a class
of people that thinks that it is in a
position to tell us all how to think at
this level now I don't disagree that
that policeman has a right to say Move
Along folks nothing to see there's a
very clear reason why that person is
saying that but when you start to say
that to your experts to the HazMat team
who's telling you you know don't don't
put out an electrical fire with
water when you are telling nothing to
see to the mother who sees her child on
the
pavement when you when you're constantly
telling everybody who has a stake in
something and particularly everybody who
has expertise in something you're a
Charlotte and you're a grifter you're a
fake you're a fraud you're the it's like
shut up just shut up there's one Hill
are you the only person on that Hill
though because as you've said here
there's a bunch of different the CPI the
stuff to do with physics the stuff to do
with the I appreciate what you're saying
funneling on
you there are lots of people on the hill
the problem is that you have to visit
all of these fields to know it's in that
field too
you know I was complaining about
narrative-driven
journalism before people were talking
about narrative at the same level that
if you if you go back to my written
output or speaking output you'll find
that in 2011 I was talking about
professional wrestling and kayfabe as
the model for underlying reality that
this is what's going on in our society
it's because I visited all these
different fields I've been an
immigration expert spent the middle of
the 1990s in Washington trying to
understand why we passed the Immigration
Act of 1990 I've been a finance guy have
the first paper that I know of on
mortgage back Securities and the danger
they posed To The World Financial system
from
2001-02 Rose I uh rang the alarm on the
Chinese using uh our universities as a
Espionage
program uh I said that uh Hillary was
not inevitable and that Trump was in
much better position to win because of
Tim oran's theory of preference
falsification
I said this thing about physics you're
all out of your mind I switched my field
from physics to mathematics because I
could see what was going to
happen I think that what you're trying
to ask me is are you the only person
who's visited all of these fields to see
the pattern and why are you at the
center of all of these
stories well
narcissism no
um this is the personal and
uncomfortable Part I I think I didn't
understand that my principle means of
trying to figure out where I'm supposed
to allocate my efforts is
wrong I just detect that something
doesn't make any sense
like very you know autism is not
necessarily a bad thing I think it's a
competitive advantage in the in the
right dose there's a sweet spot there's
a sweet spot of autism
um I think I'm beyond The Sweet Spot I
think that what happens is is that I
become convinced that somebody is wrong
and I start trying to tell them about
the fact that they're wrong and you know
as the joke goes I thought I would be
greeted as liberators um but in fact
you're actually causing a huge problem
so you know the Bureau of Labor
Statistics they're sitting duck
obviously what they're doing is
completely
ridiculous but if I say that and
everybody's agreed to keep their mouth
shut about it
it's not like they don't know what I'm
saying it's not like they don't know
that I'm right it's that we've all
agreed to act as
if I'm insane what I keep doing is I
keep using the same stupid algorithm
saying hey that thing about UFOs doesn't
Mak sense or we could clear this up in
an afternoon or hey guys what if we roll
up our sleeves and just fix the problem
many problems are owned a problem that's
owned you know does the person who
rebuilds homes want fewer homes to burn
down no their business is Building Homes
after they burned down does an does an
arms maker want a more peaceful
world does a health care System want
nutrition to decrease the number of
patients who walk through their doors
all of these are owned
problems and my problem is I keep trying
to solve somebody's owned problem
that's why I keep ending up in all these
places can I teach you about mgrm
questions tell me about mgrm questions
this is an Stanley mgrm an idea from Jay
sanac so what makes a woman attractive
is a mgrm question in other words the
social penalty for an unflattering
answer is much higher than the reward
for telling the
truth because of this we simply can't
trust the answers we receive even if
they're coming from Friends the best
known trick question is when did you
stop beating your wife any conventional
answer to the question confirms its
assumption to escape the Trap you need
to call out the question this type of
question isn't that common in practice
it's really just a rhetorical gimmick
the most important and most common type
of trick question sounds more like do
you love big
brother it's a question where an
unacceptable re answer regardless of
whether it's true or false will be
punished and the punishment is greater
than the reward for the true answer I'm
going to recall these mgrm questions
after the famous psychology experiment
where electric shocks were administered
for wrong answers and there's a
Associated idea called the chilling
effect when punishment for what people
say becomes widespread people stop
saying what they really think and
instead say whatever is needed to thrive
that's closer to the ash
experiment thus limits on speech become
limits on sincerity it's an interesting
problem
um tell me about why you brought it up
and what do you find interesting about
it
it is one
way that explains
how a group of people from the outside
can look coordinated but it's actually a
common a common Trend a common
motivation working below the surface
that motivates them all to behave in a
way that appears coordinated from the
outside from the the inside it just
looks like perhaps cowardice perhaps
compliance so yeah I've been very
interested in these sorts of issues
um I try to tell people why the truth
can't work and people are always
confused by this they say okay tell me I
have mildly bad
breath
and some people will say you have mildly
bad breath and I say well you just told
me that my breath is so horrendous that
you were willing to cross a social Chasm
that essentially no one ever crosses to
tell me that I have mildly bad breath so
obviously my breath must be as bad as a
sewer um then they say would you like a
stick of gum and I say sure and I'd show
no cognition that you've actually told
me about you know you can't transmit
that piece of information easily it's
very akin to this um yes now our society
hinges on these things on the other hand
there are ways of getting at
these uh questions through language so
for example you're not allowed to say
that you like cleavage but you are
allowed to say that was an incredibly
dramatic
neckline right and so why is it that one
phrase is penalized it's because there's
a Russell conjugation that works and a
Russell conjugation that doesn't he
sweats sheep aspires they glow right and
so in such circumstances the key
question um is how you are allowed to
discuss the truth as well as whether you
are allowed to discuss the truth many
times there's a penalty for not being
skilled the skilled person is allowed to
say something deftly the appropriate
Nuance with appropriate social graces
yeah but and then the question becomes
why can't you say certain
things
and you know this is in part I believe
in these social norms but I believe that
it is
necessary to create spaces in which you
can actually talk about the
truth and increasingly what we're doing
this is why inclusion is one of the
dumbest ideas I've ever heard in my life
um is you put somebody to create a low
trust environment in every High trust
environments uh discussion
group so
diversity is good so far as it goes
inclusion is good so far as it goes
Equity is a disaster we can't even disc
discuss it but the reason that inclusion
is has become terrible is that we are
trying to create a low trust environment
in all previous High trust
environments and that thing means that
we can't actually have
any serious discussions like if you have
uh knowledge about why a veneral disease
is
spreading um it may require that people
tell you that they're having sex with
animals uh that's
a you can't have somebody who's going to
giggle you can't have somebody who's
going to shame you have to have a
completely Dy dust
conversation about how venial diseases
can leap from non-humans to
humans
and we need experts and we need closed
doors not to become star
Chambers you mentioned before about
being able to have an insight into what
was happening in 2016 yeah what do you
think happens in
2024 I don't know I don't know you know
I I
um I met with Robert Kennedy Jr not too
long ago and he was nice enough to have
uh my wife and I to his house it was
very clear that he's trying to hearken
back to a previous remembered America
through his family and he's willing to
die for it there's no question that he's
willing to die to seek the
presidency I think that Americans are
going to have to come to grips with the
fact
that um our two political parties either
one of them could win if they
wanted but the problem is is that they
want to win as a
trough so in other
words imagine that what America wants is
no more
troughs you don't want to in playing to
that aspect of America if it means
getting rid of the trough because the
trough was your entire reason for
running a political party what you mean
when you say
trough assume that your party gets into
power now you get to hire all of your
friends into government positions then
they get revolving door contracts with
whoever they were regulating or dealing
with so effectively everybody's going to
pig out and help themselves okay we got
Democrats into Congress now they can
trade their personal accounts and pass
legislation and do far better than the
market you know whatever it is imagine
what Americans want is like hey stop the
corruption I don't trust why we're in
Ukraine the way we're in Ukraine because
I don't trust why Hunter Biden is being
given a cushy salary from a a Ukrainian
company well what you're telling what
the what the population is telling the
two political parties is and the
troughs and the political parties are
saying okay what else do you want we
can't give you that because that's the
whole point of why we do what we do
we're not public spirited we're not
thinking about America we're not
thinking about the future we're not
thinking about the good of the world or
the environment or any of the stupid
stuff that we are forced to talk about
every four years we're talking about
swimming pools we're talking about um
third wives fourth homes you know you're
getting in the way of that so tell us
what else you want that doesn't
interfere with the trough and Americans
are pretty clear it's like get rid of
the get rid of the goddamn
troughs you're slop you know you're
slopping each other
you're you're pigs at a trough and and
now the idea is that since you're not
doing anything I want my ethnic group to
be at the trough too it's like this has
nothing to do with anything we have to
clear these people
out they're just bad people well way too
close to the 2024 election for anybody
to be cleared out
now really I mean what's going to happen
between now and November I don't know I
mean how old is Joe Biden
I don't know okay what are the odds that
Joe Biden has a debilitating event
between now and
November including death so he runs a
one in 20 chance of dying in any given
year or above
that so I I don't think you know whether
he's even going to make it to November
81
yeah you have no idea what it's it's a
million years between now and November
I don't know whether Donald jump Donald
Trump is going to be you know facing
jail time I don't know whether there's
going to be an Insurrection by magga
people that who feel that the Department
of Justice is going after a candidate
for political reasons I don't know if
people are going to look at kamla Harris
as uh you know the likely
commanderin-chief
why you
laughing kamla Harris is like she's
become a meme of a meme of a
meme
so so absent
from public life as far as I can see
that it's it's hilarious you don't think
it's hilarious oh it's hysterically
funny you're talking about kamla Harris
being in charge of the world's greatest
nuclear
superpower it's it's a
scream you're talking about Joe Biden
Biden being in charge of or Donald Trump
well Trump will be older than Biden on
this next re-election than Biden was
when he first entered
office well yeah Biden began at 29 in
the
senate in
72 look this whole thing
is Chris let me let me just be more
forthcoming people want to know why I've
somewhat retreated from public life I
have no clue how to talk about this
stuff this whole thing is so incredibly
stupid nobody has ever done this in the
United
States we had a election 1980 because
Ronald Reagan was 69 years old age was
Central we've never been in this
territory before does that not mean that
you should spend more time trying to
Grapple with ideas if you're not sure
about them what does that mean that if
your concern is you mentioned people
have asked why you've stepped back from
having more public conversations one of
the reasons is that a lot of the topics
that you try to Grapple with don't seem
to make sense that much anymore is that
not the time when you're supposed to
Grapple harder with
them if somebody says to you
uh
Eric uh you know the previous election
uh are you supportive of the Hillside
Strangler or uh Ted Bundy
go well I don't know if Charles Manson
might run as a as a third party
candidate so it's too early to say this
is all so pathetically crazily stupid
what am I supposed to do just say get
off my lawn every four
seconds I I I don't know how to react
anymore there's no part of this world at
the moment that looks sane to me
and and you know I've done the requisite
work which is if that's the way it feels
to you then you should look at your own
sanity okay let's let's entertain the
idea that I've lost my mind it's like
no no this is all
completely
one problem of managed
reality one of the things I am concerned
about toward the back end of this year
is whether or not whoever wins is going
to be accepted in
even remotely a peaceful
way it doesn't mean the same thing as it
used
to look there's some mystique and some
Majesty
necessary to
make these things
work you have to believe that the
Supreme Court is a bunch of incredibly
smart legal mind you have to believe
that the president of the United States
is a an an exalted being who has power
to make decisions on the behalf of the
country you can't afford Nancy Pelosi's
husband trading up a storm like
this everything's become Instagram
stories behind the scenes of the
Kardashians nobody trusts experts
exist when your kid needs a lifesaving
surgery you're going to find out that
all you're drawing off on Twitter about
the experts doesn't mean anything to you
you're like save my
child we need experts we need
institutions we need Lies We need
fictions we need
stories we need adult level
public-spirited fictionalization of the
truth I'm not claiming we don't but now
you've got this different class of
people who says okay you don't want the
truth we need to have stories let's just
make up stuff and put stuff in our
pockets how much of it is coordination
how much of it
is well I would rephrase that a little
differently maybe I would say uh nobody
smart has gotten anything to work like
this in a long
time the reason we have Donald Trump
versus Joe Biden is that everybody
failed I failed I've been podcasting
reaching Millions I've been teaching
people about all sorts of
things one of the things I find very
funny is that there's a if you look at
um the negativity that follows you
around there are these very conserved
things that one of them is Eric goes on
forever and says nothing if you look at
the sheer density of information I've
dropped on podcast I'll put that up
against anybody you know but it's like
we want Eric to disappear we want Eric
not to say things who do you think is
behind that don't
know because you stopped your podcast
yeah I was a fan of that podcast that
first episode that you did with Peter I
thought was was fantastic I can't tell
you how many people every day where's
the portal bring the portal back what
does it take to bring the portal back
you tempted Mick Jagger said something
about Brian
Jones that has just haunted me and he
said Fame doesn't sit comfortably on
anyone's shoulders but there are
shoulders upon which it appears not to
sit at
all and I thought okay if there's one
guy who's good at being famous it must
be MC Jagger and for him to say it
doesn't sit comfortably on any shoulders
if you just parse it you think oh he's
telling us something it looks like I'm
good at being famous but it's not easy
and it's not something that's
comfortable and then he makes the second
point about Brian Jones and he says
there appear to be shoulders upon which
it does not sit at all and I think I
don't like the fact that you can't turn
it
off it's a oneway street for a very long
time that's right and you
know there's a point where you're
wandering through Istanbul and somebody
yells out Eric Weinstein and you're like
there's no way to get away from this and
you didn't like
that wonderful guy
um most everybody I meet is
fantastic I like lots of of lots of
being well known but the toothpaste
hasn't I I've hoped that the toothpaste
would sort of go back in the tube I
could do a little bit of podcasting here
and there and it just doesn't work
so you don't want to are you at the
moment are not prepared to bring the
portal back no I'm thinking about it I'm
thinking about it because I can't get
back
to look I have fantasies
about not being well now and I don't and
I think it's too
late deeper into the breach look but
also nobody wants to listen to this you
know remember what you were saying
before mgrm questions h i let's play
with it cuz I I think it's a fun it's a
fun
idea you ever heard somebody say
something oh the
paparazzi like yeah but actually I
believe
it I wouldn't want to live with
Paparazzi the problem is is that
nobody's going to hear it for what it
is if I really dislike somebody I want
them to become famous see how they
do I came up with this idea I put it in
my kns letter last week uh a Titanic
problem you could also call it a
champagne problem okay Titanic problem
is an issue that everyone says you're in
such a privileged position to deal
with this is an extra special type of
tragedy a tragedy that unfolds while
everyone cheers like being on the
Titanic after the iceberg water up to
your chin with everyone telling you
you're so lucky to be on the greatest
steam ship of all time and the Titanic
is indeed so huge and wonderful that you
can't help but agree but also you're
feeling a bit cold and wet at the moment
and you're not sure why it's from Adam
masani I uh I didn't know you had that
up your sleeve that's really good yeah
yeah I I think look I like my idea is
being well-known there's tons of of
being well known that's fun but in the
aggregate it's like somebody tells you
you can have you can have an orgasm
every three minutes but you can't turn
it off ever some there's some people who
have that is I know it's a neurological
disorder and except it's 30 seconds
right and you can quickly see that you
wouldn't sign up for
that right and so Fame is like that is
that do you really want to never know
who sees you when you go out in
public I've been fascinated by the price
that people pay to be someone that most
of the world admires and Elon was
recently on Lex's show and he said my
mind is a storm I don't think most
people would want to be me they may
think they would want to be me but they
don't they don't know they they don't
understand I love
that I love that friend of mine said to
me um very dear friend said I'm ER Eric
I'm always jealous of where you end
up but then I think about it and I'm re
I realize I'm never jealous of how you
get there
right like at some
level the easiest thing is somebody
who's
ripped wow it must be awesome well did
you just fig figure in how much work
that
took
um you know I have this guy that I I
think the world of um Ryan Williams who
was a scooter kid who then did BMX and
does these crazy tricks 3 seconds in air
what he can do is
amazing and I worry about
him uh he's comp me tickets to Nitro
Circus which I very much enjoy I don't
see anybody I know there because it's a
different slice of the world but I think
it I don't understand why we all don't
go to Nitro Circus every we monster
truck I'm all in um but I look at how
many times he
fell doing this trick where he got the
bike to rotate in an opposite direction
and he and the bike did opposite circles
before before they came back
together and I said that's your Mona
Lisa and they started putting out a reel
of like how many times he didn't succeed
at that trick hundreds of
bailouts
yeah there's no way in the world you
could get me to do I I I I want to do
the trick I want to know what it feels
like but he's one of the world champion
fallers right and so so in large measure
um I'm
divided I like having my ideas well
known 95 98% of the audience figures out
how to be respectful and reasonable and
there's just this hardcore 2% there's a
article by Tim Ferris called 13 reasons
not to get famous is that right one of
my favorite articles it's over 10 years
old so Tim Ferris if you think about his
trajectory it's really
interesting he sort of gets trust into
Fame with the 4-Hour Work week and has
this sort of very
unique angle on life where he's so
intensely curious about the the way that
you do something so you would mention
that you have a gratitude practice and
you wouldn't just say oh what time do
you do it on the morning it would be
what pen do you use what notepad do you
use which prompts are you using do you
have a timer are you doing this in the
sunlight are you doing this indoors
Outdoors what sort of a seat is it all
of these things right he's very very
interested in the particulars right um
then he gets this TV show and he's part
of this TV show where he tries to sort
of hack his way very quickly through
lots of different things do you know
that he managed to make himself into a
tie boxing champion no so Tim read the
rule book of a particular subset of K1
tie boxing kickboxing something like
that and he found out that if your
opponent goes out of the ring three
times in any bout you win by default so
he just sprinted across the ring grabbed
his opponent threw him out of the ring
three times and became a Champion by
doing that consistently they then carved
that back out of the rules and got rid
of it but he just had this this hacker
mentality yes yeah hacker mentality he
was life hacking
and then he talks about what actually
happens when you reach the size of
audience that most people aspire to have
and that there are strange externalities
there was a guy that camped outside of
his house managed to work out where his
house was maybe from metadata in photos
of some kind right and had camped
outside of his house for a while adamant
that Tim was sending him secret messages
in his podcast saying that he wanted to
be with him exactly he had to start
checking into hotels under pseudonyms he
no longer posted photos of where he was
going when he was going on trips because
people were reverse engineering it he
uses this example that million to one
odds happen eight times a day in New
York City because if you have any
sufficiently large data set the law of
large numbers suggest that within the
catchment area of 100 how many people
does how many people does Rogan uh reach
P you know
individuals a billion individual people
maybe but he's surrounded by security of
course so you know in part one of the
things that I'm trying to think about is
you have to become rich enough to make
use of the tools and then you have to
decide okay I'm going to go behind walls
and that's not what I ever wanted I
wanted to be able to go to Starbucks not
tell anyone work on stuff that I care
about
and you know there was something about
being contacted by
Killers uh it was a Colorado killer I
think who killed five people in tattoo
parlors who was trying to get in touch
with me why don't know because I'm a
lightning rod for crazy people what do
you think it is is it something to do
with the ideas of of well let's see
almost everything is
fake uh we have to get off of this
planet
um the alien story has much more to it
than you could imagine take Jeffrey
Epstein is a construct of somebody take
you know we're going to go through all
of these the world is an incredibly
interesting place and we're pretending
that it's incredibly boring and I'm I
have the stupidity to say hey can we go
back to reality and and and claiming
that we should go back to
reality in a world which is suffused
with uh
delusion means
that I think we also don't understand
how many people are Driven Crazy by
small amounts of
sanity you know if you imagine the
Robert dairo character in taxi you
imagine David burn of Talking Heads
doing Psycho
Killer
right
um it's somebody who's seeing through
the
world and they're creating their own
Illusions but they're they're not aware
that they're creating their own
Illusions they just see that the world
is fake and you know filled with sludge
and sewage
and you don't want want to meet the taxi
driver character yeah this idea the the
champagne problem or the Titanic problem
of almost everybody has less wealth and
less Fame than they want which means
that anybody who complains about the
externalities that come with wealth or
fame the total addressable market for
sympathy is basically zero the total
addressable market for Envy is very high
who is going to say when lots of people
aren't as wellknown or aren't as wealthy
or are suffering in one way or another
that you seem to have somehow figured
out it's very difficult to Garner
sympathy for seemingly crying from your
guilded coun again it's not about it's
not about Fame think about it in terms
of privacy and
insulation everybody wants privacy when
they want
privacy right if we had a toilet here
and said feel free to use it nobody's
using it but there was no walls you
would not think that that was being
offered to you uh seriously ly
um that's that's the way that you
explain what this is It's a complete
absence of privacy
the something similar but it's about
music so you might be interested uh I
must have brought this up 10 times it's
so fascinating lisis Capaldi the
Scottish singer did a documentary uh for
Netflix that
uh he does this first album he's singing
songs that he made when he was a
teenager the same songs get recorded and
released and he has just the most
phenomenal success billions of streams
worldwide
tour he then has to write the second
album Co happens yeah and he starts to
develop a Tourette's twitch like this
because of the pressure that he
feels some of it very rightly coming
from the world but some of it being
internally generated as well yeah you
know he can move at his own pace and
there's this it's interesting watching
him go through it because you think yes
there is all of this pressure and and
the world is expecting so much of you
and you didn't ask for this you just
wanted to sing the songs that you sang
and so on and so forth but also there's
not the same type of pressure that
you're putting you're imbibing this and
then starting to spin it up yourself as
well and he is the perfect example of
somebody I think who has the ability to
become world class but doesn't have the
ability to be world
famous yeah and I think that those are
two different skill sets the ability to
be worldclass and the ability to be
world famous yeah
um I know I also I think I I like I like
people too
much I really enjoy just being able to
be a normal human being in the world and
move around and try out ideas and
you know I
pseudonym
nice
pseudonymous substock account okay so
like for Christmas do you know who T
Wilkenfeld is she was the Bas player
with Jeff Beck she's an amazing talent
friend of mine came over for Christmas
two Jews we start hanging out she wants
to sing this song the gospel song the
last month of the year she's just come
off tour with the Almond Brothers Band
so there I am
trying to follow her some song I've
never heard I can't sing and playing
guitar
and we're just Clowning Around and
somebody's taking video of
it and she's like I we got to release
this I'm just thinking if you release
this I'm going to have to listen to how
everybody Eric thinks he's the world's
greatest guitarist and it's embarrassing
because she plays with Jeff Beck and now
Eric is making an ass out of himself so
I didn't release it I mean it was joyous
it was fun it was silly
and it's just like the the constant
stream of moronic abuse I don't even
know how much of it is from humans I
think a lot of it's from Bots I think
Elon is very misguided he has this idea
of like anybody who shrinks from
criticism or uh you know jokes uh is too
thin skin it's like you have no idea
what your product is your product allows
stalking you don't know how this isn't
about people yelling you
suck this is about people combing your
all your public records saying oh well
if you didn't if you didn't want us to
know where you live you wouldn't have
thrown that check into the trash or so I
was going to bring this up before we
before we started it's a it's such a
shame that we can't play music on
YouTube without getting copyright struck
it's so annoying because I'd love to get
you to react well I'll do it once we
finish yeah um I want to get you to
react to my favorite band of 2023 three
all five of my songs from my Spotify
wrapped were from the same artist okay
there's a band called Sleep token don't
know it okay so they I don't even know
how to begin to describe what this
particular genre is they they're listed
under metal technically but they have
elements of rap they have elements of
hip-hop they have elements of jazz a lot
of elements that are off key that are
all sorts of stuff
brilliant completely Anonymous every
single member of the band completely
Anonymous oh I love that they have law
around the band they um use what look a
little bit like Nordic runes on the
album artwork and if you track all of
the different runes and then reverse
engineer what they are sometimes in the
corner of tiny little pieces of album
artwork there's there's notes and things
that the first song they they made made
their songs or they made their albums in
eras and this one was this last one was
a Trilogy the first song of the first
album of this particular Trilogy which
was released in 2018 there was different
members in the band on the backside
right
has the exact same melodic progression
and Sample as the last song of the last
album wow these guys are just another
level an absolute other level last
week uh they're not named either there's
vessel that's one then there's two three
and four and then there's backing
singers and they're referred to as like
I I I I I and IV love it three's birth
certificate was discovered and released
on the internet yeah through a telegram
chat yeah they'd reverse engineered
based
on some they looked at this particular
uh American recording
copyright association website where you
have to legally list some of the names
of the people and you can reverse
engineer who that isn't oh that person
used to be in this band and that s that
his voice sounds like that person and
then we go back and see the live
recording and from that we can work out
where these people
live th this is exactly it
right and I tell a a joke about this
that's not funny at all um which
is uh well if you didn't want us to
understand your bracka jeene status you
wouldn't and publish it on the front
page of the New York Times you wouldn't
be throwing out your dental
floss like okay so I get it you went
through my garbage you picked out my
dental floss you took it to a lab and
you came up with a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and ball story
that because no particular Link in this
chain may have been technically
illegal
um everything you do is fine and I I I I
also J about this under the The Heading
of perfectly legal if you ask somebody
whether something is legal and they say
it's perfectly legal you know that you
shouldn't be doing
it I've never thought of that before but
that's so true an interesting one that I
heard recently is any website this is
from Kevin Kelly any website that has
the word truth in the URL you can
immediately
discount yeah yeah yeah I mean there is
this very funny sort of Newton's law
that I also talk about with Ben Shapiro
and Sam Harris that Ben Shapiro is
always talking about the need for reason
um in areas which seem normative because
he doesn't want to make an appeal to
religious Norms so much because he's
known to be an orthodox Jew whereas Sam
Harris is always talking about
spirituality and
morality um because he's an atheist who
is suspected of not having a moral code
because he it doesn't come from a God
you've got to count a signal you have to
counter signal and this is one of the
reasons for example why people with
unusual beliefs often take down other
people with unusual beliefs because
you've already pulled out so many blocks
out of the Jenga Tower you can't afford
anymore I was uh reflecting on the odd
horseshoe that we've seen from people
like Douglas Murray and Sam Harris who
were very critical of religion and still
are in a large degree but especially you
know 20 years ago kind of breaking down
a lot of these walls being involved in
in being skeptical about the role of it
and yet then there's now almost a return
to
True
Nostalgia for a grand narrative that
unifies everybody there's a concern
about what has come in in its place as
it woke m is it is it trumpism is
it how do you see
that it's too trite to say baby in
bathwater it's easier to say we don't
know the second order effects of the
things that we do uh perfect example of
this is after the introduction
of the contraceptive
pill
abortions went up and single motherhood
went up
that's like a third or fourth order
effect that nobody could have predicted
I don't think nobody it would have taken
an unbelievably sharp mind to have gone
okay so
if before
contraceptive birth control is available
reliably for the woman to
use an accidental pregnancy is seen as
the man's obligation as opposed to the
woman's choice but after that it's
reversed which means that the shotgun
wedding goes out of the window because
the owners can always be put on the
woman all right that's interesting I
just think that
sometimes you don't know the like better
to the devil you know in some
ways I have a different take on it but
um that's
interesting give me take oh
well
okay so one of my riffs is that if you
look at the Declaration of Independence
um the language says we hold these
truths to be
self-evident you have to say
because you have to say we are not going
into an infinite sequence of wise
statements and by saying we hold these
truths to be
self-evident you're saying you may not
hold them to be self-evident buger
off we hold these truths to be
self-evident if you can't hold these
truths to be self-evident it's exclusion
in some way absolutely and so very often
when you imagine that you're going to
put everything on
reason anybody who's had an intelligent
child Knows Why
daddy why is that well why is that and
eventually it's infinite regret well I
joke with my son and I say uh either the
parent eventually says
because or you end up as a theoretical
physicist because that's what that's
they exterminate um
you have to have an organizing principle
that scales and you know Sam's
mistake
um is not understanding that even if Sam
Harris can be immoral and ethical
somewhat rational human being at
times on his best day take Sam Harris as
a reasonable rational moral human being
you can't scale that it doesn't scale
that's a big difference between saying
it's impossible for an individual and
saying it's impossible for a
society um the next part of
that part of the document is uh that all
men are created equal and are endowed by
their creator you have to make a
reference to
ground assumption where you are not
going to go below and if you don't do
that you end up in infinite regress
that's cause yeah if I ask you as a
computer divide one by three to infinite
Precision give me the answer it'll say
333 and it'll blow up it's called a
resource
leak you can't allow these infinite
recursions seeking truth and as a result
of that we didn't understand the the
loadbearing nature of of religion in the
atheist movement now I say we that was
never my problem I'm an atheist who
prays as I've said and people are very
confused well who do you pray to and
what do you
mean your brain knows how to pray your
knows your brain knows how to believe in
a
God whether there is a God or there is
no God well how important is
belief I don't know but I've never met
an atheist who never
believes and I've never met a religious
person who always believes
humans flit in and out of belief and
non-belief it is the nature of our of
our
beast and as a result of that you know I
feel like U we're just not honest if if
if you claim as an atheist that you
never entertain the idea of An Almighty
and a Creator I don't believe you and if
you're a religious person who says like
my my belief in my Lord is 100% I was
like nope there's a line from George
jenko where he says every man knows God
when he's at his lowest place okay the f
yeah
yeah it's very
interesting very interesting to think
about what's going to come next as a
whether it does descend into this sort
of post for the next one that you want
to do the post-apocalyptic blown out
windows spring mattress in the back
corner world
where nothing is unifying given that
what we spoke about for the you know
first 90 minutes is the world is
confusing it's hard to make sense we
don't know what's real we don't know
what isn't we don't know if we can trust
the information that we're getting
that's in front of our eyes we don't
know if we can trust the people that are
around us do they have our best
interests at heart how do we make sense
of the
world religion provided a pretty good
tool for that and I I I I'm not sure
whether it's possible to be a cultural
Christian or a cultural Muslim or a
cultural
Jew I I wonder how important the belief
bit is to the religion
bit do you do you pray I meditate which
is as close as you're going to
get what do you mean you want to try
prayer sure well I mean what what
prayers move you I don't know enough I
mean I took my mom to ripping Cathedral
on Christmas Eve and we went through a
full service of 90 minutes with 13 14 15
hymns and a bunch of prayers in
between a lot of Christmas trees and
decoration and stuff but I think that
would have been the first time that I
would have heard something like that
since Primary School since I was 11 or
10
yeah is there religious music that moves
you
see you have the major scale as the
centerpiece of western music do you need
a
guitar we're
okay um wait do you have a guitar we
have a guitar can we get the guitar come
on we need
a we need to be able to hear
this principal reason for bringing out a
guitar would be to stop me from singing
which I think is an excellent idea okay
well hey no but look I can't sing and I
can't play the guitar I enjoy doing it
so the the internet can there you go
well look this is a full-size one last
time we gave you one that made you look
like you were a
giant okay so if you just take the the
the major scale
right that's not really music but try
just the descending major scale
what is that to you sounds like Mary had
a little lamb something
similar now what is it where do I know
that tune from what is that Joy to the
World the Lord has come right now if you
take a different scale right um and you
go uh the blues scale
[Music]
right it's a little bit meanor so you
can ask the same question if I do the
descending
scale you know what is that it's like
the intro from messing with the
[Music]
kid or it's close to Sunshine of Your
Love right so is a descending scale
music not much but when it's made music
by pausing or by
emphasis one of the great tunes of uh
Western Civilization has created Joy to
the World you
know my my feeling about it is that song
should move
you
and all of these religious songs
um they mean something you know I I I
was in a a
car train going from Bulgaria to
Kiev and there were all of these
Siberian miners I brought my
harmonica and they were they had a
transistor radio and at some point the
radio gives out and they want to drink
and dance because this is their holiday
and they started getting really Rowdy
and I realized I had the ability to make
music so I pulled the harmonica out I
started playing some blues and
everybody's dancing and having a great
time and they're like more whatever and
I'm paralyzed I don't have that much of
a repertoire on the harmonica
and the one thing I could do was I start
um playing Jewish
songs and this woman comes up to me and
grabs me by my lapel and says you know
in russan where do you know this from
where do you like I'm realizing that I'm
in an anti-semitic environment I think
and I've got a Siberian minor who
recognizes that I'm playing Jewish
music and I'm terrified I'm paralyzed I
don't say anything I pretend that I
can't understand her in
Russian and she reaches into her bosom
and she pulls at a giant Star of
David right and like she's just looking
me in the eyes like I know you you know
me there's a way in which religious
music is incredibly powerful and prayer
is incredibly powerful
and I think we're afraid to
pray you know you say this in terms of
meditation
we're afraid to submit to something
bigger than ourselves to use the the
programming that we have that
um that makes us feel there's something
that feels disingenuous
about praying if you don't believe
there's a line from Dan Brown's Angels
and Demons the movie Tom Hanks is
speaking to the calango and he's trying
to get access to the Vatican archives he
wants to get down there to work out some
secret that was left that he needs to
find out who who's killing who's killing
everybody Neno asks him played by you
and McGregor he says do you believe
professor and he starts giving
some politicians answer where he skirts
around the question he says I didn't ask
that I asked if you
believed he looks him straight in the
eyes and he says faith is a gift that I
am yet to be given
I don't believe it we all have the gift
of faith what we don't have is the
ability to sustain it we don't have the
ability to import it into all qu
quadrants of our
minds look I'm saying that I'm an
atheist I don't I don't believe in the
stories about the
deity but that's not
constant you you flit in and out you
know Mike do you believe in Ray Charles
I do do
you no no I'm sort of joking but if I
think about what did I say by Ray
Charles why was that song so
powerful he's basically bringing
Saturday night and Sunday morning
together right there's a there's a
religious sort of gospel Coral aspect to
it and he's got the rets and the
background echoing him he goes uh and
they go uh he goes oh oh uh uh oh oh
that's that's
pretty that's satanic grunting going on
on Saturday night right and then you're
going to show up in church and you're
going to turn it
into uh something else Ray Charles was
scandalous because he fused the secular
and the sacred the profane and the
sacred do you believe in the
devil one of the you know
you know the song Crossroads by Robert
Johnson nope
well I I can't let's see if you do
right I don't know that I could do a
Robert Johnson It Be Country blue but
like if this were an electric guitar you
probably know um
[Music]
went down to the crossroads triy to flag
myself
around went down the crossroads tried to
flag myself
[Music]
around and all good people they just
passed me by
he's talking about going to the
crossroads to bargain for his
soul he wants to learn how to play the
guitar
and that's powerful because you have
this
myth you know the devil Goes Down to
Georgia
or you go to the crossroads to gain
something in a fan bargon um how are you
going to believe that with no
Lord you're going to screw yourself out
of the ability to listen to
Folklore to mythology to Great
literature and that that that makes me
sad you know is it's like are you making
a point of saying that you can't
understand the religious
person we need churches and and and and
uh Manders and and masjids and
synagogues and we need them to behave
non
psychopathically and you can't hate on
the
psychopathy
um and divorce yourself from the power
you know the power of the word and of
song and of communal prayer and Harmon
it's something it's something I'm
wistful
for wistful for a belief that I never
had in a way yeah
uh yeah does
a I think does a particular Latin church
Chase can you grab this uh big gele for
me
please
um one of the quickest growing
denominations I think of church
attendance in America is this thing
that's all in Latin mhm have you heard
about this no I can't remember what it
is and it's growing massively in the in
a young age demographic under 30 or
something the whole thing's in Latin and
which can be awesome right well I think
I'm wondering Vatican 2 may have been a
kind of a big
mistake Al
so because when you're forced to
actually contend with what the words are
in a modern
context they don't have the power that
they sometimes have as a spell wa
difficult to switch off a very
particular type of critical Vigilant
analytical mind when what you're looking
to try and do is allow the experience to
wash over you so
perhaps uh yeah not being unless you're
fluent in Latin being able to just enjoy
the experience and just be maybe that
is most of what you're trying to maybe
that's most of what religious service
was doing maybe it wasn't really
anything to do with the words very often
it isn't I
mean it depends you know so we're
actually meeting on Shabbat this is the
I shouldn't have traveled here we
shouldn't be using electronic devices
but I'm not a practicing Jew at that
level but I think
about what we say over the wine when we
pray you know we have this thing where
we begin U
like this is the
sound of of Jewish prayer
right and then you're thinking about
what it says and it's very moving to me
because what it is is it's a it's it's
taken directly out of
Genesis and it was uh evening and it was
morning the sixth
day right and Yom is day and shishi is
six and arav is evening and V is morning
so you know what the words
mean
and you're actually recapitulating God's
shifting from work to
rest so as you come to understand what
the words
mean um it it's not destroyed by
knowledge
uh you know you know that old song by
The Rivers of
Babylon that's related to the grace that
we say after
meals um these are references that
matter uh and I think people are are
shocked
um they don't know how much of their
life comes from
scripture you know you have a round of
firings that accompany somebody says I
can read the writing on the wall well do
you know that that's Daniel
5:25 do you know what the wall
says I think many many take you know
you've been measured and found wanting
your lands will be distributed to the
Persians or something like
that you know these These are incredibly
powerful references that we live
with you know you think about the birds
to everything turn turn turn pet Seer on
there is a season and a time and a
purpose under Heaven it's
Ecclesiastes you think about Jimmy
Hendricks going off about two Riders
were approaching and the wind began to
howl it's
Isaiah where are you where are you with
the power of the
word are you afraid to welcome it in are
you worried that you lose your
[Music]
atheism what what are those two writers
approaching they come with news that's
the fall of
Babylon who are The Joker and the thief
in that
song I believe they're on either side of
Christ
being
crucified religion is interested in you
whether or not you give a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it knows about you and it finds its
way into every aspect of your
life and if you're going to be an honest
atheist you have to admit
that talking about younger people have
you seen the data showing the movement
of teenage boys politically to the right
you been looking at this where else are
they going to go it's a good question I
mean I I had a teenage boy I still have
one but he's 18
now and I watched them be pushed farther
and farther right by their
schools you
suck all of your instincts are bad these
girls are amazing look at you you're
pathetic be less
masculine and more attractive you're
just barking at them
constantly they're not moving right
they're moving out of your stupid
way you've given them what
nothing
nothing one of my son's friends died
recently by his own
hand and I don't know what kind of
pressures he was put
under but I watched those kids go
through this pressure cooker created by
this crazy easy parasitized left-wing
educational
movement get away from our
sons get away from our daughters get
away from our sons and away from our
daughters it's not left or right I don't
have a republican bone in my body get
the crazy people who do not understand
human development away from our
children stop giving our daughters
terrible life advice
but
like
um that's one of these mgrm questions
what am I supposed to say
um let me speak abstractly so we don't
get distracted with stupid stuff gender
is about
reproduction and it's paired and there's
nothing you're going to do that's as
good as the male female pairing that
produces families yes there's a ton of
problems with it there's a ton of
problems with traditional femininity
with traditional masculinity I actually
believe that toxic masculinity used to
mean something before it meant nothing
right now we are allowing our children
to be parented by people who should be
nowhere close to a child because
development for humans is different
we're not like wilderbeast where you
come out with
programming where you can walk on day
one we're basically
not blank slates but self- assembling
computers and what you put into a
developing
mind um you know what normal child
trying to figure out gender
identity
um does not go through a process trying
to figure out oh I like that dress do I
want to marry somebody who's wearing it
or do I want to wear it myself that's a
normal process that you go through in
development and if a
parent hears that they usually you know
try to guide
natural gender identity now what happens
when an administrator says oh he said he
wanted to wear a dress he's a
girl everybody respect his choice you're
thinking wait wait wait
what you took a moment that happens in
every boy's
life and you turn it into a trans
affirmation moment and then you tried to
like freeze it in and let me guess you
really just want to protect something
which is
great some people want to protect trans
kids trans kids exist they have life
very hard on them okay let's ask how
many trans kids got
manufactured by
this Dei
movement versus how many would occur
naturally and you have type one and type
two error you have a trans kid who was
always going to be a trans kid that
wasn't properly treated that's terrible
I agree with the Dei people about that
you have another collection huge
collection of normal kids who are never
going to be trans and you push them
towards this I had J Michael Bailey on
the show who his paper on rogd rapid
onset gender dysphoria yeah uh was
pulled very very rare that this happens
and I learned during my research for
that about the left-handedness argument
for both gay and transsexual people so
in the Middle Ages it was seen as being
a mark of Witchcraft or being touched by
the devil that you were left-handed
which meant that people who were hid
their left-handedness yeah I think about
12% maybe of the pop is Left-Handed
something like that but during the
Middle Ages uh it was significantly less
the uh ceiling gets released and people
are free to be their true left-handed
selves and more people become
left-handed I I I can now fully manifest
that forward and that is an argument
that gets put forward a lot for well now
that we have released the lid on the
pressure cooker that was tamping down
People's Natural trans or gay
proclivities or whatever they're now
free to be themselves but that doesn't
explain why gender dys appears to occur
in clumps it's not evenly distributed
across all schools you you linked two
things that I
think have to be unlinked we are
fighting the last war because we got
male homosexuality
wrong I'm old enough to remember when it
was a lifestyle
choice right and I had gay friends in
college who it's not a choice you know
it's like a
quiet I didn't choose this
um we're lumping a bunch of stuff
together I don't think male
homosexuality has almost anything to do
with female homosexuality I think
calling them both homosexuality is very
confusing there's something that seems
much more
obligate about male homosexuality it's
highly conserved I don't think it's
unnatural I think it's it's part of the
design of humans and we haven't quite
figured out why it's there I don't dis
agree but I think the leh handiness
argument makes sense when it comes to
homosexuality but not when it comes to
the trans issue no it makes sense in
both but the size of the effect is the
problem you're claiming I have no doubt
that there were some people who had
transgendered brains who were closeted
uh you know transvestites and and they
they had a closet somewhere in the
basement where they got to be them their
true selves no question that that exists
the issue is that you created an
enormous amount of like type two
error so you could go after much smaller
amount of type one eror you created all
sorts of negative
stuff by not balancing type 1 and type
two and that's unforgivable you're not
actually the defender you think you are
you're somebody who's destroying some
lives to privilege others and why have
you made that decision I completely
agreed with you like I I won't say there
are only two
genders you know
why because it's not
true in humans yeah two genders or two
Sexes well first of all the gender and
sex used to be largely synonymous before
we decided that one was in some sense
obligate uh biological and the other was
software programming well that was a
lexical game that was believe in the
1950 that was played to try and bate the
yeah but you can you can make an
argument that you need a term I don't
think the gender should be purposed for
that but you could make a an argument
that just like abstracting male and
female into top and bottom had some
utility right okay so what do you mean
when you talk about that interex is an
really important category to me I know
people who are interex and they they're
screwed they were screwed because our
society had no
way of dealing with them the gender
binary is so strong that somebody
through zero fault of anybody is born
with ambiguity in their genitalia and
their chromosome
something so yes there are two
intended Sexes or
genders but nature isn't good enough to
hit that Mark all the
time and those are those are human
beings those are souls and and and the
sloppy right-wing thing which is to find
the shelling point where you just sit
there and you say there are only two
Sexes and two genders I understand why
you're doing it you're trying to stop
this crazy conversation that's taken off
so it's not like I don't have sympathies
with why you're saying
that but when I bring up you know my
favorite example is persistent muan duct
syndrome where somebody goes into their
doctor having trouble having a kid and
it's like well you have Twigs and
berries but you've also got a
uterus you're female on the inside does
that person produce
both sperm and eggs no right but surely
that's the definition that is the that
is the line in the ground around male
and female large gametes yeah but sorry
the gentleman who goes into his doctor
to find out that he's got a
uterus who is
he if he wants to be male I understand
why he wants to be male if he wants to
be able to talk about the fact that he
got handed some very strange cards by uh
by the Creator in her Infinite
Wisdom um I want him or her however that
person conceives of s to be that's
that's a soul to me and I don't like the
energy of saying there are only two
Sexes and two genders and that's it it's
like I get it I understand what you're
trying to do you're trying to say that
there are two intended Sexes and genders
it's reproductive it's nature I get it
it depends on how we're going to Define
sex because if it comes down to gameit
size that's that is binary
sure okay but what do you do about the
edge Cate The Edge case but no one's
producing both so there are none I don't
know that nobody's producing both maybe
that's a fact you know usually the issue
is is that you have this this list of
homologues right so that the clitoris
maps to the penile shaft and the labia
majora map to the testicles what you're
doing is you're taking a common female
template I believe and you're treating
it through the sry Cascade uh
differently during velopment so that the
default is female but you also have this
ability uh through this one protein to
create a Cascade that creates male out a
female okay that doesn't always work out
now you've got an ambiguous situation
and you've got a a a culture that
basically can't think in
ambiguities that's where a lot of this
frustration with the gender binary comes
from is that you you know somebody in
this in a category where they're not
really one thing or the other at a
hardware
level I I believe that beyond that
there's also a software level there are
people with male brains and female
bodies and and conversely I don't
understand this stuff but I believe that
that's true if you ever have the
opportunity to interview Dedra mclusky
who used to be I think Dennis McClosky
very famous economist I had the pleasure
of speaking with her a while
back
and um you know one of the things that
she said was that
she wasn't doing this to be Hotsy totsy
she was going to she wanted to die a an
old lady not an old man you what it
wasn't wasn't a sex thing it was just
the fact that she'd been uncomfortable
in a male body her whole life so I'm
using the term her do I have to use the
term now no I could use the term him or
his but why would you do
that don't don't you have enough
compassion that somebody ruined their
family life and went through hell and in
public because it was so painful to be
in the wrong body I get
it okay now you have that compassion and
how many lives are you going to ruin
over
that how many lives are you going to
ruin pretending that this is an enormous
cohort so to the extent that I have a
slogan and I basically never speak about
trans My slogan is
make trans accepted and
rare make it rare means use the
developmental
environment in order to give good
coaching about male strategies and
female strategies for life don't
relitigate the fact that we screwed up
male homosexuality just take your lumps
we screwed it up it's a part of The
Human Condition it's never going to go
away it's different from female
homosexuality almost certainly we don't
exactly know why it's here we've been
blessed with Untold riches uh
particularly in the mimetic realm from
male
homosexuals it is what it
is and now we're going to refight this
over trans where no I think you have
tremendous opportunities through
development to assign behaviors
is the skirt a female object no the
Lungi in South Asia is a skirt men wear
it I have a
Lungi it's like telling a Scottish
person that he's
a he's he's crossdressing what are you
an idiot you ever you ever dealt with a
Scotsman you do not want to make that
mistake they will let you know very
quickly who they are um
we're out of our minds we're out of our
minds we're creating so much misery for
these young men and young
girls and and you know it just it makes
me upset because we don't love our
children
enough we we don't love our children
enough to tell these teachers hands off
my
kids go work out your weird stuff I get
it but get away from our children I came
up with this idea of toxic compassion
which was something I was looking to
name metastic
maternity yes yes like an edible complex
like the need to smother and protect
something so badly that you just want to
do violence to somebody because you want
to get your rocks off that there is this
problem with
compassion but if you prioritize
short-term emotional Comfort over
everything else you end up with some
very strange externalities it's not just
that though well I mean I wonder if
we're talking about the same thing maybe
not let me read you mind toxic
compassion is the prioritization of
short-term emotional Comfort over
everything over truth reality actual
long-term outcomes flourishing
everything it optimizes for looking good
rather than doing good this is seen in
much of popular culture as the desirable
fair and empathetic thing to do and it's
everywhere people would rather claim
that body fat has no bearing on health
and mortality outcomes to avoid making
overweight individuals feel upset even
if this causes them to literally die
sooner or have a worse quality of life
over the long run parents would rather
allow children to play computer games or
watch screens and access social media
every night instead of dealing with the
discomfort of taking it away from them
even if it ruins their brain development
social skills and self-esteem people
would rather say that children growing
up in a single parent household suffer
no worse outcomes than those from two
parent households even if this misleads
parents children and teachers about why
kids behave the ways they do Elon Musk
recently responded to criticism about
his political alignment and contribution
to climate change he identified how big
of a shift Tesla had caused in the
electric vehicle market and the
downstream impact impact of that on the
environment saying that he's done more
for the climate than any other human in
history what I care about is the reality
of goodness not the perception of it and
what I see all over the place is people
who care about looking good while doing
evil telling people what they want to
hear giving them immediate gratification
and avoiding saying anything that could
cause distress
prioritizes appearing good over actually
doing good it's
dangerous I'm with you you are in an
area I think a lot about and I don't
want to I don't want to attack something
that you're saying but I I I I conceive
of this
differently there's a point
about
sanctimony and appearing to do good
well-doing
evil that is different from the need to
parent and
protect part of what's going on is a
redistribution of empathy which is being
called an expansion of
empathy right so the idea
is we are going to be extra especially
sympathetic with some groups and
empathic with their their trauma their
pain
and we are going to take away
compassion from other groups so for
example if you look at suicide
statistics in the United
States uh from all of the rhetoric you
would think that young black asian
females would
be
um at the top of the suicide statistics
but it's
really middle-aged white men
who are killing themselves incredible
numbers you bring up the
statistic
and there's an exchange rate in terms of
human Mis Mis misery that is measured in
suicide it's a pretty
unud thing that when you kill yourself
you're probably in an extremely
negative state of personal
trauma so what does the compassion group
think about the fact that the group most
likely to end their own lives is is
exactly the group that is
faulted uh you know for the
patriarchy it's
astounding oh poor little white men in
the midwest had their privilege taken
away what the hell are you talking
about you're talking about people
killing themselves you're talking about
fathers and grandfathers
dying what we're talking about is a
redistribution of
compassion we're talking about taking
compassion away from people of European
descent we're talking about taking
compassion away from men we're talking
about com taking compassion away
from a business person like Steve Jobs
who might have pancreatic cancer and be
dying from it in his 50s because he had
the privilege of building billion dooll
companies who the hell are you what is
your problem
what come out of the shadows and admit
to what you want you want a
redistribution of compassion and you're
calling this empathy it is anything but
empathy empathy would be an expansion of
our understanding of each other's
problems and woes this is basically
saying that these people are worthy of
compassion and these people aren't the
child who might have been
wronged for not having a clear gender
identity and that would have happened
under any error in
in any circumstance that's one life and
then you have a bunch of lives over here
that are children who are pushed towards
sexual reassignment
surgery and are sexually mutilated for
no reason at all because of of
Developmental you know reasons that they
got bad advice from adults while they
were trying to assemble themselves and
you're compassionate about this and
you're not compassionate about that I
don't want you anywhere near a school
if you're not willing to deal with type
one and type two
error you don't belong around our
children if you don't understand the
human development is important and that
it is very hard to improve on the gender
binary that is even if there are edge
cases the gender binary is there for a
reason and you don't have a clue how
complicated the gender binary is you
probably haven't even studied sexuality
in different species that assign gender
you know flatworms assign it based on a
contest the winner is male and the loser
is female you don't like that tough
luck you know bed bugs only practice
traumatic insemination you don't like
that I'm
sorry how are you going to engineer the
entire world around your crazy theories
of gender and
sexuality we we need these people away
from children they're working out their
own stuff
we need to recognize that
homosexuality particularly among men in
an obligate fashion is a normal
conserved part of the human experience
that basically there is a gender binary
that there is a small number of edge
cases at a hardware level there's a
small number of cases meant at a
software
level we have to be compassionate about
all that but we can't take compassion
away from everyone else
it's a message to both the left and the
right stop saying they're only two Sexes
it's
offensive and and stop forcing people to
say something so simplistic because
you're threatening their
children there was a story about Winston
Churchill's father that I wanted to tell
you
about in September 1893 Churchill was
admitted on his third attempt to the
Sandhurst Military College he wrote to
his father I was so glad to be able to
send you the good news on Thursday his
father a foral chancellor of the ex-
cheer and leader of the House of Commons
wrote back a week later the full text
the reply doesn't seem to be available
but we do have glimpses you should be
ashamed of your slovenly happy go-lucky
Haram scarum style of work never have I
received a really good report of your
conduct from any Headmaster or tutor
always behind incessant complaints of a
total one of application to your work
you have failed to get into the 60th
rifles the finest regiment in the Army
you have imposed on me an extra charge
of some2 200 a year do not think that
I'm going to take the trouble of writing
you long letters after every failure you
commit and undergo I no longer attach
the slightest weight to anything you may
say if you cannot prevent yourself from
leading the idle useless unprofitable
life you have had during your school
days you will become a mere social wasal
one of the hundreds of public school
failures and you will degenerate into a
Shabby un happy and futile existence you
will have to bear all the blame for such
misfortunes your mother sent her love
Churchill was
19 what do you make of
it come
on tough to read it makes me think about
what drove Churchill to be the person
that he became it makes me think about
the price again that people pay for the
successes that others look at and have
Envy of Revere
admire
remember we don't know what drives
people they often don't know what drives
them as well when they look sufficiently
deep but that's rough to read say more
about that the guy goes on to be perhaps
the greatest leader of the 20th century
one of the greatest leaders of all time
he stops
Nazi Germany on just this domino fall as
they move through Europe every single
country that they come up against and
the first one that they
hit that they find some proper
resistance from is the Battle of Britain
up against Britain he is prepared to
play a game that nobody else in the
British government is prepared to play
there's a great book called Churchill's
Ministry of ungentlemanly warfare okay
and basically the Brits saw as they
entered World War II they saw
the way that Guerilla Warfare tactics
were so uncouth that one of the other
military leaders was quoted as saying if
that's what it takes to win then I am
prepared to lose and Churchill took
whatever the opposite approach of that
was so he begins to find Renegade
scientists and inventors uh people that
can
do gorilla tactics they can break down
Bridges they can sew distrust and they
they create the first olymp mine
underwater magnetic mine and these guys
are doing it by buying up all of the
condoms in villages so that they can
water protect an AED balls that they
know will reliably dissolve at the
particular all of these different things
just this crazy
Insight that man the slovenly happy
go-lucky Haram scaran style of work if
you cannot prevent yourself from leading
the idle useless and profitable life you
have I no longer attach the slightest
weight to anything you may say I don't
know it makes me sad to think that
Churchill may have done so much great in
his life and yet never felt enough
because of
the source code that he had programmed
into him yeah
unwinable
unwinable parental love is an incredible
engine but I also see love in that
letter you see
imagine there was no World War II
imagine there was no Nazi
regime what was he supposed to do with
his life open a dry
cleaner was he supposed
to become a vice president for inventory
at a large
company what what was Winston Churchill
supposed to do absent Adolf
Hitler I I God this is just so hard to
even talk about and think
about
greatness you're supposed to have great
people underg glass I call this you know
break glass in case of emergency people
we don't have any if you had trouble now
who would you go to
you know um you're from the
UK I don't think you're a biologist but
you know who David atenor is what is the
UK's opinion of David
atenor almost universally loved
universally loved I don't know you must
know an ex-girlfriend because you said
all but
um yeah he's a National Treasure of the
UK we're supposed to have tons of those
people I don't know of any we've beaten
up everything we
have and if if somebody
attacks you know I've made this point
before but everybody focuses on the
wrong speeches of Neville Chamberlain
you want to get choked up look at his
resignation speech that thing is a thing
of
Wonder his point
is this is the move that Hitler doesn't
see coming
Hitler does not see that I'm going to
resign for the good of my country and
that Winston Churchill has asked me to
stay
on
so you you guys better know what you're
doing because you're GNA have to you're
going to have us to deal with the UK
needs to get back in the game let's just
be honest about it I don't know what the
hell's going on with the
UK it makes me very angry and very sick
H so I don't know I was
at do you know
ditchley some estate that Winston church
was at in the UK not far from Ox it
sounds like every other estate that
exists yeah yeah I was there for a
meeting it was a quiet
meeting there were lots of people in the
British Foreign Service there and
they're all impeccably educated and
spoke multiple languages and all this
stuff they were all like moping about
you know oh well you know of course with
the US there's nothing really for us to
do and this is no longer the UK of the
previous blah blah blah blah blah it's
like what the hell is wrong with you
people you have this incredible role to
play yeah there's definitely a degree of
not defeatism but yeah like playing
second
string uh walk it off dude there's your
special forces are still the Envy of the
planet everybody knows how tough the U
the UK is when it comes to Special
Forces your facility with the language
is second to none and it's not just that
accent um it's the fact that you live it
culturally there's so much um quirkiness
tolerance for eccentricity for
Brilliance not just
Excellence that is deep in the English
soul and I have no idea what the UK is
doing yeah you're smaller you lost your
Empire tough luck and walk it
off it feels a little bit like
uh someone who's given a ceremonial oh
stop
it no when you look at uh let's say
there's a large debate that's going on
there's some sort of meeting of of
countries and the UK is there and it
seems like that there is a token gesture
to some bygone Dynasty H we we we must
remember to invite the Brits because
it's it's it's important that they have
a seat at the table I don't I don't know
I don't I don't feel like we're forging
forward in the world I don't I don't
know yeah you aren't you aren't you
aren't doing enough you aren't doing
enough but you want to know from your
little brother get back in the game walk
it off cut it out you're incredibly
important okay so you're small so you're
relatively small as a
market and
so why did Jim Watson have to go over to
the cev just Laboratories to do
DNA you
know think about all the things that
came out of the
UK I'd kill for the dur equation to have
been invented in the US have some pride
in yourselves there's a lot of criticism
at the moment about multiculturalism in
the UK what what does that mean that as
you enter maybe Heath thr it maybe
Gatwick it maybe one of the tube
stations com out of there uh it's
something like diversity is our strength
is one of the taglines and there are a
lot of people that okay so let's fight
this out because I I want to do this I
really
do
um undoubtedly you know many people of
Indian Pakistani origin who speak uh
with an Oxbridge
accent right and they have incling our
prime minister all sorts of mannerisms
hadn't noticed it's a joke
um the
UK is also a software
product you can teach people to
think as if they've always been I mean
look let's be honest your royal families
partially
German
um think about the UK as a software
product imagine that you can load that
software into a mind no matter what the
skin color looks like it's the software
that we're attached to much more than
your Hardware I don't think we're
getting that level of
integration it depends with which
groups you have plenty of ashkanazi Jews
who are completely English I mean I I
just brought up Paul dck dck isn't a
uh typically British name it's
French right they're all sorts of people
who are quintessentially English who
aren't
historically now I have a good friend
from way back Marcus Doo who uh never
really thought about the fact that his
his last name is totally
French you know what is he a fellow of
the Royal Society
and OB whatever it is that he is you
know it's just
yeah and I I think you guys are much
better than you think you
are and I don't know what got into your
T
but we can't afford for the UK and the
anglophone universe to keep sobbing like
this you know I I I I I I chew out the
Australians all the time it's like my
God you have this great country far away
from Europe this is your time to lead
the US is stumbling what do something
with it do something with it new
zealanders come on
guys no look I am incredibly happy to be
part of the anglophone world and not
just in terms of the language in terms
of cultural norms in terms of all of the
things I say we've contributed to the
world I'm not British I've never held a
British passport but I very much feel
like um you know the great science that
came out of the UK uh is part of my
Heritage you know and by the way you
know look at a map of the names of
surnames in Scotland and Ireland and
it's like a who's who of everything that
happened it's just I'm so proud at some
level of this tradition I sometimes tell
somebody that you can tell that a man is
only partially educated if the word
hamiltonian means
something because which Hamilton the
Hamilton
of mathematical
physics the Hamilton of biology the
Hamilton of uh us historical uh
Fame I'm very I'm I'm very bullish on
pride in the anglophone universe and
we've got to stop moping around and the
UK is supposed to lead it's been a while
there's a really awesome Netflix series
uh World War II from the front lines I
think it's called so they've used a
combination of AI and archive footage to
recolor and put into
4K this entire series and it's
outstanding and there's one about the
Battle of Britain
and it's been a I moved away from the UK
and I I had my problems with it and I
tried for a long time to try and sort of
nudge the culture as best I could from
within my business or or whatever I was
doing and then just
thought I can't
I'm trying to shovel sand away from the
seashore here and it's just not working
so I've come over to America I've
flourish since I've been here but that
was the first time watching that and
looking at that degree of spirit that
was the first time in quite a while
where I've thought to myself [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] yeah
like that's that's something that I can
genuinely be proud of it's been almost
as long as I can remember since I
genuinely thought I'm proud of being
British come to St helina
seriously you got a speck in the middle
of the Atlantic Ocean below the
equator uh I just spent a week
there do you know about St Helen I did
this the first time I've ever heard
those two words put together in my life
okay they're the remnants of the British
Empire called the British overseas
territories right and you have like
Gibralter and Diego Garcia C and Tristan
Duna pitare and all these sort of bits
and pieces
that is what's left it's an island of
around 4,000 people where Napoleon died
during his second Exile after
Elba uh because it was so secure
apparently it's the second most
fortified island in the world after
Malta uh it's an unbelievable place um
people are incredibly proud of being
British and I believe that William is
going to visit at the end of this month
and that it's been it's been 20 years
since a royal visit of Prince Anne in
any
event one of the things that I loved
about being in Jamestown St helina
um is the pride that people have in
being British and being under the
British
Order
and we just can't afford for you guys I
mean look when I say lead it doesn't
mean the US isn't going to lead you have
a different leadership role use it we're
we're in crisis right now
we all remember what it what you know it
sounds like to be Winston
Churchill right we we we know what that
voice sounds like and it's very painful
for us
that actually you know I'm thinking back
the problem is which diversity is our
strength campaign it's like some visual
diversity if you fly British Airways and
you look at that uh safety reel it's a
joke I mean they're just trying to find
everybody who they could find um you
know who displays some kind of visual
diversity no the power of
it you know the name Michael Atia he was
the the master of Trinity College
Cambridge one of the greatest
mathematicians of all time certainly of
the 20th
century the name of T is what
Lebanese nobody thought about him as
Lebanese we thought about him as
British I I I think you guys are much
better at this stuff than you think and
you've fallen for the wrong kind of
diversity this kind
of visual diversity shallow diversity
yeah shallow
diversity don't be afraid to be
British what are you working on next
what's next for
you the problem I'm supposed to say
something like I've got a special coming
up or um a book I'm thinking about
writing a book
but look the most important thing that I
have is I have a
possible expansion of our two main
theories in
physics and nothing else compares to
that even if it's
wrong a decent probability which could
be you know imagine it we're one in 100
or 1 in a
thousand which I
it's far north of there in my estimation
that it's wrong or it's right no that
it's it's that that it's right I think
it's much greater than those odds and of
course you have to believe that or you
wouldn't be working on it but it's also
the case that there aren't that many
people who have even ballpark level
skills to say what a theory would
be
um that's hope for me can you imagine if
let's just imagine next week somebody
said you know actually this looks right
um we could start dreaming about looking
up at the night sky and seeing it as a
bucket
list where do you want to
go you could ask questions about is
there any way to harvest the Zero Point
Energy from all the quantum
oscillators you could
say is there dark
chemistry well you have
dark
matter we could have dark matter at some
level this room is filled with dark
matter neutrinos are effectively Dark
Matter the only thing that can grab them
is uh gravity which is way too weak and
um and the weak Force which is too weak
so in general we're just being
irradiated by neutrinos morning noon and
night uh imagine that you had slower
moving particles than you could build
things with them and they just weren't C
L to the matter that we see here so they
passed through ordinary
matter if my theories work there'll be
incredible things to play with and one
of the things that I find fascinating is
that it becomes this issue of psychology
like why is he pretending that he has a
theory I'm not
pretending uh why does he think you know
who does he think he is and I just I
look at it and I just think my gosh you
guys have all lost the plot
the world right now needs
hope and it needs a quest it needs
something for people to dream about that
isn't the same set of questions one of
the things that I I don't love about
podcasting is that people tend to ask
clustered
questions and I'm always looking for
that interviewer who's going to ask me
things that are just
like people haven't
heard
um mostly what we do is we just do
retreads of the same
old questions and it's not a critique of
either one of us as interviewers it's
just we don't know how to get out of our
traffic circle where we go around and
around I'm trying to build the most
exciting thing in the
world which is Hope and a
future and access to the source code of
reality through through differential
equations and geometric structures
the that sounds crazy to
people yeah well look around you how
much of this was here in
1700s now go
away if if you're not understanding that
we've changed we've progressed you've
lived through a time of stagnation and
I'm sorry about that I can't help
you computers were the only thing that
really really took off during this
period of
time so think about if science
progressed the way computer computers
progressed over the last 50 years your
world would be completely
unrecognizable now what do we have we
have a wood table mugs exposed brick
glass metal there's nothing here that's
astonishing except the
computers that thing that iPad or
whatever it is is the only astonishing
thing to somebody who's looking at this
from the point of view of 1971
that's terrible okay so you've all lost
the plot don't blame me that I haven't
that's what I work on I'm going to try
to make sure that you have options that
your kids don't have to die on this
planet Elon is exactly right about this
stuff the only thing he has wrong is
chemical rockets in
Mars I'm sorry he used it as an adverti
for
SpaceX but he was right about everything
else
Eric Weinstein ladies and gentlemen Eric
I appreciate you I always enjoy coming
and sitting down with you uh these ones
fly by I'm looking forward to the next
one as well thanks for having me Chris
thank you very much for tuning in if you
enjoyed that episode with Eric you will
love my last episode with Eric which was
also 3 hours long and you can watch
right here go on give it a tap
