everybody so I've just been listening to
a conversation that I've been following
for the past couple days now on Eric
Weinstein or Weinstein actually sure of
the pronunciation of his last name since
I just heard someone pronounced it Steen
but I always thought it was Stine and
this is part of the problem you know we
often we like to correct people who
mispronounce things not realizing that
many people who mispronounce
sophisticated words at least are not
mispronouncing them because they're dumb
they're mispronouncing them because
they're smart what do I mean by that I
mean that we presume they might not be
smart because they they don't pronounce
the word in a way that we know to be
correct when in fact what is more often
the case is that they are readers they
read and when we read words we have to
intuit the pronunciation based on our
experience and ideas and rules and
thought and previous you know readings
and relationships with sounds and vowels
and consonants fricatives and so on so
I'm not sure what inclines me to be
unclear about Eric's last name except
that maybe I haven't heard him pronounce
it or maybe I did and it didn't stick
but I think it's Weinstein in any case
he's on with Tyler Cowen in portal
episode I believe number 16 and they're
talking economics a subject that I would
ordinarily consider to be not only
outside my bailiwick which a word was
happy for announcing because it's a word
that I've read and I'm not sure that
I've heard many people use that word as
you can see I'm attempting to obey
masking guidelines something that I
consider not only to be intelligent
reasonable and good given the current
situation but also a matter of personal
courtesy and communal unity but I was
listening to this podcast on economics a
topic far from my ordinary interest or
concern and listening to these two go at
it together and of course they're not
really going at it they're more they're
more or less cooperative Eric likes to
fight he makes no secret of this Tyler
thinks so highly of him and is such a
gentleman in a way an intellectual
gentleman that it's very difficult for
Eric to kind of you know find a position
from which he can strike and I can see
that you Eric will actually admit that
this is frustrating him right but he
kind of wants to have the masculine
mano-a-mano right that the Tyler's
nature and proclivities continuously
deny them
so yeah I think Eric's a little
frustrated and certainly he disagrees
with Tyler on many points however Tyler
is such a brilliant conversationalist
that it's very difficult for see this is
kind of a thing in that that you that
one learns in Tai Chi over time it takes
a long time for most of us to come to
this position but my old Tai Chi teacher
said something like bless his heart the
man who introduced me to the art Kasey
Mao who passed away from brain cancer
perhaps a decade ago he used to teach in
the concourse in between the museums in
Golden Gate Park which is where I met
him and that was a that was one of the
few truly great things that happened to
me here in San Francisco San Francisco
is uh I'm going to veer from my topic
momentarily but I will return to it
San Francisco is a haven still to this
day for martial arts practitioners every
morning beginning around 6:00 a.m. prior
to the pandemic and to some degree still
to this day that little concourse would
become a very interesting AV and
interaction was going on here that
concourse will become like a sort of
pop-up University for martial artists
but particularly for people doing Tai
Chi and the vast majority of those
people are doing Tai Chi for health not
for combat
whereas other martial artists
particularly those who study ba gua an
art that I have deep admiration and
respect for and wish I had the time to
pursue in fact it's one of the ones I
would pick if I were going to pick
something other than Tai Chi now
recognizing I'm not a young man anymore
and even young men are are relatively
likely to get injured in martial arts
such as jiu-jitsu and part of I could
rephrase part of that as relatively
likely to injure themselves but anyway
my point is that in Tai Chi my old
teacher he used to say in order to be
struck you have to strike yourself
against the fist of your opponent
essentially what he meant was you have
to be so poor at following that you're
standing still when you should be in
motion right and in particularly in the
art of Thuy Chou which is the art of
pushing hands an art shared by a wide
variety of martial arts but common
commonly practiced particularly in Kung
Fu and in a relatively choreographed
fashion in Kung Fu
as I understand it I'd have little
experience of that but also in Tai Chi
and a number of other arts they have
tweet shout which is pushing hands and
pushing hands is essentially the
essential intent is to yeah this is like
explaining what Zen is for in other
words you're [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] from the get-go if
you're starting to use words right it's
just not going to work
but we shall in in Tai Chi as practiced
by those I practice it with in a special
place at a special time it is an artist
sensitivity and essentially the goal
could be rather clumsily framed as
exerting no force yourself unbalanced
let your opponent unbalance themselves
in their attempt to steal your balance
now this is a very peculiar thing quite
unlike fighting and it's kind of the
difference the reason I mentioned is
it's kind of a difference between the
two potential combatants in Eric's
portal podcast because Tyler doesn't do
what's called forming up against his
opponent and because he refuses
he's so elegant at not forming up
against Eric Eric can't really get a
punch in and and he's frustrated by this
but he's also charmed right
he's enchanted at the same time in a way
that's entirely masculine right I'm not
claiming that um he has he's got you
know like an erotic crush on his guests
because it's certain that he's doesn't
and you know he is a he's married to a
female so
but men do form men do become enchanted
by each other and one might argue after
observing them very carefully that in
fact their enchantments are often much
deeper and harder than the relationships
they are inclined if heterosexual to
form with women and in their discussion
there were a number of comments about
the complexities of the of attempting to
use language judiciously wisely and
effectively in the age of political
correctness which is a I think honestly
and if somebody wants to have a
discussion with me about this all
happily you know presuming that we're
both there to learn I'll happily
participate but I think that topic is
very complex Lee internally conflicted I
think it involves aspects of the
policing of thought and behavior and
norms and things like this that I find
deeply troubling and I also think that
its origins are much more confused and
conflicted and untrustworthy than we
might ordinarily imagine if we're just
listening to the people who are arguing
for it
though that that group that I just
referenced is a field it's not meaning
and this is something I want to get at
something brilliant that came out in
Tyler and Eric's discussion those who
are in favor of policing language and
thought according to what they believe
is correct
about the use of gendering nouns and
such like this that is a field meaning
it is a library of unique situations
circumstances contexts individuals
groups subgroups and so on it's not a
thing
and in many of my recent videos I've
spoken about my concern about
generalizations and today in listening
to Eric he begins to argue against
certain kinds of economic methods
analytical methods methods used
analytically in the field of economics
methods traditionally used in this
fashion and he makes the claim that the
very important claim to me that what was
required to actually understand the
phenomenon being analyzed his field
theory rather than unit theory right and
the example he gave is brilliant he says
you don't ask what is the temperature of
the United States absolutely brilliant
perfect analogy just the one I needed
when we talk about men or women or
animals or political groups or religious
groups or consumers right we treat that
we are we are entrained by our habits
with language and our enculturation
meaning the behavior of our peers
associates and those we are exposed to
we are trained to treat fields as units
right
and so it is that we are deceived by
what appears to be our capacity to
measure and measurement is actually the
problem
I've spoken lately about statistics
arguments over statistics and so on
but we have two perhaps far more
significant problems and those problems
are measurement which we supposed to be
objective and really it's very rarely so
and particularly in in complex things if
we can exclude most of the universe we
can measure the remainder with some
relative degree of objective confidence
but first we have to exclude just about
everything to do that and that's really
important we need to notice this weird
quality of the nature of measuring
itself and when we casually measure
things in consciousness usually for
purposes we've not yet admitted to
ourselves let alone those to whom our
measurements will be deployed we make a
variety of fundamental errors in the
belief that object you know that there's
some kind of objectivity available and
this is one of the catastrophic rata
logical fallacies to which we are
commonly subject this fallacy is used
against us to make us Dumber by the news
I saw today in a friend's news feed a
remark that I thought fascinating which
was that Fox News has accomplished with
our parents what they feared would be
done to us by gangsta rap and that was a
fascinating little quip such quips are
not particularly changed making their
entertaining but they do help us to
comprehend phenomenon that are otherwise
relatively inconceivable it's very
difficult for me to understand the
positions that my father holds until I
recognize the context the the
information context in which he and
habitually engages and how those
contexts are skillfully and
intentionally manipulated to Purdue
certain emotional and intellectual and
analytical results in my father results
that can then be the simplest way to say
it is that can then be taken advantage
of by parties intending to profit from
doing so to benefit from doing so
there's lots of different benefits not
just profiting
so Eric gave this fascinatingly
wonderful analogy perfect one I I don't
I'm sort of I'm disappointed with myself
for not having come up with it myself or
at least something similar right and
it's it's something I'm completely aware
of I was just never able to encapsulate
it in an analogy so clearly you don't
ask what the temperature of the United
States is and if you did what you get
would be an average which wouldn't tell
you much about the temperature in a
specific place and averages don't tell
us the character of Units and this is
fundamentally important for all of us to
learn and understand because our
language implies the opposite and we are
so used to being trained and taught and
rewarded by people who pretend that
fields have the qualities we associate
with units in other words that groups
are individuals which is completely
impossible the United States is not an
individual corporations are not persons
they never were they can't be in fact
they're disembodied functional
collectives where humans are turned into
functions for the purposes of profit
shareholder revenue competitive
advantage and so on
as I walk through the garden here the
San Francisco botanical garden I'm
currently in the the redwood grove I am
traveling through a continuum of
temperatures in this place I'm standing
now I am relatively appropriately
dressed for the temperature if I am
standing in the sunlight right next door
to me right here okay
I am inappropriately dressed right
because we like convenience and because
we like to think we've made the right
decisions and so on and so forth we want
to be comforted by the fact that our
intellect is you know properly
functioning we are inclined to eject the
necessary detail to understand or relate
with a phenomenon effectively and
efficiently intelligently humanely and
so on we're inclined to eject that
detail and grab the generalization now
some of my astute listeners might find
this to be in conflict with what I was
saying a little while ago about my
objections to the field of linguistic
policing that I refer to as political
correctness there are aspects of
political correctness I have a little
problem with some of which I adopted as
a very young man in the 70s and I'm sure
there are modern people who will
absolutely will find some reason to
attack me for what I'm about to say but
in 70s I was educated by my mother to to
prefixed to use the prefix ms in fact
back then and I still think I think it
still exists today there was a very
provocative magazine with that title ms
period and it sounds like sloppy English
MS
um miss miss it's just it's hard to get
the MM sound out of Miss so I think
that's why we chose ms even though s
doesn't normally have a Z sound it's a
little bit confusing but I learned that
it was perhaps inappropriate to
distinguish women by their marital
status when we didn't distinguish men by
their marital status and I'd be just as
happy if we did if we distinguished them
both all right as long as you know
there's some kind of some of the see
here's part of the problem some of the
battlegrounds of the quality are
produced Pyrrhic victories go ahead and
look that up if you want
I think it's p/yr let's see P y HR py r
hy c but but look up Pyrrhic I can't
spell it I can only say it at the moment
in other words you know we we win some
insignificant ly symbolic first of all
the idea that that these topics comprise
battlegrounds when we start there we've
already made the first strong move and
this is part of what was going on on the
podcast with Eric and Tyler is that Eric
was being forced to realize that these
guys are going to cooperatively
establish higher ground because Tyler is
disinclined to combat and is skillful
enough that he can incorporate Eric's
apparent strikes into he can take that
mother momentum of Eric's intelligence
right and transform that into higher
ground they can both achieve together
instead of pushing back against it and
being hit right and this is what reminds
me of twee shall in their podcast and
it's you know there's a lot of important
lessons we can learn about life we've
heard from
various spiritual and mindfulness
traditions ah don't resist right it is
not that they that they mean they do not
mean necessarily though there may be
some cases where they do again it's not
a unit it's a field generalizations have
their use but are dangerous when
clumsily applied so it's not that they
mean submit right that is not really
what is commonly meant what is meant is
don't form up against something take the
momentum supplied and move to higher
ground
I saw a cartoon yesterday in which there
were two images of the same male and one
of them was a male with 20 bricks on his
back this is one who's formed up against
a problem another one was an image of a
male with on the 19th of 20 steps
putting a brick down in front of him
this is the analogy of the difference
between forming up against something and
using the momentum to achieve higher
ground
it's unfortunate how easy it is to frame
this idea in language unfortunate
because to actually employ it it
requires either very careful and
diligent practice and awareness and it's
it's the kind of awareness that the ego
is unaccustomed to Erich is a little bit
egoic Tyler isn't so concerned about his
position all right and this is part of
why Eric wants to fight and Tyler wants
to fly and Tyler is able to enchant Eric
with flying enough that Eric can't
really get you know he just he just
can't bring himself to punch
and that's that's the that's the
grandfather teaching the father there
right there both progenitors they're
both brilliant progenitors but here we
see what true skill looks like and true
skill will avoid combat for higher
ground every time right because the the
unit version of higher ground is I won
the field version is we progressed right
so for Tyler there's no question here
right ty was gonna go for we progressed
every time Eric's still kind of
interested in I won and an eric is the
is the kind of a unique intellectual
persona who is inclined to preserve
little grudges and this is one of the
things that differentiates him from
Tyler I think though Tyler has like most
of us do pet peeves
he has intellectual and philosophical
concerns that he will clearly state and
preserve and discuss and present in a
non country in on confrontational way
however it doesn't mean he never forms
up against Eric often there's a kind of
flow of energy back and forth between
tweet shout participants before one of
them falls over right and Tyler does you
know does push back in his own way but
he's skillful enough that even when
doing so his position is hard to
directly attack and I think Eric's used
to the direct attack so for this reason
they end up kind of dancing more than
fighting and Eric and a couple points in
the podcast he he almost says like what
the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you know I can't I [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hit
you
all right and Tyler's just kind of over
there smiling you know sagely to himself
it's a beautiful thing to watch very
extremely edifying but for today in my
relatively brief video what I really
want to point out is this analogy
because it gives me it gives me purchase
on something I've been talking about but
I've been incapable of properly
illustrating which is the commonly
deceptive way in which generalizations
are employed in thought language casual
analysis and behavior now we can easily
understand should we so choose that the
topic of racism emerges primarily from a
traditionally habitual an unsupportable
mode of generalization and I would argue
that the generalizations that underlie
racism are disoriented and Mis founded
in a couple of occasions when when Eric
and Tyler are speaking and they're
talking about touchy subjects such as
the relationship of gender to economics
Tyler will say for example that when you
really do the math it's not exactly a
gender difference in a very specific
variable but I don't recall which isn't
merely pay gap it's some demographics
right where you live and in what
circumstances and what what social class
and what economic class
you belong to and so on so forth
racism comes from clumsy Mis founded in
other words the purpose underlying the
desire to make this generalization is
fundamentally wrong or broken
generalizations and it's tragic for me
to hear my own family echoing
perspectives they struggled to protect
me from as a child now my mother is gone
so only my father is left really but to
hear him to hear him regurgitating
nonsensical ideas and models and
pree distilled outrage from media owned
by racists bigots financial elitists who
by themselves aren't necessarily evil is
really challenging I adore my family so
much that I mostly overlook their you
know the narrowness of their views but
my point here is that it's treating a
field like a unit right if I say
such-and-such a race is responsible for
these social ills and should be blah
blah blah I'm treating a field as a unit
and I also may be conflating the
relatively desperate and or reasonably
undesired behavior of some modest
segment of a population right in a field
I may be extending that behavior to
everyone in the field so that for
example if someone says Americans are
racists well that's the complex
statement because it treats a field as a
unity if you it treats a field as a unit
and then measures the unit and declares
its measurement and it also it's
absolutist it it judges every single
human being including babies and you
know teenagers and people who are
prodigies and people who are
developmentally challenged and men and
women and transgender people and gay
people who treats them all with the same
the same measuring stick one that
actually never did any measurement right
and it pretends to have measured all
things and this is a really common
problem in the way that we relate with
language knowledge and ideas we because
we can draw a circle around
something conceptually or in language we
then become filled with the necessary
hubris to suppose even though we've
never actually measured it we know its
character and can declare that
essentially as an absolute for all time
to all people and that is a catastrophic
miss yous of the possibilities of human
intelligence averages don't tell us the
temperature of individual places or
people and in fact happy to be corrected
on this little point it's a piece of
knowledge I get I gleaned from the
internet I heard a physicist declare it
is impossible to measure the temperature
in sunlight check it out okay and that
may be because I mean there might be a
variety of reasons why that is so but
one of the possible reasons is that in
certain fields of Trent of like rapidly
and constantly transforming activity or
character or behavior we can't get a
solid grasp on a single variable that is
the result of a constellation of causes
but language pretends otherwise and this
is how we use generalizations often most
of us many of us and in fact I'm doing
it right now right I'm generalizing
about generalizations did any of you
notice that I'm treating generalizations
as a unit when in fact they are a field
and I'm saying I can tell you something
about generalizations they're very
dangerous
now this second-order awareness is what
helps us to discover the problems we
have with our relationships with
language and knowledge ideas measurement
which is something I'm going to have to
return to in a later segment because
although I'm not entirely out of time
I'm close enough to being out of time
that I'm gonna have to
back toward my my my little slave
cubicle but I hope in in a future
episode to examine the complexities of
measurement and a few of the things that
I will seed your imagination with before
I begin that discussion is that our that
we come at measurement from a unique
array of purposes with a unique array of
tools in a unique array of circumstances
in a unique library of methods and our
purposes affect what we will derive when
we collapse the incredibly cloud-like
constellated nature of reality persons
situations and phenomenon into a
measurable derivative and that is one of
the great powers of our species that
might get us killed it's likely to get
us killed the desire to produce a
derivative of the capacity to collapse
the cloud into a concrete deliverable
that one thing is one of the primary
features of what I usually refer to as
the waking mind by which I ordinarily
mean something like the inclinations of
the left hemisphere and it's
particularly pernicious addiction to
graspable tool like utilitarian
pragmatic abstractions so what we will
find when we explore measurement
carefully is that it's not as objective
as we had hoped in fact somebody asked
me earlier today what objective system
do you use in daily life to ensure that
your understandings and behaviors are
reliable
I'm paraphrasing slightly and I said I
can't find any such objective system
because without subjectivity the idea of
objective systems does not exist and
therefore I don't understand the nature
of objective systems as absolutes
something like this again I paraphrased
and rather poorly and my point was is
that for all its apparent reliability
this idea of objectivity is a myth there
are no objective observers what we can
have is a field of observers who agree
either relatively or almost perfectly on
the outcome of an array of behaviors or
methods a sequence of behaviors or
methods desired to produce you know
employed to produce a result and when
everybody's experimental results
generally agree we then call the
subjective and we believe that
mathematics is perfectly objective yet
it is not without subjective Minds
mathematics doesn't work the attempt to
place mathematics on a firm logical
foundation in the 30s and 40s by the
logical positivists failed and it was
proven to be fundamentally a
fundamentally flawed purpose by people
like Albert Einstein's best friend Kurt
gödel so let us bear in mind that the
the tools we use to arrive at things
like certainty or even worse truth these
tools must submit to subjectivity and
where they do not they are untrustworthy
we'll learn more about measurement
together soon I hope
thank you for joining me it's a great
pleasure to just have the privilege of
learning and growing and sharing
together I why for now
