when we spoke at the start of the year I
said it was way too close to November to
switch anybody
out turns out that I was
wrong beginner's luck you said what are
the odds that Joe Biden has a
debilitating event between now and
November including death so he runs a
one in 20 chance of dying in any given
year or above that I don't think you
know whether he's even going to make it
to
November debilitating event could have
been a debilitating public event
I purposefully left it vague and I
didn't say the other part of it which I
now feel comfortable saying which is I
don't I don't know
whether I don't know whether Donald
Trump will be allowed to become
president what do you mean by
that I think that there's a remarkable
story and we're in a a funny game which
is are we allowed to say what that story
is because to say it to analyze it to
name it is to bring it uh into
view I think we don't understand why the
censorship is behaving the way it is we
don't understand why it's in the shadows
we don't understand why our news is
acting in a bizarre fashion so let's
just set the stage given that that was
in
February
um there is something
that I think Mike Benz has just referred
to as the rules-based international
order it's an interlocking series of
agreements tacit understandings explicit
understandings
clandestine understandings about how the
most important structures keep the world
free of war and keep markets
open and there has been a system in
place whether understood explicitly
or um behind the scenes or
implicitly it says that the purpose of
the two American parties is to
prune the field of populist candidates
so that whatever two candidates uh exist
in a
Faceoff are both acceptable to that
world
order so what you're trying to do from
the point point of view let's take it
from the point of view of let's say the
state department the intelligence
Community the defense
department and um major corporations
that are have to do with uh
international issues from arms trade to
oh I don't know
food they have a series of agreements
that are fragile and could be overturned
if a president entered the Oval Office
who didn't agree with them and the mood
of the country was why do we pay taxes
into these structures why are we
hamstrung why aren't we a free
people so what the two parties would do
is that they would run primaries you
have populist candidates and you'd
pre-commit the populist candidates to
support the candidates who won the
primaries as long as that took place and
you had two candidates that were both
acceptable to the international order
that is that they aren't going to
rethink NAFTA or NATO or what have
you we called that democracy and so
democracy was the illusion of choice
what what's called magician's choice
where the choice is not actually you
know pick a card any card but somehow
the magician makes sure that the card
that you pick is the one that he
knows uh in that situation you have
magician's choice in the primaries and
then you'd have the duopoly field two
candidates either of which was
acceptable and you could actually afford
to hold an election and the populists
would vote and that way the
international order wasn't put at risk
every four years because you can't have
alliances that are subject to the whim
of um the people in pleb
asites so under that structure
everything was going fine until 2016 and
then the first candidate ever to not
hold um any position in the military nor
position in government uh in the history
of the Republic to enter the Oval Office
Donald Trump broke through the primary
structure so then there was a full court
press okay we only have one candidate
that's acceptable to the international
order Donald Trump will be under um
constant pressure that he's a loser he's
a wild man he's an
idiot and and he's under control of the
Russians and then he was going to be you
know a 20 to1 Underdog and then he
wins and there was no precedent for
this they learned their lesson you
cannot afford to have candidates who are
not acceptable to the international
order and continue to have these
alliances this is an unsolved problem so
I don't have a particular dog in this
fight I one believe in democracy I also
believe in international agreements
and it is the job of the state
department the intelligence community
and the defense department to bring this
problem in front of the American people
and say we have a problem you don't know
everything that's going on and if you
start voting in populist candidates
you're going to end up knocking out
loadbearing walls that you don't
understand but Trump was in office for
four years did he turn the entire table
upside down he risked doing that same
all you remember that there was this
uncomfortable uh accomodation given to
the Central Intelligence Agency at the
beginning of his actual term there was a
question about um was he going to
question the I have a very different
point of view than most of my friends uh
who are also you know at least nominally
Democrats which is it was a very immoral
thing that was done to him he was asked
the question will you pre-commit that
you will accept the results of an
election now if you were going to rig an
election you would ask somebody that to
begin with and that's part of the game
and he says well you know you know we'll
see so you have this very strange thing
going on where democracy is the greatest
threat to democracy Now how can that be
it's two different concepts of democracy
one concept of democracy is the will of
the people you hold pites and even if
you do it with an electoral college or
political parties the idea is that the
people are you know by and of and for
the people the other idea of democracy
is that democracy is about institutions
that sprang from democracy Once Upon a
Time and that those institutions have to
be kept strong those are two completely
different concepts that are overloaded
to the same
word under that circumstance we have a a
paradox which is how do we keep the
electorate from overturning the you know
the type a democracy from overturning
the type B democracy and that's the
unsolved problem that they will not
bring in front of the people so what you
have is a situation in which I believe
that there are many people in Washington
DC who think that Donald Trump cannot
become president because he can now go
For Broke he's also not going to try to
run for
reelection he's relatively unconstrained
he's wealthy he's uh he's learned how to
play a lot of these games and maybe got
a little bit of an ax to grind as well
after the last six years no
kidding and he's a wild card you know
there are three people who are doing
amazing versions of the drunken body
boxing game Kanye who's probably uh the
first one to really fail Elon and Donald
Trump and all three of them tried to do
something where you couldn't pin them
down you couldn't figure out like what
they were going to do next and that's
what the order is keep keeps trying to
do like will you commit to this will you
say this will you mouth these
words and none of these people would
play the
game and I I find this all you ever see
Emanuel Augustus or this boxer who
actually you know I think Floyd uh
Mayweather said was his his toughest
opponent because he just he wouldn't
fight in the style that anyone could
recognize probably most unpredictable
yeah and the most entertaining boxer
I've ever seen in my life I mean just
check out any highlight reel and you
won't even believe this is real it
doesn't seem possible so that's what
Donald Trump is he's a guy who's got
formulas that confuse people like Sam
Harris you know Sam and I have been
debating this for years I think that
Trump is an incredibly intelligent man
and that there's incredible method in
his tweets uh of old you can just you
could put them into a data set and you
say that there are five or six different
types of tweets and that the left Falls
for every one of them every
time so in the situation you have a
question how is it that Donald Trump and
RFK Jr cannot possibly reach the Oval
Office and we have to have a candidate
who is pre- subscribed to perpetuating
these inst institutions these agreements
and these orders and there's only one
out of
three uh who who has that character and
that person is not w a
primary right now we have no idea who's
running the United States of
America um I just came here in at Tesla
and I did not steer once and I would say
America is in full self-driving mode and
we don't know what the AI is that's
running the Oval Office and that's
really bizarre given that we have
something like six minutes to make a
decision about nule
launches uh we have no idea what the
United States government in the
executive branch actually is but it
can't be Joe
Biden every time it seems that an
election has happened over the last
decade or so it's always being this one
is different this is the most important
this is the most important is there
something different about the one that
we're about to go into how how should we
think about this election as World War
II
unraveling the order that has produced
the illusion of
Peace for this length of time imagine
that you were let's say in the 2000s
that you had this thing called the Great
moderation there was a story that we had
finally banished volatility from the
markets none of that was true what you
were doing was you were going farther
and farther into a
regime without understanding that sooner
or later the D Jenga tower has to
collapse the the order that was put in
place at the end of World War II None of
its architect are still alive very few
pieces of information were passed down
about what it actually is or how it
functions because it's secret and I
think what you can say is that um we are
now living on the fumes built from that
Victory uh that is what is unraveling
you're about to head towards a
multi-polar world where the game theory
in a in a diotic uh game of two players
doesn't look remotely like the game
theory in a in a five or 10 player
game so kamla is essentially the
youngest Boomer possible and she's tied
to the last silent generation president
will ever have which was a bizarre thing
to begin with and she's pre-committed to
trying to continue that order uh in the
guise of a alternatively woke Wall
Street friendly Indian
black folksy I I don't even know what
she is to quote the great Chris
Williamson she's a meme of a meme of
meme uh that was from our last talk
and I I would say this is probably the
most insane election we've ever seen by
by a comfortable margin I would say that
there's no one in second
place uh I can't think of another
election that is even close to this
bizarre including the attempted
assassination on Donald
Trump yeah the there's so many things
all coalescing at the same time from
what's happening with the media to AI to
discontent to fake news and cheap fakes
and construed constructed did Che sorry
fake news was a fake story if you look
at the um Google Trends fake news was a
tiny story during the 2016 cycle that
blew up immediately afterwards it was
the
placeholder as the intelligence
Community or the blob figured out what
it was going to do next to try to take
control of the international order you
have to realize that that's the first
real surprise in presidential history
where they lost control of the process
well I've got a surprise for you I told
you not to watch this before we get to
do this uh I actually listened did you
well it's Weir I told you not to do I
know it's like pouring sugar on a picnic
to keep ants away okay okay so uh for
the people who haven't seen it um we'll
just do a quick re recap MSNBC was
exposed today for yet another set of
Lies they deceptively edited together
this video of different Joe Rogan
comments to make it appear that he was
singing the Praises of kamla Harris he's
going to win no she's not she can win
she is a strong woman she is uh a person
who served overseas twice she in a
medical unit so she was a congresswoman
for8 years yeah she is a person of color
she's everything you want she's GNA win
no she's not she can win they just want
no Trump no matter what what do you make
of that that's the
most Brazen cutting together of
something that millions of people have
seen they don't
really whatever it is is is not really
trying to fool you it's trying to
instruct
you you you're allowed to see the truth
they can make it difficult to find the
truth but it's hard to shut up Joe Rogan
they've settled for something else which
is think about MSNBC and CNN the New
York Times The Washington Post the Los
Angeles Times Reuters AP
Etc as a set of
instructions for how to keep your job
you're you're allowed to disagree we'll
set the boundaries of the disagreement
we'll set the topics of the disagreement
you may not even watch any of these
things but we'll make sure that it
filters through to the people that you
are watching so that they're
outraged and you're given a choice you
can choose to understand whatever you
want and you can choose to say whatever
you want but if you say what you
understand to be true you can know what
the consequences are you may lose your
marriage you may lose your job you may
lose your friends and so in essence we
all know that um if you question the war
in Ukraine or if you uh say look I
detest Donald Trump but I'm voting for
him because what's going on in the
Democratic party is Unholy and
insane you're signing up for whatever
Thanksgiving
dinner um we have planned for you we're
talking to your uncle we're talking to
your
spouse and and in essence this is a lot
like Caligula installing his horse as a
senator no one's fooled that the horse
is an ordinary human Senator the choice
is do you wish to say
something in of the news this episode is
brought to you by element for the last
three years now I have started my
morning every single day with element it
is a tasty electrolyte drink mix with
everything that you need and nothing
that you don't each grab and go stick
pack contains a science-backed
electrolyte ratio of sodium potassium
and magnesium with no sugar no coloring
no artificial ingredients or any other
junk sodium plays a critical role in
reducing muscle cramps and fatigue while
optimizing brain health regulating
appetite and curbing Cravings I keep
hopping on about it because I can feel
the difference you should give it a try
and see how you feel as well best of all
there is a no questions asked refund
policy with an unlimited duration so you
can buy it for as long as you want try
it all and if you do not like it for any
reason they'll give you your money back
and you don't even need to return the
box that's how confident they are that
you love it right now you can get a free
sample pack of all eight flavors of your
first box by going to the link in the
description below or heading to drink LM
nt.com modern wisdom that's drink LM
nt.com
slash modern wisdom I'd been trying to
find this term for a while that I'd
learned through film critics online uh
people like critical drinkers a swear
Scottish critic uh and retroactive
continuity red yeah I but I didn't know
what retroactive I didn't know that
that's what roning I just knew it as
rcon so retroactive continuity is a
literary device in which facts in the
world of a fictional work that have been
established through the narrative itself
are adjusted ignored supplemented or
contradicted by subsequently published
work that recontextualizes or breaks
continuity with the former so the
question is is is what we're seeing just
the star war Cinematic Universe yeah
equivalent yeah this is this is Sherlock
Holmes and and Professor Mor AR uh where
falls off a ledge and yet here he is
again um it's every episode of South
Park when Kenny's
died
so it's very important to understand the
back of house in everything that you're
doing so you know when you go to a hotel
um there's an entirely secondary
structure of floors elevators
entrances cafes that are necessary to
support the front of house uh which is
the illusion of uh the hotel that you're
staying in and the same thing is true
for screenwriting and the creative arts
I I think everyone should for example
read save the cat uh it's a book on
screenwriting that points out that films
aren't broken into scenes so much as
they're broken into beats there about 40
beats in a film and the Beats have names
and so if you read this book you'll one
one is called the bad guys close in and
another beat is called all hope is lost
and these are Main Stays and your
programmed client side at a sub a
subliminal level to be able to
follow a film based on the idea that
your brain is already
tooled uh to absorb this stuff there's a
concept called spackle in Hollywood
where it costs a couple of lines to make
something that makes no sense makes
sense I think it's referenced in thank
you for
smoking where they're smoking in space
and there's an issue with product
placement uh how does it make sense to
have cigarette smoking in space after
sex you you know whatever oh it'll cost
us two lines of spackle and so every
every once in a while the craft pokes
through and so this is the back retcon
is a back of house concept and the the
issue again really comes back to
professional wrestling the smark is a
smart Mark a person who is being duped
and agrees to be duped but has a
metacognitive
perch from which to watch his or her own
deception so you're both a consumer of
the story like when you go to a movie
you know it's fictional and you don't
sit there saying this is such BS you
know the old thing I used to say is you
don't scream don't you understand it's
just photons projected on a wall
um we are complicit
in our own deception otherwise we'll
never be seduced and there's nothing
more wonderful than a than a a seduction
to which we are willing and eager this
is an unwanted seduction this is
coercive this is based on a lot of
carrot being taken away and more or Les
less all all of what you have is stick
it's strange in a world where everything
that everybody does and says on the
Internet is permanently recorded on some
version of a blockchain that's kept in
screenshots even if it's not actually
even if it then gets deleted from
Twitter uh it just seems odd to me that
there is so much retconning of this you
spoke about managed reality sure last
time uh you know a good example a nice
simple example of this is CA Harris was
never called the
bordar like we have they they went back
and changed the old articles from three
years ago
here's my question when did you wake up
to this because in my situ Peter teal
who I used to work for uh said this to
me like Eric how did you get there
earlier and I said well I was in the
University system and academics has a
faster Glide path into the ground than
everything else you could see it there
in the
1980s I don't know I think it it it has
taken a little bit of time um maybe
moving to America seeing these things
closer up has been part of it uh I have
a strong non-c conspiratorial
disposition so I will always attribute
to incompetence or negligence or fear of
losing your job cowardice uh you're
running the packet
so there's the Lefty inovation packet
and it's something that you're sort of
obligated to run um if you're going to
be a member in good standing of the
American left so one part of it would
say that correlation does not imply
causation uh data is not the plural of
anecdote uh never explain by malice uh
what can be understood through
incompetence there's a large sequence of
things that you're expected to say if
you want the pat on the back from your
colleagues a random walk down Wall
Street nobody can beat the market you
you know that there are rich people
Three Doors Down who got that that way
from investing but they're simply lucky
idiots uh all of these things you're
expected to run if you're part of the
expert class so that the expert class
doesn't turn on their masters and what
it
is you see I was about to do the double
copula is is I always do that um what it
is in my opinion um I'm gonna have to do
it I can't can't get out of it what it
is is a uh
a
collection of safeties so that you don't
use the tools of data let's say on your
Masters and attempt to convict them give
an
example uh for example let's imagine
that you have a high number of deaths
around a vaccine or
injuries uh that could lead to questions
about under what re what legal regime
the vaccine manufacturers achieved
immunity and so you say oh no no no
that's just
uh correlation does not imply causation
uh of course there are going to be runs
in poker of course there are going to be
clusters of data uh this is what being
Fooled by Randomness is all about so if
you think about what those
things how they function inside of your
mind they tend to keep you from seeking
remedies you're not going to put
somebody in jail if you believe all
these things you're not going to go
poking into the intelligence
Community if if if a conspiracy theorist
makes you think about a lunatic you're
not a lunatic you're a grown-up it's
first order sophistication did you ever
see a film called Victor Victoria no
Victor Victoria is the I think the
tagline on the poster was the story of a
woman playing a man playing a woman and
so it was a female impersonator who was
actually Julie
Andrews right right now if you saw
Victor behind Victoria you certainly saw
one level deep that's one level of
counterintuition and most people when
they get to one level of
counterintuition stop Pat themselves on
the back and at least they're not like
the poor fools who only see Victoria
because Victoria you know is the female
being impersonated but what happens if
you see Sally and let's imagine Sally is
the person playing Victor playing
Victoria now you've got a problem which
is you say that's a woman so everybody
who sees Victor says you poor bastard
you are fooled and Reddit is great for
this by the way the average Reddit post
is ha I see through that thing that
you're taken in by but have fun with it
you know it's a superiority contest
contest at one at first order
counterintuition so at first order
counter counterintuition conspiracy
theorists are losers in their mother's
basement who posited A New World Order
where the Flat Earth Society of lizard
people controls the cosmos and the funny
part about it is the Atlantic Council
exists what's that well that would be
Sally playing Victor playing Victoria I
mean in other words of course there are
conspiracies
everywhere we found a million
conspiracies I could tell you you know
various operations Operation Condor uh
operation uh sea spray where that we
sprayed bacteria on all of San Francisco
we all know about the Tuskegee medical
experiment operation Northwoods
operation mockberg um Operation Ajax in
Chile we know that
conspiracies are the lifeblood of the
world every trade group is a conspiracy
the the Twitter fals are about
conspiracy so we're we're living in a
world hopefully you've achieved a point
in your life where you've been invited
to many conspiracies and if you haven't
I'm really sorry but they're everywhere
now what is a conspiracy theorist it's
somebody trying to figure out what these
things are from
outside that's what you've got to stop
and how do you do this well there are a
lot of bad conspiracy theorists there
are a lot of losers and a lot of morons
and a lot of idiots who imagine that
lizard people are controlling everything
and so you try to make it look like the
people who well let me give you an
example the moonlanding and the JFK
assassination are not in the same
category
it's quite
probable that something funny is going
on around the JFK assassination and it's
highly improbable that the mood Landings
are
fake you know tww flight 800 seems very
strange or what is like 300 missing man
pads from the Afghan theater a bunch of
people saw something streaking up to a
plane and the explanation doesn't
exactly add up now you have a problem
like let's you know the famous one that
I like which is just so dangerous it's
funny you can just watch the radio
activity if you can agree that nothing
like building Seven's collapse has ever
happened in Structural Engineering you
can say well that is interesting it's
just interesting that no building has
ever collapsed like
that no steel building of this height
you know from from flame whatever and
the instant you say that some member of
a group of 10 friends will say oh yeah I
bet it was a bunch of thermite placed by
Israelis right Einstein and you're
you're thinking why wow gosh that seems
like a really high penalty to pay for
just
noticing no building has ever collapsed
like that I'm not saying I I don't
believe that so it's this kind of patent
match of any type of skepticism with a
slippery slope down to the most extreme
conspiracy and and that's and yeah
you're just in
error you're you took first order
counterintuition so that you became
superior to the Flat Earth Society
but you're not the guy who's going to
figure out the Iran Contra
Scandal because if I told you the Iran
Contra Scandal it doesn't matter how
many documents you look at you'll still
never believe that that was true it's so
insane this roning this uh Mass lighting
gas lighting at global scale
MH it is mind-blowing to me that this is
done on the internet when everything is
held together
why because the the entire internet is
obsessed with pointing out
hypocrisy if no no no no no no it's not
the entire internet a large portion of
very vocal a large portion of very small
accounts a large portion of right of
Center
accounts almost no one in what I
considered my world does anything
remotely like
this in other words
if if you walk into a physics department
good luck finding a
Republican and good luck finding anybody
who will
believe almost anything that you tell
them or or or will do so publicly I took
a tour through the East Coast the
corridor of great
universities uh from Massachusetts down
to Philadelphia and you know I have many
friends and colleagues in this
departments and they'd take me into
their offices and they'd all close the
door and they'd say you have no idea how
bad it is
here and these are mathematicians and
physicists and they are living in a
world in which it is simply too
dangerous to descent to ask questions
we'll get back to talking to Eric in one
minute but first I need to tell you
about nomatic I know what you're
thinking what you thinking is what
backpack does Eric Weinstein use let me
tell you it's the nomatic 20 L travel
pack and the reason he uses it is
because it's the best backpack on the
planet I use it all of the team use it
literally everybody that turns up does
because there is nothing better there
are pockets for everything your
sunglasses your laptop your phone it's
like the Marie condo of luggage an
absolute Swiss army knife that will make
your entire life better best of all
their products will literally last you a
lifetime with their lifetime guarantee
there's international shipping free us
shipping on any orders over $49 and if
you don't love your purchase for any
reason you can return or exchange it
within 30 days right now you can get a
20% discount by going to the link in the
description below or heading to nomatic
decomodern wisdom and using the code
mw20 a checkout that's Nom matic.com
wisdom and mw20 a checkout I did some
research yeah tech company employee
donations to midterm candidates by party
well over 90% in favor of democrat there
is a 33% gap between Republicans and
Democrats in self-described party
affiliations of us journalists in
2022 and there was this recent Google
Google furor a couple they're being
popped for Monopoly unfair competition
practices on top of are they putting
their finger on the scale and
editorializing if you search for Donald
Trump's name you get Negative stories
about Donald Trump and positive stories
about CA Harris if you search CA
Harris's name you just get positive
stories about Camala Harris okay but how
how many how many let let me let me keep
let me keep going
so I don't think I'm not saying that
Google isn't but I don't think that
Google needs to editorialize the search
results if there is such an
unbalanced original content pull that
they're pulling from if you have this
huge sway in terms of tech if you have
this huge sway in terms of the people
that are writing the articles I don't
think you need Google to put their
finger on the pulse you're already it's
90% in One Direction if you take from
that pool representatively it's going to
move in that
direction so that you've you've now once
again um evidence the same basic idea
which is we'll just chalk it up to
emergence these are all emergent effects
that way you never have to pause it
intent you never have to say that
there's a finger on the
scale great you're out of it well
done that's insane Chris pulled the rip
cord and got out of it so here's the
thing that I thought that was really
interesting wa wait wait wait but I want
to understand something how do you think
you get to these levels of bias among
employees do you think that something
about being in Tech makes you democrat
friendly I think my working hypothesis
is that it's
carders that say more in order to keep
your job you need to tow the party line
and the party line is somehow dictated
top down not bottom
up maybe it's emerging from the Great
Society programs of the 1960s maybe the
idea that the hiring practices not being
allowed to discriminate in various ways
the interpretation through the courts
means that the HR
departments uh have to do things that
make it impossible to be uh almost
impossible to be a vocal Republican in a
in a large workplace so one of the
interesting things about that graph the
33% gap between uh Democrats and
Republicans if you go to about 1970 is
when it really begins to diverge but
what you also see is that uh
self-described Independence move at
almost the exact same rate as
Republicans going down so get a bit of a
gain for Democrats a large loss for
republicans and also a gain for
independent so how many of these people
are uh Republicans masquerading his
independence when they do the
self-report what what if this gets
picked up by my colleagues this is Timor
kanan's theory of preference
falsification that you have two sets of
preferences you have the preferences
that you keep at home uh and the
preferences that you show the world and
this is the engine of Revolution because
there's always one guy like a James
deore working at Google who's so
autistic that he's going to um Spectrum
himself right out of the workplace uh
and say what he actually thinks doesn't
see the social Moray that he's supposed
to adhere to and this is why what
happened you know one one of the gifts
of the chescos in Romania is that they
gave us this amazing footage of their
undoing and Nikolai chesu is at a rally
uh in Bucharest and he's on you know
whatever balcony and he's saying his
stuff and there's some noise in the back
like what's that noise it keeps going
somehow the noise starts growing louder
and people are discontent like they're
just not willing to lie anymore and each
person emboldens those around them and
you see the Revolution spread like a
tumor did you read that uncommon
knowledge article that I mentioned the
Ben Hunt yes yeah yeah uh I thought that
was very
interesting I live this right I mean
like if you look at my kayf AR it's 2011
because I'm worried that professional
wrestling is going to determine the
presidency um if you look at my
article uh on the National Science
Foundation National Academy of Science
conspiring against American scientists
that's from the early 2000s I was
cancelled in the early 1990s for
pointing this out long before being
cancelled was cool
the this is
is I don't know what to call it it's
like an ether in which we we swim it's
all around it's it's water to fish that
we can't
see our entire lives are bathed in this
and you know you've always had Howard
Zin types let's say on the left who are
willing to point
to to to issues and your parents would
say well you know be very careful with
that book because if you do know the
truth you can't particip ipate in polite
Society if you're not part of the
intelligence Community or part of the
inside group and it's the idea is that
the truth can be made unfit so that to
understand the world is to remove
yourself from the
chessboard thinking about the whether
it's finger on scale editorially whether
it's drawing from a pool which is
disproportionately represented from one
ideology or another uh everybody is
saying I don't know what's going to
happen in November but it's going to be
a nailbiter and it does make me think
well given that we have what appears to
be a a disproportionate amount of sort
of mainstream accessibility to stories
leaning in One Direction positively as
opposed to in another I wonder what
would have happened had that not been
the case it makes a nailbiter actually
seem kind of like an interesting who who
are these people who know all this stuff
why am I out of this club everybody
knows stuff about what's happening in
November I mean the last time I was on
the program I said it's a million
years
um Donald Trump was almost killed by an
AR-15 Joe Biden has
been suffering with some level of
dementia that's been progressing through
his entire term in
office when was the last time you saw
MSNBC
um with five geriatric neurolog
ologists watching his gate his speech
and telling you their professional
opinions from publicly available
data you're in the magic show baby and
the funny part about it
is the reason I don't want to hybridize
with anyone else is that responsible
conspiracy theorizing is very much an
adult
activity responsible conspiracy
theorizing is not based on saying well
I've I've got this certainty over here
and I've lost it because I know I'm
being lied too so I've I can tell you
exactly what is going on it's the lizard
people responsible conspiracy theorizing
says I know that the story makes sense
and I know that I don't know how to
correct it but you know Naval ravikant
once pushed me to do a a Twitter thread
called The Invisible world is first
discovered in the visible world's
failure to
close right so the idea is we find out
that there's a neutrino because a
neutron has a certain amount of energy
and a proton and electron into which it
decay doesn't have the same amount of
energy so something was lost so you know
there was a hypothesis due to both Po
and firmy that there must be some
particle that is diabolically neutral
undetectable by almost any means
possible that is carrying away this
extra energy and so the idea is the
visible world that is the charged
particles or the the neutron which you
could
detect that world didn't close therefore
there had to be something else well you
know when K goes from being incredibly
unpopular to the loved candidate with no
primary the visible world just failed to
close the idea that nobody ever convenes
a bunch of geriatric neurologists to
analyze Joe Biden is the visible World
failing to close this is the origin of
anti-in these are all anti-in events and
you can measure the control of
Journalism by its desire to report on
what everybody wants reported and is
absolutely pathologically uninteresting
not to the journalists but to the
editors who tell the journalists what
can and cannot be featured in print how
do you think this is being uh Justified
to and by the people
inside well I think I think I tried to
come at that as frontally as anyone as
you've ever
heard what if let's just steal man their
perspective rather than making them the
evil baddies twlling their twirling
their
mustaches what if the idea is that an
outbreak of Truth and democracy would
destroy NATO and the world
order let's imagine that that would undo
the markets that would spread
nukes you know what what happens if if
ending uh the control of social media
would mean that weaponized anti tracks
PL plans could be spread
frictionlessly I if four amino
acids lead to worldwide
lockdowns the amount of Leverage in this
system should frighten you at the same
time that the shadowy figures are
frightening you and the problem with the
heterodox is like we mentioned Ben Hunt
I think I've spoken to him once or twice
and what's his famous tagline
something like burning all the F
down I didn't know that okay well this
is part of the problem when you wake up
and you realize that your entire life is
is
uh embedded in a lie manage reality
managed reality you say I don't want to
live in managed reality man it's like
are you
crazy I don't want to live in managed
reality if it's badly managed but I
can't live in direct reality either
because maybe that's just too
dangerous and so you know I I I highly
recommend that everyone learn the lesson
of the United States versus the
progressive which is a a court case that
would be famous but for the fact that
we're determined to forget it it was a
strand effect case where a magazine
decided that it would be an excellent
idea to point out that there are no
nuclear
secrets and they said why don't we get I
think his name was Howard Borland a
reporter who had no physic background to
figure out the redacted portions of the
uh Stannis ulam Edward Teller paper that
had been deglass Declassified but
redacted that explained how you get a
chemical reaction to start a fision
reaction as the Detonator for a fusion
reaction and so he figured it out they
had charted the information it was
scattered throughout libraries do you
know this you don't know no no no no
this story is
great oh mind God you need need a little
bit more power in you get that in
nuclear next time TOA Dynamite
um there were two cases in the 1970s one
at Princeton and one at the progressive
magazine I probably should have done the
Princeton one first there was a guy
named I think it was like John Aristotle
who was a he was the Princeton mascot
like the tiger okay illustrious and he
was a shitty shitty physics student and
he said you know what I'm going to use
the fact that I'm a shitty physics
student like below average at at you
know Princeton's like one of the
greatest physics Departments of all time
and he said I'm going to approach
Freeman Dyson at The Institute for
advanced study and see whether I can
work out how to make a fision
bomb that would actually
work so Freeman Dyson said I will give
you no information uh that is classified
but I will tell you whether whatever you
come up with will work or not the guy
did it and as a result he turned it in
that is not be found in the Princeton
archives where all the junior thesis are
kept and Page 20 of it I believe is
redacted because it was a working design
for a fision bomb and then the much more
dangerous one was the progressive
magazine versus the United States where
the United
States do you know about the atomic uh
energy acts of 1946 and 54 perhaps
surprisingly no welcome to my world um
there is a category called restricted
data that is almost never
discussed which is the only place in law
where if you and I were to work at a
table at a cafe and I were to show you
something that could influence nuclear
weaponry the government doesn't need to
classify it it is born secret the
instant my pen touches the paper and
writes it down how is it
defined anything that
impinges on on nuclear
weapons including just PL
information so you don't have a cute
clearance I don't have aute clearance we
don't work for the government simp all
we're doing is physics wow yeah and this
has been around since I don't know 4654
it's the only place in law it's never
been tested in
courts and if you couple that to the
1917 Espionage Act which had carries
capital punishment I believe that it is
illegal to seek information at a q level
if you don't have an access to it so
there is a question which is if you're
any good at
physics are you potentially committing a
capital crime by advancing the field if
it could influence nuclear weapons we
have no idea whether it would be found
constitutional but what happened was
when the progressive magazine showed
that at least a
reporter through basically archaeology
in like Los Alamos library and things um
could find this and and put it together
then the only thing keeping the
proliferation of weapons is the
difficulty of producing file nuclear
material there is no nuclear secret per
se you can say what it is you've got a
chemical sphere that implodes
radioactive material that reaches
critical mass you have a fision
explosion and now the problem is you're
using a nuclear bomb like here sh
Nagasaki level bomb as just the
Detonator trigger yeah so it's going to
rip apart this
casing how do you keep it
from um destroying the mechanism that's
supposed to do the fusing well the only
thing faster than the other particles is
light you've got to use
light from this reflector to actually do
the fusion in the final stage wow and
that's what he figured out now the
reason you haven't heard about this is
that we've been undoing the Strand
effect we've been making physics
boring physics isn't interesting physics
isn't scary we've got tons of I don't
know Chinese Iranians people from all
over the world studying irrelevant
theories that aren't going to go
boom how did that happened we don't know
and I don't know whether you've seen the
Mark Andre and Ben horvitz video where
they're talking about their visit to the
White House in AI tell
me I really wish we were doing this over
negronis or old Fashions um I'm sure
that we could get one ordered wa no no
that too Rogan okay all right all right
all right um we'll just stick to
experimental neut tropics and high doses
of caffeine fantastic yeah um so they're
they're doing a podcast and they say
that well you they met with the white
house and there's this question about
should we
regulate
AI now I don't know if you've been you
undoubtedly you haven't but you might
have talked to somebody who's really
been through the Transformer
architecture and the attention mechanism
it's basically just linear
algebra and it's not very sophisticated
linear
algebra so they said Well you Can't Ban
math and the White House said oh yes we
can we did it we've banned entire
regions of theoretical physics and they
said oh
what so we don't know what that means we
don't know the most narrow reading of
that is is that you've bu you've ban
some kinds of nuclear physics I going to
say you're the physicist if you were to
make a couple of bets what do you think
that they're talking about this is the
big question we don't know whether that
we're talking about the stagnation of
theoretical physics or just Nuclear
Physics you're okay with speculating
let's
speculate um I'll do the decision tree
one possibility is that they're simply
saying that they made Nuclear Physics
very very difficult to do and that has
to do with not very sexy physics the
physics of protons and neutrons and
CLE so that Branch exists the other
Branch says um we used String Theory to
block actual progress in
theoretical physics and derailed an
entire field at least in public I can
see where this is
going well I'm I'm trying to say I
didn't put um Mark and Ben up to this
podcast you go go take a look at that
footage and you tell me what they're
talking about but it draws a very
interesting line between what we were
talking about last time which is this
seeming theoretical dead end which
everybody has been obsessed by but
before we get to
that let me point something out you have
never heard the phrase deemed
export no so you've never heard of
restricted data you've never heard of
deemed export you've never heard of
United States versus Progressive you've
never heard of the Princeton mascot
all of these things can be looked up
these are all in a memory
hole the deemed export is information
that is like a sensitive gyroscope for
um you know a targeting uh system for
for a weapon you can't give sensitive
centrifuges and gyroscopes to Rogue
regimes like North Korea or
Iran deemed export is the information
equivalent of it you cannot share that
theory or that Insight it's the
extension to intellectual matters to
ideas there are ideas you're not allowed
to
share with
foreigners and my point is you don't
know about any of this stuff how is it
then that you immediately say well
surely we're not doing X surely we're
not doing whyne my point
is do me a favor research the history of
the government uh attempts to keep the
Manhattan projects secret like you may
not know that Harold Yuri the very
famous chemist I believe published false
and misleading academic
papers there's an entire complex that
you're not supposed to
see which is how do we keep all of these
things uh from providing advantage to
adversaries and if that structure exists
and you've never heard of and you've
never thought about it and you don't
know the history why are you so sure
that you know that this is all
nonsense in other news this episode is
brought to you by ag1 in my quest for
the best greens drink on the planet I
went through just about every single
option and after a year of testing I
found ag1 three years later I still use
it every single day because it is so
much more than just greens it is the
most comprehensive highly tested and
rigorously formulated supplement I've
ever found with one single scoop of ag1
you replace in multiple Health
supplements like multivitamins digestive
AIDS immune supports and more it is NSF
certified meaning that even Olympic
athletes can use it there is a 90-day
money back guarantee so if you've heard
about ag1 you're thinking about trying
it you can buy it completely risk-free
and if you do not like it they will give
you your money back plus they ship
internationally right now you can get a
Year's free Supply vitamin D3 and K2
five free ag1 travel packs and that
90-day money back guarantee by going to
the link in the description below or
heading to drink a a1.com
slod wisdom all of this drink
a1.com
modern
wisdom that's a good point that's a very
good
point I think the implication which is
pretty interesting for
me that you were hinting at there is
that there is a
potential of the
obsession with string theory being a red
herring
very tempting shiny sparkly red herring
popular one that has
ciled physicists from looking
elsewhere for quite a
while you're giving me that luck you
giving me you're giving me a look as if
I'm close but not close enough no no no
when I say shiny what I mean is popular
shown out front dangled and made to be
glitzy and the to the public but also
internally it seemed to me did Ed
Whitten did you not tell me the last
time that you were on here there not
there are no other theories just words
is that not the guy from which everybody
else is down SC shiny that is saying
everything else is crap and dangerous in
other words it's String Theory can't
sell itself as physics by any telling of
the story string theory is the most
failed theory in the history of uh of
physics if you look at the number of
papers the amount of money the number of
people the number of phds number of
conferences
achievements in physics
proper per investment or size of effort
it is the most failed theory in the
history of physics and the way in which
it
survives is by hunting and destroying
its enemies and making its enemies
dependent on them we all have a circuit
in our brain that we're going to run to
the string theorists to talk about the
problem with string theory because of
peerreview it's like when I want to
report the police department for being
corrupt well you should go to the police
with that uh wait you're not
understanding I it's but so that's the
problem I think we're I think we're on
the same page okay I think we are uh
well I I think I'm just trying to say
it's the problem of strength Theory not
the equations not the shininess not the
advertising campaign the problem is look
at how they treat everyone else everyone
who is not a strength theorist who is
trying to do stuff that could end up as
a Dem
export or as restricted data is covered
and splattered in
Lawrence Krauss and Leonard susin
caused quite a Ruckus with this not long
ago I didn't know that it had happened
in my defense I hadn't seen this podcast
and it only came out like a few days ago
absolutely so this is Lawrence Krauss
and Leonard susin suskin being one of
the best theoretical physicists ever no
no why is he somebody worth listening to
then um he's very very smart and he's
one of the most important string
theorists ever and he writes
exceptionally clear and correct
introductory books okay but he is not a
leading
physicist but is somebody at the
Forefront of string theory absolutely
and he said quote I can tell you with
absolute certainty string theory is not
the theory of the real world I can tell
you that
100% my strong feelings are exactly that
string theory is definitely not the
theory of the real world is that taking
it out of context is that him framing it
somewhere else or does that encapsulate
the fact that he thinks string theory is
a dead end that doesn't describe the
world he's playing a game that I would I
would say is logomachy an argument over
words where he says that big S string
theory is not the theory of the real
world which is the theory that was used
to destroy all of its competitors and
that little s string theory
exists I don't this is basically the
attempt uh to take a school massacre and
plead to a parking ticket and no I think
that the prosecution should decline the
offer uh from the good Dr susin and say
no no no you have 40 Years of the
destruction of your colleagues to answer
for you've chosen to be um words family
me an uh to just about everyone
who came up with a competitor the Theory
and I've dealt with Leonard directly he
can be Charming he's a great recontour
he's very brilliant and he chooses to be
a Wolf Gang poy without achievement he's
taken a massive advance on a future
career which he will never have at age
85 so this is a person who wishes you to
think of him as a leading physicist he
absolutely categorically by the
standards of physics known to our elders
is not and Leonard susin is playing a
game he's
saying you saw Kill Bill one of the
great romantic scenes of all time is
filmed between Beatrix kiddo and Bill at
the very end of the film he's absolutely
destroyed her life he's killed her
husband fiance the father of a child she
forced an abortion she's been raped
every indignity on Earth has been
suffered by this woman and in the end
she wants to know how could you do that
to me and what are his words
say I overreacted
and and you see in the film if I recall
correctly she leans
forward and she
says you you overreacted is that your
explanation like how can that be that my
life has been turned upside down and
your offering to me is I overreacted so
these people and I and I want to
specifically call out the most
aggressive of them Lu lubos modal mokaku
Leonard
susin uh Jeff Harvey Michael
Duff uh Andy Stringer Kum and vafa have
been on a tear that nothing else exists
destroying 40 Years of
competitors and what is the bride say to
Bill said you and I have unfinished
business that's where we are right
now your explanation to me Eric
Weinstein is
you overreacted Leonard
Tes you and I have in unfinished
business what happens
next oh that's going to get
interesting you're watching the
beginning of the
collapse you're watching people running
for the exits we're not yet at the Leman
Brothers September 15 moment with AIG
looming in the background but right now
all of these guys are trying to plead to
oh well it's not String Theory proper we
meant haah we meant uh something related
to string theory yeah that's it you know
it's like that moment comically when
somebody is caught red-handed we're
we're in the middle of Shaggy It Wasn't
Me It's theoretical retconning
yeah and uh you know there's this
beautiful offering that Hector makes to
Achilles we will give each other the
honor of a proper
burial Achilles isn't
interested let's do this thing what does
that
mean well hopefully somebody will come
up with some money to hold a conference
to get these people in the same room
with the people they've tormented whose
careers they've ended whose funds
they've stolen The Stolen Valor of
actual achievements in real attempts to
change physics and wouldn't it be
delicious and fun to see Meo Kaku edwi
Lenny
suskin Michael Duff Jeff Harvey actually
have to face people who know what
they're talking about and have a
discussion of what did we just do for 40
years did we are we protecting the
American public from restricted data I
have no idea but I can tell you this
nobody in their right mind gives a
startup 40 Years of Runway with never a
call with
investors nor
um even a basic MVP most you know
minimal viable
product we've been playing weekend at
Biden's and now we're also
playing weekend at
Lenny's this is really
funny who else would
you
want to uh have a chat with the guys on
the
string theory side of the
world well I think
uh I think Peter white would be fun he's
got two new theories again I don't agree
with either of them I have my own Theory
and I I'm happy to fight with Peter but
Peter and I have been friends for all
these years uh I would love to have Nema
Aran hemed and Ed Frankle and
others uh judge this people who aren't
really string theorists who appreciate
the best part s of string inspired
mathematics let's say or string inspired
mechanisms in physics there is there is
the the equations are not without
interest or
Merit it's
the the sociology should be hunted and
removed with extreme prejudice it's
anti-science
so I don't know much or anything really
about the inner workings of string
theory but saine hosenfeld has been on
the show Brian Green's been on the show
uh Sean Carol's been on the show oh
let's get them all of them
and I saw a tweet saying that somebody
had been to a string theory convention
and had asked the question what is
string theory and the best string
theorists on the planet came up with the
answer we kind of don't know what string
theory is and the other answer is
whatever it is that we're doing whatever
it is that the string theory Community
is doing even if they did something had
nothing to do with string theory they've
now tried to say how about this and I
don't know if you remember Maxwell Smart
and gets smart so he was a Comic version
of um James Bond an American bumbling
secret agent who somehow solved cases
and and and and stopped terrible plots
but always by making a accidents and
when wherever he was caught he would say
you know I'm not worried because right
now we're surrounded by the Third
Battalion of
the Marine Division s
said I don't believe
that would you believe 12 police
officers no Mr smart I don't believe
that either two Cub Scouts with
slingshots
so this is a this is a very old pattern
yeah is this too far gone for string
theory now is it the mask is beginning
to slip to the point where even Ed
dutton's going to have to eat his words
within the next decade they'll never eat
their words they'll just keep
lying lying as a way of life lying to
the public
as I mean I think susin somewhere else
in this interview says something like we
have to keep interest in physics
High yeah look
science is
fine what we have now learned to call
the science
TM is an Abomination and one of the
things people don't learn about from
regular investing retail investing is
what's called relative value
trades uh people say oh I I'm bullish on
Tech I'm staying out of the tech Market
if you don't have the ability to go
short you don't know what a relative
value trade is relative value trade says
uh I think Microsoft uh has the right ID
over at open Ai and Google's geminy uh
has too much political encumberment so
I'm going to go long Microsoft and I'm
going to fund it by going short Google
and therefore whatever Tech does they'll
both go up or both go down as a SE
within the sector as the sector Rises
and Falls but you're betting on the
trade hedge kind of
exactly the right trade at the moment is
go long science because it's been beaten
up with its association with the science
TM so short the science TM long
science uh I think is the multi-billion
dollar trade for smart countries at the
moment and you have to hunt out the
science TM which lives inside of the
journals lives inside of the funding
agencies lives inside of the
departmental defense mechanisms lives
inside of the
CIA Detra all of these sorts of um blob
related um agencies that get their paws
into science and by the way I I
absolutely want the military to pick up
the funding of basic research we have to
overturn something
called the Mansfield Amendment which a
previous generation was obsessed by and
modern academicians don't even know
exists that was when the military was
funding basic research they were our
best friends they stayed out of our hair
they were just paying a retainer so that
they could call On Us in times of
emergency and we stupidly gave away that
funding source and it's time to get it
back and it's probably time to allow
physicists mathematicians biologists
intellectual property rights over
basic research not just Technologies
because what right now what we're doing
is you're impoverishing the people who
provide your safety and your Prosperity
you're not letting them participate in
the very society that they're funding
I've been using my eight Sleep mattress
for years and I absolutely love it I
used to find myself waking up in the
middle of the night because I was too
hot and this has been completely
neutralized by the magic that is eight
sleep it is time to upgrade your sleep
game with eight sleep's newest
generation pod the Pod 4 ultra it can
cool down each side of the bed to 20°
below room temperature and for those who
snore heavily it can detect your snoring
and automatically lift your head a few
degrees to improve air flow and stop it
and it is clinically proven to give you
up to 1 hour more of quality sleep every
night best of all they have a 30-day
sleep trial so you can buy it try it and
if you do not like it after 30 days they
will give you your money back plus they
ship internationally right now you can
get
$350 off the Pod for for Ultra by going
to the link in the description below or
heading to 8sleep.com
slod wisdom and using the code modern
wisdom a checkout that's EIG HTS
sleep.com
wisdom and modern wisdom a checkout is
this indicative of a broader problem in
all of science is physics the tip of the
spear or is there anything even further
down science used to be dominated by
physics and Mathematics in a certain
sense after the atomic weapons proved
their metal and then the physicists
showed that they could do things that
nobody could imagine for example
molecular biologies is basically founded
by
physicists worldwide web comes out of
CERN semiconductors come out of you know
Stanford the the actual silicon that was
in Silicon Valley
um
so then it became a biology focused so
right now when you say science most
people think biology rather than in
previous years where most people thought
the physicists who could do
everything uh
we need
hearings and we need to basically rid
the National Academy of Sciences the
National Science Foundation the national
science board the national research
Council um the journals Lance at nature
science publishing houses of all of the
science we've got to get rid of the
science the science is infecting us we
need we need Lawyers Guns and Money and
it does seem like a fantastically
asymmetric trade you know I think I I
hear this all the time in the world of
trading look for limited downside and
unlimited upside I think we could make
fantastic progress with within
theoretical physics within five years
and I can promise you nobody's
interested in funding
it what does it mean when academicians
go
after Harvard MIT is it academicians
though yeah oh it's trolls with phds
there's an entire community of um trolls
hunting people who descent like I bet
Saina hossenfelder has people who are
just sitting around trying to destroy
her Y and the same was true for it's
it's magnified I think not just by The
Descent but also by uh the
platform same more exposure people get
jealous of exposion and I don't think
it's that oh I think that it is very
very obvious that if somebody gets
attention and someone else feels that
it's undeserving in one form or another
that guy's are phony and look at all of
the whatever they get I think there's
some of that but I think to think that
that's what it is is mistaken not
entirely but I think that it's a a
really big uh leverage function on top
of it I don't think that's true right
now we have a country with no
president and we've moved on and what's
tayor Swift
doing right so my claim is is that
anti-in
once you understand what anti-
interesting
is
like ass assume that you actually wanted
just to humiliate people you'd give them
a talk if you can't play the
piano um and I want to humiliate you
because you say you're a piano player
away you go I'll I'll get you a grand
piano on a stage in an audience yeah
yeah yeah yeah no no this isn't
that this is something really
interesting and because it's also it's
cheap it's free why don't we find out
whether somebody has something to
say I'm I'm telling you right now I
believe I can explain where the particle
Spectrum comes from I can explain the
origin of this is my claim uh the 16
particles that make up the first
generation of matter not coming from
particle theory but coming from general
relativity the most natural thing in the
world is to say it's a really bold claim
there's no known explanation for the
particle Spectrum in terms of general
relativity what is that guy talking
about let's get him in here let's get
him on video we'll humiliate him this
will be fun we'll take away his audience
never happens instead what it is is that
there's this constant sort of whisper
campaign against somebody like Sabina OH
she's a popularizer she's not serious
she she doesn't know her stuff blah blah
blah blah blah it's the uh they sold out
of uh pop pop musicians I like their old
stuff well did did you see this thing
with Shan Carroll and Kurt
gongal I know Kurt theories of to toe
theories of everything um I didn't see
what him and sha got into this is this
is spicy this is like the Kardashians
for physicists I love it oh absolutely
yeah uh so Kurt says well what do you
think of Lee smolen Steven wolf from
Eric Weinstein and Peter
white and Sean Carroll very deafly says
oh I wouldn't put uh Lee smolen in with
them
the others are amateurs Lee Mullen is a
serious physicist Peter white just wrote
one of the greatest books in physics and
Mathematics I've ever seen a
comprehensive Guide to the role of group
Theory within the quantum symmetry
within the quantum nobody knew that this
guy had this in him he was running this
blog and it was an excellent blog
everybody in the community reads it
nobody and and many people pretend that
they don't because it's very critical of
string theory but he's very very good
then he writes a book like this nobody
saw it coming then he comes up with two
theories both of which I think are wrong
but are really really clever about the
nature of the strong force uh what would
be called weaker hypercharge and what
would be called weak Isis Spin and and
the origin of the Left Right asymmetry
of the universe called
chirality and when I ask these critics
they have no idea what these theories
are it takes took me like 15 to 45
minutes to get the basic idea of both
this is preposterous to for Shan Caroll
to claim Peter white is considerably
better than Shan
Carroll and if you don't believe it
let's have the two of them on stage with
each other it's very funny I would love
to see CTS moderate that conversation
yeah uh so I had an idea that I really
wanted to teach you about and I think I
love this part of our interaction well I
here something I prepared earlier um
so you'll be familiar with the term
audience capture which is when you begin
feeding red meat to your audience you
start to say what they want or expect
you to say rather than what you truly
believe because you've been positively
reinforced to do so by plays and
comments and potentially money there is
a you know that I brought that up in the
article on the international on the
intellectual dark web that Barry
Weiss no I didn't
so there is a new idea which I love
called criticism capture tell me about
it I don't know about it so this is uh
Ethan Strauss and I'm relating this to
your idea of an accuracy budget as well
okay and I think this may be pieces
together so let's see what you think
criticism capture is more dangerous than
audience
capture most people have occupations
where they get criticized in private to
have it take place in public as happens
in media is a different dynamic
especially in this era I happen to think
one's response to criticism is important
and almost defining in this field the
game isn't just what you do it's what
you do after what you're doing gets
defined by people who hate it I've
contemplated hypothetically ideal
replies when getting ripped at scale
some are cruel some are nice some are
strategic some are impulsive in a way
they're almost all dishonest nearly
everybody in this situation attempts to
seem Above The Fray they're fighting
like the wojack of the face in front of
the rage tears that's why you see so
many public figures on the internet
starting off with LOL when what they
really mean is you in most
instances whatever you come up with is
only marginally better than I know you
are but what am
I the basic theory is that people are
more unhinged when addressing their
criticisms not their
compliments I called this the stri and
squeeze in a slightly different context
so the idea is that he a low value
human becomes obsessed with you because
what they get out of it um is if you
react to
them they want the attention and the
portion of your audience that dislikes
you to become Their
audience and if you answer the
criticism like
intellectually you're fundamentally
playing into a Gambit so you try not
answering the criticism and then it
becomes why won't he answer his
critics and then you're saying well are
you applying this
criticism um uniformly are
you it's an absolutely diabolical
situation so the point that I find
interesting is not although it is what
is the motivation if the criticizer is
interesting to me but what is the
response of the criticized is much more
interesting to me what are the options I
I'm actually just interested what do you
see is the options that are possible
because I can't this is a problem that I
can't solve I understand I think there's
a great point that Ethan makes where he
says that the unraveling usually starts
as a rebuttal to some criticism not the
Embrace of some inspired followers say
more about that the impact of criticism
isn't the impact yes people fear the
professional social and financial
consequences of reputation but often in
media that's not what kills you instead
it's your own unforced errors in
response to the criticism very some
people some people change their
messaging to avoid the blowback like a
wide receiver shying from necessary
contact over the middle some
disagreeable personalities get their
backs up and overcorrect their content
starts to match the fevered pitch of
their most aggressive detractors they
almost mirror the derangement regarding
criticism itself as a positive indicator
so I think we've all seen over the The
Last 5 Years people lean into almost
being a a meme of a meme being a
caricature of themselves and you know I
know that you had a I think you were
disheartened
by what you didn't see your audience do
for you when some criticism came for the
portal it wasn't
criticism I can handle
criticism you'll notice that I have a
very strong civility
issue I have an anti-stalker anti-roll
policy for
example I really like Michael malice as
an
individual but when Jay Leno had a bunch
of hot oil or something scaled his face
Michael chose to make a joke and he said
well Jay Leno hasn't been hot this hot
in years
and it's not like I don't understand the
joke but it's like I don't know Jay Leno
and the guy just had skull I just don't
do this I don't like getting energy from
hurting people M I just did this
Terrence Howard thing with Joe Rogan and
I told Joe I will not go on a show as a
debunker it I I texted you and said how
impressed I was with your patience
really it's not just patience Terren has
a couple things that are really worth
while and and
that wait wait wait it entitles me to
say
a lot of what you're doing is just very
very low quality but this thing that
you're doing over here I'll vouch for
I'll put my name behind that that's
really clever and really good if I can't
find one Jewel one gem one positive
thing to say it's it's for somebody else
and part of this is I'm trying to
indicate this is what criticism actually
is I'm modeling what criticism I wasn't
weak I didn't shy away from what I
considered to be the sort of uninformed
or pseudo scientific or historically
inaccurate stuff in that but I also had
no desire to hurt Terren and in fact I
wanted to elevate him and help him to
make him feel silly
or you know that there there's a time to
hurt somebody and I don't but Terren
hadn't done anything you know he's
confused about things and he he knows
that he has something and he doesn't
know where it comes from and all that
kind of stuff and then to hear some
giant portion of the internet say oh my
God know this is the way this is the
genius and another portion say this guy
is an idiot and has nothing neither of
these things are
true to get back to your point about
criticism
capture I can't solve this problem
because the critics are mostly stalkers
I'll answer a
Critic anybody
who's the first thing I'm going to do if
you call me like a cult leader I'm gonna
say well tell me something what did you
call Ed
Whitten what did you call any susin
because that's a cult you want to talk
about a cult I mean that's a serious
cult there's no way that you can um say
well you know the this tiny cult down
the street uh you know has a problem
with pedophilia say well did you check
out the Catholic
Church well no we're not doing that
that's a religion oh okay I understand
so you're going to go after small fry um
as long as you go after everybody evenly
and fairly and academically you're not a
troll I saw a great quote the other day
that said cult failed religion religion
successful
cult they're in they're interrelated at
at a a very important Lev but you know
like Redemption is part of all religions
usually and very often some of these
minor Cults are just about expulsion and
destruction I think
that what we have to realize is that
civility wasn't some sort of nice
among uh 18th century gentlemen it's
absolutely essential to high trust
activities like science that have
incredible power over our lives
and I am not aware of my critics I have
trolls I have stalkers I have people I
fear physically and I think about
legally and I think about protection
from them but I'm not aware of a
single critic of my
theories if you if you ask anybody who
jumps up and says oh I'm a Critic of
Eric's theories I would
say ask that person has that person uh
tried
to uh hunt down your previous
connections and written to your friends
and tried to dig up dirt and if they
answer honestly because I actually have
the letters and emails that that these
people engage in these people are
character assassins posing as critics
and I think that this is actually the
big problem we don't have
debates we have um we have street fights
we have people pulling a knife in a
boxing match or you know plaster you
know bandages in their boxing gloves or
or whatever is going on we need fights
we need critics we need debates that are
refereed that are ethical where people
shake hands at the beginning and hug at
the end touch gloves you know
we don't have that and we're and we're
dying from that you'll notice that for
example in the string theory and the
string theory critics they basically
don't appear on the same stage ever and
this has to do
with wrestling versus
MMA you notice that you don't see
um if wrestling is so effective why
don't we why don't we try it like
professional wrestling inside of an MMA
thing where you're jumping up on the
cage and coming down and all this stuff
it's because one thing is an actual
sport and one thing is a simulated Sport
and I think that what we need is we need
Queensbury
rules Queensbury rules is what how you
avoid
kayab um you have ideas you can't gouge
eyes you can't use small digit
manipulation where you break
fingers you can't go for the throat or
the genitals you put your finger on I've
never heard of this criticism capture
and I love it and that's why I developed
the concept of the strice and squeeze
either you allow us to whittle away at
you or you respond to us you boost us
and you become part of the Trap you know
if you ever watch like David
Attenborough
naturalism you'll see pack animals
whether it's orcas or
hyenas doesn't matter they do this thing
where they nip at their
Target and then there's this weird voice
over which I don't understand at all it
says you know the are trying to uh trick
the animal into expending its
energy uh to to fend off these nips the
nips don't actually do much damage but
they do exhaust the animal so it won't
be able to fight later say okay so
imagine that you don't respond to the
nips do you live no no no no
you then the heus become
emboldened and then you die a different
way so my point is is is that Evolution
would certainly have figured out not to
respond to the nips if that was a
winning strategy everybody's concerned
about the social status isn't it
interesting that everybody pretends that
they aren't I am I'm of course I'm
concerned about my social States because
it's my ability to walk into a
department and talk to a colleague I
think what we're going to do is we're
going to solve this problem because to
not solve this problem is to effectively
dead end um our most important
scientific Endeavors to say nothing of
other forms of criticism but just in
science mhm right now the critics don't
exist the stalkers are everywhere and
the the length to which the stalkers
will go particularly in my case PhD
level stalkers people who write to my
wife's thesis advisor you know you're
talking about a level of insanity that I
think these people are emboldened
because what they do in the shadows just
isn't known can you
see my uh Kitty play pen pink fluffy
version of of your terrorism capture
sure can you see the line that I would
draw between that and the idea that you
have of an accuracy budget and how one
could become perverted by the other oh
sure look but I love I love the accuracy
budget thing and I've not heard of it
before which is why I wanted to give you
hypocracy budget the accuracy budget all
of these budgets to to lead to human
life the inconsistency budget yeah can
you explain because it's it's one of the
coolest things that I've learned I
really appreciate that
recent in order to live a life in public
you're going to opine on a million
different things you're not going to be
G be giving full footnotes you're not
going to be giving
um oh I don't know bibliographies
and counters and so in essence there's
sort of a good
faith level
of hypocrisy and inaccuracy and
self-kindness and all of these things
that every human being
exhibits and if the idea is that we're
going to hold everyone who's expressed
inconsistent opinions or who's found a
self- serving opinion now and again and
we're going to call that person a
hypocrite or a liar or whatever we're
going to torch all of our best people
what if we took Gregor mendle and his PE
pods where we found out about melan
genetics and we said well you faked your
data so everything you did is crap
because he did fake his data but he's
also a genius who Advance the field
Newton and his Alchemy yeah for sure and
all of in order to keep good people in
the public sphere the key question isn't
have you ever exhibited inconsistency
have you ever been cruel when you
shouldn't have been you self- kind like
for example you made the statement in
our last meeting it's way too close to
November uh for anyone uh to leave the
race does that mean that we should never
listen listen to Chris Williamson again
horseshit in fact the most important
thing is is that you own that in the
first part of The Interchange and so my
feeling is is that not only do you have
uh a budget for making strong statements
that turn out not to be true but we also
know that you're like a really good
faith actor and I would listen more to
you the next time you say something like
oh come on Eric there's no question that
whatever it
is and so how do we get this idea of no
no no that was hypocritical but he's way
under budget on
hypocrisy she's you know she got that
wrong um but on the other hand uh you
know she's told us so many things that
are right her her budget doesn't go to
zero like I think Neil degrass Tyson is
really really wrong on
gender on the other hand so much of what
he says is just true and there's a move
like I'm very critical of Neil
but do you want to cancel a guy who's
this good at explaining science Sean
Carroll is an absolute ass when it comes
to critics of mainstream Theory and and
a diabolical
one but he's civil he's a great
explainer he really knows physics at a
very deep level that many people do not
currently and I don't want to see Shan
Carroll removed from science
explanation
I I want to dance with him on a stage
that would be fun but that is not a
person that needs to be removed because
he's got a really bad nasty streak to
him when it comes to the critic the
criticism of mainstream physics and I
just don't understand this this desire
for personal destruction there's there's
this some there's no principle of
Charity have well there are people who
don't no I should say it
differently I've become aware that in
that
Community to show any kind of Mercy or
charity or
generosity let's take the the debunking
community the people who are always
telling you don't worry I will warn you
about the bad people on the internet
you're
consuming they work at the level of the
human and that's how you know that
there's something wrong with them I
can't think of an individual who always
gets everything
wrong you know Donald Trump has done a
lot right broken clocks yeah what no
it's not broken clocks yeah yeah do you
think Adolf Hitler got to be uh the
leader of Germany because he got every
single thing 180 degrees wrong that you
could set your clock to him how wrong he
was no he had to get things
right but he's absolutely diabolical so
what do we do we put a perimeter around
him and say look that thing is so
dangerous that we are going to act as if
everything it says is wrong and that's
what this that's what this comes from it
comes from a
strategy where you can't afford to do
Fugu with certain people Fugu um
Japanese puffer fish served as Sushi
where the neurotoxin produces a
delightful tingling sensation on the
tongue if carved correctly and if served
improperly kills the patron so you have
Fugu chefs and you can't afford to let
an unlicensed uh Chef serve Fugu and so
in part the strategy is you say well
puffer fish is just too dangerous to eat
and therefore puffer fish
bad I think that that's what we do too
often we've just decided that
effectively um the debunking community
wants to go after people wholesale it's
much more efficient to destroy the human
well efficiency was sort of what was
front and center there that we all look
for shortcuts
right we have heuristics we have a
reputation this person has been wrong X
number of times therefore we can
accurately predict that dot dot dot um
but it seems
like
any inconsistency any hypocrisy any
failure um is often uh magnified and
scrutinized and and blown up out of
proportion with the accuracy
budget one of the interesting things
that was I've been talking about
recently is that
um content creators like a podcaster or
YouTuber or whatever will get criticized
for the videos that they made or the
guests that they brought on yeah but
they never get complimented for the
guests that they didn't bring on give me
an example like you've never had Alex
Jones on have you no so for instance the
the the number of guests that get
offered to us get suggested that we
should bring them on that I should bring
them on and I say no to because
of me not believing that they're a good
actor that I don't want to speak to them
that I'm not interested in them uh but
very few people
know the people that you said no to
almost nobody does so you don't get any
bonus points because it's very confusing
like for example I might have Alex Jones
on my show I would never do uh
Infowars right and so the idea is you're
trying to figure out the context Alex
Jones says many interesting things and
he's been right about many interesting
things and he's gotten things really
dangerously
wrong um you have to take in and by the
way I've talked to Alex Jones which is
interesting um the funniest part about
it is he uses Alex Jones as sort of an
adjective like that guy is way more Alex
Jones than I am um which is really
disconcerting like
intellectually
um James O'Keefe does some good work and
he does some work work that I can't
stand and I had him on or you know I had
um the woman who plays Riley Reid the
pornographic actress as a guest on the
portal and uh I'm very disturbed by some
of the things that she's engaged in but
I find her you know absolutely a
Charming soul and we talked about things
that did not that were not in inly uh
exciting because we were talking about
the context of the work
so the issue of serving Fugu is really
important and I think that it has to do
with in what context does it occur does
the host push back and sort of warn
people about some of the issues that are
dangerous and is the is is the host any
is that person good enough to serve Fugu
so when we balance criticism capture how
that feels for the Creator the people
that people are fans of that me and you
are fans of we are both this is the
funny thing about about content that
Elon musk's jet is delayed I imagine
he's got a lots of things to do but one
of those things will probably be if he's
tired I'll open up YouTube and I'll see
what's on there everybody is a fan of
somebody on the internet whether it's
writing reading heing whatever it might
be um and when you combine that with
this idea of an accuracy budget and
basically the fact that everybody's
accuracy budget starts in a deficit that
the principle of Charity is very rarely
given to anybody on the internet uh I
had this idea of the peak hate rule
similar to the peak end rule that
everybody every content creator every
sort of public person is known for their
biggest and most recent uh sort of runin
with something that people find
reprehensible okay uh so Jordan Peterson
best known for Bill c16 he's a
transphobe and also Jordan Peterson is a
Zionist pro- Israel maybe that's the
most recent thing that he's done or he
mansplains to Kathy new I don't know who
whatever is whatever his most recent
thing is um Lex tweeted recently I think
that neither Trump nor Harris will
destroy America if elected president
call me crazy but I think that Trump is
not a fascist and Harris is not a
communist I think this is a reasonable
rable position but according to the
Internet it's insane either way getting
attacked by both sides has been mentally
exhausting for me perhaps that's the
design of the current political climate
anybody with moderate open-mindedness
needs to be pushed out in favor of a
battle between dogmatic extremes this
doesn't seem like the right path toward
truth has been mentally exhausting for
me was the point that I made and the
thing that I've realized now kind of
seeing both sides of the fence being
both a Creator and a consum
is that this lack of principle of
Charity this over magnification from the
creative side in terms of how it feels
from a criticism capture perspective
that your criticisms are more uh
deleterious than your compliments are
infusing uh and the fact that the
accuracy budget doesn't exist basically
means that apart from the most staunch I
don't give a Tim Kennedy Joe Rogan
style or I don't read the comments style
approaches almost everybody that you
like to watch on the internet is on this
very
slow descent where they begin to run out
of fuel that anybody that anybody that
decides to play with ideas that needs to
push the accuracy budget right anyone
that decides to actually push up against
I'm not too sure here but I'm going to
give this a crack okay uh they are going
to be
disproportionately um criticized online
that is going to be uh deleterious and
it's going to dagate their motivation
and that basically means that everybody
is on this sort of slow and it's
essentially a fight against like digital
entropy well look I'm learning something
from our conversation in real time like
for
example I
cannot I don't have a good response to
stalking and what I realized is that my
discomfort with the people who are
coming after me
is a stalking based discomfort and now
I'm suddenly understanding why Joe Rogan
is saying like don't read the comments
which is like a don't let the critics
live rentree in your head that's not my
problem so in part um if I understand
what you just said I think kamla has
some
communism in her appeal I may not be
native to her but I know that that the
uh under 30 crowd is playing with like
Neo marxian ideas and that I've been
told by the Democratic party we need
their votes don't worry they won't get
anywhere inside the party we just let
them mouth off and they don't get any
legislation passed like I've been told
here's the plan we need you to stop
coming after us of course we're
hypocritical we're courting Communists
because we need the votes to win but I
guarantee you they won't be able to do
any damage if we are elected so now you
say something about comma and somebody
says I can see the
communism Equity is communism it's
equality of outcome that the support for
October 7th is revolutionary it's not
you're not talking about liberalism or
progressivism you're talking about uh
calling the murder of parents in front
of their children resistance
these sorts of things are confusing us
because we have these very strange
amalgams I can tell you that part of
kamla um is the appeal to the to the the
Hampton crowd that she will continue the
carried interest exemption in the tax
code that doesn't feel very communistic
another part of her is speaking to um
you know radical islamists saying uh
don't worry we're going to be portraying
this as uh bigotry and islamophobia
you're just another religion like any
other and you're being subjected to pre
Prejudice so how do you deal with an
amalgam where you can't go long and
short I can tell you that there are
parts of Donald Trump that I very much
appreciate and there parts of Donald
Trump that make it impossible for me to
imagine voting for him when he was at a
rally and there was a protester being
leted out and he said you know back in
the day we all have our bad Trum we know
how to take care of such people and if
anybody wants to rough these people up I
I'll pay your legal bills and I
thought wow you have no idea what you
just Unleashed and you're comfortable
with it I don't want that person with a
nuclear football my discomfort with
Donald Trump isn't a class issue or
whatever is I saw a temperament that
shouldn't be anywhere near that KLA
Harris shouldn't be anywhere near the
nuclear football I have no idea who's on
top of the nuclear football because it
can't be Joe Biden I promise you that
and I've been assured by the way
that what's really going on is that
there's a team that is governing because
Biden cannot and that I should feel if I
knew who these people were I would be
pleased as punch because they're far
better than Joe Biden can you imagine
being told that as an American we're not
going to come we're not going to invoke
the Constitution and rid ourselves of a
president who's incompetent we've
instead installed a great team that you
can't see so don't worry so in all of
these situations Chris I think what's
happening is we don't have the ability
to slice and dice the average person I
don't know if you've seen this poll that
I'm running right at the moment still
live I decided to try to make pro-choice
and
prif the same category and I asked the
question you want to pull it up on my
Twitter feed and read it by the way
anytime you do a poll on Twitter you
will always be told you don't realize
that this is biased because it's your
audience and you don't realize that
you're language is prejudicial but it's
funny that those complaints aren't
levied AT AP or or because every poll is
subject to something like this this
one's really instructive question is
your position on abortion whatever it is
exactly the same for the day after
conception as it is for the day before
full-term
birth yes of course 33% no of course not
67%
2557 votes there's a bit of time left I
don't think it's going to reverse though
well here here's my question first of
all is that already an interesting
result because pro-life and pro-choice
in their most staunch form are now
sharing a position that it is either my
body or my body my choice or uh this is
a
life uh and it's always murder so both
of those are now grouped and it about
onethird of the respondents hold a
pro-life or pro-choice
position the comments are dominated by
people saying of course it's a life this
is a monstrous question how can you even
think about this I don't believe in
Murder so in other words it's not even
the pro-choice people but the pro-life
people who are dominating the comments
and it goes back to Yates with the idea
that uh the worst are full of passionate
intensity and the best lack all
conviction it's
not right but it's the people within a
clear ideological position feel very
comfortable
speaking and the people who have a
Nuance position have learned their
lesson to shut up the quiet middle and
this is why mere negative stuff on the
internet doesn't have a lot of effect on
me I just say oh my god I've I've
learned my lesson about the Chihuahua
effect the Chihuahua effect is is that
the annoying voices that just Yap all
day long have time because they're not
doing anything productive they're mean
people they're not that important so I
basically just block on civility if you
start using loaded language about clown
lol you know that stuff I just block you
because I can't afford to have that
person in my head what I don't know what
to do with is the fact that people don't
realize that neither pro-life nor
pro-choice as an example captures an
average thinking person's response to
the complex embryology of pregnancy and
cessation I've always said that uh what
is a position that you you know that
famous Peter question what is the
position that you hold that most people
would would disagree with I don't
actually know if this is the truth but
it's certainly one that people don't
talk about and mine is that both
pro-life and pro-choice sound like the
right answer to me I can be I've got
permanent recency bias yeah based on
whoever the most uh like the closest
proximity last guy was if I've just
watched Shapiro right I oh yeah well
that does make a lot of sense so and so
I'm exactly the opposite my feeling is
the the the only two positions I don't
listen to in Immigration theory is open
borders and closed borders because
they're both exactly this is my getto
room position closed borders and open
borders people should get a room
pro-life and pro-choice people should
get a room the rest of us are trying to
solve problems I don't know what you
guys are
doing and you know it's not like I don't
have absolutes in my life I do
it's just that they're few and far
between and they have to be carefully
Chosen and I think this has to do with
shelling points if you know that concept
Asim Don
so if you don't believe that conception
or birth is the uh right limit point for
inter uh interceding in a pregnancy then
you're looking for some point that is
much less well defined you know is it a
particular Carnegie stage is it
viability if it's viability what happens
when the technology changes what about
Frozen embryos etc etc so we have this
this pension
for Clear positions that are
wrong over nuanced positions that are
right but lack a good shelling point and
it's always been the case I I I noticed
this so long ago
that certainty is a proxy for expertise
it's a good version of it it is uh I I
the example I use all of the time
um I I don't know why it's the case but
Peter Zion geopolitics guy yeah he has
Rogan actually brought this up and Sam
Harris both separately uh and it was so
funny it was this thing that I'd had
after I'd spoken to him that I then
heard Rogan say on an episode and Sam
say on the intro to the episode with
Peter this is the most man I've ever
spoken to in the world I I don't
necessarily have the chops or have done
the research to be able to work out the
veracity of what he's saying but my God
it's convincing because this isn't
caveated it's not it seems to be so the
evidence would suggest that so and so
this is exactly what's going to happen
with nitrogen balance in the soil in
Russia over the next five harvests this
is what we know is going to occur with
the Chinese battleships in the South
China
SE which is so I'm exactly the opposite
guy my feeling and and I and I wish I
would love to just push this out is pay
the tax on the way in so for example uh
of all the free speech people I I'm the
only one I know who says categorically
I'm not a free speech absolutist and
I've watched my friends who said they
were free speech
absolutists fall off pay the tax on the
way out well the problem is is that you
know you're going to meet a
situation in which you have to realize
that that simplistic so the key thing is
there are a lot of things that generate
Applause you know and you've got to
forgo the Applause
lines right because those Applause lines
are there because people are saying
finally somebody said it they just I
appreciate the clarity there there
wasn't a lot of Wiggle words can I give
you a a physics term that we've been
playing about with me and a couple of my
friends love to learn thinking in super
positions yeah
before collapsing it down but there's
some people who can't bear the
uncertainty 100% I mean I really believe
that that is probably the one concept of
quantum mechanics that actually like if
if you the Heisenberg stuff where people
say well if you if you look at a system
you interfere with it that has nothing
to do with Heisenberg the superposition
is actually pretty much a tight pairing
between quantum mechanics and what it is
that we need to do another version of
this by the way is
some giant percentage of the
population says I don't understand your
argument when they say when they really
mean I don't accept your argument for
example you could ask me I don't you
could say Eric I don't understand
anti-Semitism Jews do so much they
contribute to society I would say I
understand
anti-Semitism now there's a question
wait wait wait a second we're trying to
label anti-semites as lunatics and
you're saying you can actually yeah I
can run it in emulation I have a Sandbox
in my brain I've got a little
anti-semite in my Jewish brain I'm sure
he's loving it he's having a great time
up there he wants to know why so many of
your guests are
Jewish
um we've got to stop doing that we've
got to stop saying I can't understand
X when we mean I understand X find X
very very
dangerous and
wrong it's almost like a weakness or a
fragility to
not allow yourself to try and play that
other side what was that uh you need to
be able to explain the other side's
argument better than they can yeah this
is the steel Manning thing that I think
I
actually forget who I heard it from
first I used it on Sam Harris and the
first time I ever heard it be used was
Sam and Jordan was how they opened up
that Pang bur
debate so I think he got it I think you
you can hear on something called faith
in reason where Sam asks me to clarify
what that means and it wasn't original
to me but I it's a really important
concept it's very cool
and it's outrageously civil well thank
you and you know this is one part of the
reason you know something I I don't know
how to deal with is that I coin a lot of
acronyms Concepts Etc and people say why
do you do that it detracts from your
message it's a lot of
clutter and I I don't know how to
respond exactly we're missing a lot of
Concepts and one of the things that I
know is coming from
you is a book in which you take all of
the things that you pepper these
conversations with um these Concepts
which are necessary for Modern Life but
haven't been embedded in our
education right so like the Strand
effect before you get to the Strand
squeeze is actually something that's
very important to understand in our
media age and if that wasn't pushed out
it would be very confusing as to why
somebody wouldn't respond to something
when they do have an answer MH
um our cognitive
toolkit got hit with a lot of stuff
having to do with the internet then the
web then social search and mobile that
is so much
change
that a brain that came before those five
things cannot function in the modern
world and what we need to do of course
and this is why I I was suspicious that
we're going to be in this criticism
issue forever is we haven't yet invented
the concepts that make Modern Life
tolerable and I think that you and I and
a bunch of people in podcasting land are
casting about for what are the missing
Concepts and and I give this example of
the word selfie because it was the best
example I've ever
seen why did h chicks in restaurant
bathrooms take pictures of themselves in
mirrors nobody knew didn't make any
sense and at some point somebody coined
the word
selfie and it was instant we'd all seen
this phenomenon but nobody had had a
concept he was word of the year in one
year yeah yeah and the reason is is that
you needed it because it was there
everywhere but until it had some place
where it could nucleate around this is
good so this has just uh tied me in to
this makes this makes an awful lot of
sense so your idea of an accuracy budget
okay I think I need to request uh a meme
budget yeah because I one of the
criticisms that people have for me and a
bunch of my friends like George or
whoever why does everything need a
name why does everything need to
be an analogy why does it have to be why
does it have to be a yogurt lid moment
as opposed to why can't you say you just
saw some and I'm like for a few reasons
firstly this is great firstly
remembering Concepts is hard and
essentializing something taking it from
this big long St the parable of the
Mexican fisherman if you've heard the
story a couple of times you remember
what it is you don't need to hear the
story again you just hear the parable of
the Mexican oh yeah of course it's the
guy that over complicates his life and
ends up coming back to the place where
he began it's the same stories you get
in The Alchemist by Paulo quo etc etc
fantastic dis ego it pick whatever it is
of choice and then it takes this huge
huge big concept and synthesizes it down
and if you don't know it then you can
click on that and the hyper the phrase
and or the
uh fails over to a bumper sticker the
bumper sticker to a summary paragraphed
and Abstract to a short essay to a book
and so the idea is that the more you
need of these things you can keep
clicking through yep to expand out to
expand out the funny thing is that have
you noticed that caned humor
disappeared what's that mean nobody
three guys go into a bar that thing that
your uncle used to do doesn't happen in
our world at all and almost all of the
Jewish wisdom that had been in the
talmud in my experience my father had 35
Jokes which if you understood all of
them was a blueprint for life and like
I'll just say the
punchlines knew he had a
hat keep your goddamn Jack
uh $5,000 plus legal expenses
Now by killing canned humor you killed
off the encapsulation of thousands of
years of talmudic study about the very
difficult tradeoffs and constraints that
human beings are under and so you say
yeah I don't tell corny jokes you sound
like you from the cat skills like well
no Sherlock you just basically took
the human endowment and flushed it down
the toilet now something else I want to
play with if you if I
can the stuff that comes back at you on
the internet if you had to pick and
choose what you think is fair and what
you've learned from versus what you
think is just a distraction I wonder if
that would be something we could play
with like what have you learned from
your critics where do you think there's
validity where do you have an unsolved
problem and where do you just have the
idea of I can't have that in my head
it's the wor thing in the world the most
accurate I think is that uh my
difficulty in discomfort pushing back uh
my people pleasing nature is in me
everywhere that I go uh
actually apart from one I'm in a
restaurant uh dealing with waiters I'm
pretty good at making my sort of needs
known there but outside of that uh
sitting with discomfort
um disappointing people making them
upset or angry
um I often feel like other people's
emotional states are my responsibility
this is something that I have across the
board um and that means that I have a
particular Vector of weakness when it
comes to the podcast because a lot of
the time I need to push back against
ideas I need to stress test and if you
say something good example of this
Abigail Shri wrote a book bad therapy
yeah and I fundamentally disagreed with
a lot of the ideas in it so I thought
and I messaged a friend before I was
going to do it and said this is my plan
for the episode I want to make my
positions
known and not step in and throw a life
boy to try and fix the problem and the
you know perennial recovering people
pleases out there may sort of feel the
same that you say a thing which is going
to induce some discomfort or something
which is it stops it's got a harsh end
to it or whatever and then you say would
it you sort of bring this thing into
Land by offering so how can it be the
case that therapy All Therapy is bad
because it allows you or it causes you
to focus on your yourself and your
issues but you also including that CBT
something which is unbelievably
practical and and shows up as an
evidence-based intervention for lots of
people's disorders is it that and then
it's is it that you step into soften the
blow I see so throughout that episode in
particular I had to ask these questions
and then as I watch the
guest get to this point which is exactly
the the reason that you ask a difficult
question as opposed to there is this
compulsion inside of me I'm dragged
forward to go well what I mean and and
throw this sort of Life boy to them uh
because sitting with that discomfort so
that is by far I think the most valid
criticism now one of the things that you
that nobody gets to see is how hard it
is for people to achieve the things that
they achieve so apart from in sports if
you got a guy that's got the world bench
press record with long arms and you go
oh my god look the length of his arms
look at his bench press record that's
phenomenal the dude that's 5 foot 10
that's in the NBA oh my God look at his
height he's in the NBA you know you can
see this physical characteristics but
then if you were to see Douglas Murray
and Malcolm Gladwell yeah on stage
together or Ben Shapiro and anybody and
you go they're able to be disagreeable
so seamlessly for me to get
even 5% of the way there I need to do
the equivalent of a one rep
max to to tell AB ask abigel what CBT um
and that's for me just an obvious area
where hypertrophy and Noob gains can be
acred most easily so I think that's
that's the fairest of of the
criticisms anything else that you think
is like something you find in the
comments where you feel like you know
you're you're pointing at something
that's true but you're not getting it
right or
um certainly oh actually I mean one of
the one of the criticism that that comes
up relatively frequently
is I'm both a misogynist a red pill
right-wing misogynist and also a blue
pilled leftwing cuck at the same time
super position super it's absolutely
thinking in a super position but you'll
see the comments on the same video yeah
you'll see them underneath the same
video and uh I it that is one of the
things as somebody who uh fears not
fears criticism capture but certainly
would be a a poster boy for uh criticism
capture being warping and it's something
that I need to account for I I do
particularly well with positive
reinforcement with enthusiasm with
excitability can I give you my take on
this because I think this is one of the
most interesting things you just put
your finger on
what what you're talking about are
cognitive
clusters so for example when I was on
this the first time I learned about it I
was on stage with Ben Shapiro and Sam
Harris and if you look at
the clusters of comments on that video
from the Masonic theater in San
Francisco they were like thank God Eric
was there because otherwise we'd be
hearing about uh is there a god yes no
which is boring as hell why is Eric on
stage we're all here just to hear the
atheist debate the Orthodox Jew so what
you what you learn
about is that the cognitive clusters
have no awareness
that they're part of this dietic
relationship of what you are and how
they process so for example I'm
colorblind as is my brother are you
really yeah wow and the first thing that
everyone says to a colorblind person
what color is that over there you go I I
don't it's very it's very
interesting being colorblind because
it's the terminology is bad you see
color but you don't have the same um
it's not like the world is is black and
white it's just yellow or green I can't
tell
so depending upon what color blindness
you have you see different numbers in
the pebble tests that they give you so
the question of what is the pebble you
know it's basically it's basically uh
you know Mindstorm versus green noodle
or the green needle or the dress or any
one of these things where people Factor
themselves out of the equation and they
imagine that they are in a universal
position as consumers of whatever it is
that you just said
right it's like why why does he spend so
much time on the stuff he's discussed on
every other podcast why does he just
jump in as assuming everybody knows
exactly what this is
about your audience is unaware of the
fact that they've been cognitively
clustered and so when you read these
things you're not reading about
you you're reading about dietic
relationships with different cognitive
clusters and you'll find the same like
one of the one of the things that I know
is that a lot of people don't agree with
the dialectic they believe that there's
a thesis and there's an in an antithesis
and there's no
synthesis there's just people sitting on
the fence who who are for not
having a position and so every time I
attempt to synthesize things because
things are in superp position and I'm
trying to talk about the Nuance they
have an idea of he never says anything
because to them to that person saying
something is to say Trump is the man you
got to go with kamla otherwise you're
just you
know those sorts of people in that pole
for
example
uh the cluster that believes that
pregnancy doesn't change in any
meaningful way relative to
abortion
are a meta cluster including pro-life
and pro-choice yep what what we need to
do more of is to understand what it is
that we're reading as feedack back I
know for example
that many people find me
overbearing and it's not that I don't
see that in myself but nobody ever asks
me do you see in yourself that you can
be overbearing a conversation totally
well if you can see it why do you do it
interesting question um in general I
find that sometimes I I try not to be at
overbearing at all and I feel like most
conversations end up in a conversation
I've already been in I'm I'm old enough
and I'm just bored because I think that
humans in general are a large language
model that's one of the reasons Naval
hasn't done another podcast properly
since Rogan said I don't want to say the
same things
twice
maybe
um but I guess what I find is
that people don't ask about other
people's levels of
self-awareness oh I love asking
that I love asking that that's one of
the reasons that your question was so
interesting there's a a concept familiar
or similar to what you were talking
about before called tilting at windmills
an online stranger doesn't know you all
they have are a few vague impressions of
you too meager to form anything but a
fantasm so when they attack you they're
really just attacking their own
imagination and there is no need to take
it
personally my brother has a version of
this that I think is brilliant where he
says that the person who's just cut you
off in
traffic all you know about them is that
they cut you off in traffic you don't
know about their work in pediatric
oncology and so until you actually have
a fuller position you don't realize that
you've cut somebody off in traffic and
been cut off in traffic and the only
data point you have represents the
entire human of course yeah combination
of fundamental attribution error and a
bunch of others there's a an equival an
equivalent that I learned uh from
Instagram of all places which I I think
sort of shows this relativity or our
assumption that our position is the
correct one every guy that fancies girls
with bigger boobs than mine is a chubby
chaser every guy that fancies girls with
smaller boobs than mine is a pedophile
that basically you have yourself as the
reference point and then anything
outside of that on either side is is
some
perturbant why do you think this is why
do you think that we don't
actually I'll be honest almost no
conversation in my
life moves above the level where I could
set a large language
model to have it good question so I
think we have these
social mores and and and Dynamics
typically that we
follow uh by not wanting to look silly
or play outside of an area that we know
a lot of the time it causes us to go
back to scripts that we've run before
that we knew kind of worked so I think
confidence sort of social confidence has
a lot to do with it um thinking is
expensive and it's hard and genuinely
genuinely trying to be generative during
a conversation is tough a lot of the
time people are uncomfortable with
silence which causes them to push
answers out when sort of sitting back
would have maybe allowed them to come up
with something new if you're trying
to if you're trying to go quicker your
direction can be less precise and you
can move in a less agile way you're just
trying to get the things out as opposed
to giving yourself a little bit of a
beat this is why the best definition of
a best
friend is who can you spend time in
Silence with without it feeling
uncomfortable and who can you be around
with the least filter I think those two
together are a really good example of
who are your
people present company excluded just
just for the reasons of for the obvious
reasons who are the guests who bring out
the best version of you as an
interviewer George Mack who's one of my
best friends phenomenal
writer Rob Henderson ginda Bogle Rory
Southerland Douglas
Murray on the guesting side
Rogan sorry you've interviewed Rogan no
on the as a guest
guing side but I don't do that that much
so I don't have a particularly big pull
to pull from but those are the guys that
I get to play with ideas and I know that
we're focused on the idea I know that
Tim Ferris was a really great example of
this just such a great conversationalist
you know he's if I'm imprecise with a a
question or if I'm trying to get to
something yeah he takes the best version
of the thing that I said as what he and
he infers what I meant to say and it's
absolute best so he almost as such a
great interviewer makes you a better
interviewer by turning your hopefully
quite good question into the best
question by his answer sometimes
reframes it sometimes moves it in the
direction it's really great it's it's
like a
multiplicative uh
environment do you feel like you know
things about Joe Rogan or Lex
fredman or Douglas
Murray that most people don't know that
make them so successful
yes and Tim Ferris and certainly Rogan
and certainly Douglas okay so let's take
take Rogan because a lot of people are
mystified all right so let me open up
the Joe Rogan superpower as a podcaster
is that he can ask a question with a
statement nobody else nobody else has
landed on this and I realized this the
first time that I got to sit down with
him so news to me it's a it's for a
couple of reasons Joe is able to say a
state in response to a statement so you
as the guest or some dusty academic
author that's got a new book out and
you're telling him about you know you're
David bus talking about evolutionary
psychology and it's all interesting and
these are new Concepts and you finish up
explaining about how sex ratio
hypothesis works and Joe says it's so
interesting because in New York you know
you have this sort of abundance of women
and the guest then goes ah so Joe
doesn't make a conversation feel like an
interview because he answers statements
with statements if you actually listen a
lot of the time Joe doesn't ask that
many questions in his podcast he's not a
big question asker when compared with
most other podcasters he makes
statements and the reason is if you
listen to most conversations normal
conversations between friends statement
statement statement statement it's back
and forth one of the reasons that Joe's
show feels so naturalistic is that he
asks questions with statements it's very
rare super rare I've been trying to do
it ever since I went on two years ago
for the first time I've been trying to
cultivate that because I think it makes
for such a beautiful conversational flow
one of the problems that you have is as
you start to push the guest's expertise
the Delta between yours and the guest's
expertise your ability to answer
statements with statements becomes lower
you need to say what do you mean by that
or how's that the case or what would you
say is this thing um but that's what
makes him that's one of the reasons that
makes him so great and that's why it's
so enjoyable uh as a as a a guest on the
show I don't immediately resonate with
that because I think that sometimes he
has different Dynamics with different
guests but it's very it's certainly at a
minimum adjacent to something that I
experience with him which
is he's
really less egoic than just about anyone
I deal with and the way that you see
this like you know an interesting thing
happened it's happened a couple of times
between you and me where when you said
this thing like do you know what
audience captures like I don't I'm I'm
straining it wasn't much discussed
before I brought it up but I don't want
to say that's mine right I just I want
to let it go but I don't want to
suddenly lose my claim on it and that
has to do with like ego and insecurity
and yep and whatnot wanting to be
recognized yeah well just and Trauma
from having had things taken away from
you that you can never get back
Joe could take the shot himself and
instead he serves it up to you correct
and maybe you can't even do as good of a
job as he would have done but his job
like until you piss him
off he's trying to make
you the best version of you and this is
this is where uh I come into tension
with my people pleasing nature that a
combination of give someone open and
they'll show themselves for who they
truly are in any case than asking
questions that are you know sort
of it gives people the opportunity and
the the room to step on the landmines
that they're going to lay for themselves
in any case but also I want a guest that
comes on the show to just have a good
time I I see it as my job to basically
be a trampoline so they're going to jump
up and down and it's my job to be as
springy as possible and make them seem
as acrobatic and as great as as they can
and a lot of the time that
means taking something that someone said
and as opposed to trying to tear it down
to is this what you how about this or
that's an interesting idea or I've got
this that's Bill Bill build oh that's so
interesting so on and so forth uh and it
can seem like pandering I can see how
they could seem sort of sycophantic in
some ways but for me as far as I can
tell the the job of a podcaster is to
make the guest's ideas as good as is
possible this is this is the best light
that they could be seen in and this is
how they relate to me and this is what I
think about them and this is what I
thought that you meant uh and that's why
it's fun that's that's that's what fires
me up do you know why
I do your podcast it's like three in a
row when I I'm really trying to do less
podcast yeah I keep bringing you out
over time yeah well no but it it has to
do with the fact that this is how I get
a chance to see you when you're in La
true and like we don't go out to a bar
so this is my chance to like hang out
with you for a couple of hours and in a
way it's sort of sad we have this
Dynamic where it's like also save it for
the podcast save it for the podcast um
it's it's it's frustrating because in
part like I have lots of friends that I
don't podcast with who I have great
conversations with one of the things
about Joe for example that I really I
don't know how to tell people it he's
obviously like this thing about he's a
meatball me Meathead is a great troll
that Meathead reads so much he knows so
much he's interested in so much that a
lot of what's happening is is that he's
actually infusing the guest with an idea
he could take credit for himself but he
would rather that the guest looks good
and it doesn't come across as people
pleasing and I'll be honest I don't
really
see this criticism maybe it's because I
see you principally in your interactions
with me
um I don't I don't like the gotcha style
you you saw this with Don Lemon and Elon
Musk um where somebody comes from the
gotcha style of interviewing it's like
well just softball after softball like
you idiots what what do you think life
is do you think it's like you you you
you did the gotcha question that fouled
the person up on air and you got to see
them sweat and break down and and lose
that's not what makes great podcast and
you want repeat characters that you keep
coming back to and you watch their
development and I so I just want to say
that from from my cognitive
cluster I'm not positive that these
criticisms of you are valid it may be
with other guests but like in
general I feel like you can you can
establish an evolution of thought
without going through that sort of
competitive nonsense I appreciate that
and it's something I'm working on so one
of
the most important personality traits
that me and my friends have tried to
cultivate in ourselves is agency it's
what we're obsessed by it's what we talk
about essential uh intentionalism which
is a subset it is necessary but not
sufficient in order to be able to build
out agency something else that we really
love talking about and upon reflection I
realized that all of us had first
learned about the word agency from you
so I wondered whether there is
a from my first podcast whether there is
a tension to navigate between
wanting to maximize agency wanting to
have control over the outcomes in your
life basically believing that I will win
the video game sort of no matter what's
in front of me and I will also treat
life in that sort of playful manner as
well which I think is an element of
agency how do you navigate the tension
between wanting to live a hopeful
agentic existence and all of the Doom
and Gloom that you're permanently
embroiled
in this is a it's an amazing question
and I it's strange to me that it didn't
get followed up by almost anybody
um High agency is a lifelong commitment
for me and you know the song boy names
Sue by Johnny Cash can you play it on
the
harmonica it's mostly a it's it's a
patter song before it's like rap country
no not familiar my my daddy left home
when I was three didn't leave much for
me m and me but this little guitar in an
empty bottle of booze I didn't blame he
ran and hid but mean it's thing that he
ever did was before he left he went and
named me Sue the guy he must have
thought it was quite a joke got a lot of
laugh from a lot of folks seems I had to
find my whole life through some guy some
gal would Giggle and I'd get red some
guy would laugh and I'd bust his head I
tell you life ain't easy for a boy named
Sue anyway goes on and basically this
guy has to become tough and
agentic and he swears that uh you know
he'll search The Honky Tonks and saloons
until he finds his father and kill him
and finally he chances upon a saloon and
there at a table de de and stud was the
dirty mangy dog who named me
sup and he gets into a fight with his
father the father cuts off a piece of
his ear and
uh finally Sue gets the better of his
father and um he says you know you have
the right to kill me I don't blame you
if you do
um but before you know before I die I
want you to thank me for the spit in
your cuz the dirty Mani dog who named
youu or whatever and they
reconcile that song to me is about
dyslexia it's about disg graphia it's
about the torture of school for being
smart and not even having a high IQ
because one of the four components of IQ
is something called processing which I
just think is an Abomination that that
somehow gets into
intelligence I was a B minus
high school student in math mostly
because I was Charming or the grade
would have been even
lower
and and so one of the things that
weirdly I'm most proud of in my life and
sort of the origin story that people
don't ask enough about because it has to
do with this Lexia is that
somehow a B minus high school student
limps out of high school and three years
later at 19 has a master's degree in
mathematics headed for arguably the top
Department in the world as a graduate
school at
Harvard and that's not a story about I'm
so smart it's a story about agency it's
about doing the thing that you're not
good at like that you're really really
bad at and you know my son who's
currently um he's finished all of his
physics courses in in the theory portion
of his major as a
freshman
uh many years a go he broke my heart and
he came to me and he said Dad I know I'm
not a good
student but you'd think of all the
things I'd at least be good at math
because he was very analytical and then
suddenly he you know during the
pandemic um he wanted to get out of the
school he was in because it was a bad
fit in the science
department and he was stuck at home
between 10th and 11th grade and he said
Dad I want to know if it's okay if I use
this time when I'm stuck at home to
study for The Graduate record exam as if
I was a as if he was a graduating senior
in physics and he says I want to take it
in the fall and I said well let's review
this you've never taken calculus you've
never taken a course in physics you're
struggling in all of your technical
subjects why do you want to take the GR
in in physics and he said I've listened
to you very carefully and you said that
we should get around College by using
The Graduate record exam as a colge
equivalency dis degree just the way we
have a high school equivalency degree
and he said I've looked at all of the
universities as to what their physics
requirements are in the top 10 and it's
very uniform because they have to be
interoperable I've reduced it to
basically four books that I have to know
I know what the prerequisites are and
there's a test to see if it works so I
can hold myself accountable I've noticed
that the only place holding the GRE in
physics is an Arizona can we fly to
Phoenix and take the
gr uh in physics as if I'm completing a
four-year
college and I thought about it I said
this means you're going to be ruining
your summer he says no no no for me it's
fun let me try will you back it so I
bought him the books bought the plane
ticket and the kids sat at the table for
like two and a half months we fly out he
takes the exam but the kid's never taken
any relevant class
whatsoever and he proves that he's at
least at that
level life is filled with these
opportunities they cheat codes
everywhere there are Panic rooms where
if you know which book to pull the
bookcase just swings open for
you um both my kids grab graduated a
year early because all you have to do is
ask your high school hey I really want
to graduate a year early and it's
possible I don't know how to teach
people that no is the beginning of a
conversation you know one one day I was
having a a steak dinner I think with uh
Dave Rubin and Jordan
Peterson and it came to the Big Five
personality inventory which Jordan
swears
by and He was discussing you know he can
read off your Meyers Briggs like that
and he says but that's not really as
good as the big five so he gave Dave his
big five I was terrified I didn't say
anything he says you Eric are
particularly say why he said well you're
very high in trait openness but what
really distinguishes you is you're the
most disagreeable person I've ever met
or something close to
it and I think cultivating
disagreeability it even sounds bad well
he's very disagreeable but it's it's
trait disagreeability rather than than
that it has to do with nonacceptance
somebody says there's nothing we can
do well is there really nothing you can
do are you sure you know very often for
example I can get cat GPT to tell me
things that's not supposed to by
figuring out how to do prompt
engineering
um there's almost always a way to do
anything that seems like it should be
possible and cultivating this trait
macgyvering everything or finding the
cheat
code is a way of life and if you don't
have that as a as a
dyslexic my grandfather was probably the
most brilliant of four people in his
generation and the four families that
came West to make mayonnaise for it's
how we ended up in
California and he wasn't equal to it
couldn't graduate from college couldn't
get Beyond his intelligence couldn't get
beyond the
deficit
and one of the podcasts that nobody
listens to me on that I'm proudest of is
a a podcast called something like teach
me teacher where I basically go after
Educators and I
say you guys are the most dangerous
horrible people to the neurode
Divergent every second I of my life
spent in your classrooms before College
before University is a second I want
back is trauma is
pain all you did is instill in me that
I'm an idiot I'm a I'm not good
enough I should go away I'm bad I'm
aberin like I got it I really got it you
don't like me I don't like you you're
bad people to me you can think that I'm
the student who's just
disagreeable but the fact of the matter
is life depends on disagreeable people
what would you say
to the people who feel like they didn't
fit in when they were younger they still
don't fit in now like life happens for
other people and they're on the outside
sort of
watching it's an interesting question I
don't know how to give everyone advice
but is there something that you're best
at is there something that you don't
suck at that isn't valued by the world
you know that's kind of the beginning of
you have to make some room for
self-esteem one of the things that I'm
not positive my grandfather ever said it
but I remember it as if he said it is
you owe the world your eyes maybe your
eyes aren't that good maybe what you see
isn't true maybe you're confused maybe
you're clouded maybe you're egotistical
maybe you're a narcissist blah blah blah
blah blah blah blah but whatever your
eyes are they're yours and you have a
right to process the world and say what
you
see and one of the quotes that I like
best of myself which is not of repeated
is most of us die never having heard our
own inner voice even
once it is so
shocking to
speak with your
voice the first time I understood
anything about male female
romance something slipped out of my
mouth that clearly was a lack of impulse
control and it
worked it was
charming
and it shouldn't have worked it should
have been crash and
burn but some point you'll have an
accident where something will sort of
work out better do you know the Tom
Petty song even the
losers oh if I ever get invited on The
Tonight Show that's what I want to come
out to so it's the song
and well it was neat it's sort of like a
Bob Dylan Bo it was nearly summer and we
sat on your roof and we smoked
cigarettes and we stared at the moon and
I showed you Stars you never could see
couldn't have been that easy to forget
about me and it goes into the story in
which a guy who clearly is a lower
status guy is on a roof and and in my
mind you know he says I showed you Stars
you never could see like maybe he's an a
omy geek and somehow he's got the hot
chick on a roof and they're smoking
cigarettes and he seems cooler than he
is and he says you know something about
uh you kiss like fire so it doesn't tell
us about sex doesn't get into like the
notch on his came and and I love songs
that talk about kisses is proxy for
whatever
happens and in that
story he has an accident where he's
above his station in the world as he
perceives it
somewhere you have an accident where you
had your best day ever even the person
who's the most out of luck has
their best days ever and they have to
ask themselves well what happened on
that day what was it that you did start
building on that and and
by you also have to realize that certain
kinds of criticism has to be ignored you
can't process all criticism because a
lot of criticism is designed to hold you
back back as opposed to help you get
better and your obligation is only to
process constructive criticism now you
can turn negative criticism and
destructive criticism into something you
can do
but stop processing the criticism that's
actually poisoned so that the other
person can get ahead of you in the world
and I think that that that that thing
about high
agency is try to find the cheek codes
the the one I've given four that I I
love because I don't need it anymore is
that in Penn Station in New York your
intermediate between Washington DC and
Boston so you're not guaranteed a seat
on the train and there's a giant board
which says which track you should meet
your train whichever direction you're
going that means everybody runs to try
to get a seat on that train but there's
a much smaller screen that says arrivals
for people meeting trains since most
trains are never met and there's a tiny
number of people who crowded around that
screen and they always knew what
platform the train was coming in 10
minutes earlier than everybody else and
you'd go to that platform and you'd see
everyone else who figured out that cheat
code and so my claim is is that
somebody's winning try to figure out
what it is that they're doing you can
even pay them like just give me half an
hour of your time tell me what you do
let me want you if you're not good at a
in a bar whether you're male or female U
meeting people somebody's good befriend
that person buy them a drink do
something kind breaking the fourth wall
the exact solution that I found to be
able to punch above my own weight when
we wanted to start this Cinema series
for the show was I realized that really
bigname guests like the the the sort of
topflight ones that are in the most
demand you can get them to be more
likely to come on the show if you just
go go to them if you find out where they
are and you off to send a car for them
and you show up there because the
likelihood of catching Jordan or you or
Joo or Goggins when they're through
Austin is essentially zero but say look
I'm going to remove all of the different
bits of friction I'm going to come to
you can we make it work that was one of
the things that worked so again George
uh has this question he uses to work out
who is the highest agency person in your
entire life tell me you're trapped in a
South American
prison you know one this one is it's
Absolut it's one of those awful 5,000
people in there it's a 100 people per
room there's half the number of bunk
beds everyone's got a skin head you have
24 hours to get out and you've got one
phone call who'd you ring it's hard in
my
case
why I happen to
be the brother of Brett Weinstein I
happen to have worked for Peter
teal um my wife is a total
supermind uh I've got no shortage of
these people you want to get one phone
call I know I can't figure out who most
people the thing that I worry about is
that most people have no one
yep but you know it has to do with
people who are extremely
generative and high
trust
and can readjust their thinking because
no solution is
clear
but yeah I think a different version of
that question is is your problem which
call to place or that you have no one
you can even think of and then another
version of the question would be if you
could call anyone and you don't happen
to know them personally is there anyone
that you would think would be the best
person and another insight for this
would be for how many people would you
be that phone call it's an interesting
question you know we want to cultivate
agency in ourselves and every time that
I've asked this question at dinner or on
a podcast so what's the most impossible
situation you've gotten your you've
macgyvered your way out
of uh I've manag
to prepare myself pretty well typically
um it's not much macgyvering but I came
off a moped in
Bley uh and managed to lose the skin on
basically the entire left hand side of
my body balines Road versus me in a tiny
pair of swim shorts and I lost um first
round TKO and I needed to come up with a
solution to be able to get
myself uh looked after while I was out
there in terms of sort of Health Care I
needed to kind of manage my own um the
protocol that I was going through and
and then I also needed to make the call
about when to come home and it wasn't
like I had a ton of money to be able to
get myself back uh so did that spent a
week laid up trying to get better
realized I wasn't going to get better
also realized that Indonesia versus the
NHS for all the problems the NHS has I'd
rather be in the UK so managed to do
that but that involved oh actually that
was an interesting one uh on the way
back one of the things I didn't want to
do was not be able to have my foot
elevated but I had no nowhere near
enough money to be able to fly business
class so fluted my eyelashes at the male
uh flight attendant and uh they took
pity on me and put me in premium economy
and a couple of other things so that's
that's one that comes to mind uh but no
South American prisons or or anything
like that yet how about you is there
anything that comes to mind yeah not all
of which I can discuss but uh not at
Liberty to say publicly
well no I mean some of it
is I have two children to Shepherd
through this world and there's a lot of
Technology just in terms of problem
solving that I I I love sharing with my
audience but there's some that I reserve
for for my family alone
and you
know I would say there are lots of
things that I'm not good at to have
Jordan Peterson come after you on
conscientiousness I think it's because
he's asked me several times to do his
show I've never really gotten back to
him I don't know if that's so Jordan I
totally apologize love you the
um I think that in general the thing
that I'm most valued for in my family is
when you need an elephant or two pulled
out of a
hat that's what I'm really good at
pulling rabbits out of the Hat not so
much yeah yeah yeah very much so I hope
that I'm the same too but you know
probably geometric
Unity
is I have only two claims no sorry I
should say different I have only three
claims on
immortality my children is my
first geometric marginalism which I did
with my wife which is rebasing economics
on the differential calculus not of
ordinary calculus but of gauge theory is
the second
and that is dwarfed by geometric unity
and the image I have when I think about
this is of a
person cradling a flame in a hurricane
for 40
years Against All Odds
like it is without question the most
brilliant thing I've ever done ever will
do whether it is right or wrong whether
is fool's gold or real gold has not been
determined by the outside world I'll be
stunned if it's Fool's Gold
but I cannot believe I I I don't even
know how to live with it it's
so it's so outside of ordinary I can't
answer questions people's like hey what
are you up to what are you thinking
about what are you doing and it's like
if I told
you what why does the conversation will
always go south yeah and
I think you know Lex asked me
this like what are you proudest of it's
said
trying not giving up not listening to
every voice in the world which says let
go of that thing it's like now I'm
betting that 10,000 of you are wrong and
I'm right and I pretty sure I will win
in the end and you will lose but I will
probably have to wait for this
generation of humans to die or retire
what did you bring what's that which one
the little things what are those well I
mentioned this woman uh when I was on
Joe
Rogan Beth Sheba
grman and she's a National Treasure what
you're holding in your hand is a
three-dimensional projection of the
four-dimensional platonic solid
corresponding to the do DEA hedron I
think that's called the 120 cell so
that's a four-dimensional object
projected in three dimensions and it's
the analog of the do decahedron there
are five platonic
solids in dimension
four you'll give me that
one this is the thing that you can't
even believe
exists that is called the 24 cell it is
a platonic solid projected into
Dimension 3 that has absolutely no
analog that was only discovered in the
end of the 18 hundreds I think by
shaffle almost no human knows it
exists and because of the fact that you
and I have been able to do millions of
views more people are going to know
about Beth Sheba
grman
um and we're going to take care of our
mathematical artists who are able to
transmit the most profoundly
bizarre features of the world this has
to do with something called an
exceptional leag group called
F4 it's 52
dimensional it has a its next analog has
78 Dimensions called E6 E7 has 133 and
the granddaddy of them all E8 has 248
Dimensions nobody knows why they're
there it's like a mathematical platypus
from outer space with no
context
and I brought them sort of for no reason
um because I didn't know where we were
going when I did the Terren house
thing at at Joe's
request um it generated a lot of
interest and a lot of heat I got a ton
of criticism why would you sit down with
a pseudoscientist you're normalizing
this Behavior Terrence Howard is
actually playing with all sorts of
geometric shapes and dualities between
geometric shapes that even professional
mathematicians couldn't figure out Neil
grass Tyson says I don't know where
these come from
um I didn't know where the conversation
would head you always throw curve balls
and so I just want I brought a couple of
toys and things in case they they came
up have you ever read uh escaping
flatland oh how can I not even know
about this so uh it's a book from the
1800s and it is about a sphere that goes
to visit a two-dimensional world of
flatland so in the two-dimensional world
you have different shapes and the shapes
denote the class well this is Abbott's
book flat yes is this beyond that no but
it's it's also referred to as escaping
flatl I see I didn't understand sorry so
yes Abbott's book uh but I always think
about that you I I still really don't
understand tesseracts and those what are
those vases that loop back on themselves
what Klein bottles yeah like I still hey
shout out to Clifford stole in Berkeley
California who produces them at Acme
Klein bottle uh somebody I did a
commercial for who never never asked for
it just we have to we have to help these
businesses so people are aware you can
order a clim ball go on sorry about that
it's just cool uh but you know I I
interstella is my favorite ever movie
and they try to sort of represent a 4D
Tesseract in three-dimensional shape
threedimensional space and that's kind
of hard to wrap my head around um but
flatland is is an interesting um
equivalent just one down into a place
that we can so for the people that
haven't read it this sphere is able to
make itself
shrink and grow at will in front of and
it amazes the inhabitants of flatland
because obviously as it moves up and
down through its Third Dimension it just
grows and and shrinks in the two
dimensions a sphere passing through a
plane and you're seeing the cross
correct yeah and it gets bigger and it
gets smaller and flatland the Flatland
inhabitants are absolutely amazed at
this ability that it has to do and uh
it's just great it's a really really
cool way to think about and I I I also
think about you know the challenges that
people have of orthogonal
thinking uh you know if you are trying
to play with
ideas
that break against whatever the sort of
the current flow is uh maybe it's with
subtlety or complexity or Nuance or or
uh charitability and um yeah I like I
like things thinking about that sphere I
like thinking about him it's a very odd
thing that you bring up
because that example and when you said
the title escaping flatland I was
Goosebumps
um I have not gotten back to Sam Altman
who asked me for a
proposal because I'm not sure whether
I'm supposed to help Sam now Sam is a
friend of mine and I think very very
highly of Sam Alman um despite all
the machinations and whatnot I I know
him to be a person deeply concerned with
Humanity who will not be understood uh
even maybe he has to do Machiavellian
things in order to take care of humanity
it's very confusing
situation in a certain sense large
language models are
flatland all it can do is read what
we've already done and extrapolate and
so to the extent that we haven't
extrapolated everything from what we've
already it can connect things that we
didn't connect
example I like to give is Guns Germs and
Steel may have been one of the great
books of all time but it was Jared
Diamond taking things that were in the
literature scattered and without doing
real original research he came up with a
thesis that was
spellbinding the um key question is how
do you break out of flat land and
there's a a tool that is not understood
because you learn about it in I don't
know middle
school and you don't realize what it is
and that's the square root oper
operation the square
root is how you escape flat flat
land you ask for the square root of two
which is a an integer and you wind up in
algebraic numbers that are irrational
you ask for the square root of
negative-1 and you add end up in purely
imaginary numbers that you learn in
school and you don't know why they're
there even mathematicians don't really
fully understand how to apply them in
everyday life
um reasons we can get into in another
podcast you can apply it to the
determinant of a matrix if it's anti-
symmetric and get something called the
fafan that nobody who's taken ordinary
calc uh ordinary linear algebra has even
heard of it's a sort of reserve for the
priests of
mathematics the square
root is an example of a question that
you can ask inside of the reality that
you're aware
of so for example the light between you
and I is photo
and those are examples of bans but the
matter here is sort of the square root
of the light if you will and this is
what we would call
fironic
um once you understand that the square
root is the Psychedelic of mathematics
that breaks you into the Panic Room that
you did not know was even present in the
house that you bought I mean it's your
house at some point I realized that
there was a a space behind a wall in our
house and I said break it open and the
contractor broke it open and found all
sorts of things that had been like
hidden there since the 1970s in a
compartment that could be open up and
people had lived in the house they had
no idea that this thing existed that's
what therapy's like that's what therapy
is like therapy is inviting somebody
into a house that you've lived in your
entire life and them showing you rooms
that you didn't know of
that it's also the case that most of the
really important programs in your brain
have never run
like I don't know if you've ever
experienced real
hunger I don't know whether you've ever
I've only once in my life gotten to a
level of hygiene that was so low that my
risk-taking suddenly changed it's an
emergency program that says you cannot
afford to not take massive risks if
you're this dirty I was in the Himalayas
in the north of India and I cannot even
believe the risks I took when I was that
dirty um
it's a it's an astounding thing that we
live in our own bodies and have no idea
what's internal to us in in particular
in our own
mind the issue
about tesser X like I could teach you to
see four dimensions if you take that
Klein bottle and for people who don't
know what it is they can Google it
imagine that in clear glass you take an
ordinary bottle with a punt that little
thing at the bottom that goes up and you
pull the punt through the wall and you
bend the neck and you fuse the two now
okay you say Well it has to go through
the wall of the bottle but if the bottle
is
clear and you make the neck increasingly
blue as it goes into the punt and then
it goes back into the clear if the
amount of bless is a fourth dimension
you can see that it's not actually
intersecting itself because the wall of
the bottle is clear but the neck is
highly blue so you are actually
literally seeing four dimensions now I
can increase that to five Dimensions by
changing the texture Six Dimensions with
respect to the
opacity and you can more or less see Six
Dimensions visually once you train your
mind I mean it's like it's not a
particular
trick above that you really don't have
the benefit like the entire back of your
head is your visual cortex and you you
can't use it directly then you have to
start doing incredible things where you
allow low-dimensional sort of sketches
to stand for higher dimensional objects
and you have to lean on the crutches of
algebra but if the question is that
before you uh Shuffle off this Mortal Co
coil you want to see four dimensions
it's entirely
possible we've
got an even more intense couple of
months coming up than the last time that
we spoke
you kind of hinted at it earlier on this
velocity of stories and
forgetfulness uh
either done on
purpose done by accident done due to
sheer random access memory
limitations how do you well first off is
the speed of Meme and news velocity that
we're seeing
now just
classic election year and I've not been
here seeing this up close before
no no
the I want you to think about the number
of times you've seen a Mona Lisa
meme the Mona Lisa had to be the Mona
Lisa for many years before it was worthy
of so many
memes that Trump
photograph where he's pumping the air
with blood on his
face had about 4 seconds before it was a
mean the concept of the Sacred and the
archival is being lost because of the
novel environment provided by the
internet and the the tools of
editing you know the distracted
boyfriend mean or Haw Tua right these
things are so fast
that they are robbing
us of the
Sacred and you don't need to believe in
God the the re
reverence
um if you've ever been to Florence and
seen Michelangelo's David I'm going in a
week and a
half oh boy that the belli room at the
eizi gallery uh the day the David in
particular because you see the studies
when you go to the academy you're
walking through the studies for the
David and then you actually see this
thing you've seen it a million times
before and you still can't believe
it it's so different it's so different
than everything else
like you I was just I was just playing
Jules Holland and Jeff Beck doing drown
in my own tears and I was thinking I am
the same species as Jeff Beck I am the
same species as Michelangelo I same spe
species as gudi and his ceiling of lasag
famia these are things that are just
beyond anything how did I get onto this
oh the sacred the reverential speed of
memes the speed of
memes we can't afford it we are we too
are entitled to the
archival we too are entitled to
something that isn't a
joke you know the the cringe ation of
everything everything is being
performative everything has been done
godamn it yeah yeah I know I know
exactly what you mean the exhaustion
that you have with it I I I feel as
well I like sorry I like uh Earnest
people I like
cringe you want to talk about something
really contrarian like I was just
listening to Tim
McGraw's uh something like that do you
know the song I had a barbecue stain on
my white T-shirt she was killed me with
that miniskirt you know never heard
this the whole
song
is it's
cringe you know like Shania Twain's man
I feel like a woman is a bit cringe I
like it a lot
um the Tim McGrath song is the setup for
a
heterosexual romance between what must
have been a 16-year-old girl and a
17-year-old boy who meet at a county
fair and it's perfect L constructed and
the reason that it's cringe is because
it's so clearly perfectly
constructed um it introduces the boy
buying gasoline and a coke he drives to
the county fair he sees a girl in line
instant attraction they skip stones
together so it's not just animalistic
there's a
sweetness and whoever wrote that song
I'm assuming it's Tim mcra but maybe it
was somebody else realizes that every
woman has this question
why aren't you going to leave me as I
age what is so special about
me right and so they're they're singing
along about she's got red lipstick and a
Minik skirt and all this stuff like
she's above he's below I work so hard
for that first kiss not about sex you
don't know whether anything went beyond
that kiss you probably don't remember me
so you think that they don't have sex
it's very well
constructed and it's basically a song
for men and women at the same time we
used to know how to do this and part of
the reason it's
emotional is that we really blew it with
lgbtq I really appreciate that we
screwed up with gay men we did not do a
good job by
them being gay and being male is a very
strange different thing from the point
of view of heterosexuality it's a huge
evolutionary
puzzle and we needed to make
accommodations particular particularly
for that
Community but it is also
true that heterosexual families are as
flawed as they are with the fighting
with the recrimination etc etc are the
the Mainstay of a society that will
last
and I have an enormous number of gay
friends it's not some of my best friends
are gay it's like way too many of them
are gay
so I spend a lot of time in in gay
space and what I've learned from
that is that you can go about 85% of the
distance talking about relationship sex
in the
abstract hopes dreams for the future
attraction and then the last 15% is
really different and I don't want to be
in your business at all and and it's
constructed that way because we freak
each other out we don't really want the
specifics of the details Beyond a
certain
point and I think that that last
15% can't be shared between Straits and
gays we can go 85% of the
distance but the heterosexual Community
is now much more in need of help than it
ever has been before and the idea that
as soon as you say something about boys
and girls and falling in love and all
and just these assumptions about
masculinity and femininity that you
immediately have to acknowledge every
other type is is one of the things that
I think is absolute poison for a
society there's special stuff about men
and women that isn't shared with the
rest of the
rainbow and boy meets girl boy loses
girl boy gets
girl in this song is about rekindling
the ability to say I have a right to
sing about boys and girls without
bringing in every other thing that can
happen we've got to get back to romance
if you think about songs that mention
marriage right there are all sorts of
songs where men and women sing them sing
along together old songs that appeal
equally to both groups and if you think
about this the concept of a man putting
a woman on a pedestal and a woman
looking up to a man both of these things
have to happen for the magic to
occur I think we've stopped instructing
our young as to what this is and why
it's worth working for and why being
single and racking up spectacular body
counts is not an answer the way you
think it's going to be when you start
out you
know it's
important not to keep changing
everything every
seconds there are there are novels think
about when The Sopranos came out and the
length of those
storylines think about the development
of Tony
Soprano versus let's say a beautifully
drawn
character like Michael and The
Godfather Tony Soprano is drawn at some
level that puts a great film like
Michael Cor you know Michael Corleone's
Odyssey to
shame how do we come up with something
that's
archival and one of the things that I
say that nobody I don't think anybody's
picked up on
it I have a line that great
art is the reflection of our time in
real time for all
time you have to accept that if you're
Shakespeare you're writing in England in
a particular era you can't try to write
universally it has to be
performed in that time to feed back to
the people who are living it with you
and it has to be archival so that you
know nobody says wherefore art thou in
our modern context but we're going to
work our asses off so that we can go
back I can still recite the first lines
of choser because my high school knew
that it was important to know something
in Middle
English where is that how how do we stop
this memeification I get it everything's
a joke but now the idea is that the guy
throwing spitballs in the back of the
class or the professors and the class is
not functioning you know at some level
cringe
Earnest the hardest thing to say is I
believe in this person like you know
Douglas Murray is a mutual friend of
ours I don't know everything Douglas has
said I don't know that he hasn't said
some really horrible things nor does he
know whether I've said those things but
I saw him attacked online that's an
archival friendship I want to be friends
with Douglas forever I really admire
that guy
and I think it's important for us in the
podcasting
Universe to be Earnest and to say I care
it's you want to talk about something
radical it's not Reddit the average
Reddit post that I
read has one point and it's wow you fell
for that thing that I saw right
through really you're going to use your
time on planet Earth to convince people
that you see through everything and that
everybody who fell for something there's
this Mo brilliant moment that BR e Ellis
had when I was podcasting with him where
he started talking we were talking about
seduction he was like can you imagine
Never Falling for a seduction like never
being seduced your whole life man are
you missing out how do we get people
people to be able to hold the
illusion so with respect to the next
couple of
months I don't know that anything crazy
is going to happen it's still a million
years kamla was not elected through a
normal primary system that we've had
since 1968 when everything fell apart in
Chicago for the
Democrats Donald Trump the Assassin
assassination story is a very very
bizarre one I don't think Donald Trump
is acceptable to the international order
I don't I'm not saying that they will
take him out with a bullet but they will
certainly take him out with memes tweets
data
analytics skull
duggery um and I'm actually most
interested in this other
campaign uh of Bobby Kennedy but more
importantly at the moment Nicole
Shanahan uh it was just up with Nicole
Shanahan
in the Bay Area and I haven't endorsed
her and she hasn't asked for an
endorsement what she wants to work on is
incredible I wrote a paper on Kian labor
markets and immigration and how to
actually redo immigration properly and
Nicole was thinking about Ai and Ronald
coast and his very deep theories of
economic do you know about Coast I
listened to the episode you did with her
so I know that
much to take kamla who is currently vice
president and the ridiculous things that
she says that make no sense at all and
to talk to somebody who wants to talk
about protecting the labor market the
way Andrew
y Sam Alman and now Nicole Shanahan are
thinking about you're talking about
people who don't even seem to be like
the same species I need to ask you this
can you please try and explain to me
what you interpret by what can be
unburdened by what has been what does
that
mean I don't know if I should say I
don't know if I should
say there's a line in
marks
where sometimes you hear certain phrases
Like A World to Win AOC uses the phrase
We Have A World to Win which comes from
the end of the ma communist manifest
originally written in
German it was the name I used to hang
out in the Revolutionary book store in
Cambridge Massachusetts with the
Communists because they print everything
in every language so if you're trying to
learn multiple languages they'll print
the same text in all of these languages
and you can compare
um it basically says you have to wipe
out what has
been to arrive in the new where's it
from what can be unburdened by what has
been it's not a direct translation but
it occurs in KL Marx now I could I
wasn't expecting this I could find you
the exact
reference if you think about what Mao
had to do to wipe out Chinese history
what pole pot had to
do you're trying to wipe out
memory because the memory has all of
this
burden why do you why why is it
important to go after doctors and
lawyers and teachers and
professors because in some sense they
are going to
resist the New Order that you're about
to impose you're looking for a blank
slate they like a te to the
Past okay I'm going to tell a story I
don't know that I've ever told anyone
maybe I have maybe I haven't can't
promise it's original to you but I was
in hoan in Vietnam and I'm going to lose
this
one hoan is one of the only beautiful
places that I found you know like hu and
hoan a lot of things were really ripped
up in that
war
and there is a an unbelievable
and difficult
instrument which the Viet language is
very hard so I'm going to say it wrong
called it would be written as Dan baow
it's one string in a giant lever and you
pluck the harmonics and it's supposed to
be an intimate in instrument I think
sometimes played by the blind where only
the person who's intended is the
recipient of the
music
okay I see this in a window in hoan and
I become transfixed by it and a woman
says I see you looking at this in
English would you like to come in and I
said I don't want to impose she says no
no no it's not mine so she invites me
in and there's this guy who appears to
be brain dead he's like
deformed I'm not going to get through
this and he's speaking very haltingly
and I I don't know who he
is and something about music something
about journalism something about a
professional I can't really make out
what's happening I'm asking about the
instrument and this woman brings him a
guitar and this deformed
man starts
playing some transcri like chopan or
some some piano cont
on the guitar at some incredible level
and I can't even imagine that his body
can do
it and so I I have no idea where I am or
what's
happening and then he motions for like a
book and she brings a
book and it has all of these articles
about this man tortured for his
principled stand against
communism this man has been destroyed
Mind
Body to the point
where it's just painful to watch him and
I realized that basically he just do you
know what a nail housee
is if you Google nailhouse under Google
Images do it well you can't do it or you
off the internet no I can do
it tell me what you see
it's a toll building an individual
Standalone structure in the middle of a
road there are these people who will not
give up their homes when a shopping mall
goes in or a road is put and for some
reason they'll build a highway to screw
over the person who stands up and says I
will not
move and the idea is that that road is
the future unburdened by what has been
and then there's some hold out who won't
go along with the
program if Kamala Harris is as
unsophisticated as we think she is do we
really believe that she is quoting from
the dark depths of why do you believe
she is as unsophisticated as you have
just claimed what did her father do I
don't know look it
up and by the way I am assuming that I
will end up on the open Skies watch list
as a result of this podcast that is
crazy by the way what happened to telsey
the trip the quades on her boarding pass
Donald J Harris the father of camel
Harris Jamaican American Economist
professor emeritus at Stanford
University originally from St ANS Bay
Jamaica what kind of
Economics known for
applying post keian ideas to development
economics
H what's poian I don't know
P keian economics is a school of
economic thought with its origins in the
general theory of John mayard kean's
subsequent development influenc to a
large degree by a name I can't
pronounce I think that there was a lot
of marxist thought and I as a as a man
of whose family comes from the
farle you recognize certain sorts of
commonalities I'm sure she would see
them in
me um
the Democratic party is not
communist I don't think that that's
right that's the critique of many of my
right-wing friends but it is welcomed in
a lot of Neo marxian
thought I would say AOC is straight up
Marxist I don't know I think comma is
both is everywhere
between crony finance and
Marxism you're talking about things for
which you do not have language so the
reason that I said I don't think that
Kam can be a sophisticated as perhaps
this obscure reference
said a hundred times apparently
according to the archive who's Charles
Mingus I don't know KL is a lot smarter
than you're giving her credit
for I mean this is the uh your point
about how many levels through it do you
go this the first one this is the second
one this is the third one yeah but in
order to be able to do the Ukraine is a
country it is a small country Russia is
a big country they are a bigger country
this is bad time is all around us in
order to be able to do
that self-referentially with agency
knowing what you're doing the
metacognition to be able to do that and
play a role to me seems that's like 200
IQ stuff to be able to do that I don't
think so I think it's 130 IQ
stuff I think you could do it better
than you think we we could have a
pretend all right I'm going to talk to
you in a way you haven't heard before
son I'm going to school you on a few
things you can stop that silly grin and
wipe it R off your
face we can sound like however we want I
could affect some sort of Oxbridge
accent or I could do Cockney doesn't
matter um you're looking at
characters this is why I wrote the 2011
kayab essay because you're looking at
professional R do you imagine that the
iron
Chic you know who is the iron Chic who
is Triple H who is the Undertaker do you
think he actually works in a in a
mortuary these are
characters George W bush as a debater in
Texas for the governorship was really
really
smart and suddenly he got real dumb and
folksy and do you imagine he actually
says
nuclear he knows it's
nuclear you
know I would learn to say nuclear I
could say
nuclear I got to be careful with that
nuclear physics and I can I can get
Democrats to correct me and look like
every time this is there's an
old FDR line which is nothing in
politics happens by
accident don't get taken in at level one
look you
know friend of mine Dan bar has a
beautiful thing where he
says when someone looks at the
window and one person
sees the reflection and the other person
is looking through the window and what's
on the other side they don't realize
that they're seeing different things I I
believe that in part this is a
superposition of signals to wall stre
Street to
antifa to organize labor to women in the
workforce worried that they're never
going to find mates and have
children these
are ridiculous things crafted to appeal
to many different people and and to be
decoded by different
groups kamla really is scary for very
reasons for very different reasons than
Donald Trump is scary and it's a weird
election for me because I know three of
these people I know JD
Vance and I know Bobby Kennedy a little
bit and Nicole shahan Shanahan a little
bit better and I don't at
all know the Democratic ticket nor do I
know Donald
Trump but Donald Trump isn't who he
seems to be Donald Trump is much more
methodical
much better at business and very shady
techniques at that you know I think I
remember hearing a story about how he
bought a bunch of pianos for his
hotel and didn't want to pay full price
and then
explained well I don't know if the story
is true so I'm going to be very clear
about that allegedly allegedly and I
talked to people who were in business
with him and one of whom did Serious
Business with him said to
me he's a very good businessman who you
wouldn't want to do a second deal
with
um these are complex life forms
and I don't know what I'm watching I do
know that I I had a meeting sort of by
accident with a person in the Democratic
party who really tried to explain to me
Eric can you hold off on the
anti-democrat party tweeting you need a
higher level briefing about how we're
actually conducting ourselves I just
don't think that the surface is worth
very
much we're in a lot of
danger and one of the things that I
don't love about myself in podcasting
space is that I don't get to talk
about why I'm so worried about
existential
risk it doesn't come out of needing
gloom and doom to energize
me I am so head over heels with this
planet with all of its wonder and
beauty that I can't imagine that people
who who've never been to Glacier
National Park have never been to a
hindustani classical music concert
who've never had great
durian or Cavaliers nearly putting it
all at risk because it's fun to
posture on issues like Ukraine or
Iran
and that that's like a major Distortion
about who I
am most of what I am is about just
waking up every morning and saying my
God I'm still here on this wonderful
spinning orb and what are all these
completely empty suits doing just to
maximize profit that is putting
everything at risk and that's why I
think this election is a catastrophe I
have no
idea what Donald
Trump or kamla Harris represent I have a
very good idea about what Nicole
Shanahan represents and I have a pretty
good idea about what Bobby Kennedy wants
to represent whether he does it the job
that you know he's a complicated guy
with a complicated past and I'm not
signing on for but he's got a real pure
heart and he listens and he's unafraid
to take on look the man is willing to
die I want to just be very clear about
this Bobby Kennedy is willing to die to
take on the intelligence Community like
his
Uncle this is a person of extraordinary
courage of extraordinary intelligence
and ability who's had a very complicated
life and yeah there's you know like with
anybody there's a lot of stuff that I
don't want to sign on for but I'm
definitely working with that Campaign
which is not asking me to endorse it and
I'm parking my interest with
them um and I want to explain what the
calculation is because usually the
question is who are you for who are you
against it's not
that if more people will answer Kennedy
Shanahan until November 1st you will get
the maximum amount of Leverage over the
other two campaigns at a bare minimum
but if you throw your lot in with Donald
Trump or
kamla the duopoly has won every election
since Millard film War that's 42
straight
elections if we do not break the duopoly
it will break
us and the Kennedy Shanahan ticket is
sophisticated in realizing
that campaigning could be something
different it's trying to figure out what
should campaigning be but it's crazy to
be an all day session trying to figure
out how to save the labor
market from Ai and I also want to want
to say something about JD
Vance without naming
names and I hope JD doesn't get angry at
me for this one JD invited me out years
ago to Ohio
to a room in which I was the only
Democrat only person probably ever voted
Democrat
or lots of prominent people and we sat
in an oak panel room for three days in
the middle of
Ohio and I swear to God it was like
talking to progressives who were worried
about coal
miners it was people talking about the
Working Poor and unless you're going to
believe that all of these luminaries in
the Republican Party were there to fool
Eric Weinstein so that he would leak
something from this
meeting uh these people actually cared
about out of luck Americans who
were hurt by NAFTA who had been betrayed
by the Democratic
party and watching JD like he's
campaigning however he's campaigning I
don't totally recognize that person but
I can tell you this that in his off
moments where he's just dealing with me
human to Human
there is no question in my mind that he
cares about the working poor and middle
Americans and people under a squeeze and
he cares about Hillbillies and it's not
a joke you know black Americans are
famous for contributing culture to the
United States of America whether it's
dance or music or oratory or writing
hillbillies are much more
invisible but Hillbillies have been
Central to providing culture for our
country one of the most generative
populations out there in West Virginia
and
Kentucky and I I think people forget
that we had slavery in the 20th
century lot lots of it
white you had
um you had alternate money like Bitcoin
except it was script issued by companies
people lived in towns that were owned by
companies they had private armies that
were called uh detectives like
Pinkerton there was war look up the
Battle of Blair mountain or the Harland
County Coal
Wars JD Vance is an
heir to like listen to uh you know the
song which side are you on oh my God
Pete Seager there was an Union organizer
sorry I I come from very left like far
far left there was a union
organizer whose house I think was shot
up by a detective agency
to intimidate him into not organizing
the workers and his
wife stayed in the house and penned the
song which side are you on boys which
side are you are they say in Harland
County there are no neutrals there
you'll either be a union man or Thug for
JH
Blair Pete Seager took that song and
made it almost like an
Anthem the Democratic party abandoned
these people if you look at the
statistics for voting it's Democrat and
blue right up until Al Gore and then it
goes hard hard red these people were
hurt
bad and while Hillary was calling them
deplorables people like JD Vance and the
right were saying what do they need
we're not afraid of their Bible
thumping we recognize the culture the
endowment the contribution to American
society and I wish the Democratic party
were doing this they're right there go
speak to them stop spinning on them and
on them and pissing on them but
somehow we've got this sort of NAFTA
coked up on NAFTA intellectual Elite
that says hey we helped people in Mexico
so some some coal miners got hurt boohoo
look at the suicide
statistics if you look at suicide
statistics the group that you think is
on top
you know middle-aged white men are
killing themselves at a level that
nobody else is and that's a very clear
marker of who's actually in distress
young black women are not in the amount
of distress that middle-aged white men
are and I think that that's one of the
things that's going on in these
campaigns that's so confusing which is
that I can tell you for sure that JD
Vance Nicole Shanahan and Bobby Kennedy
are 100% sincere no matter how they're
campaigning or what you're upset about
in their off moments and I've been with
all of them these people deeply care
about the out of
luck they're they're interested in
taking
on real power I don't know Trump look
you can tell it's it's not there's no
Allegiance I've I can't imagine voting
for Trump JD Vance is not the person
being portrayed as weird you want to
talk about weird take one look at the
Democratic party and the bizarre stuff
that's going on with you
know I don't know gender affirming care
where you're cutting off penises and
breasts giving it new names for radical
mastectomies or reproductive mutilation
that's weird to try to do that at scale
a tiny number of people need that in
their lives and by the way you and I
talked about this last time
this Olympics was a real wakeup call for
me the number of people who can't deal
with the
idea that there are people with who've
been raised female who may have XY
chromosomes and this treating this as if
it's trans or if it's weird
Behavior I mean I was just sickened by
the Republicans I was sickened by the
conservatives who are so adamant about
trans that they don't have decency and
compassion for for a soul who might be
in an ambiguous category now that said I
also think that if you're XY kot type
you should never be entering a boxing
competition and using that leverage
against somebody else it's also the case
that even if you're out of luck you
have
responsibilities in something like a
combat Sport and and I felt like we
tried to have a complex discussion and I
got hit with all of these people on the
conservative side or like you're making
this out to be so complicated it's a
tiny category
well show me the love in your soul first
and then we'll have a
discussion yeah it was a an incorrect
patent matching don't you think from the
I thought it was a a real Fu in mouth
moment for a lot of people on the right
I thought that they could
have all of the talking points that were
being used about trans people were being
applied to this which just made it sound
like people on the right are the bigots
for somebody that doesn't fit into one
category that everybody had always
accused them of being but it's another
superp position right how can you hold
the need some care especially for an
athlete oh my God but how do you also
say to this person guess what I know
that your love for boxing is this thing
and it's your Pursuit that's carrying
you through life I just unfortunately
for you this is maybe a sport that
you're you can't do it you know if if
that's what's going on and there there's
a lot of you know there's also a
question if you take like Mike Tyson you
know if you take Mike Tyson's fast
twitch
muscle somebody had to ask the
question is that great athlet
athleticism or is that just too much
power to be firing at a human head um I
don't know the answers to these things
Joe invited me to Combat Sports to see
UFC it's remarkable how like I think
nobody's been killed in the UFC
ever right it's very important to act
actually ask these really tough
questions and I think that and you know
part of the reason that I wouldn't take
the question about about Brett is that
the last time we had a discussion I I
found myself being discussed on my
brother's
podcast and I don't want to be pitted
against Brett and Heather I love them I
think the world of them they're
brilliant their hearts are in the right
place but if if we get into an argument
about ovotestes they're going to lose as
two biologists and I'm going to win it's
not all about motility of
gtes uh the world will keep throwing
curveballs at you and you have to begin
from a heart openen place to say some of
us are out of luck because we
Fallen Edge categories and so I stand by
everything that you and I did last time
it's a difficult place to be and if you
have to simplify it as to boys or boys
women or women you're not getting it on
the other hand we have to stop
normalizing what is effectively a a
reproductive Holocaust against children
who we trusted to schools where people
are allowed in to recruit into
reproductive mutilation and you've got
to combine these in a super position or
you're just not getting
it Eric Weinstein ladies and gentlemen
Eric I really appreciate you every time
that we get to sit down it gets uh
easier and more fun and appears to go
for longer as well Chris you're one of
the best out here and I really
appreciate maybe next time we just get a
beer uh you don't have to have too I
tried to do it I tried to get that the
line of cocaine you said you didn't want
when we went to the bathroom I look I'm
trying to embody my old club promoter
world but dude I I really do appreciate
you I uh I look forward to making sense
of what happens over the next couple of
months at some point next year we look
forward to doing it soon with you thank
you very much for tuning in if you
enjoyed that episode with Eric you will
love my full length conversation with
tulsy gabbard right
here go on press it
