this week Dr Eric Weinstein the
mathematician many credit with founding
the intellectual dark web wrote a
despairing post on X that summed up his
feelings on America's big decision day
it read I'm failing this election I
tried but I simply failed I cannot work
within these Concepts my world my
country my America is not on the ballot
well that post has been viewed over
7even million times already with many
echoing his lament but many commentators
have accused Dr Weinstein of sitting on
the fence and squandering his
significant influence at a critical
moment for the country and he joins me
now Eric great to have you back on
uncensored um you decided in the end to
say what you said you saw the
extraordinary reaction to that good bad
and ugly a lot of people saying you've
been a bit cowardly here what do you say
to
them well I I find that um somewhat
funny because uh standing up to one
political party alone is bad enough
standing up to
two uh just makes things worse uh in
ener to me cowards lead mobs they incite
mobs and they fight from within mobs
partic mobs particularly behind the veil
of anonymity so uh it has nothing to do
with that and I also think that the post
was widely
misinterpreted so let's let's clarify
what you meant so tell me what you
really meant by that
post sure imagine that you have two
restaurants and that both of them are
failing uh the health Health grade uh
one of them may be failing the health
grade by much more than the other U
because it has problems with fecal
matter and the food let's say um you may
say I can tolerate the risk of going to
the one that's less dangerous but you
can't recommend the restaurants to
somebody else um because quite frankly
they're both super dangerous now in my
opinion the Democratic party has become
something completely ununderstandable
unrecognizable and uh its leadership
appears in my mind to be evil um and
that is my party the Republican party is
far more chaotic but both parties have
chosen a strategy where instead of
courting uh Common Sense people um
somewhat in the middle although I don't
think it's a you know it's a linear
Spectrum anymore at all they've decided
to hang on to their extremes and pretend
that they aren't there or not incredibly
uh toxic and violent and in part you
know my frustration is that uh in order
for me to recommend a party and I was
hoping to recommend a ticket um this
election cycle I don't think kamla
Harris and Tim Waltz have given me any
possibility of recommending them so
unless somebody can make that argument
uh to me directly in the last few days I
just see it as an
impossibility uh I was very disappointed
um in some sense because I have uh three
friends in the big six uh on the
Republican side um which would be RFK Jr
tulsy and JD Vance and you know my
feeling about this is that we have a
situation by which um the Republican
party is just completely incautious and
if you see the reaction just search on
my name in the word Jew uh you'll see
exactly how much toxicity is hiding uh
amongst the good people of Maga and too
few of them by the way uh have the
courage to stand up um when somebody's
being attacked and so it's I think it's
a bit Rich that the cowards who
privately message me and say we support
you uh don't say something in public
when they're watching a mob descend on
an individual and quite honestly I I
wasn't hoping to take on Maga but if if
that's what it takes to stand up and say
you cannot brutalize people like this
and inciting mobs against individuals is
what I thought you were accusing the
Democrats of doing and now you've stared
into the abyss and it stares
back I mean Chris rufo said this is
narcissism marked as idealism it's
absurd to expect politics to conform to
one's individual preferences and
idiosyncrasies the essence of politics
is decision under imperfect conditions
if you can't figure out how to rank
Trump and Harris you're just Naval
gazing your
response Chris
who I mean it's sort of my response uh
in other words this is an individual
who's been very successful um arousing
Passions
and he's been very effective in being
very aggressive I think he has actually
an excellent point that in many ways the
the Republicans have been too passive
and so in order to compensate for that
flaccid aspect of um Republicans rolling
over in the past he's decided to go uh
red meat as to whether it's narcissism
or Naval gazing or cowardice or fence
sitting or any of the other epithets I
was hoping he would dig a little bit
deeper into his thesaurus but it's
offensive and I'm just not going to get
particularly exercised people have heard
me at nauseum about the problems with
the Democratic party if I was to join
Maga I would start criticizing Maga in
particular for blinding itself to the
real problems of January 6 just the way
I point out that in on the Democratic
side I don't believe it was a free and
fair election in uh in 2020 because of
the interference through the tech
companies and um a problem with the news
media that I would call A ryome A ryome
is a you know like Quaking Aspen you you
think you see a bunch of different trees
but it's actually one organism and all
you're seeing is it breaking through um
the ground in different places for some
reason the Democratic machine uh seems
to control all sorts of different
newspapers that
basically uh engage in something which
I've called jop painting which is
campaigning while pretending that you
have immunity
uh under the guise of Journalism and
journal painting is the
scourge uh of these elections so I've
called the 2020 election not free and
fair and I've called the January 6th and
the the Georgia interference a serious
question and everyone I know who's
chosen one side or the other will blind
themselves to one of these two facts and
that's you know I'm trying to get
America
back my to my friends in the Republican
party uh I understand that you
understand that there are winners and
losers and that's how you think and
that's how you talk but it matters how
you win and if you don't believe me try
to think about how many people have a
poster of Lance Armstrong on their
wall right that's a very good point um
what you did came at a time when there's
a lot of attention around some of the
major newspapers in America from The
Washington Post to the LA Times USA
Today all deciding not to endorse
anybody at this election which has
caused Fury with their uh journalists um
because historically they voted
Democrats and and in a way it's exposed
the very liberal leanings of many of
these newsrooms that there's Fury
amongst journalists that they haven't
once again said vote Democrat but Jeff
Bezos who owns a Washington Post said
this he said most people believe the
media was biased anyone who doesn't see
this is paying scanned attention to
reality and those who fight reality lose
presidential endorsements do nothing to
tip the scales of an election what
presidential endorsements actually do is
create a perception of of bias a
perception of non-independence ending
them is a principal decision and it's
the right one uh obviously it's a
different circumstance to you and the
pressure that you came under to endorse
either side but what did you make of
bezos's argument for not allowing the
Washington Post to
endorse Mr Bezos you have far larger
problems than the endorsement issue you
have a problem of Journalism may I uh
just point out you went after me because
I was the supposed far right podcast
host who had JD Vance on his program and
when I did that uh I talked to him about
something called the grandmother
hypothesis which is a scientific theory
uh put forward by effectively George C
Williams and his and his um students uh
you covered that I think in 2015 and you
wrote in your paper not you personally
but the journalist since having children
is what drives Evolution there's no good
evolutionary reason for women to live
past their ability to reproduce and
instead what you did is you took my far
more careful statement uh talking about
evolutionary females and you tried to
Tar JD Vance with it as if we were both
uh opting um to enslave older women only
for the care of the young quite honestly
what you have is you have a paper that
is effectively lobbying for the right to
be hypocritical you're an anti-science
organization uh if you want
me to explain to you how you violated
journalistic ethics uh as by the society
professional journalist code of ethics
which has undergone many revisions any
version of it you're not bending over
backwards to do objective journalism you
have a printed code of ethics all you
need to do is follow it uh I I applaud
the fact that you were starting to bring
the paper back to being an actual
newspaper but right now what you have uh
is an anti-scientific wing of the Dem
Democratic Party of the United States
and that's not a partisan position that
is my party and I would previously have
regarded The Washington Post as one of
the three finest newspapers in the
United States of America what's going on
you you better fix it you're rich enough
to do it stop stop dragging your feet
and it's time to make uh reparations to
the people that your paper has wrong and
but if you choose uh to start with me I
would be
delighted sh should newspapers of that
stature endorse anyway I mean is is
Bezos I'm not withstanding the
criticisms you've just outlined is BAS
us right in the principle that the post
didn't historically used to endorse
until I think several decades ago um and
then they began to endorse is it
something a newspaper should do or is he
right that instinctively if you want to
avoid a suggestion of bias you just
shouldn't get in to the endorsement
business traditionally there's a Chinese
wall between the news Division and the
opinion and editorial uh pages of a
paper and if that Chinese wall is strong
uh then both of them give us some
insight because in fact the editors are
sitting over the news and this is their
opportunity to say we are biased uh by
what we see and we wish to give
normative judgments rather than merely
descriptive judgments of the news as as
we see it in the current ERA there
should be no endorsement the most
important thing is for news
organizations to go back to being
journalistic
organizations um the reporters simply
flagrantly violate the printed code of
ethics and this isn't difficult uh it's
just that everybody's been having a
bachal uh rather than um following the
rules of Journalism this has been an
orgy uh of partisanship and journal
painting and we don't know what to do
about it and quite honestly you're rich
enough clean it
up the um big fiori that blew up at the
weekend I was at this the rally at
Madison Square Garden first one I've
been to of Trumps uh and it's it sparked
garbage gate in all its guises and
everything let's take a look little
mashup look at the rally itself and I'll
come to you with a
question this is Donald Trump's house
brother she's a fake a fraud she's a
pretender her and her pimp handlers will
destroy our country I'm not going to do
conspiracy and I'm not not going to do
conspiracy but it's kind of funny that
they tried everything else and now
they're trying to kill
him they better not
I don't see no sticking Nazis in here
homeless and Veterans
Americans Americans sleeping on their
own feces on a bench in Central
Park but the illegals I got whatever
they want don't they the only thing I
see in here are a bunch of hardworking
men and women that are real Americans
brother
now it was interesting to me uh we'll
get to garbage G in a moment but Arnold
schwarzeneger seems to have gone on a
similar kind of Journey as you've done
about questioning who he should be
endorsing ultimately he did come down
excuse me but he came down on the side
of carela Harris and explained we need
to close the door on this chap of
American History I know that former
president Trump won't do that he will
divide he will insult he will find new
ways to be more unamerican than he
already has been and we the people will
get nothing but more anger he said I'll
always be an American before my I'm a
republican that's why I'm voting for
carela Harris and Tim Waltz what what
did you make of his explanation for why
he'd be voting against his historic
party and in relation to what we saw at
Madison Square Garden were you concerned
about the rhetoric that came off the
stage there or
not it's a bunch of different question
question so let me do my best um first
of all I can't I can't possibly figure
out how he imagines that the Democratic
party um can put the country back
together again my guess is is that only
Donald Trump can further divide it or
put it back together and if it's kamla
Harris we're going to be waiting a
probably a period of four years uh given
that she won no primaries and she's her
party has pulled off the mask as to um
how it chooses to operate Donald Trump
could further divide us or he could
choose to unite us and in fact if he
decided to go with the super ticket idea
and say look you don't have to vote for
me vote for any of the six um that's an
ingenious political move it will change
American politics forever because it
will give people the ability um to see
that he's put his own ego aside he
didn't choose to do that I think that
Donald Trump could uh he has an ability
to be very presidential when he likes
and he has an ability to be um h Hell on
Wheels when when he feels uh it's
warranted I think if you look at the
second potential shooter of Donald Trump
you have to
be really uh unwilling to consider
conspiracies before you start worrying
about what a single bullet could do to
the entire
country um it would be a tragic
occurrence if it were to end the life of
Donald Trump but I'm not really sure
people have an idea of what would happen
in a heavily armed country um had that
second shooter got off a shot that found
its Mark I think we are
teetering um we're on a
time I don't I don't know what the right
analogy is we are in a very precarious
situation my decision to stay out in
part is to take a hit during the
election because there have to be voices
for afterwards if you recall you know
you need people when when tensions are
high who have not gone partisan and so
I'm just going to take a bunch of lumps
and say that right now we've had two two
and a half Shooters uh towards Donald
Trump I worry that there is an amendment
to the Constitution maybe the 14th
Section 3 um that could provide for a
challenge saying that an insurrectionist
if uh January 6th was called that way
could not assume office
I'm not sure where we are where we are
is extremely precarious and as I said
before on Chris Williamson's uh program
I'm not sure that Donald Trump will be
allowed to become president I definitely
believe that if it's a landslide he
stands a far better chance but I believe
that the foreign policy Machinery of the
United States is sufficiently worried
about what he would do in Ukraine what
he would do with Nat how he would handle
uh the attempted permanent alliances and
and the agreements of the United States
while in office that it feels incredibly
threatened and I really do think that
grown-up responsible people need to pay
far more attention to the second shooter
than the
first when you say Trump wouldn't be
allowed to be president what do you
actually mean by
that I don't know I'm trying to say that
I think that there are elements who view
potentially the release of information
around Jeffrey Epstein who view
information around um potentially the
JFK assassination who worry about the
covert operations in Ukraine becoming
exposed or compromised I think that
there are a great number of things that
are
quiet um that are assumed to be uh
respected by both political candidates
and I think what's happened is is that
you've got a populist who is signaled
that he is not going to play by the
rules of the permanent class in
Washington DC and Beyond and I believe
that that is Donald Trump's best quality
it is the thing for which he is most
beloved and I think it is the thing that
he the thing that within the Beltway he
for he's most feared and and and hated
for and I I just don't think people
understand the depths to which certain
operatives will go to potentially
frustrate his campaign and frustrate you
is a word that I choose to leave
ambiguous another conservative
commentator Mike sovich uh he said of
your decision not to make a decision
said or to not to choose a party said
this is pathetic every word you write he
he said oo's moral cowardice and a
pivotal moment in American history this
is self-important horseshit best suited
for the therapist chair uh do you have a
response to that I mean that's the more
visceral end of the rage that your
decision seems to have inspired in some
conservative
circles you know as somebody who stands
up to mobs regularly I'm not really
worried about trying somebody trying to
fit me with a pink tutu in front of the
world um I know Mike Mike's a very very
smart guy I've uh found him a long time
ago even when he he was
radioactive um I think he's a guy who
really believes in what he calls the
gorilla mindset and the idea is that
they're winners and losers there are
real men and there are and so in
that snap to grid universe that's what I
am he knows better why he chose to do
that in public I have no idea but uh I'm
not going to go after Mike
cernovich in public right now I'll just
say this boy the magga people are bad
strategists the idea of trying to figure
out whether you can incite me to say a
bunch of really negative things about
Maga uh right before an election or the
idea that you want me to move out of the
democratic party towards the Republicans
where I'm far more important being a
Critic of my own party these guys just
don't seem to understand um
in some sense how to win properly how to
have allies and if you wanted to ask me
to answer the question about Madison
Square Garden uh I'd be happy to yeah
yeah please do so I think that basically
uh the left of center people don't
understand the amount of love and
positivity and hope and
energy uh that that party has which is
not dead from the the the neck down I
think that there was a huge coming
together of people uh brown blue green
yellow white doesn't matter Jews Muslims
etc etc that said I think it was very
heavily tilted towards red meat it was
very heavily tilted towards men over
women the edgy comic um Tony Hinchcliffe
I'm going to just stand up for him and
say he's absolutely brilliant I know him
a little personally uh in person he's
the nicest sweetest human being uh he
was talking not about humans as garbage
he was talking about a garbage problem
on an island that has
landfills uh nevertheless very dangerous
to do uh you know that kind of insult uh
comedy in a Madison Square Garden there
was an attempt to tie it to the 1939
rally I can promise you I've gone to
Eric Clapton concerts at Madison Square
Garden nobody made a you know comparison
uh of Eric Clapton to
Nazis these people are fighting in just
a horrific smear campaign where the
Democratic party's Chief tool is
personal destruction and they're trying
to destroy people who went and tar them
with the brush of Nazis now that said
there are absolutely bigots anti-semites
um really horrible people inside of Maga
that Maga will not clear out just the
way um I'll tell you tell it to you this
way the Democratic party will not clear
out the people uh who were celebrating
October 7th as an act of resistance by
the great humanitarian sinir and the
Republicans will not clear out all of
those people shouting at me that I
should go back to Israel because what
have Jews ever done for America we're
basically a fifth column in the United
States uh check your nuclear weapons and
see who made you the absolute strongest
country As Americans I'm sick to death
of people being quiet I'm I'm talking
not about the bad people in magga I'm
talking about the really good people the
people I love who whose back I have in
Maga you don't have my back that's your
problem your problem is is that you
contact me priv privately rather than
publicly and you know that this is
dangerous talk it's not just a question
of quote those Mean Tweets you've got
that wrong this is the precursor to
really bad things happened look at what
happened in beu and estanbul during the
50s look at what what happened uh in
Germany in the 30s when you allow people
to start talking recklessly like this
this is this is the appetizer it's the
Prelude it's the precursor to violence
and quite honestly you should both of
these parties should have thrown the Bad
Apple out and competed for the middle
and the moderates and the reasonable
people and instead they were and
they clung to their extremist in order
to win an election and it's going to be
up to those of us who have to stand up
to both of these parties to put this
country back together and uh you know
I'm not going to use my French on this
podcast but I'm sick to death of men
with masculinity issues yelling coward
at people who stand up to mobs if you
want to Insight a mob or you want to
hide within one or you want to hide
behind anonymity
um you've given us your calling
card Eric you said you're not going to
endorse but does that mean necessarily
that you're not going to cast a vote
could it be that you may vote privately
without saying who you voted for
absolutely yeah yeah yeah in other words
either party could have looked at itself
and said you know what we have a huge
problem and we're willing to look at
ourselves in order to win the people who
who want a home I don't want to be
homeless and I'm by the way Chris rufo
and Mike CERN they just don't get it I
can look past all sorts of things the
threshold for me endorsing a party means
that that party isn't going to corrode
me in order to keep my membership card
right in other words I intend to talk
about the problems of Georgia in January
6th and the fact that the election of
2020 was not free and fair um if you
require me to to Blind myself to one set
of those things I I can't join you and I
can't recommend you to others now does
that mean that I'm not willing to take
the risk when I go to The Ballot Box and
cast a vote no I'm willing to do it I
have four choices I can vote for KLA
Harris I can vote for Donald Trump in
the super ticket I can vote for a third
party or a right-in candidate and
thereby avoid the choice or I cannot
vote at all the only thing that I'm
really thinking is not going to happen
is I probably cannot find any way path
to vote vo in for KLA Harris but what I
choose to Do privately is not a question
of wimping out you also had the
opportunity to win me over what I said
in the next tweet which we haven't
mentioned is I'll work with anyone who
wants to put the country back together
but if the idea is you know show us how
tough you are put on a Maga hat or show
us you know that you're true blue and
you'll sing from the blue
Himel you got to be kidding boy do you
have a wrong
number and Eric finally who do you think
going to win this
election I think it's going to be Donald
Trump if it's counted
accurately yeah say to the the the
theory
of no please finish after you
sir it's in part due to the theory of
timour Kuran um I have I think in eight
years I have never seen a human being
wearing a magah hat and I've uh traveled
all over the country um I don't know how
that's possible people hide their
support for Donald Trump because Donald
Trump makes life hard he makes it ugly
uh if you have um let's say a male
female divide in your family or you have
a family that is dependent on a blue
employer or whatever Donald Trump is
quite honestly completely inconsiderate
about the problems that he's causing
inside of your world you know he's just
he's borish and he's a brute on the
other hand you could easily make the
case as Dave Rubin has uh said artfully
said you can't dream about a panther in
a china shop you're getting a bull
whether you like it or not if you want
some of the China knocked over all of
it's going to get knocked over now what
my opinion is is is that you may want to
risk a brute to break out of this
incredible strangle hold that the
Democratic party ryome the joural
painting the the the academic
institutions uh all of these things that
are so supposedly neutral that always
seem to go in One Direction um
they have to figure out how to break
that strangle hold now what you're
seeing is that these newspapers are
choosing not to endorse because comma
didn't win any primaries and she's a
horrible horrible candidate as a result
of that um we don't know which who's
running the country we Biden's um
declining mental condition if you'll
check my old tweets I've been talking
about this for four years what we have
is we have a national Mass
delusion uh that in some sense the
Democratic party is playing by the rules
when it isn't and um you know in this
situation where in unprecedented
territory the question is do you want a
brute who might actually be a greater
danger or he might be the thing like you
know radiation or chemotherapy that you
need to kill the cancer uh if it doesn't
kill you
first Eric Weinstein as always
fascinating to get your perspective I
really appreciate
it Pierce thanks very much for having me
on
