I recently did a performance of this
song by Brett Crow and it's a graphic
score and has a lot of really
interesting markings on it and I've had
a lot of questions of is this what
actual harp notation looks like so I
wanted to go through this a little bit
because the extended techniques that I
actually used in the piece are most of
them are actually real harp extented
techniques but they don't necessarily
look like what's in the score some of
them are similar but I'm going to go
through them anyway because I think it's
interesting just to learn What harp
notation looks like and what the harp is
actually capable of so we're going to go
through my performance and talk about
the extended techniques as they come
[Music]
up okay so this first one this is what I
was using it is just a screwdriver from
Ikea any metal rod would have worked in
this sense
um this is what I generally use for this
technique on the harp it's actually
called fluidic Glides or fluidic sounds
I wanted to show you this book that I'm
going to be using today to talk through
a lot of these techniques uh this is the
name of the
book and this is just a glossery of
pretty much like every special effect
that you can think of on the harp it has
so many listed here so it's not only
describing the technique but also how
it's it's notated in the music this is
fluidic sounds it says press a steel rod
or the side of a metal tuning key
against the upper portion of a string
shown by the dots use the left hand with
the right hand play the string and
Rhythm indicated by the diamond notes
place and move the left hand to produce
the pitches shown and what a fluidic
sound looks like is
this those were not exact notes but you
get the idea it's really hard though to
find the exact pitch sometimes what I
have to do is I do a trick I actually
mark my pitches out on the string uh
with a pencil it comes right off and I
just Mark once I find the spot let's say
if I wanted a
[Music]
c there's the spot so I'd Mark that with
the pencil so if I needed that specific
pitch for a piece when I'm playing
through then I could make sure I land on
it or go directly to that spot to get a
c and the other fluidic effect is just
Glides like gandos essentially on the
string it says follow the same
procedures as for fluidic sounds except
slide between the given notes without
producing specific notes in between
slide
quickly okay let's keep
going
okay so that technique is just a quick
gando with the back of my nails and it
creates a really percussive type of
sound on the strings the technique that
I'm doing here is called a gushing cord
or falling hail honestly I've never
really referred to it as this it's just
a glanda with the back of my nail but it
says to slide rapidly in the center of
the strings with thumbnail if you're
going up or the second finger if you're
going down and it creates more of a
percussive
effect piece that I was doing here I was
doing multiple attacks of
it to give a really cool percussive
[Music]
effect okay this is not a real harp
extended technique um I just thought of
this I was like well what kind of looks
like this squiggly lines and what will
produce a sound
that would be also interesting to watch
so I was just grabbing I was just
grabbing all of my harp extended
techniques I have like a little bag of
everything and uh my exercise band was
next to my bag I'm like oh that could
maybe work so I pulled it out and gave
it a try and it it worked so I I added
it in composers take note if you want to
add this to your next
piece um but yeah the best way I
discovered and the way I did not do it
in in this recording um I kind of was at
an angle and I found it was not accurate
when I was hitting the string sometimes
I would miss the best and it it's just a
little awkward to play cuz I have to
lean out like this to get both hands I
guess I could try with the the left hand
but I'm I'm rightand it so it's just
easier for me to do it like this but if
you're going directly to the strings and
the if the distance is short between the
rubber
band so even that was a little bit
tricky and most of the sound you're
hearing is the slapping of this so I
don't know if it's really the most
effective extended technique but it's
interesting to
[Music]
watch so this is more back of the nail
just improvising Glendo going up and
[Music]
down and with this fluidic effect with
the screwdriver um instead of going just
down and up in one motion or hitting
specific pitches I'm doing kind of like
a kind of ghost tremolo type of sound
effect
[Music]
here the other thing I want to say about
this technique is in order for it to
make a sound you do have to continually
pluck the
string there's only so much that you can
do until the sound then dies away so so
that's why I was plucking so
often the other warning I will give with
this technique is if you do enough of it
on one string it does wear the string
away it ends up like chewing it up so I
I personally try to not do this
technique too much cuz it does wreck the
[Music]
string here in the score I kind of did
what the shape looked like which to me
is is kind of like a quick scoop along
the strings so they they ended up
sounding like just quick short
[Music]
glissandos okay so right here I did
again more back of the nail very short
glissandos generally this doesn't really
work very well in the harp the sound
just cuts out so quickly right after
that it doesn't really have a chance to
ring fully and it just sounds like it's
stopped I kind of made it work here but
it's it's not often
[Music]
SC all right sorry to stop so often so
that uh slap of the harp is called a
palm strike and according to the book it
says to violently strike all the strings
between the notes shown with the flat of
the hand and release it
immediately
[Music]
and this technique it sounds like it
hurts but it really doesn't it's just
quickly sliding the hand up the strings
and this is called a whistling sound
slide rapidly over the strings with the
flat of the hand in the direction of the
arrows so this can go up or down I tend
to go up for this effect just because I
feel like I have more Runway and my
hand's not going to like smack into the
soundboard here but that's kind of what
that technique is and depending on
how slow or fast you go the sound can
change and you want to try to not leave
the string too much or you'll get a
little bit of ringing that that maybe
that could be part of the technique if
you wanted to write that
[Music]
in so there I just did Regular plucking
of notes the notes that are actually
notated in this score I just played as
normal notes this is just normal sheet
music and here I did more quick
glissandos if you're interested in
hearing more of this nail glissando
effect in classical music you can look
up the Hena or the gasera harp conero in
the third movement there is tons of
quick movements of the gandos also in
the Cadenza as well it's really
interesting to hear how he uses a
combination of slow nail candos as well
as the fast rhythmic
[Music]
ones okay so the shapes I interpreted
them as gandos and honestly all of those
gandos maybe except the square not even
the square actually no I would never
write in a performance the reason be is
when we're playing glos on the harp you
always want make sure you're strumming
straight across the string if you're
going at an angle you're going to be not
leaving the string in the best way and
the sound will be compromised so when I
was doing the
triangle I was kind of going up in an
angle and not all the strings were
playing evenly and same going down the
bottom of the triangle is fine Circle
same
idea it's just a little bit awkward cuz
I also have to change my finger halfway
through so this really is is not ideal
especially in this place right here
the square I thought it was kind of
interesting cuz I I did this kind of
gesture or whatever it was I started up
or down I can't remember here uh and
then I went across I think that one kind
of works cuz it it creates like an
interesting the scraping effect there
and then going across this is often seen
even though it's technically overlapping
notes but it's often seen when we we go
like both directions with the hands like
[Music]
this
[Music]
okay the only thing I'm going to talk
about here is the crescendos and D
crescendos yes you can control the
volume of this depending on how hard you
[Music]
pluck
[Music]
okay so let's talk through some of that
um first off the lines are pretty
accurate for
gandos uh they show actually this book
is really great for showing all the
different ways gandos can be written so
I'll show it on the screen here uh
gandos often are marked with squiggly
line but often are also seen with just a
straight line up and then you'll see
here gliss add lib the character
glissandi should be performed in the
context of the piece performed it's just
saying like do the glissando as as you
feel fit for the piece it could mean
like sweeping up like that or it could
be quick downward glissandos and then
again we have the Palm strike here often
I've actually seen Palm strike notated
exactly like this actually except over
the pitches that I'm playing here
everything's in trouble cffs it just
would not have made much of a an effect
if I did it right there it's way more
interesting if you hit the wire string
so that's why I kind of like threw my
hand down there instead but generally
they are written like that as like a
block of a cord like this if you want
them to last longer they're they're
written right here as half notes so it's
the same idea as when you're writing
sheet music if you want the quick
quarter
notes if you want them longer you can
write them as half notes or whole notes
Etc and then of course at the very end
we just have utter
chaos I interpreted that as just make
sound we want noise so I just took the
nails again and just went as fast as I
could between the two nails to get that
[Applause]
[Music]
sound
okay so this is just a roll from paper
towel and I covered it in like gold
tissue just so it doesn't look crummy um
but I've seen this used where you get to
sing into the harp I've also used this
in a harp duet that I performed uh
generally if you're singing into the
soundboard it's it's just easier if you
have a tube versus if you're like like
this it's just awkward position uh but
this makes it a lot easier and because
of the resonant of the soundboard the
sound just like resonates so much so
let's
see yeah there's definitely frequencies
that ring a lot better than
others and the checkerboard I actually
just had no idea what to do for that and
I was like actually I think this would
be really funny to film me playing
checkers in the middle of this and it
happens twice in the piece I'm like okay
this is this is going to be good also
like if I'm being honest it gave me a
chance to have a break between recording
this just so I wouldn't have to do it
all in one take so I did the first half
I did two different takes of it and then
I did the second half two different
takes again but it was nice to have that
[Music]
option
[Music]
okay so for that line it is actually
pretty accurate for what's written the
sideway V's that you see above the notes
those are accents just strings that are
plucked with a little bit more Force the
symbol that looks like half a circle
with a DOT that's a formata which means
play the note and just hold it for a
little bit longer than its actual note
value and then we have just scribbles
between the notes I interpreted all the
jaggedy scribbles as just like a quick
rhythmic back of the nail gando and then
I interpret the swoopy squiggles as kind
of like a like attack the harp just go
crazy and then lastly we have a singular
dot above the notse notes and I almost
missed one of the notes in this this
take here but uh what happens those are
called staccatos and it's just playing
the note and coming back on that string
ringing string immediately so we dampen
it and it creates kind of like a sharp
attack we don't generally see entire
pieces that are all staccato if you
think about the ergonomics of the
instrument harpus work best when we can
place our fingers and then play the
strings it becomes a little bit tricky
when we have to come back to the string
to dampen
it because we are limited in how fast we
can go with that ways of getting around
that by splitting up between two
hands now I can go a little bit faster
but if you think about even just using 2
two two
two you get really limited of how fast
you can move your
hands so these markings here the two
lines I would actually interpret that as
a pause but I wanted to add sound to
these so I just interpreted as two short
[Music]
glissandos exactly as those are written
I thought those were pretty accurate a
swirly gando going up and down and then
I just did a straight two-fingered gando
going up and down for the rainbow bit
technically I should have maybe done
like two fingers in one hand and one
just to stay true to the three lines
that are there again this is all open to
[Music]
interpretation I saw the circles I was
like oh it kind of looks like an ooh I
was like oh maybe I could like ooh while
I'm playing sing while I'm playing and I
actually think it's kind of a cool
effect to have the same pitch sung as
you're playing it really adds an
interesting layer to the music when you
have singing at the same time I actually
meant to do repeated notes over those
because they're squigglies not straight
lines over the oo and I totally forgot
in the recording but it it it was still
[Music]
effective
[Music]
I've already talked about the Palm
strike I've already talked about the
screwdriver effect uh the squiggly lines
over notes I interpreted that as just
quick repeated note playing this is not
super ergonomic to playing on the harp
if harpist want the same note repeated
we would make an inarm note between two
strings so that means two strings sound
exactly the same so the first note's a c
so I would make the B A sharp so we have
two C's and then what we would turn it
into is a
Trill so it just sounds way better than
me
doing getting kind of like stuck on the
strings a little bit for this I ended up
doing exactly that getting stuck on the
string a little bit just because there
were more than one note that would
require a petal change and I also didn't
want to have to do a whack load of petal
changes in the middle of this um for
example right after the C the C and the
B work but then it's an a after that and
for an a natural there's no inharmonic
strings I could have interpreted it like
that I could have
[Music]
been I think it would have sounded kind
of cool like that actually but I I
wanted the harmonies to come
[Music]
through
obviously the eye looking was a joke the
glissandos here are actually pretty
accurate of how they would be written if
this was harp music I started on the
middle here and then just worked my way
outward I think that's pretty effective
actually something that I did here also
during that eye look part is I did
muffle it's called muffling on the harp
muffling muting the string
and because the nature of the harp it
just Rings all the time so instead of us
worrying about making sure notes are
ringing long enough we have to worry
about the opposite making sure like is
is the music clear enough that we can
hear what's going on because there's all
the strings ringing so often times while
we're playing we we'll be muting the
strings as we're going to make sure
things are clean and
clear
this is the same idea of the singing and
playing at the same time I think it's a
really cool added effect um FYI I
discovered after I filmed all this that
I was totally holding that kazoo
backwards whoops anyways it was still
effective and I feel like it just adds
to the chaos of all of
[Music]
this
[Music]
this line of music I think is one of my
favorite Parts in the whole thing I just
find the harmonies of these repeated
notes just so beautiful so pretty uh
same idea I've already talked about the
repeated note aspect but I was trying to
also stay true to where they began and
where they stopped so that the a would
start first and then the F would come in
and then the C would come in but then
the a stopped and then the F stopped and
then the C would be by itself right
after we have three squiggly lines going
down I just did a three-finger glanda
going down or it was with this hand I
think I don't think it was super
noticeable because of the angle it was
filmed at but I was holding three
fingers out for
[Music]
that
[Music]
oh my goodness I just love those
harmonies they're so pretty love
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
it I'll stop it here long V that you see
there is a crescendo where we're
supposed to get louder in the music and
then of course we had the checkers break
I actually played a full game of
checkers by myself in order to get that
shot cuz I want it to be accurate I
didn't want to just like put random
tiles over I guess I could have I don't
know if anyone ever noticed but I played
a whole game and I wanted to make it
seem like the game of checkers was
nearing the end at the end of this piece
I just thought it was it was really
funny uh and then here uh we have three
more notes after the checkers here of
these kind of like swoops that go over
the notes
generally when we see that in harp music
there slurs kind of like we want the
music to be phrased like so in this
sense it's just going to the next note
so generally we see them over a few
notes at a time to make it more lyrical
sounding so here I just interpret it as
let's lift the hand a bit more so I just
kind of like bounced a bit more does it
change the
sound not necessarily but it does affect
how I play it and interpret the music if
I was going to be playing something lato
which means
smooth it's going to be interpreted to
me a little bit differently if I was to
lift between those
notes where that would be more bouncy
sounding so notation like that is also
important but generally it's up to the
interpretation of the player to get that
same
[Music]
effect
so again we have more screwdriver effect
on the strings I actually made mistake
what I meant to do is I wanted to go
back down again because it's the
opposite right you're going down on the
string but the sound is getting higher
that's kind of how I played it of how
it's written but how it sounds I should
have played the opposite because it goes
the swoop goes up and then down to the
last note the F and I should have done
the opposite I should have done
[Music]
going back to the F like that that's
this piece in a nutshell and all the
extent techniques that I used for this I
love showcasing all these different
techniques that are on the harp
especially for composers who are looking
to write for the instrument we are
always looking for a new repertoire as
harpists it's very exciting and it's so
much fun to play like we play an
instrument that we can pretty much make
sound like nearly anything and we can be
like percussive with it and it can sound
raw and it's different than the
stereotypical harp sounds that you
usually hear of angelic gandos although
we can totally do
[Music]
those to end this video I just want to
go through a couple other of my personal
favorite extended techniques that are a
little bit unique so um this is my
alltime favorite a Super Ball Mallet um
it's a bouncy ball with a chopstick in
it
and there's different ways you can use
this if you rub it on the soundboard it
make it sound like a whale which is
super
[Music]
fun one of my favorite sounds it just
sounds so cool and the other one is uh
rubbing it on the strings again this
one's a little bit hard to figure out
you got to really know the pacing of it
takes a little bit of time for the
harpus to learn like where The Sweet
Spot is and also the the Super Ball
Mallet does mat matter I have a couple
others that just don't work they just
don't make the sound as good as this one
right here so it's it takes a little try
and
[Music]
error it's so cool and there's just like
so many things you can do with this you
can also like hit it on the soundboard
to create a drum with the harp you can
also like hit the
strings really anything that you can
think of you can do with the harp I have
a tongue depressor here I've used this
before to do gandos in the upper portion
here now this is a really cool effect I
learned from a harest friend these are
just honey Dippers and you put them
between the strings and when you go to
pluck the strings again they're they're
little finicky sometimes they just slide
right off if you put them between the
[Music]
strings it's kind of fun how they slide
down cuz it changes the pitch and that's
all I'm going to be talking about today
for extended harp techniques I'm curious
to hear what your thoughts are on all
these if you had a favorite one or if
there's something that really surprised
you let me know in the comments and yeah
let me know if you also have any
questions I'd be happy to answer
