there's a lot of dystopian thinking in
the world right now either you Embrace
progress and abundance and and growth
or how tightly can we embed the machine
learning algorithms into the physics of
electrons the tools that you're about to
inherit are tools that can boost
intellect not just thousands but
billions of fold potential
if people have a mindset that they want
to embrace technological change they
want to figure out how to best augment
themselves augment their businesses with
AI they will have a place in the
future welcome to moonshots Peter D
mandis here I'm about to have a
conversation with Gom Verdon he is the
founder of the accelerationist movement
effective
accelerationism eak he's also the
founder and CEO of extropy AI it's a new
form of computation uh thermodynamic
Computing different from digital
different than Quantum uh he spent 3
years at Google working with Sergey Bren
he's a Quantum physicist a brilliant
individual we're going to go deep into
why is it important to have an
accelerationist abundance mindset and
what is the future of AI Computing when
the cost the thermodynamic efficiency is
something that is hundreds of thousands
thousands of times cheaper and we make
this ubiquitous throughout the Universe
his mission is to increase the amount of
intelligence per watt and the amount of
intelligence in the universe all right
if you love conversations like this
please subscribe please upvote this help
me bring incredible moonshot Engineers
like Gom Verdon who goes by Gil to the
moonshots podcast all right let's jump
in Gil welcome to moonshots it's a
pleasure to have you here buddy thanks
thanks for having me super excited to be
here yeah we've seen each other twice in
the same uh same quarter first off on
the stage of abundance 360 this past
March and then you joined us at the
xprize Deep Tech Quantum trip in up in
the Bay Area and uh yeah it was fun that
was a lot of fun yeah met some brilliant
folks there always amazed by the quality
of the X prise community so I'm super
happy to be here thank you so today
we're going to talk about two of my
favorite subjects uh the first subject
is the whole abundance acceleration
movement uh and just to give people an
understanding of how fast things are
changing and why that's a good thing
right because so many people are fearful
of the speed of change and want to put
on the brakes mostly I would almost say
governments are like if you don't
understand it the answer is stop slow
down Y and so yeah why is that a bad
idea and can it actually be slowed down
and stopped the other is what you're
building which is a new class of
computational uh Hardware uh to enable
this acceleration movement so we're
going to jump into both um if you don't
mind let's start with what is your
moonshot if you you know guon Verdon
have a moonshot uh that you want to make
happen the next decade what what is it
what's the equivalent to elon's going to
Mars for you that's a great question I
think
having a processor that is brain scale
uh in terms of numbers of parameters and
and model capability but that is far
more energy efficient I think that's my
more energy efficient than the brain yes
yes the the brain's pretty damn energy
efficient that's right and why is that
and and that's what we're trying to
reverse engineer interesting so I just
to put a number on it uh for folks you
know 100 billion neurons 100 trillion
synaptic connections running on what how
many watts do you tens of Watts like I
think like 14 to 20 watts of of energy
but the equivalent for a gp4 system
would be what tens or hundreds of
millions of times less efficient yeah
it's really but you want to be more
efficient than that more efficient than
the brain that's what we're aiming for
yeah amazing um you know uh I in
listening to you and I've studied your
work and I'm just I'm fast fated by it
uh I wrote down that your mission would
be you know the ultimate substrate for
AI compute to build the ultimate AI
Computing machine and also to propagate
as much intelligence per watt in the
universe yes is that fair to say what
does that mean yeah I would say you know
there there's kind of two two dual
missions that come together towards one
greater Mission the broader mission is
to scale intelligence throughout the
Universe Scale the total amount of
intelligence in our in our corner of the
cosmos um but to do that you have to
increase you know how much energy we
produce right going up what is called
the cev scale and we'll talk we'll talk
about cev yes sure it's a way to measure
how much energy we produce and consume
um and so so that's kind of the the core
cause area of eak is to argue for um uh
policies that will help us scale our our
energetic consumption and and growth of
civilization and then with ext Tropic
our goal is to get more intelligence per
one um and uh that is ultimately a race
to the bottom right it's how tightly can
we embed the machine learning algorithms
into the physics of electrons right I
love it I love we're going to get into
all of that and I want to talk about the
accelerationist movement and talk about
xtropicalovex
I think um you know the original
Manifesto I wrote U around the same time
I was founding ex Tropic I was going
through bit of a lull just P you know
founding paperwork right you know you're
you're waiting on on on some some
lawyers and so on and I had I was like
okay this is probably the last two weeks
of vacation I have for the rest of my
life once this gets going and so let me
let me try my hand at uh philosophy
right instead of just doing science and
math and algorithms which you know did
for more or less 10 years before that uh
what if I just like tried to apply my
sort of physics mindset to understanding
the rest of the world and and write up
write something up pretty quickly I've
been having I was having conversations
late at night with other technologists
sort of online there's sort of
communities where people have Anonymous
accounts right uh because they're
employed by XYZ and they don't want
their opinions to reflect that of their
employer and they want to have the
freedom to experiment with their
thoughts right and have candid
conversations of like hey where is
civilization going where is society
going where's this all going you know
and we would have these conversations
late at night and and essentially we
decided to write something up and uh you
know I added my own twist uh to it and
uh you know put out the manifesto it
went viral at first it was kind of uh
dismissed and then it just kept
compounding kept compounding and now
it's kind of you know uh truly like a a
counter narrative to to the the culture
of sort of um AI doom and and and
overregulation and safetyism that we see
today I mean there's a there's a lot of
dystopian thinking in the world right
now right there's a lot of fear and I I
remind people that our default mindset
is that of fear and scarcity yeah right
fear and scarcity evolved in the
savannas of Africa 100,000 years ago and
it saved our lives back then and today
it
um it doesn't contribute it's not
valuable in the world we live in um
EAC stands for Yak for Effective
acceleration and your Manifesto if you
going to summarize it would be
what the idea is to understand the
process that got us here the process of
progress itself of advancement of
civilization uh of inspiring ourselves
from well trying to understand it from a
physical standpoint right like there's
been quite a bit of work in the physics
of life right like understanding how did
life assemble and become so complex
right so the science of complex
self-organizing systems that have
energetic constraints so out of
equilibrium thermodynamics and taking
inspiration from those ideas and
applying them at civilization scale to
have a prediction of where are we going
how do we reached how do how do we re
reach sorry rewind how do we reach the
better futures um ahead and how do we
maintain a sort of robust advancement of
progress towards this greater grander
future and essentially what I saw was
that we need to maintain variance and
dynamism as a core uh value for us to be
malleable and adaptive to whatever
challenges come our way rather than
trying to freeze everything slow down
and panic actually what we want is
actually more malleability more dynamism
so important so the malleability
adaptability the agility I would say is
uh if you don't have that when you get
hit by a disruptive Force he can destroy
you right the analogy I use and your
you're free to use it is you know 66
million years ago when an asteroid
struck the Earth the dinosaurs that were
slow and lumbering were not malleable
they were not adaptive and they died but
it was the furry mammals that right
flittered around
jiggled around to use the free electron
analogy that ended up becoming dominant
and so that malleability and Agility
today comes from from what from millions
of entrepreneurs trying millions of
ideas there I I I think like every uh
potential parameter space of how we
organize ourselves what are our cultures
uh how how we do things which
Technologies we're pursuing where we
live how we live every every possible
space should have some amount of
variance to it and we should allow the
freedom to explore and and and
dynamically optimize ourselves because
for example you know the dinosaur
example if you didn't have genetic
variants at the time if we were all you
know being dinosaurs we would have been
wiped out right but because we had
variance we were robust to a change in
in in in the landscape right and so I
would say right now you know there is a
sort of weird Trend in in the past uh I
don't know decade or so with the arrival
of the internet that there's a trend
towards over centralization and top-
down control of of culture amongst other
things right and and now it's that sort
of uh centralization around a mon
culture is is trying to uh also
potentially control a core technology
like AI right so if AI is in the hands
of very few it's not a lot of variance
in How We Do AI right there's going to
be a couple prescriptions dominant
models dominant players exactly and and
and their uh tactics for how to you know
align the AIS are going to be the only
options we have and and to me that
doesn't seem robust because there's
there's too much uncertainty right now
and and in times of uncertainty you want
to have variance in how you do things so
you're hedging your bets right yeah
there's a great biological analogy you
really want genetic variants so when new
think enters the ecosystem it might kill
a large percentage but a few of the
variations will be resistant
survive so we're talking about human
survival in one sense here as an
underlying optimization function mhm and
and but we're also talking about sort of
how do we keep a a varied culture
different subcultures will have
different opinions about how to embrace
technology or reject it and really in
the end each subculture is going to be
tested you might have people that want
to merge with the machine people that
don't want anything to do with it some
people that fully embrace it and I I
think all paths will be explored but in
the end whoever like the message of eak
is you know there's a tendency of the
universe towards growth and it will
adapt and reconfigure
everything uh that is alive towards uh
this growth and whether you align
yourself with this growth or not is your
choice but that choice ultimately has
consequences as to whether or not you're
influence or you are part of that those
likely Futures right and and and that
comes from some very esoteric equations
from thermodynamics but um essentially
it's a message of hey um either you
Embrace progress and abundance and and
growth or you know may you're you're
probably not going to be you're going to
miss the boat in a sense in fact at the
abundance Summit this year um Alexander
wezner gross was there was talking about
uh AI is coming on strong um it is going
to you know reach what whatever we call
AGI and then digital super intelligence
there's no there's no barrier that says
AI only goes towards you know an IQ of
humans it it blasts through and
continues that infinitum especially if
the hardware You're Building comes into
existence or when it comes into
existence I should say
um and the question is does Humanity
couple with it yeah or do we decouple
and that's really a lot of the
interesting
conversation um i' like to talk about
that I'd also like to talk about what
people's fears are one second because
again so the coupling with AI means that
we get a chance to uh to accelerate
alongside it enabled by it it's almost
like when life began and we had these
procaryotic life forms and they absorbed
mitochondria yeah and became a
eukaryotic life form was able then to
utilize the the free energy of oxygen uh
for oxy otion to grow more rapidly yeah
so today we have our phones and our
devices are kind of like our
mitochondria to some extent which I
definitely want to implant in my head
they're they're intellectual powerhouses
of our of our system right and uh in a
sense we're already pretty augmented we
kind of feel naked and incomplete with
our our phones and uh you know over time
we're going to have wearables that share
our perceptions share our experiences
have priors of our actions based on the
state of the world and on previous
history of what they've seen and that's
a sort of exogenous neural augmentations
neural augmentation of ourselves of
course there's our friends at neuralink
that are working on the full merge with
even higher bandwidth but even without
that sort of uh invasive approach to to
merging with the AI I think we're
already most people are merging without
realizing it right sure um and so you
know what does the human of the future
look like well I think it's one that
really harnesses is all these tools to
of of cognitive leverage right to to
augment uh itself right and I think that
the humans that maybe dismiss technology
or don't embrace it those are the people
that are going to maybe be in trouble or
relative disadvantage and so I think so
far the beauty is that you know you know
we're both CEOs right we both have like
standard issue iPhones or Androids right
um and it's the same as anyone else
right everybody everybody has access to
to the same technology and it's
ubiquitously accessible and cheap and
that's the beauty of capitalism right um
I think that hopefully uh Ai and neural
augmentations can be uh cheap enough and
ubiquitous enough so that everybody can
own their own uh AI the AI that is an
extension of themselves and that they
have control over it uh because I think
if we only allow for AI augmentations
that are controlled by Central parties
we're kind of losing a sense of self
there uh we're we're kind of delegating
to this sort of uh I've always imagined
uh for the longest time an AI software
shell the closest thing is Jarvis uh
from Iron Man but an AI that is my I
used to call my AI uh Jamie joint anthom
meano interface that was my AI was able
to interface with everything in the
world I could step into an F35 fighter
not know how to fly it but Jamie knows
how to fly it and you know I can say you
know move that image here or there
or how you know the technology that
you're enabling and I don't want to go
there yet but because it has the ability
to operate potentially at room
temperature and with very low wattage it
also feels like a technology that could
be
incorporated into me yeah a lot more
than any of the other AI technology yeah
uh do you imagine a future in which I
have become a cyborg with with the those
AI
implants yeah I I would say you know at
least one of my goals is not just you
know uh to augment humans ex exogenously
but potentially integrate these devices
um into our bodies obviously that's very
Moon shoty speaking you know sort of
thinking but at the same time within a
certain thermal budget right which is a
a bottleneck today for for implants in
our brains you know our goal is within a
certain thermal but to be you know the
most performant neural information
processor out there right and we're
going to keep iterating to to maintain
our our lead there so and I I I love it
you're again we'll come back to this in
detail but the power and uh and
temperature and efficiency Vision you
have um because it's orders of magnitude
different than what exists today enables
integration to the humans I about the
fear there's a lot of fear out there
yeah um and the fear dominates the
conversation you know I blame the crisis
News Network and the news for basically
broadcasting every negative piece of
information on the planet
um have you been as as you have
been uh leading this
conversation um on the accelerationist
movement and you've had folks like uh
Mark Andre uh who's sort of come in as
well into that conversation what's been
the feedback from society have you
gotten a lot of push
back uh yeah I mean it's it's it's very
polarizing right like there's some
people that are uh you know positive
some abundance mind mindset they're like
yes we think technology will help us uh
conquer our problems and and and help us
tackle any issues and there's the people
that uh you know think technology maybe
is is negative or they've seen how it
impacted their lives and maybe maybe
they want less technology right they're
kind of it's kind of techn progressive
versus techn regressive right it's kind
of a new it's a new axis of of of
polarization of opinions and uh clearly
from my experience online it's been very
Pol polarizing we've had quite a few
fans we have quite a few uh opponents
but you know I welcome uh discussions
right the whole point is to have
discussions about uh how fast we want to
go
right but if it was only one a one-sided
discussion beforehand about slow things
down centralize you know uh let's
regulate regulate um then we were going
to head towards that without any sort of
opposition whereas now I I feel like we
kind of brought balance to this force of
sort of novelty seeking uh you know
favoring entropy versus sort of higher
uh you know more order more constraints
uh and there's kind of this uh there's
kind of this thing that happens in
complex systems where the optimality is
that criticality the balance between
Order and Chaos between energy
minimization and entropy is is where you
want your complex system to be because
that's where it's it's most performant
so I don't think people realize there's
no onoff switch on this technology yeah
and I don't think there's a velocity
switch either I think it is um I often
asked myself the question if you'd gone
back in time and said Einstein listen
stop thinking about this it's going to
lead to the atomic bomb whether or not
he would have been able to stop thinking
about it and if he did the next person
would have taken it over and and moved
it forward so you know I I tell people
there's no there's no slowing it down
and if you believe that which I do then
the question is what do you do and I
think it's guiding it that is the only
real option we have correct and I I
would say that um you know the the
market itself right um is a very
powerful aligning Force right if you
have a product that is not of positive
utility to us we don't buy it it runs
out of whatever company makes that
product runs out of capital and the
product dies off right there's a
selective pressure on the space of
products and right now because uh L AI
models are products right you have model
as a service companies like opening ey
anthropic eventually XI um this
competition of for users and ultimately
of capital to you know fuel the gpus
that keep these systems alive um uh this
competition induces a certain selective
pressure and models that are not aligned
that don't do what you ask it that are
hard to interpret hard to read actually
don't do well in the market and in a
sense it's it's a much more careful sort
of gentle guide towards systems that are
aligned compared to um sort of
centralized regulation like this is how
much compute you're allowed to use for a
model nothing more and so on I I I think
that's going to be net negative uh
overall so in a sense people have um a
vote uh in in the system they they can
vote with their dollars they can vote
with their usage their API calls of
which systems they like and that's going
to steer the market sort of
evolutionarily in the space of potential
neural Nets towards more of uh models of
that kind right but Gil what happens
when someone comes to you and say listen
um I get this I like it I love the
abundance future but let's be serious uh
this is super powerful
technology right um uh Claude 3 is
already at 101 IQ it's more intelligent
than humans and we're giving infants
nuclear weapons to play with and these
things are going to um ultimately
destroy
Society um and there's a small chance we
survive but this is way too powerful and
we need some level of control we need
some level of centralization just to
make sure things don't go off the
rails how do you respond to that I would
say that I'm I'm more weary of the
dangers of centralization than giving
everyone you know access to to neural
augmentation I I think the I like like
you said I I don't think there's going
back right I don't think we can go back
to not knowing about this technology
there's too much upside on the table to
creating it so it's it's a it is an arms
race like never before yeah yeah and so
for me it's like how do we guide this
acceleration towards the positive future
to me I think if only a few people or
parties have control over
the only AI that are legally allowed um
we're going to have a lot of problems
because that's going to create a sort of
gradient of power right people with but
we have duopolies now with in cellular
phone networks in cell phones and
computers and so forth is it how is this
different from those duopolies I think
if we're going to truly augment
ourselves our own intelligence with AIS
I think in order to maintain the
benefits of having individuality right
individuality we celebrate individuality
in our society at least in the west and
it's our greatest strength because this
variance everybody brings something
different to the table and we're
searching over all sorts of spaces of
science art culture and so on and we
find new Optima something original that
then gets spread throughout the network
and is of massive benefit to everyone
and if we only have centralized models
right a few models that are trained for
everyone
they're amortized so so so there's one
model for everyone we lose the benefits
of having sort of individuality and so
to me my quest both on eak and
xtropicalovex
maybe you have 20 20 agents that work
for you right yeah Peter three of 10 is
going to hang out with you yeah I think
that's the future I think that um people
you know will it's kind of like having
you know employees you you know
management is prompt engineering to some
extent you can prompt different agents
to do tasks for you maybe you fire them
up and then boot them down when you're
you're done and I think that gives us a
lot of intellectual and operational
leverage and I think people tend to
think too much much about the economy
has this Zero Sum system where like if
AI have take some of the jobs there's
going to be less jobs for us but we all
know that's not how the world works
right like if if if we're able to do
more at a certain cost we're going to
try to aim higher and and and you know
there's plenty of room to grow uh out
there that's a really important point
and and you know when I think about what
do I worry
about um and I'm I'm definitely the guy
who says you know the glass is not half
full it's overflowing yes but I do think
about if AIS are doing all of the work
and if I can write a book at the snap of
a finger and start a company at the snap
of a finger and what's
challenging and that we humans need
challenges there's a great uh paper I
read
recently
um uh it's called Universe 25 if people
on Google it and so the the studies were
done in the 60s in which a large open
space was created for field mice and it
had all of the room and the nests and
the food and they had no struggles at
all and the mice you know breeding pairs
were put into this and they grew and
they grew and they grew and then after a
couple of generations it basically died
off because there was no struggle in
there and and so one of the things that
I think about is is that humanity is
going to have to uplevel yeah um our
Ambitions and our struggles M uh and I'm
excited about that but people need to
have you know the ability to have a
massive transformative purpose to have a
moonshot so let's talk about the
kardashev um uh you know scale here so a
a Russian cosmologist astronomer right
um comes up with this idea so explain
what it is yeah it it's a sort of
Milestone system to keep track of the
progress of growth of civilization um
there's originally there was uh three
types or three big milestones and then
Carl San found a way to interpolate
between the Milestones so we have a
continuous uh scale there um but the
original scale was uh in type one a type
one cev's uh scale civilization uh would
would produce as much energy as is
incident onto earth from the sun right
so if you take the sun we occupy a
certain amount of solid angle certain
amount of the sun's Rays hits us that's
a certain amount of power and by the way
uh the numbers that I remember because I
I speak about this when talking about
energy abundance is that today I think
there's 8,000 times more energy that
hits the surface of the Earth that than
we consume as a species in a year we're
still we're still really early we're
still below type one yeah well below
type one um type two would be uh having
the equivalent of the energetic
production yeah Dyson Sphere that that
captures everything being emitted by our
son and type three would be the entire
galaxy right and so I think in general
if you set um this guy was really
ambitious back
then he didn't start with like a type
one as a fireplace or you know we still
type zero right now yeah we're still at
the beginning of this but but I think
this is you know in our moon shots
conversation in our abundance mindset
when people think about well what am I
going to do you know it's like you've
got to point your your vision yeah you
know 90 degrees up and start talking
about you know how do we achieve uh
Transcendence in our solar system and in
our galaxy yeah I think a lot of our
goals people's goals are to anthropos
Centric or they want to do Rel relative
to others and now that AI comes in and
kind of breaks this sort of Zero Sum
competition between humans right we got
to set our sites on a
non-anthropocentric goal right and we
have a goal prescribed by the universe
in a sense which is to grow yes uh
because any life form seeks free energy
and looks to grow and the point is that
if we have AIS uh that help us and
extend our intelligence we should tack
tackle harder things and there's an near
infinite scale of harder things to
tackle because unlocking that next scale
of civilization there's tons of
challenges to to achieve that and so
that's the sort of mindset uh I bring to
the table and and and frankly you know
my whole career was trying to tackle you
know how to leverage AI to understand
the physical world I haven't been trying
to let's say automate humans uh I've
been trying to engineer matter
understand chemistry at the base level
understand the physics of the world so
that we better perceive predict and
control it which is kind of a you know
core based technology for us to unlock
all sorts of other Technologies right
and is when someone hears this
conversation they say well my God I
can't think about that I don't know how
to I'm not Elon to build you know
Starships or Gil to build quantum
computers and and such but the reality
is the tools that you're about to
inherit are tools that can boost
intellect you know not just thousands
but billions of fold
potentially well we'll see how it shakes
out I I think that the current
approaches where we train on human
generated output right the internet is
broadly at least right now uh I'm sure
in a couple years won't be the case but
generated by humans yes right and we're
kind of distilling a mixture model of
all human intelligences right you could
think of the LM trying to distill a
mixture across the opp of all our brains
right and so at least to me it seems
like it would saturate to something
nearing you know typical human
intelligence um
until well until it's embodied and then
can interact with the environment and
get its own samples and and query the
environment in a way that you know isn't
bottlenecked by what was generated
previously by a human I me one of the
conversations we had on the Abundant
stage was uh the excitement about AI
helping
us decipher and deeply understand
physics and math and biology and
chemistry um in ways that we can't
fathom right now I mean you do believe
that don't you yeah I do I do think it's
possible I do think it's much harder
than distilling human intelligence I
think uh understanding biology and
chemistry is orders of is going to take
orders of magnitude more computation and
so the computers were building yes
they'll be able to run uh models that
are anthropomorphic right like llms and
so on train on on human data um but
ultimately it's machines that are going
to help us grock the physical world um
and there's this beautiful Theory by um
by Steven Wolfram on on complex and
self-organizing systems and his
prediction is that certain uh systems in
nature are irreducible you can't you
can't get a you know tldr you can't
compress
right the gist of it to something very
simple you actually don't have a choice
but to go through the highly complex
computation to predict what's going to
emerge as a behavior at a different
scale and so nature nature is very hard
to predict uh at all scales and I don't
actually believe that you know there
will be one God AI model that will
emerge overnight immediately understand
all of physics and uh you know create uh
Nanobots that eat the Earth which some
people people believe in but at least
fundamentally you know from my own
experience studying complexity in in
Quantum systems and and Quantum machine
learning uh and and then you know from
wolfram's Theory it seems that there's a
fundamental complexity in nature where
we're going to have to scale our
computation of intelligence
proportionally to the complexity of the
systems we're trying to understand and
there won't be like an overnight sort of
uh runaway um intelligence explosion
like that it's going to be consistent
exponential progress and to me there's
much higher likelihood that we shoot
ourselves in the foot and stop this
beautiful process of exponential
progress uh then there is you know us
you know giving the keys to
uh Singularity thus thus the Boomer
versus Doomer point of view yeah that's
right I mean because the majority of
people feel just the opposite that this
is uncontrollable this is a reaction
that has no bounds and therefore uh is
dangerous and and I I hear you saying
this is a precious flame that we have to
be careful we don't blow out yes yeah
it's a it's a different narrative than
what you've hear you've heard you
typically hear people have sci-fi based
priors right like what what are their
priors on on what the future holds
they've seen a lot of sci-fi movies I
blame Hollywood I really do yeah I mean
I mean the only film that I I think has
done a good job here is her you know
where the AI gets bored and leaves yeah
that's actually accurate uh but um you
know in my case I think once we've
created AIS that are you know of similar
intellect to us we're going to learn how
to interact with them we're going to
learn how to employ them in a in a
positive fashion uh there's going to be
a big adjustment there but once we do so
we're going to have way more challenges
for us to scale
civilization to the stars and there's
plenty of challenges left so there will
always be more work to do right and and
we're going to put our most capable
systems on the most complex and
difficult tasks and there's still going
to be work left of all kinds and so I
think if people have a mindset that they
want to embrace technological change
they want to figure out how to best
augment themselves augment their
businesses with AI like they will have a
place in the future those that want to
you know stay away from it then you know
I mean they could go back to the we have
the Amish we have the Amish example
right the and and the the challenge
becomes you know people who feel this
way I'm like okay just for just a week
go without your phone your TV you know
your car all the technology don't buy
food in the supermarket go find a cow
and look at yourself go plant your and
the reality is um what makes the the
leveling the playing field for Humanity
is the poorest and the wealthiest all
have 24 hours in a day 7 days in a week
365 in a year it's how you use your time
yeah that differentiates you so my
ability to have ultimately hundreds of
of extraordinary agents that can do do
my the things that I desire and bring
back the answers for me is a
massive uh Force multiplier for
productivity yes I think I think people
should should think more like that like
a capital cater like a manager as the
way we're going to merge with AIS um and
it's going to allow them to do much more
I think more people should be
entrepreneurial more people should think
hey what opportunities do I see in the
world now that we have these AIS that
are on the verge of human like
intelligence what should I aim to build
how will I direct capital to unlock more
value right um and if everybody shifts
to that sort of mindset I think the
fears about what are we going to do in
the future uh will fade right everybody
I want to take a short break from our
episode to talk about a company that's
very important to me and could actually
save your life or the life of someone
that you love company is called Fountain
life and it's a company I started years
ago with Tony Robbins and a group of
very talented Physicians you know most
of us don't actually know what's going
on inside our body we're all Optimist
until that day when you have a pain in
your side you go to the physician or the
emergency room and they say listen I'm
sorry to tell you this but you have this
stage three or four going on and you
know it didn't start that morning it
probably was a problem that's been going
on for some time but because we never
look we don't find out so what we built
at Fountain life was the world's most
advanced diagnostic Centers we have four
across the us today and we're building
20 around the world these centers give
you a full body MRI a brain a brain
vasculature an AI enabled coronary CT
looking for soft plaque a dexa scan a
Grail blood cancer test a full executive
blood workup it's the most advanced
workup you'll ever receive 150 gab of
data that then go to our AIS and our
physicians to find any disease at the
very beginning when it's solvable you're
going to find out eventually might as
well find out when you can take action
Fountain life also has an entire side of
Therapeutics we look around the world
for the most Advanced Therapeutics that
can add 10 20 healthy years to your life
and we provide them to you at our
centers so if this is of interest to you
please go and check it out go to
fountainlife
decomp Peter when Tony and I wrote Our
New York Times bestseller life force we
had 30,000 people reached out to us for
Fountain life memberships if you go to
Fountain life.com back/ Peter will put
you to the top of the list
really it's something that is um for me
one of the most important things I offer
my entire family the CEOs of my
companies my friends it's a chance to
really add decades onto our healthy
lifespans go to Fountain life.com back/
Peter it's one of the most important
things I can offer to you as one of my
listeners all right let's go back to our
episode so a lot of folks listening are
entrepreneurs and they're looking at
moonshots they're looking to do
something big and bold and significant I
like I jokingly said not another photo
sharing app you know
uh how do you what's your advice for
entrepreneurs today uh looking over the
decade
ahead yeah I would say um you know
everything that's like white color work
or software you know doesn't necessarily
have everything that has pre-existing uh
abund abant data sets might not have too
much of a mode right if if intelligence
becomes more abundant and if the current
systems we have don't necessarily
generalize too well but they're really
good at interpolating across data points
that are pre-existent maybe stay away
from things that are typical right and
go towards the atypical do something
that's never unique data sets yes right
so something that's like surprising
contrarian and so on you know yes that
gets people to judge you that like okay
this sounds like a crazy idea but
actually everything that is typical is
going to have plenty of AIS that can do
those tasks right and so to me I think
we're seeing a sort of deep Tech
Renaissance uh and even I think this
narrative is floating amongst the
Venture community that actually deep
Tech you know the world of atoms is
where the hard problems are and where AI
won't be able to follow you yet right
and I think there's a a fundamental
reason why that is I think the physical
world is really hard and even uh even
with all the help of uh White Collar AIS
that we can muster there's going to be a
bottleneck to creating things in the
world of atoms so build companies that
are uh doing hard things in the world of
atoms and you will do very well in the
future that is my
advice uh I want to dive into your
startup again there's a lot of folks who
are uh super excited and all they think
about right now is how can I get access
to h100 networks and how do I start
coding for this and
and if if you're able to pull off what
you're building right now you will
disrupt those that
capability I don't want I I can't put
orders of magnitude on it massively yeah
um but let's go back to your history
that led you here you were at University
of waterl yeah in studying quantum
physics Quantum yeah quantum gravity
Quantum information uh during my masters
and then over time I realized that
actually to better understand the
physics of the world it wasn't going to
be a couple mathematicians in a room on
on a Blackboard to solve the The Theory
of Everything But it's probably going to
be some form of computation and AI that
would solve it and so to me uh that
Journey led me to be a pioneer of a
field called Quantum deep learning um
wrote some of the first Al alms in the
space and you got you got recruited out
of school didn't you yeah yeah that's
right uh basically first year of PhD uh
I met um Hartman Nan who now leads to
goog heart well yes Google Quantum IAB
and uh uh essentially you know we were
on the same wavelength right what did he
say to you um in his in his German
accent I I won't imitate his accent but
uh you know I think we met at Nasa I
gave I gave a first talk after writing a
a very large paper on how to to do deep
learning on quantum computers and he was
like come give a talk in in in Venice
Beach uh not too far from here and and
talk to our scientists and so uh we you
know brought brought my co-author
Michael at the time we did and they
asked us hey you know try to build a
prototype for what a tensorflow which is
for Quantum Computing would look like
tensorflow is Google's core machine
learning framework right or at least
used to be um and uh we hacked it
together they liked it and basically
onboarded uh the whole team uh on
they gave you a offer you could not
refuse yeah yeah exactly and and frankly
you know uh waterl is great it's a great
school but you know it is in the middle
of nowhere in Canada and and to me to
move to California seemed like the right
um you know opportunity I should I
should take and uh you know just went
for it and haven't looked back really um
and so it's been it's been a it's been a
ride yeah uh and then you actually spent
some time working closely with Sergey
Bren yeah so uh after we you know built
tensor L Quantum that there's a team
that was forming around Sergey working
on Quantum Technologies uh and Ai and
physics and AI more broadly uh and and
to me I was sort of getting a bit uh
impatient with the timelines with the
comput the Computing stack and I saw
that there were opportunities and
Quantum Communications and sensing that
were maybe shorter term and so I wanted
to try my hand at that MH and to me it
was a a completion of sort of the vision
of understanding the world that at a
quantum mechanical level because if even
if you have the algorithms running on
quantum computers that can understand
Quantum data and learn AI
representations of them how do you
acquire Quantum data and how do you
transmit it and so that's what I worked
on uh so I worked on Quantum analog
digital conversion the US Quantum
Internet and so to me it was completing
the stack for us to be able to perceive
and predict and eventually control our
world at a quantum mechanical level
which to me is kind of a very deep node
in the tech tree let's say it's a
civilizational technology that's really
important but during that time in
Quantum Computing I realized that
actually there was going to be different
nodes of our our our Tech tree that need
development imminently that use a
different kind of physics that's not
quantum mechanical physics and that
would be much more useful for for Gen AI
as I was seeing sort of jvi workloads
eat more and more of the compute
internally at Google so we've got
classical digital computers right now
the classical CPU from Intel and such
and then
Nvidia I think very luckily fell upon uh
the opportunity with gpus most people
hopefully know gpus graphical processor
units were originally created for video
games for graphics yeah for graphics and
then they just happened to get a market
in Bitcoin mining yeah right and then
all of a sudden here comes the whole
generative AI world and and Nvidia
becomes A2 trillion doll company yeah
like that's a lot of good luck that's a
lot of good luck turns out uh Matrix
multiplications which gpus excel at are
very useful for all sorts of uh
different applications including AI but
as as you mentioned gpus weren't
designed from the groundup from first
principles to be AI processors right
it's kind of a co-evolution between the
hardware and the algorithms right the
algorithms that ran on gpus like modern
deep learning tended to do well because
gpus already existed and then both kind
of fed off each other right so we're
trying to create an evolutionary for in
the space of Hardware it's going to
engender evolutionary Forks in the space
of algorithms and they're going to
co-evolve that's why we're a full stack
company and we co-design the algorithms
so let me uh let me read uh something
here um that sort of describes what
you're doing sure and see how this how
this hits um we're building the ultimate
substrate for AI compute looking to hit
the limits of physics in terms of Energy
Efficiency and speed of AI embedding AI
algorithms into the physics of electrons
dancing around and we're doing this by
building a full stack of hardware and
software Reinventing at first principles
how to how to create generative AI MH um
you call it thermodynamic Computing MH
probabilistic Computing and this is a
third branch of computing isn't it yeah
it seems like it cuz today we we have
the determinist to computers right your
transistors are definitely on or
definitely one or zero one or zero it's
one or the other right and you
definitely know which one it is right uh
and then you have a quantum computer
which has super positions of ones and
zero it's 0 plus one0 minus one and
everything in between everything in
between complex numbers you can make
those interfere with one another but
actually having a computer that you're
unsure of the state of the computer and
it's problemistic it's Z one or
something in between but um you're not
not sure exactly the state of the
computer is actually much more energy
efficient because knowledge costs energy
there's this old uh tale of Maxwell's
demon I don't know if you're familiar
with bringing back Fain memories go
ahead yeah yeah so so you know Maxwell's
demon uh you know tells us that actually
it's it's a thought experiment that
examines the energetic cost of of
knowledge right um and I I guess I could
I could go into it uh but yeah Maxwell's
demon essentially you can imagine having
a box with a a partition in the middle
right uh and you have one side of the
box has a bunch of red particles and the
right side of the box has a bunch of
blue particles and you have a trapo in
the Middle with a little demon right and
you know if you if you keep the trapo
open you you wait a long time you know
the balls cross and on average you get a
mixed thing where you have red and blue
balls in both partitions now where the
demon comes in would be you can actually
reverse this process of going to a
higher entropy state right which would
violate the laws of thermodynamics by
having the demon look if a if a ball of
a certain color comes in opens the door
if a ball of the right color comes in
the other side opens the door and can
filter and again separate out into red
and blue partition which seems to
violate the second law of the ramics
that states that so therefore there is a
there must be a cost to that observation
there's an energetic cost exactly so
what we see is that a lot of the cost of
running a computer comes in when you're
trying to maintain its determinism uhuh
right and it turns out that you don't
need to always be maintaining
determinism when you're running AI
algorithms because AI algorithms are
natively probalistic MH and so having AI
run on a digital deterministic programs
super inefficient that is emulating
probalistic programs yeah super
inefficient so why not run probis
programs on a problemistic computer and
so just from that we have just an
efficiency and a tightness to the
embedding of the algorithms into the
physics of the hardware that's really
hard to achieve on digital computers but
not only that we're actually catering to
the the the imminent what would be
otherwise problems uh uh of of of uh
transistor based Computing right um
because as you scale down transistors
and you try to make them more energy
efficient uh unfortunately the fact that
transistors are made of matter and
they're jiggling causes your transistors
to misfire and get hot right get they
get hot and and sometimes they they say
things they don't don't want to say no
but like they're they're they're
misfiring um and they become effectively
stochastic um and instead of uh trying
to filter that noise and filter uh uh
that stochasticity and and make it
deterministic again right through error
correction similar to how we have to
filter out the stochasticity and Quantum
Computing with Quantum a correction um
instead we embrace the noise and use it
as part of the algorithm and it's part
of our models of the hardware and it's
part of the algorithm and so it's a very
different way of thinking uh it's very
challenging because we have to rebuild
the whole stack to go with it it's very
ambitious but to us it's a necessary and
clear from first principles evolutionary
step in Computing and it's one that we
think is
inevitable uh we're just the ones that
are boldly going for it right now yeah
and you describe thermodynamic Computing
as being in particularly valuable at
describing chemistry and biology because
we're talking about thermodynamic
systems there yeah so so um you know
chemistry has some Quantum effects uh in
there mixed in but uh biology proteins
molecular Dynamics at the mezos scales
right they're bouncing yeah they're
bouncing around they they're around and
that's very tough to simulate right
because we have to embed that stochastic
process into uh digital computers right
and and it's it's a process that these
fluctuations happen on very small time
scales so you can't just fast forward
the movie Very efficiently and so for us
we're looking to embed the physics of
protein folding eventually not not
initially but protein folding which
happens on a certain time scale because
you have big proteins and they're
jittering your about into the Jitters of
electrons that we control how they dance
and electrons because they're much
lighter they Jitter much faster so you
get a speed up by embedding the Dynamics
of proteins into the Dynamics of
electrons and that's it there's no you
know it's just a it's very analogous the
physics of the mesoscales of matter to
the native physics of the hardware and
so we get a we get a speed up there but
we're we're going to work on quantifying
exactly which what sort of speed up we
expect right now it's an intuition
similar to fineman's intuition about why
would you build a quantum computer where
well there are quantum mechanical
systems you want to simulate and it
turns out that yes in fact you get a
significant speed up running Quantum
simulations on quantum computers versus
classical right so so um you had this
Insight while you were at Google and
this was what drove what no liated you
or actually before I started my career
in Quantum machine learning I wrote down
the equations for our very first chip
while I was a waterl uh and I thought
this idea was crazy it was too original
you know I was I was straight out of M
my masters in theoretical physics I had
just learned machine learning you wrote
it down in one of these notebooks over
here yeah just a notebook yeah crazy IDE
yeah there you go um and I thought the
idea was too crazy you know I I was
still I was wrapping up my masters at
the time and I wanted to understand and
go through the exercise of inventing a
bunch of algorithms in physics based AI
more generally MH before I went for it
right so I built up you know years of
credibility shipping a lot of papers and
products and going to Google and so on
to have the experience to do this
moonshot at the end the day you got to
find what is your best idea what is the
most impactful
idea uh that you can work on for the
rest of your life what are you like
willing to die for yeah this is we call
that a massive transformative purpose
and your moonshot right yes it's like
and you know I wrote down uh again what
I hear as your MTP which is maximizing
the amount of intelligence in the
universe yes and along those lines
intelligence per watt like maximizing
that and if you can do
that it's
upleveling m it's upleveling everything
yeah it's the highest it's a very it's a
point of very high leverage right and
obviously not everyone has to create a
tech technologies that are as impactful
as that but at the same time if
everybody thinks about which technology
they can build which Technologies do
they have the unique skill set for that
they can that they think would truly
impact the world in massively positive
way if everybody goes and does their
moonshot they're thinking about I think
the world would be a much better place
right and that's kind of the ethos of
the acceleration Community I know it's
the ethos of your community uh which
really you know uh was
been around for much longer than we have
and I think a lot of people sometimes
just need a push to it's okay to be
ambitious it's okay to go for it it's
okay to take risks you know you'll have
a supportive Community go for it it's
actually like if you achieve what you're
looking to achieve we're all going to
benefit so we're going to support you
and I think having a supportive
Community is is so important um do this
this very simple concept of maximizing
in Ence per watt and in the universe
seems like a fundamental yeah it it
seems like uh what life would always
Trend towards yes and given the fact
that we humans are only some 4 and a
half billion years in a 13.8 billion
year G universe as we know it
um I'm
wondering where all the intelligence is
you know I don't want to get into F's
Paradox of why aliens aren't here right
but I have to imagine there is a
maximization principle for intelligence
the universe and I always thought about
Intelligence being the counterveiling
force to entropy like entropy
increases um the counterveiling force
for that would be would be intelligence
increasing as well does that make sense
yeah actually um you know
there there are theories for example
Carl friston someone you should talk to
Absolute brilliant uh scientist his
theory of intelligence is that we seek
to minimize surprisal right and entropy
is expected surprisal sure right um and
so intelligence is trying to model the
world to have the Min a minimization of
surprise and it turns out that for for
biological systems if you can predict
your environment really well you're in a
position to extract more free energy and
cons it in a clever fashion that's
thermodynamically optimal so now I I
guess my theory which you know I've only
Loosely kind of had time to put my
thoughts on paper through the manifesto
and some tweets but something I'd like
to formalize in the coming years on the
side is you know how how did
Intelligence potentially evolve as a
byproduct of this concept of
thermodynamic dissipate adaptation which
is a a concept from a professor named
Jeremy England from MIT that posits that
uh systems that are uh complex and and
uh uh subject to the laws of
thermodynamics self-organize in order to
dissipate more heat over a long time
scale not instantly not overnight to to
to acquire more energy and then
dissipate yes yes essentially more
precisely the theory says that
trajectories of of States over time um
the ratio of of likelihoods of two
different histories two different
trajectories um scales exponentially
with how much free energy was dissipated
so F so paths toward the future where
we've dissipated more heat are
exponentially more likely and so there's
actually this probalistic bias of the
universe towards growth yeah right and
that's what that principle at least
According to some theories is what led
to life self-organizing and creating the
complex systems that we are today and to
me that is the process that led to all
the creation of all the wonderful things
we see today and it's almost like sacred
in my book we should keep that process
going we don't know what upside we're
leaving on the table if we were to stop
it or or decelerate and and obliterate
ourselves right is there is there any
way to know given this basic
theorem whether a tendency towards a
recurrent simulation would be the end
result so recurrent simulation well
meaning you know we are a simulation nth
generation simulation that keeps on um
re
instantiating yeah I mean I I I've
studied simulation quite a bit right my
my job was to figure out how to simulate
uh I've simulated uh you know early
universes for fun on on quantum
computers as a hobby and sold it as art
in the past right but the there's a
certain um uh density to information if
you will
um and and and my work on on Quantum
Internet was actually studying how
densely you could pack Quantum
information in various substrates and in
a sense this um assumption that you can
have a simulation within a simulation
within a simulation really doesn't hold
because at the end there's a base
reality and in that embedding Universe
you have a maximal uh information
density for your computer um if the laws
of physics in that Universe are anywhere
close to ours um and so the assumption
that we live in a simulation from from
from this uh assumption that you can
embed a simulation within a simulation
um yeah only go so far only goes so far
it doesn't really hold yeah so to me I
don't think we live in a simulation and
I'm happy to chat with anybody who
thinks we do uh and show them the
mathematics of how hard it is one thing
we can test is whether we live in a
Quantum simulation or not right um
because I think Google's quantum
computers amongst others are reaching
the number of cubits where there
wouldn't be enough atoms in the
observable universe to to emulate the
quantum computer with a classical
computer and so we can at least rule
that out uh and and if if uh one of the
quantum computers show that uh I'll be
very satisfied with that I think that's
a very interesting thing to answer so
you have this idea of a thermodynamic
computer mhm and uh when did you pick it
up again
uh I picked it up you know I I left my
career in in Quantum Computing Quantum
machine learning took a couple months to
you know gather my thoughts and I I I
went for it
basically uh summer 2022 and um just got
going and got the company going and now
it's been going for almost two years you
call it extr Tropic Ai and I've seen
some uh some great video of your your
Fab uh and your uh your C your cryo
Hangout spots you know so uh your goal
here is not something that's operating
at cryogenic temperatures it's something
that is operating at room temperature
that's right and being built on the
Silicon fat yeah so so you know when you
prototype things you start with the
biggest most macroscopic prototype you
can because it's simpler it's easier to
get going uh and you can probe it and
understand it better in our case we
couldn't do a breadboard prototype you
know like you would do with other
electrical circuits because we want to
operate it in the regime of ultra low
power and the right ratio of power of
noise where we have the right properties
of of the electron physics so for us the
first prototype is the most macroscopic
will make of a thermodynamic computer
but we had to super cool it because
that's how the physics works out uh
essentially uh we did a super connecting
prototype it's our first prototype but
our next chips are going to be uh in
Silicon and we're really excited about
you talk about embedding
physics uh and embedding the algorithms
yeah
uh explain what that means I mean my
whole career was figuring that out how
to embed quantum physics into a quantum
mechanical computer how to embed AI
algorithms into quantum mechanical
physics right and so for us it's very
similar sort of mindset um there's ways
to compile things into Primitives that
then get compiled to Primitives of the
hardware physics right uh in Quantum
Computing they're called Quantum Gates
right and we have something similar um
in terms of Frameworks that that we have
internally and we're looking forward to
putting out a lot of the details uh on
how to compile for uh any sort of
algorithm to a thermodynamic computer
and and frankly part of my goal is to uh
partially open source the concept of a
thermic computer so a broader Community
can join us on this Quest you know we're
one effort for this but it's it's too
important of a technology to to keep it
on a shelf for for a few more years we
don't have time I mean the the potential
for this and if you can describe the
potential for this in the gener of AI
World cuz today there is if we're
projecting the growth of generative AI
yeah are we running out of chips or
energy first bit of both right uh I I I
think energy is going to be a big
bottleneck cuz chips are reacting to to
the market right now there might be an
over production of chips I doubt it but
it's it's going to be up there I what's
what's the state of of the best chip
today is it h200 what is what's out
there the best chips are manufactured in
Taiwan by tsmc right with um machines
from asml which is an supplier of
lithography machines and those are
Exquisite machines but um you know our
our goal is to have a different way to
embed the problem into uh the devices
and for us to not depend on the same
processes that everyone else depends on
which we feel is important hedge because
otherwise Taiwan is a very sensitive uh
area and the world supply chain depends
on it and so if we could you know forego
our Reliance on on Taiwan to make the
most Cutting Edge chips for AI that
would I think put everyone at ease and
be a net benefit did you see the movie
Oppenheimer if you did did you know that
besides building the atomic IC bomb at
Los Alamos National Labs that they spent
billions on biod defense weapons the
ability to accurately detect viruses and
microbes by reading their RNA well a
company called viome exclusively
licensed the technology from Los alos
labs to build a platform that can
measure your microbiome and the RNA in
your blood now viome has a product that
I've personally used for years called
full body intelligence which collects a
few drops of your blood spit and stool
and can tell you so much about your
health they've tested over 700,000
individuals and used their AI models to
deliver members critical Health guidance
like what foods you should eat what
foods you shouldn't eat as well as your
supplements and probiotics your
biological age and other deep Health
insights and the results of the
recommendations are nothing short of
Stellar you know as reported in the
American Journal of Lifestyle medicine
after just 6 months of following vom's
recommendations members reported the
following a 36% reduction in depression
a 40% reduction in anxiety a 30%
reduction in diabetes and a 48%
reduction in IBS listen I've been using
viome for 3 years I know that my oral
and gut health is one of my highest
priorities best of all viome is
Affordable which is part of my mission
to democratize health if you want to
join me on this journey go to vom.com
Peter I've asked naine Jane a friend of
mine who's the founder and CE o viome to
give my listeners a special discount
you'll find it at vom.com
Peter so the exoic chips in success and
I'm curious what your time frame is
would be how people would stand up their
their gener of AI large language models
on
their every place yeah so at at first
it's going to be you know application
specific devices it's going to be
smallish devices with not that many
neurons right but they're going to be
very fast and very energy efficient um
there's all sorts of applications for
that at the edge but over time yes as
the chips grow in more and more of the
program uh becomes part of the physics
of the chip or they become thermodynamic
programs then eventually we could run
the whole program on the chip because
for us most of the energy and time is
actually consumed by the computers that
have to interface with the chip and the
chip itself um which is really weird
think about um but yes over time we want
to you know tackle the broader gener of
AI Market it may seem far off at the m
at the moment because we're just
building a couple building blocks but
given that we're using a lot of the
existing Supply chains uh for
semiconductors and how semiconductors
have a very mature set of tools you know
semiconductors are the things we can
manufacture at scale the most reliably
right and so if we rely if we use a lot
of the knowhow there we can actually
scale this technology much faster than
previous attempts at novel Computing
technology can give folks listening an
understanding of the potential
efficiencies in terms of power speed
cost these these things how do you think
about this because it's pretty
staggering it's it's um you know at a
fundamental level like the the the the
Primitive itself um of you know
simulating the physics of this device
uh if you were to just sample it right
if you somehow embed your algorithm
directly in the physics of the device uh
for example Monte Carlo algorithm fits
very nicely into the physics of the
device a Monte Carlo algorithm usually
you could program it on a computer a CPU
or GPU you get maybe a th samples per
second um you know this chip does
samples on the you know 1 to 10 Pico
second time scale depending on
the on the land Escape but Pico seconds
is below it's thousand times below a
nanc mhm um and so it's it's it's really
fast right and the speed up you can
expect depends on the algorithm and how
well it fits on the device so it's hard
to give like one number so help me
understand what this looks like in the
world ahead uh these
xtropicalovex are they the base for AI
everywhere at some point I mean that in
success that's part of the goal right
that yeah that that is Ultimate success
and it's certainly possible we're we're
starting with something humble you know
just put on some Edge devices but over
time yeah it would be the most
performant chip not only for the cloud
but the edge as well and um you know
personally I would love to uh wear that
wear some chips uh or or gadgets uh
powered by our chips someday at scale of
course um and uh you know I I think
intelligence will be embedded in in Far
More systems than we're used to if we
achieve our mission you know that's on a
you know 15 to 20 year time scale right
like we have so much to do until then um
but I think it's it's certainly possible
and and to me it's it's going to be much
faster in scaling than than Quantum
Computing by by quite a bit and um so
let's go there one second in terms of um
you know
Kur and I had a conversation and he says
listen we're going to see as much change
in the next decade as we've seen the
last century M right in a very steep
segment of the curve yeah and do you
imagine I mean I can imagine a world
where everything is
intelligent we intelligence is embedded
in every aspect of our lives and AI is
is is everywhere yeah I I I think that
makes you think people are you think
people are
going to be able to adapt to this speed
of
change I I I I think so I think if
people maintain an open mind and you
know the speed at which we can adapt you
know if you look at the fundamental
theory of natural selection from uh
Fisher um the speed at which you can
adapt a system is sort of uh bounded by
or proportional to its variance um so
having variance and how we do things
helps us adapt quickly because if you
try different things you get a better
sense of what's better you're not locked
into a local minimum maximum exactly
right and you get out of the local
minimum and that's basically the message
we're trying to tell people is like I
know right now if if you're at the
precipice of a lot of change and you
know our first reaction is to stop and
try to freeze things but that's exactly
how you become fragile to be anti
fragile you need to be constantly
adapting and high variance and malleable
um and and uh you know if if if you this
is you you know this is a theory of
complex systems if you have systems that
are malleable and flexible they can
adapt if they're too stiff they break
and they have catastrophic failure which
is what we're trying to avoid um and so
part of the message of acceleration is
for us to be robust and adaptive to
whatever is to come we cannot predict
the future you provably cannot predict
the future if you could there would be a
couple people on Wall Street making all
the money right now right and and
clearly they they can't right you can't
reduce the markets to a simple model
and so you can predict the future all
you can do is prepare for it and and and
maintain uh dynamism and adaptability
for whatever is to come and that's what
we're we're arguing for what's next
you're uh you've got a Fab you're going
to be demonstrating silicon your chips
on Silicon uh is this going to be a
partnership with an Intel or Nvidia or
you going to go it yourself what do you
think at least right now we're we're
looking at partnering with the
traditional Fabs directly ourselves
right um and so I I think a lot of the
uh ways that uh the traditional players
in digital uh Computing um you know the
the ways they've been creating computers
and programming them won't necessarily
car carry over to our systems and so
yeah you've had to build a full Hardware
software stack for this yeah and and I
mean we're still very much actively
building it uh you know we're looking to
get our first prototypes um um you know
in the coming year or so on the on the
Silicon side are you hiring moonshot
Engineers definitely I mean I think um
anybody who is kind of tired by the old
way of doing things maybe an electrical
engineer that's been in their career for
a while wants to go for S something
Cutting Edge and and and very ambitious
should consider joining us I think
there's a lot of people in machine
learning as well they're getting Jaded
by sort of the the monoculture around
llms and and and Transformers today and
just training big models on data there's
not a lot of artistry to it um what we
offer is basically a big mathematical
challenge to to figure out the new
software stack and algorithms and
architectures for for this new substrate
and so we've been able to attract some
really top talent there so anybody who
needs a really strong intellectual
Challenge and has a lot of uh AI
experience should consider joining us
and help us Pioneer this this new
paradigm xtropicalovex
well buddy thank you for your your
passion you love what you do you and and
you you know I think uh the importance
of having an accelerationist mindset a a
mindset for uh uh exploring and creating
intelligence and being able to solve
problems um you know I think mindset is
the single most important asset we
humans have and thank you for your
mindset thank you so much thanks for
having me and thanks for you know
pioneering the way as a techno Optimus
pleasure great to be here thank you
[Music]
