and then we just did some more water
then we put it
on so that and it isn't it isn't just
slow chords you can
do every part of this instrument is
extremely delicate you nudge the
instrument glass shatters you press it
too hard it doesn't play you press it
too soft it doesn't play you press to
the wrong speed it doesn't play you
press it too hard it shatters and cuts
your fing everything you're doing Dennis
James specialist in instruments made out
of glass yeah yeah that's fine what is
this thing called This is a recreation
of Benjamin Franklin's armonica it's the
Franklin design there are a few
concessions to 18th century verses I did
this in 1991 when I try to leave Europe
they say that I'm stealing it from the
European patrimony that it's an antique
instrument I said antique it's got an
electricity and I build it seems like
this is an extremely fragile instrument
and the thing about glass that you learn
breaks this is the speed control so I
have an electric motor I have a sewing
machine motor it's the first major
accommodation in the 18th century they
did it like a lathe or a sewing machine
but mechanical you did it with your foot
now oh yeah you didn't have a motor so
yeah that's the first accommodation
you're seeing it right up front is that
I put an electric motor it's kind of
nice invented by Ben Frank Franklin and
he was so associated with
electricity this is the connector yeah
I'm it's like gas pedal this is vertical
yeah this is turns it's a potentiometer
so we got this little guy that I'm
hooking up to and they pull and it just
turns the Swit okay that's in so the
deal about the motor the amount of
weight of all that glass to get that to
turn quickly takes a huge amount of
torque and then this belt drive clip
that in there this is a sewing machine
motor well we call it that it's it's the
type of sewing machine motor but this is
a much stronger one first question I had
when I saw a photo of it was has anyone
ever dropped it I've dropped it it
slipped out of control and it slammed
down onto the stage did all of it
chatter well we heard the big crash
which means call The Glass Factory
Federal Express 4 days replacement bowls
put them on when I open it and it's not
broken it's Christmas yeah do
this nope
nope you sure I just want to be just in
I
know this keeps the motor in place when
you get that torque the motor just wants
to climb right up the belt and so we
ended up making a bracket just knowing
the amount of glass that's in here
there's just such an unsettling feeling
like if this falls down it's like going
to be a chandelier hitting the ground we
pull the
pins and
Christmas shot glass white rine red red
wine cereal bowl cake cover this is a
shaving mug this is a little purse
atomizer that I keep full of alcohol a
single drop of perspiration hits a bowl
I have to get that off of there because
it
spreads so that's always there this is
the top half of a butter
dish so I took it to a gold plater now
we get into the preparation for
playing right there so this is a note
Rod this is invented by a guy I remember
it was
1785 came up with the idea Franklin
painted the rims on the insides of the
bowls white for each of what would be
the accidentals get your fret markers in
there so there we go so you need to get
surgically clean yeah I completely
scrape every surface until it starts to
grab you can feel the grab cuz if
there's any oil or sweat it it just
won't work dead and then then one of the
things is the Habit is you never touch
your face your ear
that's going to be hard it's hard no you
don't have to dry stay oh you don't want
to be dry don't want to be dry and I use
distilled water does it have to be
distilled water yep everything else
leaves deposits on the glass alcohol so
now what we're going to do is we're
going to clean this
babe you I clean it every time I play it
if it plays it's clean there it is I had
to slow it down to that speed now if I
kick up the speed it stops playing it
only plays yeah yeah also needs to be at
a certain speed too every note has its
own speed now I'm going to give you the
puzzle you're adjusting the speed for
every note on the instrument to play it
then you see it in the music where they
have you playing both both sides and
what do you do yeah think about it you
move your hand I've had 14 oh my God you
move your hand don't you you're number
15 in 40 years but then you can't
sustain for very long right it's just to
get it to start the most important thing
is starting a note
this is the coolest thing I've ever
seen the sound is coming out of the
cracks yeah the bulk of the sound is
here the vibrations are either this side
or they're being thrust out of the
little Gap the cone of sound is this
way
whoa that's powerful in the room the
dissonance is amazing can you imagine in
concert Halls people go bananas
I already love it we alcohol our hands
all the touch surfaces you just rub them
down it does two things it cleans them
finely and it stops the sebaceous glands
just stops your hand from sweating
totally kills the ability of it
production for about 10 minutes now you
wet it Ben Franklin talked about it you
don't go this way because the water goes
down inside so you come up and you just
keep it spinning while you're doing
it okay that came in late that means I
need a a little more water on that one
and I got to adjust my speed to
touch there it is now I'm playing both
[Music]
ends you can barely see with the little
grab the quickest way to play glass is
on the actual knuckle that skin is got a
great surface and you just press and it
just grabs the foundation of this
instrument is just like when you put
some water on your finger you play a
wine glass
right that's it a line of tuned wine
glasses and a motor that spins and you
can't get to the rim because it's on its
side so you have to play on the side
whole new touch experience then the game
is to learn how to reliably make that
note to play now to make it loud think
about what a violin player does when
they're B because we're bowing the glass
this is the surface of the strings of
the bow the water is the rosin the
sticks FP principle of physics where it
grabs let's go grabs let's go in the
proper relationship of mass and all the
rest it pops into speech so the game is
once it's playing how can I make it
louder well the first thing you think of
is well you just press harder it
stops if I'm going to increase the speed
which would give you more energy stops
just slips you can feel it just slips
under your fingers and then it comes
back into when it drops to scene the
trick is both pressure and speed
and then back off and then when you're
back to the point of the motor then you
lift touch and that speed and pressure
is different for every Bowl it's the
start is the kicker start is different
for because then I'm instantly able to
adjust with the pressures because once
it's playing I can without touching get
a certain amount of volume change with
the accessory I can really and then you
see how I do a a swando
[Music]
if this piece if this piece didn't exist
I wouldn't be sitting here it's written
just for solo glass harmonica by wolf
gangas Mozart he wrote it in 1791
[Music]
so that last is one of the tricks of the
trade they talked about it no matter
what the piece was they always ended in
silence because it's the only instrument
up until that point that could do that
die away to Absolut nothing and F let
see if you can tell when I
stop I'm off now you
see I mean it's such a sensitive
instrument that can be very like
[Music]
really typical of the writing for it
something that's so so unique about this
is just how delicate yeah everything
every part of this instrument is
extremely delicate I did one performance
dealing with modern instruments with a
metal strings instead of gut you know
and all these instruments that are not
the way they were so everything's gotten
louer you know and this thing's 18th
century you know I'm playing The Mozart
piece and I'm Ripple along doing and I'm
knowing that they're not hearing very
much and I just went all right I'm going
to crank that volume and I'm going to
kick that thing up to and I'm just going
to see how loud I can get and guess what
I broke the glass oh that was my next
question like sliced my finger right up
still have the scar immediately blood
just went and it spread you know and I
was playing well blood still works until
it starts to
dry until it starts to dry and you just
can't play it just stops and you stick
to it it becomes Like Glue you know but
I did learn and I'm glad it happened
because I learned how hard I can press
so now you're going to do it okay so now
so definitely don't play it too hard you
want your fingers to be like pruny bath
that's the ideal and that's about 8
minutes while we're it put your foot on
the yeah that's good now just practice
just little bits of speed change you set
your speed for the lowest note you're
going to be playing and then you're
adjusting your speed to go up as you you
go up higher so now what you do is just
take your middle fing just your middle
finger of your left hand just make it so
you're arching as much as you can and
then there it is there you got it
already so now do that on another
note oh my he's a
natural that's great now try the side of
the thumb while you're holding that one
a look at that hey now mess with your
speed just not pressure just mess with
the speed and you'll feel it when it
just quits because of the speed
yeah now come back off without changing
anything just come back and you'll feel
it kick in again wow now get off
completely now lighten
up oh yeah like you said the pressure
and the speed need to is everything now
as you increase the speed press a little
harder I'll do it for you yeah a little
more speed oh you're really pressing oh
after your story I don't know
why there's a bunch of spinning glass
and I can feel already that I need more
water oh yeah and I wasn't playing for
that long and already my thumb it's like
I I clearly need more water on so if I'm
going higher I need to go I need to
bring the speed up like crazy and then
you also have to get closer to the
rim yeah you're very good get more water
you need more water at the top yeah cuz
I'm not really
water
there oh this is so
difficult there needs to be a different
pressure for each
one very nice
oh take that lift up and come right back
down again see if they'll play see that
was a little late so that means you have
to come in a little earlier and you have
to pull on this one just a touch when
you come down the one on the
right yeah I see it there's a bite
there's a bite it's kind of like a
flange cuz you got to do it before you
want the note really just before yeah
just
before oh he's he's a sensitive guy he
knows his stuff I can feel it you need
you got to like grab the bowl in to get
the it kind of feels like on a guitar
very particular ver yeah but on this you
need that very particular ver for
everyone or it just doesn't play right
get to the rim get closer to the closer
to the rim yeah a little bit and then
Arch back arch yeah y so very
nice so you're at the stage now where
you just have to get comfortable yeah
you can do it it's really tough I mean
it's really really Del new use of your
fingers I'm going to try to just get one
clean
C you're you're you're already six
months into
it yeah yeah very nice I'm going to see
if I can just get some chords sure
[Music]
nice M
nice kind of feels like it's it's
falling but you have to fall like this
I'm kind of imagining as if there's like
a pivot point right here and then I need
to like do
[Music]
that oh I like it ending on that one
note oh that's kind of a cool
thing yeah ooh yeah cuz I've done that
with a wine oh yeah yeah and and how
tough that is so if you've ever tried to
do that on a wine glass imagine well a
bunch of them in front of you spinning
yeah that's it yeah so the next time you
get $107,000 you can get one of
these that's that's that's organ that's
organ
touch the beginning the beginning
treatises have you play hymns
I can feel my pinky need some more water
can you help me out here oh the pinky
[Music]
yeah oh
[Music]
[Laughter]
you're slipping away and using just one
finger hard yeah it is hard yeah this is
really really great hard it's like
learning a new language but if you say
the wrong word it cuts and SLI your
finger open yeah
really this is just me now yeah as the
teacher has given up on
[Music]
me I'm starting to get the Touch
starting to feel it Mr Krabs
[Music]
man because as soon as you get ready for
this to work this stops working vice
versa how hard you press only matters
initially and then after that your
pressure on the balls needs to be the
same as the speed over here it needs to
be so delicate and so slow at the
initial
it's yeah that's when I know I got a
note it's when it's pulling my skin
along this is my least favorite note
from now on yeah this is an F F this
note that's really hard I mean it it
looks impossible so yeah it kind of
feels impossible but clear clearly it's
not
[Music]
oo hey you cuz this is right this isn't
right
[Music]
right that is a little hard to listen to
that oh yeah you don't like it you don't
like it Jake no it's really hard to
listen to yeah yeah that's another thing
that's delicate about the instrument you
don't do it right and it's Nails on
chalkboard beautiful nails on a
chalkboard
[Music]
nothing why did you choose these
instruments in particular I this and the
and just the most difficult instruments
[Music]
yeah cow Chia don't want to go too far I
I want you to get more louder than that
cuz it will cut me oh well yeah 600
bucks a note down in
there oh you're worried about the
balls my attending are
Franklin produced apparently the number
was eight and I've tracked down seven of
them and I have a sniff on the eighth
one it was sold in 1939 at auction in
Denver so it's out there so there's it's
out there during that time there was
only eight of these made Franklin made
eight one Factory in northern France
made 5,000 of these okay they made them
all the way until 1946 there were
factories in Italy in Venice and in
Morano and they were as common and as
produced as pianos became in Victorian
times oh they were hugely popular but
then the problem started and they became
banned it became illegal to play them
illegal to own them uh illegal to make
them and that's all part of the mystery
of the glass and the history the the
famous glass disorder and we all have
our theories about that the symptoms Peg
it for me and every doctor I've spoken
to they lost their hair they developed
delirium remans went blind ended up in
the asylums and their minds they lost
their minds people thought that was
because of the glass bows well yeah the
players yeah yeah over time and so if
you talk to any doctor immediately they
go oh lead poisoning glasses which were
made with high lead content but the
thing is there's just not enough going
on here for the lead to leech out into
the skin so the best theory that's
coming around now is that lead was
already a huge problem in the 18th
century so that's why these were illegal
cuz they thought they gave you well they
called it the the glass illness they
didn't say lead it was just the
mysterious illness because the main
problem was it was killing people in the
audience it wasn't the players now you'd
start to play you play your first notes
and somebody stand up scream and drop
dead wait what yeah it's a real famous
incident wait what this is like this is
like documented documented in if you
believe everything you read in the
newspaper my favorite Monica was killing
audience members killing audience
members yeah you everever heard of mass
hysteria yeah yeah that's the best
explanation we have people expected
something to happen so it did so yes
people were Keeling over it would cause
fainting men to revive it would cause
women to faint um what are you talking
about no it's all documented on that
note I'd love to continue playing it see
what happens I got one a here
[Music]
okay for
[Music]
I can take a sip and bring it down to be
yeah we'll put whiskey in next time yeah
Dennis thank you so much for allowing us
to come in and see this instrument sure
I'm sure this isn't the last unusual
instrument we take a look at on this
channel if you would like to subscribe
maybe another one here sure with you I
got yeah
