[Music]
first thing I remember KN was a lome
whistleblower and young dream of growing
up to
r on a break train in even Town not
knowing where I found no one can change
my mind but Mama
Tri one and only reel child from a me my
mama seemed to know what
last SP of all my Sunday learn for the
bad I kept on turning Mama couldn't hold
me
anymore and I turned 21 in prison doing
life without the no one could Ste me
right but Mama Tried Mama Tried Mama
Tried to raise me better but her
breeding iight that Lees only me to
blame
[Music]
Mama De old daddy rest his soul yeah my
mom heavy love she tried so very hard to
feel his
shes working hours without rest wanted
me to have the bed to tried to raise me
right could I
ref and I turned 21 in prison to life
without the RO no one could steal me
right Mama Tried Mama Tried Mama Tried
to raise me better but iy that only me
to blame mama
[Music]
and I turned 21 in prison doing life
without the RO no one would Ste me right
but Mama Tried Mama Tried Mama Tried to
raise me better but her bleeding I deny
that is only me to blame
Mama that leaves only me to blame mama
