have you ever felt like the internet
archive runs on sticks and stones and is
constantly on the verge of a major
security breach it just happened that
was the ominous message that greeted me
yesterday when I visited the way back
machine one of the most important
websites in the history of the internet
because it literally archives the
history of the Internet it's been taking
snapshots of websites including their
HTML CSS JavaScript and images since
1996 allowing us to remember the
worldwide web in its Peak form when
Amazon looked like this and weird people
made weird websites just for fun unlike
nowadays where everybody just chases
algorithms on cringe factories like Tik
Tok and Instagram unfortunately the fate
of this website hangs in the balance as
it's currently getting pwned boned and
owned from multiple angles a data breach
exposed 31 million email addresses and
password hashes its open Library lost a
critical legal battle its website was
defaced with some JavaScript graffiti
it's been getting dos Non-Stop and its
current status is offline as we speak
what the hell is going on at the
internet archive it is October 10th 2024
and you're watching the report the way
back machine contains over 890 billion
archived web pages weighing in at nearly
100 pedabytes it's an unimaginable
amount of data like if you look at one
web page every second for the next 100
years you would have looked at less than
1% of the total archive and this data is
practically Irreplaceable the only
company that might be able to replace it
is Google but Google recently stopped
using its own cached archive and its
search results and now points to you
guessed it the internet archives way
back machine now we don't know if the
hackers have access access to the
archived website data but if they do and
they might they have the power to erase
the history of the worldwide web before
we untangle this mess you should first
know who Brewster kale is an advocate
for universal access to all knowledge
and the digital librarian who started
the nonprofit internet archive back in
'96 and times were different back then
you could buy a house in San Francisco
or Seattle and start a company and the
internet archive could easily be a
multi-billion dollar company but instead
it's a free nonprofit service that
benefits the world not everybody's a fan
though you might want those unhinged
post he wrote on the Temple of the
screaming electron to be erased forever
the internet archive will remove
personal data and comply with gdpr but
some people want legitimate content to
be memory hold forever in addition the
internet archive also offers a service
called open Library which was founded by
Kale along with the late Aaron Schwartz
it digitizes physical books then allows
one digital copy to be lended out for
each physical copy that's owned it
sounds reasonable but they were sued
recently by a bunch of Publishers
claiming copyright infringement and the
Publishers won that lawsuit which could
result in over $600 million in Damages
that was a big L but now let's move to
the timeline of the recent hacks hibp
which is not an STD but rather a website
that helps people find out if their data
has been compromised in a data breach
was informed of the internet archives
data breach on September 30th it's
confirmed on October 5th the internet
archive gets notified on October 6th and
provide a 72-hour window before making
the data breach public on October 8th
Brewster kale post about a Dos attack
occurring joking about it coming on a
Tuesday instead of a Monday because the
internet archive has been been facing
aggressive dos attacks going all the way
back to may he posts again on October
9th but this time it's a lot more somber
the website is defaced with some
JavaScript library which triggers an
alert message about the data breach
before it's been officially disclosed
then finally as of right now on October
10th the website is still being attacked
and is completely offline things are not
looking good but that brings up a big
question what sort of sick twisted
hacker would want to mess with the
internet archive and why well a activist
group called black meta is claiming
responsibility and will continue to
attack until all their sister are
completely down and just an hour ago
they posted this crazy
[Music]
video I found it kind of funny because
it uses a lot of the same stock
photography that I use in my videos in
the video they say they're not a bunch
of teenagers which means that they're
probably just a bunch of teenagers they
have a political message about the
situation in the Middle East which
doesn't make a ton of sense because
attacking the internet archive isn't
going to make people like you which
means the only explanation is that it's
a false flag now I have no idea who the
real hacker is but I'm sure you're
watching this video right now and I have
a message for you if you let the
internet archive go now that'll be the
end of it I will not look for you I will
not pursue you but if you so much as
delete a single website in that archive
I will look for you I will find you and
I will kill you this has been the code
report thanks for watching and I will
see you in the next one
