thank you thank you podin for that um
generous
introduction and um a big thank you to
the organizers as well for inviting me
to this beautiful city with its Rich
history and uh its gorgeous surroundings
it really is a pleasure to be here
um and um I should say that as a a proud
European um it's a pleasure in
particular uh to be here at the European
Society for Aesthetics um we live in a
world unfortunately where a
narrow-minded nationalism in all its
different forms um is very much on the
rise so I think a society or an event
that brings people together across
boundaries across National
borders um deserves our full and
enthusiastic support um having having
said that
um I'm ready to begin let me just switch
the screen a
bit but before I um really get started
let me warn you that um my talk is quite
long um it's going to be about 50
minutes long um and it has many slides
so there's going to be 60 slides in
total and um
this is not because I think that what I
have to say is so important um but it's
rather because I unfortunately have and
I've always had a bad case of stage
fright which means that I am usually
very nervous before I have to give a
talk and I always am afraid that I'm
going to forget what I have to say um or
mess up what I'm going to uh say so in
order to prevent that I've just made
sure that every I want to say is on the
slides um now this is not how it's
supposed to be done I know and uh it's
not necessarily helpful for you but
please know that it's helpful for me to
have this back up and uh so I want to
thank you in advance for your
understanding um okay so let's get going
so here's the structure of my talk so
first I'm going to give you some
background on the origins of my project
and how I got thinking about
existential Aesthetics in the first
place secondly I'm going to try and
explain what existential Aesthetics is
and is not thirdly addressing potential
concerns and then fourthly and finally
I'm going to try and explain U why it's
important to
foreground this uh new area of
research so the background then
um many philosophers of Art and
Aesthetics choose their field of study
because art or certain aesthetic
Pursuits are of deep significance to
them I haven't done any Empirical
research on this um but it's an informed
guess um so we're here in the room full
of philosophers of Art and Aesthetics
and my guess is that many of you will
have chosen your field of study because
you care about art because you care
deeply about art uh at certainly is true
for me um so some works of art have had
a profound effect on me throughout my
life and um just to show you that I'm
not lying uh I'm going to give you two
examples
so here's um a picture of the so-called
before Trilogy directed by uh Richard
linklater and um when I saw the first
film Before Sunrise long long time ago I
I fell in love with it I really did so I
saw it multiple times and when I saw it
I felt like butterflies in my stomach
and I went to see it several
times and then when um the sequels came
out before Sunset and before midnight uh
I felt like that love only deepened in a
way so I went to several screenings
again I organized a joint screening of
these films I went to visit the
locations where these films were made
it's the kind of silly stuff that one
does when one falls in love with someone
or
something so that's just one example um
here's another example quite different
so this is a portrait drawing by Hans
Hine which was made in the 16th century
of a woman uh it's usually referred to
as a woman with a white hair hairdress
and U we don't know who this woman is
when I first saw this um that was in the
National Portrait
Gallery uh it was during a quiet day so
I was the only person in the room
there and the room was dimly lit I think
that helped uh and it was part of an
exhibition called The Encounter and
while I was standing there in front of
this portrait
drawing uh that's really the feeling I
had like a feeling of an encounter and
um I had the sense of across the seas of
time encountering someone in this
drawing in a way that I found incredibly
mesmerizing and and moving um because
that's one of the reasons why I found it
to be so moving was
that
this uh portrait was made of someone who
was clearly very important in their time
otherwise they wouldn't have had Hans
Hine make their portrait and yet she had
been completely forgotten so fallen into
Oblivion and I I found that really pant
and it's one of the few times that I I
actually found myself to be in tears in
front of a um a work of visual
art so two examples just to illustrate
that uh art has profoundly affected me
in the course of my life and I want to
go a bit further and say that precisely
because art has had this deep
significance to me that that's why I
came to study philosophy of Art and
Aesthetics so when I was um doing my PhD
I was studying philosophy and I had to
starting my PhD and I had to decide
which area to focus on u in the end that
didn't prove to be a very difficult
decision because I figured well I care
about art I love philosophy I love art
so I'm I'm going to do philosophy of art
what can go wrong and um and it really
felt like it was a marriage made in
heaven um so to speak and for a very
long time it
was but uh recently that kind of
changed I think five or six years ago
five or six years ago I I grew
disappointed with mainly my own work uh
in in Aesthetics and philosophy of
art uh and I felt a bit disenchanted and
so I started reflecting on why that why
that
was so I took a look at the work I had
done in Aesthetics and um so here are
some of the essays or book chapters that
I wrote at the
time I see that that's not really very
visible but so one of the one of the
topics I've written about is the role of
the artist's intention in the
interpretation of Art
um as Pauline had had mentioned I've
also written about the difference
between erotic art and
pornography and another topic that I
started writing about was portraiture
and I wrote an essay on what makes
something a portrait so what's the
difference between a portrait and a
genre painting or a portrait and um a
pastoral scene for
instance and um I wrote These um in
these papers and I edited these books
and I did that I think in a way that I
did enjoy myself but I after a while it
it dawn on me that something was missing
and that something was the fact
that none of these really touch on the
Deep significance that art uh holds for
me so while it's fun to think about
these topics none of them really at
least that's the way I felt none of them
really really went to the heart of why I
care about art so why did I write about
these topics then if they didn't address
what I really care about
it uh the short answer is because I
could so those are the topics I could
write about and there's a bigger story
here and maybe if there's enough time in
a Q&amp;A we can pick this up but those are
the topics that were being discussed at
the time in the literature and certainly
as a junior scholar that's what you're
supposed to do like you look at the
existing
literature and you try to see whether
you can maybe add an objection or
formulate a new account and people were
writing about the intention of the
artist in the interpretation of art ster
isiminger Sherry Irvin levenson
portraiture was being written about by
Cynthia Freeland Paulo spui and other
people and similarly with the erotic art
versus pornography discussion people
were writing about that and so I thought
I can make a contribution to
that but it if I'm honest it was n
really really what I uh was interested
in when I was thinking about art so five
or six years ago I thought
um enough of that really um so I I
decided to take things more personally
and um I decided to write about the ways
in which art and aesthetic experience
have been centrally important to
me and so the first thing I wrote was um
an essay a short essay on on what it
means to fall in love with a work of art
and my key example was uh the before
Trilogy then later on I also edited a
book on the before Trilogy as as Pauline
had
mentioned um I
also um started thinking about why I was
so moved by this particular portrait and
I wrote about this in an essay which has
as the subtitle on being moved by
portraits of unknown
people and um later on when I reflected
a bit more on that particular emotion
that I felt it dawned on me that maybe
this was an instance of what I have come
to call aesthetic Melancholy when you
reflect on harsh existential truths such
as the fact that at some point we will
all be forgotten um but in a way that um
makes some experiences stand out more or
can make you appreciate the beauty of
what you're looking at even more so
that's a case I would say aesthetic
Melancholy now while I was doing that I
was also keeping my eye on the rest of
the field and um I was noticing that
other people in Aesthetics and
philosophy of art were also um writing
more and more about the ways in which
art can be of real importance to people
or have a profound effect on people one
of those people is in the room here
Maria Jose alcarez Leon who wrote about
aesthetic intimacy
which is um the feeling of profound
connection that some artworks and
artists can
engender at the same time John Holliday
was writing about the same phenomenon
but specifically in relation to
fictional literature I'm just going to
give you a few examples
um um see I'm blending in already
um UC sardion um has written a book on
um effect in artistic creativity
painting to
feel in which he examines how painters
pursue certain kinds of effects via
painting because they Galvanize enrich
and restructure their overall sense of
being this means and these are his words
this means that painting and painter the
effectivity carry considerable
existential import as he calls
it deer de cleric my colleague at the
University of Kent wrote a really nice
essay on irony disruption and moral
imperfection about how engaging with
ironic storytelling such as the one we
find in comedy series the good place can
yield existentially significant
Insight Kathleen Higgins as many of you
will know has been writing about um
grief and mourning so in this essay she
life and death in rock she discusses the
role of stone memorials in dealing with
existential matters of life and death
She's also written about the role of
music for instance in dealing with
matters of life and death and in her new
book she considers how Aesthetics can be
helpful in dealing with these very
existentially important moments in
life Nick rigle is another prominent
aesthetician that is worth mentioning
here um he's written on what he calls
transformative
expression so the fact that art can
radically change our lives and selves
and this is something that Anthony Alman
has also written about art and
transformation is an essay I always
recommend to
people and a final example Gerald
levenson another prominent figure in
contemporary Aesthetics has this essay
about how you are what you audit um so
you become or you are what you listen to
at least that's been the case for him so
he says the music that I have responded
to most deeply as a listener over the
years is perhaps the dominant element in
the fabric of my life so it's become
really crucially important to him and
these are just a few examples so there's
something at least that was clear to me
so something has been going on in the
last few years that I find really
interesting something genuinely new I
think in the field of Aesthetics at
least as I have known
it because when I was starting out in
Aesthetics and philosophy of Art
uh there was none of that and I double
checked so I um went back to the the
reference works that in my time were
seen as the works of reference in
Aesthetics and philosophy of art so the
blackw antology in Aesthetics and
philosophy of Art and the Oxford
Handbook of Aesthetics and if you look
at the table of contents here so it has
406 different articles the black um well
handbook that
is and not one of them addresses the
existential importance of art not one
and the same is true for the Oxford
Handbook of
Aesthetics uh so I thought that was
pretty relevant I thought this is
something I want to write about and um
and I wrote the essay existential
Aesthetics which was uh published in the
Journal of Aesthetics and art criticism
in 2022 in that essay I try to explain
what existential Aesthetics is and is
not and I'm going to Briefly summarize
it for you before going on to what I
think is the the most important part of
this
[Music]
talk this is what I think existential
Aesthetics is it's philosophical work
that investigates the various ways in
which works of art or certain aesthetic
practices or aesthetic experiences can
be of existential importance to
people so when I say that works of art
or aesthetic experiences can be
important to to people this can mean
individual people for instance when you
reflect on the 10 albums that changed
your life for instance um but it can
also mean communities so how certain
works of art or aesthetic experiences
can be important to communities like
really important or perhaps even to
humanity as a whole like we're uh facing
a climate crisis at the moment which I
think um rightly so is an existential
crisis for human beings and so you can
reflect on how art maybe can play a role
in addressing these and Ben Oaky
actually has done just that and in um
this study for the guardian he asks like
how artists should confront the climate
crisis and what role art can play and um
yeah you you're not going to be able to
read that but he calls for something
like what he what he says is existential
creativity
and um so that's a way in which maybe
art and aesthetic practices can be
important in addressing an existential
crisis at the level of humanity
anyway now existential Aesthetics I
think is a distinct area of research but
one which has I think some overlaps with
other areas or debates in
Aesthetics so take the book I was
referring to earlier on um UC sard's
book about painting that's a
contribution to the philosophy of
painting but I think it's also a
contribution to what I would say is
existential
Aesthetics overlaps of this sort are um
to be expected one has them in all sub
areas of philosophy and Aesthetics I
don't think that's a
problem and I don't think they prevent
existential Aesthetics from having a
distinct identity and I think that's
important to
note so while there are affinities
between let's say
um existential Aesthetics and everyday
Aesthetics it's helpful not to equate
the two and just to make that point
existential Aesthetics does not need to
focus on everyday phenomena but it can
focus on works of high art take the uh
the portrait I was referring to earlier
conversely everyday Aesthetics May
examine experiences that have no
existential import uh for instance Sher
Irvin in a in a really nice paper on
everyday Aesthetics gives this example I
run my tongue back and forth on the
insides of my closed teeth feeling the
smoothness of their Central surfaces and
the roughness of the separations between
them that's an an an experience like an
everyday experience that you can
aesthetically enjoy but I think has no
existential import
[Music]
um now it's also important I think to
disting distinguish existential
Aesthetics from public
philosophy u i see existential
Aesthetics as part of the academic
discipline of philosophy of Art and
Aesthetics so for instance Nick regle's
essay on transformative
expression is an instance of existential
Aesthetics but it's not public
philosophy it's geared it's aimed at
academic philosophers it's very much an
academic
paper and working public philosophy I
think uh you agree with this does not
have to focus on themes or topics that
are of crucial existential importance to
people so if you take the um the
brilliant Aesthetics for Birds blog
which I think is a venue for public
philosophy they talk about all sorts of
topics and only some of them will really
touch upon things that are of
existential significance to people so
this slide will show you like an an
entry on uh the death of the author
public philosophy not existential
Aesthetics finally and maybe most
importantly existential Aesthetics is
not to be confused with
existentialist Aesthetics um this is an
important
one existentialist Aesthetics and I'm
here referring to the Stanford
Encyclopedia of Aesthetics of philosophy
I should say uh existential Aesthetics
is or you could Define as contributions
to aesthetic thinking made or inspired
by existentialist philosophers such as
Albert kamu Simon De Gabriel Marcel
morrice meron ch
um now um it's pretty obvious that one
can engage in existential Aesthetics
without subscribing to the tenants of
existentialism uh Nick Rigo levenson
myself have made contributions I think
to existential Aesthetics but we're not
existentialists
conversely not everything that fits
under existentialist Aesthetics will um
count immediately and it so facto as
existential
Aesthetics so existentialist
philosophers and SRA is actually a good
example existentialist philosophers have
made contributions to the ontology of
art the philosophy of fiction the nature
of
imagination and really valuable
contributions but none of them really
address the existential importance of
aesthetic experiences none of those
contributions address those or the ex
existential importance of works of art
not directly at
least right um so having giving you this
brief summary of what existential
Aesthetics uh is and is not let me
address some potential concerns and this
is new material here I'm departing from
what I wrote about in the earlier essay
um and it will allow me also hopefully
to refine some of the things I said
earlier on I want to consider three
potential
concerns I'm also slightly concerned
about that dog um there uh three
potential concerns one is um isn't the
account too
thin
secondly shouldn't this be subsumed
under hashir world problems thirdly
isn't this old hat so let me begin with
the first
concern existential Aesthetics as I've
defined it is philosophical work that
addresses um the ways the various ways
in which art and aesthetic experiences
can be of existential importance to
people now in the original paper I make
a distinction between two ways in which
these can be uh of existential
importance so a work of art can be
existentially illuminated when it clar
ifies certain
aesthetic um existential questions or it
can be existentially
impactful when it profoundly affects the
course or the quality of a person's
life uh now that's a neat distinction
but so the objection might go uh that
account is too thin and too
imprecise surely there are other ways in
which works of art and aesthetic
engagements can be of aesthetic of
existential importance
[Music]
uh moreover like if a piece of sculpture
were to fall on me and break my spine
now that would profoundly affect um the
course and quality of my life but it
doesn't mean that it's of existential
importance to me and I really like this
objection this was actually a referee
who made this point and I think they're
100% right um so it made me realize that
my account as I presented it earlier was
too imprecise so we need a more
substantive and precise account and
that's what I want to present to you
now so I want to argue that um works of
art and aesthetic experiences or
practices can be of existential
importance in at least six different
ways they
may help address certain existential
questions or an existential crisis or
they may precipitate an existential
crisis
um they may give meaning to life or make
life worth
living potentially number four they can
bring about or constitute an
epiphany they can be
transformative and last but not least
they can evoke or be expressive of
existential feelings emotions and moods
and I'll briefly introduce each of these
different
ways works of art can help to address
address certain existential questions or
even an existential
crisis me raises the question what is an
existential question um here I'm just
borrowing David
benatar's formulation that existential
questions deal with the most fundamental
concerns we have as human beings such as
how to face our own finitude and
mortality how to cope with the human
condition is there a purpose to life
does it all make
sense and an existential crisis occurs
when such queries become particularly
pressing for instance when people are
desperate to make sense of their life
and existence okay I think we have an
idea of what existential questions are
in existential crisis can
be I simply want to make the point that
works of art help us sometimes to deal
with this uh a really good example is
given in John Stewart Mills
autobiography I'm sure some of you are
aware of this
that John Stewart Mill at the age of 20
fell into a really severe depression and
he talks about this at length in his
autobiography and um what pulled him
through and I don't know whether you
know this is Art um and Beauty more
specifically it was the beauty of
Wordsworth poetry that really helped him
out of this existential
crisis this is John Stewart
M what made Wordsworth poems of medicine
for my state of mind was that they
expressed Not Mere outward Beauty but
states of feeling and of thought colored
by feeling under the excitement of
Beauty from them I seem to learn what
would be the perennial sources of
Happiness when all the greater evils of
Life shall have been
removed I needed to be made to feel that
there was real permanent happiness in
tranquil
contemplation Wordsworth taught me
this so just one example um here's a
more recent example um this is an
essay by Mala
chatterly in Aon where she writes about
how she was saved from the brink of
suicide by the novel infinite just so
novels can have this effect on
people and just to show you that it's
not just works of art that can have this
effect um aesthetic experiences can do
so as well
here's just a brief reference to the
film Taste of cherry and those of you
who have seen this film will know that
um the main character talks about his
own um depression or and the fact that
he was going to kill himself and he
tells the story of how he was going
through this Orchard with a rope
climbing a tree to fast in the rope in
order to hang himself and
then he says then I felt something soft
under my hand mulberries deliciously
sweet mulberries I ate one it was
succulent and then a second and third
suddenly I noticed that the sun was
rising over the Mountaintop what Sun
what scenery what Greenery I felt happy
then I gathered some mulberries to take
them home my wife was still sleeping
when she woke up she ate mulberries as
well and she enjoyed them too I had left
to kill myself and I came back with
mures a mulbury saved my life a mulbury
saved my life it's basically the
aesthetic uh pleasurable experiences of
Mur in that um glorious setting is is U
what convinced him not to kill himself
and to overcome that existential
crisis now uh works of art um maybe
unfortunately can also
precipitate an existential crisis and
here's just one example of an author who
says that after watching citizen King
they had an existential crisis so works
of art can do that but
um Sublime nature can also do this uh
and for instance this article claims
that if you watch a particular
time-lapse video of the Grand Canyon you
will you will have an existential crisis
the idea being that being faced with the
temporal Sublime and your own
insignificance might for the first time
perhaps raise certain existential
questions like what am I doing here what
does my life mean like uh I am this tiny
Speck in this fast
Cosmos um thirdly irrespective of any
existential questions works of art may
just give meaning to life or make life
worth living in the strongest possible
sense of the word of the of that word um
and just this newspaper clipping of
someone who says that dance gave uh my
life meaning before I know that I needed
meaning in my life and I'm sure you can
think of other examples like that maybe
even taken from your own um
experience works of art uh can bring
about epiphanies and sometimes aesthetic
experiences can count as an epiphany for
those of you who are interested in
epiphanies Sophie Grace Chapel has
written a great book about epiphanies
and she gives this helpful definition of
what an epiphany is and she says it's an
overwhelming existentially significant
manifestation of
value often sudden and surprising which
feeds the psyche which feels like it
comes from the outside which teaches us
something new which takes us out of
ourselves and which Demands a
response now in that book she gave
several examples and you won't be
surprised to hear that some of these
examples are taken from art
um but um she also give gives the
example and I'm sure that some of you
will be familiar with this taken from
Iris Murdoch's uh book The sovereignty
of the good it's perhaps the most famous
passage in that book where she talks
about looking outside of her window I am
looking out of my window in an anxious
and resentful State of Mind oblivious of
my surroundings brooding perhaps on some
damage done to my
Prestige then suddenly I observe a
hovering
Castel in a moment everything is altered
the brooding self with its hert
vanity has disappeared there is nothing
now but kastro and when I return to
thinking of the other matter it seems
less important Sophie Grace Chapel says
that's an epiphany and
um the contemplation of this castol I
think could legitimately be called an
aesthetic experience if so it's just an
example of how an aesthetic experience
can count as an
epiphany uh works of art or certain
experiences can also be transformative
and um in philosophy y transformative
experience has become a technical term
since um Lori Paul published her book uh
transformative experience transformative
experiences are experiences you could
say that radically change the
experiencer in both epistemic and
personal
ways a person transforms epistemically
when they gain knowledge of what the
experience is like that they could not
have had and
otherwise the person transforms
personally when key agential featur such
as core preferences life goals the way
they maneuver through the world
change standard examples of
transformative experiences are becoming
a parent like when you become a parent
the idea is that can be transformative
you change as a person I'm not saying
that happens all the time or for every
parent but it can be a transformative
experience
um but I think I hope you'll agree with
me that art and encounters can also be
transformative in this technical
sense U maybe you can think of examples
of your own but here's an example um
that is discussed by Jean qua in the
guardian and she um writes about how for
her writing a
poem uh was a transformative experience
she was
off um she was off on a particular
career trajectory that that had nothing
to do with art and uh her values seemed
to be quite removed from art but writing
that one poem changed her completely
transformed her and she abandoned her
studies and decided to become a writer
um it really changed her life
fundamentally this is a maybe a sillier
example of how people um after watching
certain films and this I mean these are
actual people who decided to immigrate
um this guy moved to New Zealand after
watching The Lord of the Rings
um so yeah works of art can be
transformative in all sorts of ways
finally um works of art can evoke or be
expressive of existential feelings
emotions and moods this is not my area
of expertise um but in coming through
the literature I noticed that a lot of
people are writing about this I've
already mentioned UC sard's
book on painting uh to
feel and in that book um he argues that
painting May induce Oceanic feelings
which involve a sensation of self-
boundary dissolution and which can best
be understood as shifts in existential
feeling and existential feelings as he
understands them are pre-intentional
background feelings that structure
experience as a whole they are ways of
finding ourselves in the
world other authors prefer to talk about
certain existential moods
for instance David
weberman refers to maximally existential
moods as philosophical because they
revealed something about the general
character of Being
Human now I think a good example of an
existential mood might be on We what the
French call on we which is not being
bored because say your train is delayed
but because you have no idea how to act
meaningfully in a meaningless
World works of art can express
I think or be expressive of this
particular existential mood and I can't
think of a better um work of art than
antonioni's uh film Trilogy which seems
to be expressive of that very basic move
the basic mood laventura L
and uh then there are people who prefer
to reflect on what they call existential
emotions existential gratitude for
instance there's a whole literature on
existential gratitude which is being gr
grateful not for this or that in
particular but for one's life or for
existence as a whole and um again there
are works of art that are very
expressive of this uh if you haven't
read Ellen hallinger the line of beauty
uh it's a marvelous novel and I think
the final page of that novel is
extraordinary and it really is very
expressive of what I would like to think
of as existential gratitude
so to sum up I think works of art and
aesthetic experiences or practices can
be of existential importance in a number
of ways at least six
now this is ongoing research it's a
provisional list if you have other
suggestions for me they would be very
welcome um obviously some artworks will
take more than one box for instance Jean
qu's transformative experience of right
wrting this poem uh I think also counts
as an
epiphany but um nevertheless I think the
conceptual distinctions I made are real
and informative at least I hope so I
don't think one can be subsumed under
the other so just to um give you a few
examples not all epiphanies will
constitute transformative experiences
for instance Iris Murdoch's Epiphany I
don't think is a transformative
experience the transformative potential
of does not always come in the form of
an
epiphany uh Anthony Alman in his article
on art as
transformative has this really good
example of Molly who watches the film
free solo about M mountain
climbing and um that sets her on a
trajectory that is transformative but
it's not sudden um so it wouldn't count
as an epiphany
straightforwardly but I think it's a
really good
example some artworks may give meaning
to life irrespective of any existential
musings um I've already given this
example this is just to illustrate that
the third way in which something can be
of existential importance cannot be
reduced to the first two ways which
focus on existential
questions okay so that's one concern
hopefully out of the
way second
concern
um pondering existential
questions isn't that really a luxury um
if you're a member of an oppressed group
or a marginalized group you're going to
be too busy trying to keep your head
above water to start musing about the
meaning of
life so shouldn't all of this just be
filed under hashir world
problems in other words isn't
existential Aesthetics only of interest
to White CIS male able-bodied
philosophers
now I think the short answer is no U but
I really take this objection seriously
and I've thought about it um so I want
to give you um a robust answer it's
going to be a three-fold
response uh first of all as I've just
noted um the concern the second concern
here focuses on existential questions
but I've just tried to explain that
works of art can be of existential
importance in other ways Beyond merely
raising raing existential questions or
addressing existential questions for
instance they can help to give meaning
to life or make life worth living and
this is going to be all the more so in
precarious
circumstances um and this article is a
good source it gives you many examples
of people oppressed or in marginalized
circumstances who've clung to Art uh as
as something that is of central
existential importance uh to them
one example being um that of the
musician Mustafa Zar who said about his
art like he was detained he was in
prison for a very long time that music
is a tool for preserving my sense of
personhood it is so I don't forget that
I am a human being so clearly it's of
existential importance to him U but he
is a member of A persecuted
minority secondly um I just want to make
the point that existential questions are
not the prerogative of privileged people
each person no matter their station in
life I think can face existential
questions simply in virtue of Being
Human
um here is a quote from Kieran Sea from
his book midlife um which if anyone is
struggling here with a midlife crisis I
I really recommend it's a great book of
philosophy um he talks about what
existential questions are specifically
to midlife and I think these can come to
anyone no matter what situation you're
in um questions of loss and regret
success and failure and so
on thirdly um
true if your life is in imminent danger
in situations of Oppression you will
have little time to pause and Ponder the
big questions in life I think that's
true if philosophical questions are
going to arise in that situation
they will more likely be questions of
justice and fairness about what is
morally right or morally
wrong uh
however I think such questions Justice
and morality can be and in fact often
are Stepping Stones to more existential
ponderings uh for instance like being
faced with an injustice might lead to
precisely these kinds of questions like
what an ABS world is it where one group
of people is allowed to exploit another
group um so how can the universe be so
indifferent to such unnamable suffering
so these questions are lifted to the
level of like real existential musings I
think and that is the point that Paul
Taylor also makes in his essay on very
influential and great essay on black
Aesthetics he says racial conditions
inflect the general existential
considerations of despair
joy meaningfulness and
absurdity if the prospect of life's
meaninglessness is terrifying how much
more terrifying is it to be enslaved and
stripped even of the feeble existential
armaments such as religion language ties
to one's ancestors and descendants with
which humans try to ward off
Despair and he adds the existential
challenges of life under white supremacy
have f famously been subject to Black
aesthetic production and he gives a few
examples and he's also quite
significantly I think adds has also been
the subject of aesthetic criticism and
Theory from studies of black music by
Angela Davis and Leroy join Jones to
sadaa Hartman's remarkable study of
slaves being forced to dance for their
masters and so
um I want to say any existential
Aesthetics worth its name can and should
make room for the voices of the
oppressed and really stands to be
enriched um by the important work that
has already been done in this area
Okay uh final concern and I will deal
with this very briefly we're near the
end of the presentation I'm happy to
report uh it's this like the idea that
beauty and art can be of vital
importance to people oh that's not new
isn't it like old hat Plato Plato
already writes about the vital
importance of Art n very much writes
about the vital importance of art
Heidegger has written about um the
epiphanous potential of art Kord um has
written on the existential import of the
aesthetic life of the transformative
power of Art and so on and so forth so
how can I present this as a new Suba
of
Aesthetics well in a way I I don't and I
do um so the first thing I want to say
is I think it's a newly emerging field
within the field of Aesthetics that I'm
familiar with which is anglo-american
Aesthetics um broadly speaking maybe
analytic
Aesthetics uh and I want to make the
comparison here with um environmental
Aesthetics so as the first sentence in a
Encyclopedia of philosophy says
environmental Aesthetics is a relatively
new subfield of philosophical Aesthetics
it arose within analytic Aesthetics in
the last third of the 20th century and
one of the pioneering essay was Ronnie
heer's contemporary Aesthetics and the
neglect of natural beauty now when he
wrote that in
1966 of course that doesn't mean that um
no one before him had written about
natural beauty obviously in the history
of philosophy many philosophers have
written about natural beauty in the 18th
century there was Kant there was Burke
there was William Gilpin there was U
doll price in the 19th century there was
thoro there was John mure so clearly
people had been writing about nature
before uh the second half of the 20th
century nevertheless what happened was
that heurn was um looking at the work of
contemporaries in his field as he saw it
and noticed that um no one really was
doing that and so that's why he was one
of the the key figures and only one of
the key figures in um in starting what
has now become a really significant
subfield called environmental Aesthetics
basically I want to make the same point
about existential Aesthetics I do think
it's something newly emerging within the
field as I know it of course it doesn't
mean that no one has written about
existential concerns and art before
clearly they have um but when I looked
around five or six years ago at
certainly 10 years ago at uh Aesthetics
the field as I was moving in um that
wasn't present and certainly going back
to when I was a junior scholar think
again of those handbooks that I showed
you no one was writing about this so
there was a neglect there and uh I think
it needs to be addressed and is being
addressed I think I could make the same
point about everyday Aesthetics but I'll
skip that and uh move on to the final
part which is um why is this a good
thing basically so existential
considerations are coming more and more
to the foreground in our
discipline it's a growing sub area I
think uh and it has that's definitely
true it has great potential for
expansion I think philosophers should be
encouraged
uh I want to encourage you all here of
course to try and uh help to fulfill
that potential and I just want to give
you a couple of good reasons for doing
this I think it might underscore help to
underscore the relevance of Aesthetics
within philosophy it might enhance the
relevance of Aesthetics outside of
Academia it can provide a common ground
between analytic and Continental
philosophy it can um and I think it
presents an interesting Common Ground
between art and philosophy and then it
may also have some personal relevance
May Aesthetics as a discipline
um I think um has been pushed to the
margins of
philosophy
unfortunately and I I'm pretty sure that
all of you will agree that that is an
unfortunate um event if you want to call
it that um it used to be more Central if
you think about Kant if you think about
Hegel uh those towering figures in
philosophy thought of Aesthetics as
really Central to the profession
unfortunately that's no longer the
case now this has multiple reasons I
think multiple
causes but I think one of the reasons is
that many of our colleagues in
philosophy tend to think of aesthetic
features as mainly or merely decorative
um they think of art as a hobby and as a
luxury
it's nice Aesthetics is nice but it's
not of any fundamental significance to
human beings and it's certainly not
worth the same sort of attention as
epistemology knowledge gets or
morality well um I think once we start
foregrounding the existential importance
of Art and aesthetic experience I think
it's going to be much harder to make
that case that Aesthetics is just the
icing on the
cake so it might help us with the
relevance of Aesthetics within
philosophy it might also help to address
or enhance the relevance of Aesthetics
outside of
Academia aestheticians philosophers of
art uh and of course I count myself
among those we're sometimes surprised
that our work finds no uptake outside of
Academia um so I've as many of you have
I've published essays I've published
books um but uh yeah they're they're not
read by a lot of people and that that's
fine with me in a way but um it's kind
of as far as I'm concerned I I don't
care that much but I do find It a Pity
that the work that that we're doing here
is is not really taken that seriously in
the art world or Beyond
Academia um so and that's odd if you
think about it because so many people uh
are really deeply invested in the Arts
because they make art because they
appreciate art they go to museums they
paint and so on and yet so few have any
interest in Aesthetics as a discipline
so that's I think a really odd um
mismatch uh I'm being optimistic here
but I think existential Aesthetics might
help to change some of this since um IT
addresses themes and topics that are
never just of academic interest
if the making or the appreciating of art
occupies an important place in one's
life then it should not be difficult at
all to relate to work in existential
Aesthetics because that's precisely the
sort of Aesthetics that is about the
ways in which art and Aesthetics is of
real importance to
people
um there was a time and that's not so
long ago um that analytic philosophers
did not pay much attention to ex
existential matters in stark contrast
with Continental philosophers I was
trained as a continental philosopher but
then I moved into analytic philosophy I
consider myself an analytic philosopher
and I guess as a result I haven't been
doing anything on existential manners
for most of my
career that is now
changing um analytic philosophers in
general and philosophers of art
anesthetics in particular are engaging
more with existential matters when they
do so I think they may be inspired they
should be inspired by what Continental
philosophers have done and in turn
hopefully they can Inspire their
Continental colleagues um so I think I
hope existential Aesthetics might be
this field where the two shall meet um
again maybe I'm being too optimistic but
I I really think that might be the
[Music]
case Common Ground between art and
philosophy um when people are faced with
existential questions
that's in general when they turn to
philosophy that's when they turn
philosophical they ask philosophical
questions it's also when they might turn
to
Art and here I'm just going to defer to
Ethan Hawk um uh the actor um and
director and author who played in many
different films and uh but including
also of course the before Trilogy and he
did a recent video which I I I I kind of
like liked and in which he tried to
address this question what is art for um
he's not a philosopher but I think the
answer he gives uh makes
sense uh so he says most most people
don't spend a lot of time thinking about
poetry right they have a life to live
they're not really that concerned with
Alan ginsburg's poems or anybody's poems
until their father dies they go to a
funeral you lose a child somebody breaks
your heart they don't love you anymore
and all of a sudden you're desperate for
making sense out of this life and you
ask yourself has anybody ever felt this
bad before how did they come out of this
Cloud that's when art is not a luxury
it's actually sustenance we need it
um uh
so art is there to addresses in these
times of existential need and philosophy
as well I think is eminently placed to
add address or raise existential
questions so looked at it that way um
there's a real Common Ground between the
two they mo they may do so differently
and it's interesting to think about
those differences but they have that in
common yet that is curiously under
examined I think in philosophy of art uh
so much material nowadays is being like
written about the ethical dimension of
art or the cognitive value of Art and
all of that's great
um but there's so much less on the
existential importance of Art and the
similarities and differences with with
philosophy in that regard and I think
that's worth writing about as well this
interesting Common Ground between art
and
philosophy finally
um I'm just going to return to the very
first claim I
made that many philosophers of Art and
Aesthetics choose their field of study
because art and certain kinds of
aesthetic Pursuits are of deep
significance to
them
um undertaking work in existential
Aesthetics I think may be a way to
reconnect with that original spark of
interest um it certainly has been for me
um so uh I I have um decided as I said
in my philosophical work at least to
take things personally and for me that's
been a blessing so if you're in any way
similar to me um if your relation to Art
and Aesthetics is in any way similar to
me I can only invite you encourage you
uh to do the
same thank you
