and the purpose of this talk is
basically to tell you guys about what I
believe is a really good way to direct
your career and I do leave your life
toward doing big topic but we'll get
more into the details as we get there
before I start I just want to ask folks
how many people have heard of effective
altruism before ok so it looks like
about half maybe how many people feel
like they could explain what effective
altruism is okay so like a few people
and they're all in front row all right
that's right cool so I'm gonna tell you
guys about this movement called
effective altruism so effective altruism
this is not working so effective
altruism is a movement attend the never
happened so effective altruism is a
movement that developed about a decade
ago out of Oxford and Cambridge and the
core idea behind this movement is
actually a very simple one right
most people who are you know good people
like yourselves obviously want to do
good things in the world they want to be
helpful they want to be charitable they
want to improve the circumstances of
lives of people who are less fortunate
than them and when you look at the all
the things we do as human race things
like science and engineering and
politics we we have advanced so far in
the way that we do these things in that
we we leverage our knowledge of science
and statistics and psychology and all
these things to be as rigorous as
possible and how to produce the optimal
world for human beings but for some
reason when we think about charity when
we think about doing good we tend to
turn our brains off we tend to just
think oh yeah that sounds good that
sounds like
very normal wonderful thing to do and we
don't apply the tools of reason and
analysis of science to what is
presumably the most important thing that
we do as human rights so in fact of all
for me to say yeah not working is a
movement that's not just about doing
good it's about doing the most good and
what I mean by that is that instead of
saying yeah the thing sounds like it
works that's things sounds like it's
good for people the real question is why
shouldn't we try as rigorously as
possible to find the best thing and to
have the most impact per person per hour
per dollar it means taking a scientific
approach to an area where people usually
don't leve
the tools of science and the tools of
you know statistical rigor it means not
just thinking about these things but
also we're going out how to implement
them into your life whether it be
through the places you give for charity
whether it be where you spend your time
volunteering or whether it just be how
you architect the arc of your career all
these things matter and how much impact
you have on the world so to give you a
better sense of effective altruism I'm
gonna tell you three stories the first
story is about a program called
scared-straight how many people have
heard of scared straight okay most
people so scared straight for those of
you who don't know this was a really big
social program in the u.s. in the 80s
and 90s was kind of 87 commercials
there's like well well-known thing that
was going on
we're basically what they would do is
they would take at-risk youths who live
in cities or work you know in places
with high crime rates and they would
take them on sort of field trips to
prisons and you know they'd go parade
them around the hallways and the
prisoners
right and the idea of course they would
be scared straight that they'd be so
terrified by they would see viscerally
how bad was to be prison and they
wouldn't do bad things and end up in
prison so this was this was media it was
widely lauded as one of the most
important social programs to try to
combat the crime wave that was going on
to the u.s. okay so there's only one
problem with scarce rate which is that
it didn't work now what do i mean by
that it didn't work so what I mean is
not that it basically didn't really have
an important impact of stopping crime
would it reality the primarily did stop
right there
crime has gotten much lower in the US
since the turn of the century but the
reality is that we can actually plan
which didn't happen until two decades
later when people ought you ran the
meta-analysis what they found was that
nursery increased recidivism rates by
13% meaning that spirit caused more
crime Rason cause less okay that's
really weird and it's really weird
also that nobody cared to look and then
they just assumed that like wow this has
this nice impression of being a
wonderful thing to combat crime
therefore throw much money and so what's
the what's the what's the more the more
that doing good is harder than you think
right and the reality is that most
things don't work now this is kind of
unsurprising in almost every other
domain right if you're trying to you
know start a business to make money your
first search is going to be well my
first idea probably won't work right if
you're gonna try to run a scientific
experiment you assume the null
hypothesis probably my intervention does
nothing right and for some reason when
it comes to charity we assume that
things just work we assume that things
have the impact we imagine them to have
and we don't intuitively think well
almost everything doesn't work therefore
we should go run
studies that actually figure out
rigorously what works and how much
impact does it have instead we give
everything the benefit of the doubt
which is the exact opposite attitude
that we should have in domains that
matter a lot
that's really weird okay education in
East Africa so East Africa has you know
very very low literacy and education
rates and of course it's very poor high
rates of disease a lot of agricultural
societies and so in order to get kids to
go to school that you know can raise the
floor of just you know literacy and
sophistication and destructor you need
kids to go to school now it's tough for
kids to go school one because you know
they're sort of there tend to be a lot
of other competing demands for their
time such as I mean one things like
illness to their families being very
poor that are you having to work as a
child and so the there was a group of
researchers at MIT in one study who this
guy is not so they study what is the
most effective way to try to get more
students to go to school in East Africa
okay three interventions of the truck I
would explain you with these three
interventions for and they sort of Rand
expose the first intervention was they
decided to give the students free school
uniforms right because they you know sir
post-colonial Africa areas for school
uniforms so the second intervention a
tribe with judicial cash transfers for
growth a basis basically says if you go
to school will pay your parents or your
family some money and that's like a
direct incentive to go to school so if
this is the girls in the school's worked
hard they were expulsion okay now let's
take a look and I want you guys to
predict which of these interventions was
most successful okay so the three how
many people think that merit
scholarships were the most effective
intervention okay couple people you've
why do you think there's no
right so we incentivize you to work hard
as opposed to just show up yeah that's a
good reason
who thinks judicial passion is for girls
all right so that half everybody loves
why do you think that okay yeah no fair
enough
directly incentivize the behavior you
want that's the simplest path to getting
people in school I don't think free
school uniforms was the most effective
yeah why do you think
Yeah right
they were all right you can't really
know running the okay basically
so it was a really big difference in
impact between the most effective
intervention okay but they actually
tested one more thing and the last thing
yes it was how much money their children
would make if they went to school and
turned out this was way more than
anything else
for a dollar intervention and in fact
the researchers didn't even think this
was good idea to try because numeracy
lates rates in Africa so low if these
who the parents wouldn't understand the
charts that they were showing them about
how much money the trigger would me but
it turns out this one intervention is so
much more effective than anything else
you can't even see this on the chart
okay it's literally multiple orders of
magnitude more effective than any of the
other interventions okay so what's the
point of this is there's a huge gap
between a good charity and a great one
and an even bigger gap between the bad
charity and a good one right so again
most things don't work and the Delta
between intervention
is huge okay now if you if you just sort
of look kind of smear your gaze over
this charity sounds really wonderful
this one also sounds wonderful this one
sounds so delightful your people over
those differences you're not really
gonna understand it on the ground for
the real thing you care about which is
ultimately impact in people's lives the
difference is really matter
okay next right so there are these two
guys Holden and Ellie who worked at a
hedge fund in New York and you know
they're they're kind of guys who and
they were trying to find a good way to
figure out where are the best charities
to donate to on a constant basis how do
I get the most benefit for any dollar
that I did I all right this is so now at
the time they sort of tried to see what
was out there in terms of charity
research to find what are the most
effective charities and they don't
really know time finding and in fact the
only site that really tried to do this
sort of charity evaluation was a site
known as Charity Navigator I think a
little familiar with Charity Navigator a
few people okay so so just to give you
an idea Charity Navigator is this
website so one of the most popular
websites for evaluators and business
does look up 501 3 c charity and
essentially you'll see like a pie chart
that shows you the breakdown of where
they spend the money right okay 10% of
marketing five percent of fundraising 25
percent salaries and then the restaurant
fulfillment right and so naturally what
people think when they look at this site
is like okay I want as little as
possible on salary little spot I want
the most going towards the direct
program okay now le and hold it look at
this and they were like what the hell is
this
this is this is worthless right why it's
worthless
the reason why it's worthless is can you
go back
yeah is this one right here right the
reason why it's worthless is that if I
show you of my truck I'm happy to these
four charities spent their money on
marketing versus paying employees
whatever it would have absolutely
nothing to tell you about what was the
best charity to donate to right it's
like I tell you a company is spending 20
percent of its budget on marketing does
that tell you you should invest in the
company or not of course not right the
only thing that you really care about
for company is does it match my profit
and whether it decides it the best way
to do that is by hiring a bunch of
people or the best way to do that is by
spending bunch of marketing great go do
that right for charity the thing that
actually matters is impact that's the
thing that you really care about how
much impact is this charity provide for
a given dollar of input but just looking
at my chart doesn't tell you anything
right
so a couple slides forward so Elliot
Holden looked at that and he thought
well this is this is screwed up somebody
needs to go fixes and so they decided
they were gonna go for it so they start
an organization called give away and
what Gil of us is it basically
aggregates data from all sorts of
nonprofits all around the world and
tries to take the best data that they
have ideally randomized controlled
trials and essentially does sort of open
analysis on them and tells folks who are
potential charity donators what they
believe based on the available data are
the most effective interventions
anywhere in the world and every year
they publish their results and a ranking
of what they believe are the most
effective charities in the world now the
reality is most charities don't give
their data to give up
why do you notice I mean the answer is
that most data is not flattering right
most data shows that like we said most
things don't work right which is not
surprising we should expect that those
things don't work if we're being
scientific and rigorous we like of
course most things are not gonna work
that's cool that's okay it allows us to
more efficiently allocate
sources if we know what's working and
what doesn't but Google has basically
become a de facto charity nightmare for
many many people around the world and
especially here in Silicon Valley where
they're based on so in seven you go home
just to be uneducated their top
Charities the first year there they were
in business five million dollars and
they now advise multiple foundations
that manage billions of dollars from
wealthy donors who decided that they
want to also adopt the approach of
effective altruism okay so now let's
zoom a little bit let's talk about how
do you decide where to go into let's say
you say ok fine science whatever it's
cool I like it but how do you actually
decide where to donate to ok so the
first thing is that you get decide
you're positive where general is what
kind of problem are you going to try to
solve ok and there are a few principles
that effective ultras use to decide what
makes for a good cause area okay so the
first thing ok the first thing is how
important is that closet okay and by
this I mean there's literally what's the
magnitude of this problem okay let's say
for example you are looking at let's say
you want to watch something too and you
wanted to solve some kind of you want to
cure some kind of disease okay so you
could choose a disease like Huntington's
disease so Huntington's disease looks a
lot of people's a really terrible
illness it's a genetic and so you might
think like yes this is terrible I've
seen portrayals of it on house I I want
to end I want to end this disease once a
problem okay so that's that's awesome
but the the downside is that not very
many people suffer from heart disease
actually it's a very very rare disease
right in the other hand cancer kills
about 25% of all human beings
okay cancer is a very terrible disease
and if you can cure cancer you would say
many more lives they appeared on these
disease right so just getting a sense of
what is the actual scale of this problem
if I solve it matters in deciding what's
the most effective place to do resources
that's second question one ask yourself
is how crowded is the space okay so
going back to the cancer example so
cancer is one of those things like
everybody has some expression cancer
everybody knows somebody or yourself and
so it's very obviously cancer is
terrible
many many people die from it we should
try to cure cancer okay now here's a
problem the problem is that many other
people feel the same way you do and
because they all feel the same way you
do they are very happy funding any kind
of cancer research and so the net result
of that is that any cancer researcher
who has a half-baked idea about how to
actually cure cancer can get funding
very easily because funds is very very
rich in the cancer center so what that
means is that your marginal dollar
adding one more dollar to all the
funding available for cancer research
it's unlikely to really move the bar
because of the fact that all the good
ideas are already been funded right
where has taken the other hand tropical
diseases like malaria right these tend
to afflict people who are not in the
first world they tend to be sort of you
know long-standing
diseases that sort of around for a long
time so not like outbreaks like Ebola or
something like that
these sins of these diseases tend to
kill many many people around the world
but they don't learn media headlines
they're not as sympathetic to - you know
wealthy countries because they they tend
not to happen wealthy countries and so
the marginal dollar that goes into
studying how many cured tropical
diseases it's a much less crowded bed
than betting on cancer right so just
asking what will one more dollar or a
hundred more dollars where a thousand
more dollars do in this space given how
much funding is already there is an
important question to answer when you
decide how to donate your money is
tractable is this problem right so one
example here is one really terrible
thing in the world is war right war is
terrible it's not war that's great
however nobody is a clue house
top away right
we don't know charity you know they do
Foundation that's not more right like
basically it's kind of up to just the
people in power stop work right so
unfortunate as that is I don't think
anybody who really has any good idea how
to fund a 501 3 C that stops work
however there are things that we
actually do know how to make progress
works right such as you know minimizing
the contraction of malaria that's a very
tractable thing we actually know how to
do that right we're like putting
vaccines or iodine salt really
straightforward things that we actually
totally know how to do are very
tractable and just require money right
these are the kinds of adventures that
are much more likely to actually result
in positive outcomes than ones that are
kinda like oh this is a big problem but
I don't even know where to start at
solving so here are some of the causes
trying to wrap separation here you can
see so here are just some of the causes
that effective ultra is effective option
is a pretty broad movement so there are
a lot of differing opinions and beliefs
about what is the most effective way to
to prove the world but different people
have arrived at different ideas of cause
areas and here are some of the the most
commonly supported cause areas by
effective ultras so the first and most
obvious one is blow with all the
development basically the idea here is
that there are a lot of check in okay
good times take a break
how long does it take for you'll do
check-ins 20 seconds okay we'll take 20
second break need some water oh they did
not do that back at me yeah I guess you
use a lot more a lot more caps for now
hmm all right we're all checked in make
sure you check in guys
okay all right that's a bank so we learn
about the basically the idea here is
that there are a lot of people the world
who are still in abject poverty right I
don't know guess all this progress we
have Bill Gates and the grant I don't
know maybe I guess a Reeboks name but
they're unlocking the world who are
still in fairly fairly dire straits and
are very very poor and do not have good
health sanitation you know very very
basic things that you would want as
human being the thing is most of this is
outside most of outside the United
States and you know let's say for
example you wanted to lower the infant
mortality rate in the u.s. that is
extremely difficult because the infant
mortality rate it was already very low
and all the low-hanging fruit to improve
infant mortality is already been plunked
but this is not true at all in other
parts of the world right and so for very
cheap you can do very very basic things
like just vaccinating children or
deworming them or giving them you know
cleaner water or iodized salt or all you
know all these very basic examples of
things that you can do to prevent the
death of children around the world so
basically the floor is so low in other
countries that just by diverting some
resources toward health and development
in different places around the world
that is where you can end up doing the
most good just in improving in the lives
so that's one cause area that a lot of
people don't a second cause area is
animal suffering so depending on your
ethical framework you know if you if you
believe that animals suffer and that
they have souls and that what you know
whatever the analog of souls isn't your
worldview that perhaps factory farming
is one of the worst things that we do as
it would be and sixty billion farm
animals are raised in factory farms
every single year and any intervention
that we can do to reduce the suffering
in animals ends up just by just by the
magnitude of the problem can end up
resulting in a huge decrease in
so folks were animal activists they you
know the the interventions that tend to
be successful are oftentimes just
lobbying so one example of this is sobic
Donald's is one of the largest
purchasers of chicken in the world and
it turned out one of the things that was
one of the Charities of this highly
supported me effect of ultras community
basically what they did is they lobbied
McDonald's trying to get them to stop
buying chickens that were in battery
cages okay so it's not for the battery
cages these very very small cages that
basically chickens when they grow to
full size they basically cannot move and
so it's it's very very painful existence
to live inside the battery cage and
essentially one day McDonald just caved
they said look all right fine we're not
gonna buy chickens of battery cages on
board and things because McDonald's is
such a dominant purchaser in the market
for chickens the entire supply chain of
farms just overnight switched to no
longer use and battery caters and every
other we have an air of like you know
what a burger and you know they also
didn't wanting to sort of keep up with
the Joneses decided to also stop
purchasing battery caged chickens and so
with a fairly small intervention
suddenly a very very large impact on all
the chickens that are growing for us
consumption suddenly changed right and
so even relatively small interventions
can have very large impacts in the space
just because of the magnitude of our
existential risks so these are things
that basically if gone unchecked could
lead to very very massive negative
outcomes such as a nuclear war is that
one of the most obvious ones so this is
you know a lot of people even the
nuclear war is basically contained but
there's a lot of arguments that you know
there's so many uncertain international
fronts right now between us in China and
the Middle East that just doing anything
possible to minimize the chance of
nuclear war is extremely important
because if it does happen the
consequences are so dire and so there
are other things
as a result of these elevated technology
so you might have heard Elon Musk late
Stephen Hawking Sam Harris talked about
hey iris and basically the idea that as
AI becomes more powerful and becomes
more powerful very quickly inserts
becoming responsible for more and more
of the world's infrastructure it might
become very dangerous if we don't
understand very well how the controllers
AI and make sure that it's aligned with
human interests or alternatively
pandemics bioterrorism these sorts of
things that are becoming more and more
possible very rapidly but we don't have
a good frameworks on how to control them
now to make sure they don't spy on a lot
of hand or end up in the wrong hands so
this is another positive with a lot of
attention Walter's believe that because
very little attention that's paid these
topics they might be abnormally
important to devote your own resources
or attention towards and then finally
the last puzzle look at its policy
reform
when you think policy you might be okay
it's like you know donating to a
presidential election the Donald Trump
is terrible and maybe we want to make
sure if he doesn't win in 2020 but this
is usually not what is meant by policy
right and the reason why is that if you
remember back to our framework about
tractability and crowdedness
presidential elections are some of the
most proud of things that you possibly
put money into right the amount of money
that goes into deciding who's going to
win the national election is enormous
but there are a lot of other impactful
elections that go on all the time and a
lot of other important policy issues
that go on all the time that are much
quieter don't have nearly as many
constituents and end up having a much
larger lever for you as a donator to end
up having a big impact down the road so
these are things that tend not to
electrify the political national debate
like things like prison reform or things
like just changing the way that regular
around technology or you know housing
laws and things like that the end of
having a large downstream impact either
here or overseas so and also this
extends to using matter the cost
effectiveness measures within
policymaking so a lot of times if any of
you have worked government you know that
it is very very hard to get
decision-makers to really read and
understand and be statistically literate
about stuff that goes on on a policy
scale but the more than we can do that
the better decisions we ultimately make
as a society so this is another area
that a lot of people are focusing on so
cool that's in a nutshell you guys have
a sense of it now the question is what
about you how can you get involved what
role can this play in your life why am I
even talking about this - the first way
okay so there's this website you're next
this Web site known as 8000 hours and
the name of the site comes from the fact
that on your career on average everybody
spends 80,000 hours working over the
course of your life right it's a lot of
time and think about how is it that you
want to be spending that time throughout
the course of your life and how much
impact you want to have through your
career itself now I I know that you guys
are all in Afghanistan I can't tell you
to choose a career but even even within
the tech industry there's a big buffer
between working in a place that is not
having a good impact and working in a
place that has a lot of impact and it's
quite likely that not all of you will be
software engineers for all of your life
so he knows and ours is a great resource
and it's one that I actually consulted
very heavily when I first started down
my journey in effective altruism 2013
when I first came across these guys and
they had a big impact on me and deciding
the way that I wanted to live my life
and think about my own life trajectory
so the other way of course you can be
involved is now all you hear I mean
presumably you're all unemployed right
now but you will pretty soon
according to their statistics you're
making a lot of money okay and the
further you go are you making any more
money and so donations might be one of
the most effective ways for you guys to
actually give back and express your
beliefs and desires about the world
through you know basically putting
putting your money where your mouth is
so next level so I'm not making that
much money relative to the folks who are
you know running these companies or not
just how just how hard it is to make the
kind of money that you guys are gonna be
making okay so just making but you in
the top ten percentile in the world okay
that is not a lot of money in the US but
around the world
that is a okay
now you're not a one percenter in the
u.s. if you make a hundred k but you are
a very very one percenter in the world
if you make a hundred k us becomes
$30,000 that puts you in the top four
percent globally okay no what does it
mean crazy important
he's a ninety nine percent of all people
just randomly born into the world make
way less money than you do okay
you are a 1 percent in the world
okay the question is what do you do with
that how do you process that information
what do you what do you do from here now
knowing that you're one percenter it's
like oh so there's there's a lot of talk
in Silicon Valley especially lately
obviously we know the most basic ones
there's there's rays there's possibly
gender and you know having the the the
the privileged version of all of those
dimensions makes it easier for you to
get forward in life but we don't ever
talk about the probably the most
significant form of privilege in the
world which is which is nationality
right just like being born into the
United States you are already one of the
most privileged people on earth if you
were born into a country that did not
have the same economic power it does not
have the same freedoms they do not have
the same social mobility that do not
have the same centrality in the growth
of Technology you would not be here you
would not be doing anything nearly like
this right and so you know for myself
like you know I often think myself in my
shittier moments as being like well I
work so hard to get to where I am
because like I mean we're Harvard I you
know study English learn how to code and
blah blah blah like way up but the
reality is that I was born United States
I was born a citizen right most people
around the world a lot of people around
the world they would pay a lot of money
to become US citizens and they tried
many many people other will try their
goddamn hardest to get into the US and
can't write is a reward that you were
born into if you are a citizen and you
know I have I have I speak English which
is one of the most important languages
on earth
I am literate I am smart I you know was
born to a family that didn't have
significant economic hardship and all of
that made it possible for me to get to
where I am today and make a stupid
amount of money in Silicon Valley and
one of the weirdest markets in the
history of the world where random folks
who studied you just you know whatever
liberal arts like me can go get a job
making a bunch of money and become a
one-percenter thanks that's really weird
it's really weird that we were able to
find ourselves in a world where that's
possible and given that we are here the
question is what responsibilities do you
have as a beneficiary of that sister to
give back and have a big impact beyond
just your own life so there's a there's
an organization called giving what we
can and given what we can basically they
they're a group of folks who pledged on
the basis of their own
admission that hey I have lived a pretty
good life I'm pretty lucky most people
aren't as lucky as I am somebody gives
some money to charity every single year
and I'm gonna try to give them to the
most impactful cherries I can and
generally speaking the we can encourage
people to have this 10% 10% is from
small enough that it's like basically I
ian is one rates right so I'm sort of
like one raised behind my peers in terms
of how much money I'm making but like my
take-home but basically my standard of
living is essentially the same I just
you know take newer pools instead of X's
or something you know it's like it's
it's it's not an onerous amount of doing
so so this is a career path more
involved in tourism where leads to one
known as burning to get and this is what
I chose to do in my life back when back
in 2013 when I first decided I was gonna
go to Silicon Valley and go to Academy
and do all the stuff it was because I
decided that I wanted to learn together
so learning to give it's a very simple
idea I don't explain it in ideally a few
sentences so you can imagine that I want
to do the most good in the world one of
the other things you do is like okay I'm
gonna go join the work in some shelter I
have all these visions of how you know
harvesting to be a bit by mosquitos
worked so hard to putting all these
great selfies and now it turns out if I
go get a job on Wall Street or in the
tech industry and make much money I
could probably make enough money and
then donate it to pay for someone else
to go during these work and that person
will probably do just as much good as I
am because like it's not like I'm
amazing it you know whatever rejected
people with needles or whatever they're
doing there
being right in fact my baggage is really
the fact that I'm pretty smart and I've
been a technology that I can learn how
to be an engineer right there do you
invite if I make enough money I'm
successful enough I can donate enough to
get two people or three or five and so
the idea is that if your comparative
advantage is in earning money actually
become more effective then in many ways
that you could do directly by working
for a non-profit yourself right so this
was the idea that I think they're
convinced me back in 2013 when I first
decided to pursue getting into the tech
industry - so tell you guys a little bit
about my story so you know so I'm sure
some of you probably know who I am I
gave one of the lectures but just to
give you just to give you the very very
short version so I used to be a
professional poker player I did that for
about five years for when I was 16 12 21
and around that time I also went to
school and I studied English and
philosophy which are both totally
worthless but at the time I was like I
sort of made enough of it at a young age
that I learned very quickly that money
does not bring happiness and I knew it
not just for myself and my own
experiences but also from seeing so many
other young people who had also had
fallen into a bunch of money by playing
professionally and I saw very obviously
it didn't make them happy so that
connection was severed for me very very
that most people think of much longer
time to learn that lesson so after I
left poker I had to figure out like what
do I want to do with my life 21 have you
know no real skills I basically just
like a college dropout
what am I know and then I came across
effective officers and
so it made sense to me and it sort of
seemed like yes this this yes at the
kernel of what I care about because I
want to have impact in the world but I
don't really know how do I really know
what it means seven pact just sort of
blindly pursuing you know money he
doesn't really make sense to me it
doesn't really matter to me it doesn't
motivate but if you know if you really
just think you know one second farther
than yourself that money actually has a
massive impact in other parts of the
world there's massive impact if you
actually direct it toward the places
where it can do the most good
and so I realized like hey I I think I'm
a pretty competitive person I'm pretty
good you know getting good at things so
maybe I should go to the tech industry
and try to learn entering to what is
potentially one of the frothy esteem
ploy markets in recent history so again
I came out here moved to Silicon Valley
I remember at the time I was living in
so this is back when I became a friend
of Market Street and I was living in
this like really shitty dorm that was
like it was like one student in a bunk
bed right above me and like a shared
bathroom in the hallway and I just you
know all I did was like eat I ate
breathe and lived epic a debate for like
three months and eventually I am getting
high back Academy as a TA and that's
when I first started earning together
that's when I first won donating the
money that I was making to share so the
very first job I donated 33 percent of
my income my pre-tax income every year
since then and that's kind of my that's
sort of the goal that I hold myself to
and my goal is that as I ideally make
more money that I can donate
so that's kind of my story now crypto
industries and I do a lot of weird
but this is this is really what got me
in the game
is that what I do matters because of
where I direct the resources that I've
gained in my career towards so where do
I donate I mostly donate to the first is
to anti malarial interventions so
there's a foundation here called the
against malaria foundation which
distributes anti malarial bed nets the
second is charity advocacy this is
essentially kind of along lines of what
I'm telling you guys I'm just getting
people to think more rigorously about
how they donate money because I I
suspect that that sort of has this kind
of ringing effect that the more people
who understand it start thinking more
deeply about where to donate they
getting the people around them surfing
more deeply on how to donate and more
than just what I can do myself many many
more people who kind of start advocating
the same message end the thing so I
think this tends to be one of the areas
is most underfunded for how important it
is so that's one place where I'm also
donating some might pick up so what's in
it for you why should you bother doing
this and I have some things here that I
guess you read but I guess the you know
for me I am I'm a pretty cynical person
right like people tell me a story about
how so great I tend to call I
tend to not believe them and so and
that's very much true about me
internally as well right
I tend to be very self-critical I tend
to be very doubtful of my own intentions
my own designs my own life story like
how much my bullshitting myself about
what I'm doing I don't know but the one
thing that effective altruism kind of
serves as for me it's the one thing in
my life that I know I'm not bullshitting
myself about like it's sort of the one
thing that I know I'm really having than
that no matter how much my job feels
like
how much my persona or social media or
you know what's going on this looking
valley or what we're building out here
no matter how much of it I can get down
and cynical about the one thing that I
know is that I'm having a real impact
and that for me has been a very powerful
lodestone in pushing forward my own
career okay
everybody thought your phone your phone
okay
so I want you navigate to this website
effective altruism org so this is the
best best primer basically to kind of
get you plugged into what is the basic
thing that effective altruism is all
about this is the right starting place
if you want to learn more and if you
don't want to go it's fine but if you
are curious and if this is something
that you are interested in this is the
place to go so I would encourage you
later on and here in the bathroom or
whatever to click around and read
through as much as you can and obviously
the folks here at app Academy are
totally willing to talk to you about
effective altruism so you can talk to
John
there's also group is there group
there's currently no group but there
will be because you're going to start it
and you can also reach out to me or to
anybody else who is involved in this
wonderful production there's also a big
and very active effective alternative
unity here in the Bay Area
so there are a lot of folks who are
really smart and engaged and excited and
would love to talk to you if this is
something that you're interested in and
with that we can go to questions that's
it for me
okay yes it's a great question so to my
mind the answer is that you know the
world is full of other lives right and
even the things that are served to known
unknowns we're just kind of taking our
best guess at what we think the world
was like right ultimately you can't opt
out of that guessing you have to sort of
take a take a shot and say hey how much
do I think basic research matters and
you have to sort of take a guess also of
okay given the amount of funding that's
currently available for basic research
how much will a marginal increase in the
funding toward basic research impact the
rate of new discoveries I think at the
end of the day you have to you have to
make a guess about what you think the
world is like and giving your model of
the world what do you think will be most
effective while you'll never be right
and you'll probably always be surprised
I don't think there's a way out of that
cycle
I don't think effective altruism gives
you a framework to make that yes I think
in fact of officers and gives you a
framework on how to think about making
the right choice given a framework or
given a model of the world but it tells
me nothing about how to build the model
of the world right so if you don't know
what's gonna happen if you increase
funding to basic research too bad you
got a guess yeah yes
Huntington's disease from cancer yeah no
that's a great question the reality is
that charity is not just about compact
right we all understand that intuitively
there's more to what we do when we try
to do good things in our community into
our family into our loved ones than just
maximizing impact to my mind the right
and most just way to deal with it so you
know I'm somebody what I also care about
a lot of causes that I don't believe are
maximizing my impact in the world and
include ease and suffering those that's
okay to my mind the way that you want to
deal with that is by you know in a way
yeah I think those are two separate
things right being engaging the
community and helping out people
face-to-face and feeling the sort of
energy be somewhat derisive - cause I
can sort the warm fuzzy feeling that you
get when you're actually you know
connecting with other human beings and
helping them directly you know sending
money to Africa for nets like it's kind
of cold and distant and you don't really
you know you don't see the smile on its
face and it's important not to
trivialize them right
however absolutely they're just not the
same thing but there's donating money to
try to actually reduce suffering in the
world and there's donating money because
that's just part of what it means to be
a good person right and that that should
come out of in some sense a separate
budget it's just it should be a separate
thing that you do you understand but
look when I go to you know my local
nonprofit and volunteer that I'm not
trying to maximize my impact I'm trying
to be more involved in my community and
that's just a separate thing I'm trying
to do right so you know I volunteer a
lot of rails bridge which is against
nonprofit that helps teach women and
people and it's not the most effective
way that I can use my time or money
right but I know that and that's okay I
go there because I like to go I like who
it makes me as a person to go there
right but you know if I have a friend
need or if I know somebody or if there's
some charities that I feel particularly
tugged by I'm happy to donate them but I
know that like that comes out of like
there's my
maximize impact and the budget where I
do the things that I think make me a
better and more connected unity I think
if you separate those two things you
will end up having a lot more equanimity
in your approach toward giving yeah I
mean I don't know that I have a very
legible criterion but basically you know
that 32% is like my effective altruism
maximizing impact like I'm not trying to
feel good in that in the allocation of
that 33% but there are other ways in
which like I do you know ultimately
giving the charity is a ultimately a
social and a communal thing and you know
there are times and I've given charities
that you know something like hey there's
charity I'm really passionate about it
would you give some money and I'm sure
why not I want to support you I think
that's a great cause but it just comes
out of a different part of my brain so
right now I don't have a framework for
it cuz it doesn't come up that often
that I need a framework but if it's
something you're actively involved in I
would encourage you to think about how
to build the framework like that for
yourself yes
ya know those are both great questions
so in terms of sustainability sorry I
don't know what exactly you mean by
sustainability that's a very broad
concept but there there are a lot of
folks in the effective authors in the
community I mean ultimately effective
alternative is just kind of an
orientation right it's not a particular
set of beliefs or injunctions right it's
sort of like just thinking rigorously
about where to do good right that's
that's the big blanket concept within
that there are a lot of different folks
who have very different beliefs about
what is the best way to practice
effective altruism and so there are some
people who think that sustainability you
know it's an inability ecological
welfare are one of the most important
cause areas focus on and they find waste
waste to to maximize impact that and
there are also folks who you know
there's a very famous New York Times
article back in mostly 2011 or 2012 back
when effective also just started
blossoming and there are these famous
examples of these these guys who
basically went to Wall Street to earn
money as traders or whatever or whatever
but then like donate a bunch of their
income and they were like living in
closets or something just they could
donate even more money and so there's
this guy I can't name it something who
wrote an op-ed in The Times
basically saying like well but look what
they left hands doing evil and at the
same time like come on and I think it's
it's it's it's a very good question the
reality is that here's my take and this
is not an authoritative date is that
when we think about doing good versus
doing horrible right a lot of times we
think about who is the person who has
blood on their hands right we think
who's the person who actually held the
knife when it went down
and we we are much more loath to ask a
question okay if you weren't there
holding the knife was the knife have
gone in anyway right
as human beings we tend to think of
morality in terms of sort of group
dynamics and group dynamics are a lot of
times about blame there are a lot of
times about who gets rewarded who gets
punished when something bad right but if
you really just care about how much
suffering happens in the world then you
just get more about how does the bad
thing doesn't happen at all I don't care
if it's on my hands I don't care
someone else's hands I care at the
bathroom just stops right and in that
framework you want to think more about
replace ability in the sense that if I
didn't go do this thing with someone
have done it anyway right and the answer
of a lot of times is yes right so one
example is like becoming a doctor
becoming a doctor is one of those things
it's like canonically good person thing
right if you're a really good person is
going down now let me ask you met a lot
of doctors you know that's kind of
but we still kind of have this
in our collective you know Union
unconscious about doctors that they tend
to be good open are people but the
reality is that you know if you are like
I want to do the most go to save lives
I'm gonna go become a doctor well the
reality is that there are a lot of
people try and be doctors and if you
didn't become a doctor someone else
would be in the operating rooms that you
would have been in and they were gonna
do the exact same you would have it
right there's like there's not a
shortage of doctors that you need to go
fill and you don't cause more go to the
world by becoming the person who is the
doctor right maybe if you're better than
that doctor then great but do you know
you're better than doctor so I think now
a lot of people are resistant to that
framework they think that's the wrong
way to think about it they think the
right way to think about it is are you
personally morally responsible for your
you are personally responsible for the
things that you do and if I don't think
people do bad things
tough I mean let's try to stop them
but you should be doing the right thing
directly with your own life and that's
just a philosophical question that you
know I can't resolve free to give decide
for yourself so that's my answer I hope
that I don't know cool we'll take one
more yeah
best way to infuse into governmental
policy making I mean I I think the
answer the answer in my mind is is
probably very boring which is that first
you are not going to be able to infuse
this into government policy making today
because I mean also when people are
people are guided by their incentives
and their incentives are that you know
people are just basically respond to
their base or whoever elected them into
power or whoever's controlling the purse
strings of their their future elections
so I'm not terrific hopeful that the way
that policy happens changes what I'm
more hopeful is that the populace
changes right in the best ways actually
in that change in a representative
government it's not just like trying to
grab the representatives and shake them
until they agree with you the best way
just make people change their minds
about things right I mean ultimately
that's how most of the social changes
happen in the last decade has largely
been not because you know you know the
Senators just suddenly had a Jesus
moment it's that attitudes in the
country changed right and especially
from young people and activists kind of
galvanizing these changes in the
population so you know one example of
this is that you know people people are
very scared of China especially because
trying to just have such a different
regime authoritative its centralized but
the reality is if you look at young
people in China if you've like actually
met young people in China they're
basically Americans you know
they're so westernized relative to their
parents and it's kind of just a matter
of time when you know enough of the old
guard and who kind of you know leading
the the current party die and get
replaced by their younger
representatives that China is inevitably
going to westernize and anybody who
knows that like you've been there on the
ground sees that right the same way I
think that is largely what I hope to
happen in you know other countries
around the world is that as people to
start thinking more deeply I'm just
kidding you know be more thoughtful
about these memes that it'll just happen
organic just says the people who
actually make object will decision their
lives change their perspectives
that's my tank I could be wrong but
that's roughly what I believe cool
let's get you out of here you guys are
actual you guys need actual amount of
code so you can make money
