you just did P Morgan um well I it was
like a live segment from this morning
sure yeah okay yeah how was that is that
the first time you spoken to him yeah
all right what did you think uh it was
okay it could have been way worse it
could have been way better they brought
me in it was a segment on like um the
differences between like Trump and Biden
and their senility basically is Biden
cility going to be a huge problem and my
opposite person is like Tommy Lauren and
it's a very much like mainstream media
opinion like or mainstream media
appearance so it's like give me your
like 30 second splur give me your 30
second splur and then next question and
I hate that back and forth like drives
me crazy so well I mean it says
everything that we're having a
discussion about who is the most scile
among all of the different politicians
that might influence the future
yeah a lot but at the end of the day the
voters only have themselves to blame so
that's true but then I guess you can
only vote for the people that are there
no there's a lot of people to vote for
these are the two most popular ones I
think that the system is delivering the
people that have the widest support
right now yeah people they might not be
um universally liked but you only have
to have a plurality of the support to
make it through like people are looking
at you like ah I guess like sure but
people might not like them like 80% of
people might not like Biden or 80% of
people might not like Trump but those
80% of people don't all agree on who
should run instead so that's the issue
right yeah interesting I wonder if
people could coordinate better whether
or not you would have uh better
outcomes I don't know Vice media
shutting down no longer publishing have
you seen this are they shutting down or
they just not going to publish articles
on that website anymore that's
technically what it is a memo to Vice
employees Thursday CEO Bruce Dixon said
that the company will be cutting several
hundred jobs in the next week as part of
its major restructuring Vice will
discontinue publishing content to its
own website and instead we'll put more
emphasis on our social channels as we
accelerate our discussions with Partners
to take our content to where it will be
viewed most broadly what do you think
cool I guess Does anybody read like
website stuff from Vice I feel like they
were most known for the YouTube video
content like the investigative Journal
stuff I should know the lady's name I
wish I did but she does really cool
stuff remember went to China to
investigate the weaker stuff yes um she
like she does a lot of cool stuff uh
there there are a couple cool things on
Vice in terms of what I've seen for
video content I don't read their website
as much so I don't know I mean Vice is
one of those things where when you do
see articles shared it's usually like
rage sharing you know white people can't
suffer racism or like some some
something that seems to be purposefully
that almost like rage trigger people to
click on it sure but I have definitely
enjoyed me some Vice Mini documentaries
20 minute 30 minute you know lunchtime
viewing things on YouTube I've seen one
there's a bunch that they do about party
culture in the UK about like aging rag
ravers like people still doing drugs in
their 50s 60s 70s like classic Larry
British people okay so that's good but I
don't know I just wonder you know you
just did Pi Morgan Tucky Carlson has
left his sort of mainstream credentials
behind and moved independent Pi is
leaving talk TV and going to basically
be a full-time YouTuber essentially
although it'll probably be a little bit
more advanced than that I don't know it
just seems like there's some interesting
movements maybe it's more so in the
video side of things but you know that
was vice's written content and that's
being pivoted what do you think what's
the state of modern media landscape and
what do you thinks in the
future I don't know it's different from
different perspectives as an as a
content creator my guess is going to be
alternative media is probably a lot more
money uh mainstream media is probably a
lot more exposure that'd be my guess um
in terms of are we moving towards a more
alternative media landscape where
everybody's consuming alternative media
that's kind of already happening or has
already happened in some ways mainstream
media has kind of integrated itself into
alternative media so people might get
all of their for instance their news
through Facebook or Twitter but that
might be coming in the form of headlines
from mainstream media Publications um I
would definitely say it feels like we've
moved past especially with Tucker
Carlson leaving it feels like we've
moved past the age of the pundit where
you had these like huge like Larger than
Life figures like the Anderson Coopers
the
the Tucker Carlson's the Bill O'Reilly's
the John Stewart I guess is back now he
just pivoted back yes um well he tried
to go to Apple and there was some
editorial differences I think that
caused issues at Apple and then he'd
wanted to bring up some stuff to do with
China and that wasn't allowed and yeah
he ended up basically going full circle
back to somewhere that oddly had more
freedom or at least editorial freedom I
think as far as he was concerned yeah um
yeah I don't I have no idea where the I
think we have huge issues in our media
landscape right now I don't think
they're necessarily tied into mainstream
versus alternative but I know that
that's what everybody's fixated on um
what is the what should people be more
concerned about then with regards to
Media landscape epistemic grounding uh
we live in like completely different
worlds more today than we ever have and
that's probably true every single day
that our factual understanding of the
world has diverged so much between the
different like groups that it's
unworkable or maybe has already become
unworkable such that I think I think it
was finally when the Jewish space lasers
were clearing out real estate for Oprah
in Hawaii that I realized I was like oh
my God nothing can happen anymore as it
is there we're we're we're past anything
ever happening that just happens there
are going to be no more normal plane
crashes there are going to be no more
diseases there are going to be no more
vaccines it's all going to be a
conspiracy it's all going to be a secret
missile attack it's all going to be a
secret Jewish super weapon it's all
going to be a secret Bill Gates migr
chip like nothing can happen anymore
without it being part of some Grand
narrative or grand design which I think
is really sad
why why um like what's the undercurrent
that's driving that is it just a
multiplicity of different people being
able to comment on it is it the fact
that free access to information means
that everyone has a different
perspective on the same story is it the
fact that there's no centralized uh flow
of information which is giving someone
like the narrative somebody sent me an
email a while ago that I thought was
really interesting I think it was just
his idea I think he called it like the
magic box idea or something and
basically I think as humans we become
further and further separated from the
actual things that are happening with
everything that we interact with so for
instance um if I do the oldest example
you like an abacus right right yeah like
I can see the math happening there I
know exactly what's happening you can't
lie to me about an advocus okay um if I
have a calculator it's a relatively
simple device it only does math I can
see exactly what's going on as the
devices become more and more complicated
and you become less un less aware of
what's Happening under the hood becomes
easier for you to insert more random
stuff that you're not aware of so like
nobody thought that an advocus would
track you nobody really thought a
calculator would but is your phone
tracking you is it listening to every
single word you're saying even with no
evidence presented for any of these
ideas of which there never has been that
your phone is secretly listening to you
and recording stuff and blah because a
lot of people on Tech sites have like
tried to investigate this people still
think it and I think that that example
with phones can be blown up to literally
everything from carburated to F injected
cars from bureaucratic organiz that
might just like manage a local level
thing to the FDA that does you know
vaccine approval on a nationwide level
from from literally every single thing
in our life things that we used to look
at and kind of understand things have
gotten so so so complicated that I think
that people are kind of starting to fill
in the blanks very easily and quickly
with a lot of other stuff there's no
real way to like argue against them you
know ah and you will slot into it stuff
that just fits your prior your biases
some halfed truth or some whim or
hearsay and you just sort of throw this
into the workings the Abacus example
whoever gave you that's that's a really
smart thought of that on the spot really
Destiny original no that was me you got
a destiny original analogy right on the
spot okay this is some real [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] right
here but no yeah it's you can see the
working you can see step by step what's
laid out in front of you but people
weren't given the workings of what was
happening in government or in war or in
news previously there was still a degree
of opaqueness to what was happening so
what is it that's different between 100
years ago and now I think that
ironically enough the people that seem
to have the biggest problems with
liberalism with like freedom and
everything so I'd say the
anti-institutional people that are like
well we need to bring back religion and
kind of like conservative social values
whatever I think that they've to some
extent Fallen to be the biggest victims
of I hate to say this it's weird because
I'm a liberal like too much liberalism
too much freedom and that there's
probably some important guard rails that
kind of keep us in track or in check
about like how we need to live our life
like in in a given like tribe it's
probably good if there's like shame
around like eating poop or having like
sexual attraction towards children or
trying to stab and kill somebody like
there are some socially cohesive
elements that are good that we all kind
of like enforce these things to kind of
keep everybody a little bit in line um
whereas today because we have so much
Freedom with the internet which is the
thing that has changed our life more
than anything else in the past 20 and 30
years nobody wants to talk about it they
just talk about it's either feminism or
it's red pill or it's space lasers or
it's uh Biden in the Deep state but the
internet has dramatically changed for in
such a quick per time period such a
quick time period right when I was in
grade school cell phones didn't really
exist not really not like they do today
um things have changed so much and now
people have the ability to select for
their world way more than they ever did
and that is incredibly damaging because
there's some amount of friction that is
incredibly healthy for the human mind
it's good to be able to step into a room
look look at like grade school or high
school or college everybody manages to
make friends but it's not because they
all swipe right on each other to get the
perfect match of qualities it's because
when humans spend time together they
learn to ease the friction and they kind
of get along with each other but now
that we have the ability to hyper select
for every single [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] thing that we
want it is I think it's incredibly
damaging to the human mind because it
lets us select for too many things that
we no longer have to uh become
comfortable with like an example I would
use is that like uh you know if 30 years
ago if I really wanted to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] my
toaster I'm probably not going to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
it that much I'm probably not going to
talk about it that much absolutely not
um and I don't even know if I'd be able
to
find like a like a anybody or any
camaraderie it would just be really
rough but today I could probably type in
like toaster [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] recommendations and
get like the top 10 models ranked from
like quickest to slowest orgasm for like
toasters that I want to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and now
I've got like a whole world of people
that all support my toaster [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
Ambitions and that's it's funny for the
toaster [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] thing but when we talk
about like vaccines or covid or
education or the FDA or the Deep state
or Andrew Tate or anything these things
well now it gets like really scary and
that's the world we're in where you can
select for your reality rather than
having to deal with the reality that
might not be as much fun to deal with
right so it allows Echo Chambers to
continue to propagate there was
something you may have seen this someone
explained where Emos went and they
basically talked about the lack of
development of subgroups that they kind
of come together briefly and then sort
of fracture off into other I mean you'll
remember like Emos and Goths and like
there was genuine cement subgroups maybe
they only existed for five years or
something but they were there right
there was like an actual they had an
identity and they had dress and they had
all the rest of the stuff but I wonder
whether the sort of universality of
everybody trying to optimize for the
same things which is really like clicks
and attention online no matter who you
are even if you're just like some Normy
person that that wants to have like more
fans and more friends on Instagram and
be more popular in school or have a
better Snapchat streak or whatever the
hell it is I wonder whether there is
something about this universal currency
of status where everyone eventually has
to play that game because there's only a
few roots to be able to be successful
within that one thing and the same thing
is going to be true of your ability to
sense make like there's only so many
different paths that you can have to be
able to reach that or to be able to be
successful as a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] newscaster or to
be able to be successful and catch
attention online so I wonder I wonder
how much of this is just people trying
to trying to make sense of the world and
instead what they do is find things that
confirm their biases and then just sit
and steep in those groups but for some
reason it doesn't does seem to cese in
the same way that it used to that's it's
really interesting to say that because I
have another theory or idea on how
Society is like kind of falling apart
not falling apart splitting apart um and
it plugs into that perfectly and that I
think that people aren't fundamentally
different today than they have been for
the past 100 thousand years we're all
humans we have more or less the same raw
materials yeah the the biggest thing
that I think has changed there's two
things happening right now in that we're
becoming more separated than we ever
have been and more similar than we ever
have been and the way that I feel like
this is working is people are
withdrawing into two separate groups
that are enforcing Within These groups
an insane amount of homogeneity and I
think the reason why this is happening
is because it feels like our communities
have gotten larger and larger and larger
and larger and larger so for instance um
it might be that maybe 30 or 40 years
ago maybe I super identify with the kids
in my neighborhood um you know because
when I was growing up the people that
you hung out with was whoever you could
walk to or when you were old enough
whoever you could bike to this is your
community these are the people that you
hang out with um you develop ideas you
develop in tense at least for me like
high school rivalries between football
teams between like yeah that like that's
like your community um and then when you
get a little bit older maybe you
identify as an adult with your
neighborhood maybe identifi with a city
that you're in or a political group in
your city or sports team or whatever I
think that these were maybe it might be
like older it might have been like a
churches or unions that you're in um
these are the things that I think people
identified with and they have they
enforce a lot of homogeneity in these
groups which is probably normal to some
extent right you're going to want people
around you to be very similar that's
just normal hang around with people that
align with who you are yeah yeah um and
that could mean appearance and race it
could mean ideology it could me yeah it
could be a billion different things
people relate on a lot of levels be
religion but today what's happened is
the internet has made it so that the
smaller groups are not really fun to be
in they don't really feel important they
don't feel impactful or meaningful so
instead what happens is is the group
that you're belonging to is larger and
larger and larger forcing homogeneity on
a neighborhood that you live in or I'm
from Omaha Nebraska is a lot different
than forcing homogeneity on you know 160
million people in the United States
versus the other 160 million people so
um to draw back to kind of what you were
saying earlier is that as these groups
become larger and larger it's harder I
think it feels like it's harder to have
these certain types of subcultures and
everything because everybody's part of
like this Global culture now which is
all enforced by um and facilitated by
the internet right and then but you also
have it's interesting you say both
becoming more similar and more different
yeah and that we're getting further
apart because these different group
groups are flying away from each other
at the speed of light yes um but Within
These groups you have to have a cohesive
opinion you have to have an OP if you're
if you work in a warehouse in Alabama
you still have to have an opinion on
whether or not Leah Thomas can be an an
athlete in in college or whether you you
know if you work in or live in Seattle
you need to have an opinion on AOC or if
you live in LA you need to have an
opinion on whether we should be
supporting Ukraine or Israel and like
yeah these the huge Global culture has
extended beyond the neighborhoods and
the churches and everything to includ
everybody yeah everybody has a phone or
the internet the number of things that
you need to have an opinion on the
number of things that you're exposed to
has increased the level of Purity and
agreement within the group that you need
to adhere to in order to not be
ostracized by the group has also
increased a little bit I think that is a
I would say that that's probably like an
artifact so it feels like you have to be
more pure but it's not really that you
have to be more pure it's just that
there are so many more issues that you
probably have to there's more ways to
get wrong so like yeah yeah exactly so
like for say like 20 years ago uh I
don't know if there would have been a
social group enforcement on like the
type of beer that you're drinking but
after the whatever the trans Bud Light
stuff was or Budweiser stuff was that
might be part of your group now it's not
that they've gotten more peer and that
they demand more rigidity to the ideas
than they used to it's said now there
are more ideas that you have to adhere
to basically yeah so it appears like
they're more pure but it's just more
stuff that you have to keep in mind yeah
I think Bud Light is a really
fascinating little Canary in the coal
mine of sort of modern culture and I've
had a number of conversations about this
where when budlight happened it was a
huge big deal budlight was almost like a
a simulacrum for America it's like see
this is something that used to be pure
and and and and and patriotic and it was
it was trucks and Eagles and all see
what's happened these these wokies have
come along and they've they've
annihilated it and and and all the rest
of it and then full circle only when was
that 12 months ago 18 months ago it
wasn't more than two years ago when that
happened with Dylan milany right it was
in the last two years and now you Kid
Rock the guy that shot the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] cans
with an AR-15 he's drinking it on I
bought $10,000 of stock I think like the
day after all that broke and I yeah myat
Market it was obvious like so stupid
right yeah I posted those games on
Twitter I was like thanks conservatives
yeah what did it go where did you go
from and two how far is that I don't I
don't remember what did I beat there but
M it's moved a good amount yeah uh but
yeah and it just seems to me the
speed with which people will f finger
wave for or against something and then
forget the position that they held so
vehemently I really really have a huge
problem with people that are like so
adamant that a thing is true and then
only shortly after that are so adamant
that a thing is either no longer true or
they don't recognize what they said
before without at least going do you
know what it is maybe budlight weren't
the you know like libtard wokies that I
thought that they were maybe that was
just one malignant uh marketing campaign
that that went or right or whatever like
just show your working like show your
thinking to take you from where you were
to where you are because it just sounds
an awful lot like wherever the tide sort
of comes in and wherever the tide goes
out that you kind of get ripped along
with it and I don't know it's one of the
reasons why I'm quite skeptical of
people who don't caveat much about what
they say if you speak in absolute like
you'd better be certain because my
threshold to speak with that amount of
certainty that I know that this company
is one thing or I know that this company
is another thing it's like it's pretty
high so you either don't know what
you're talking about or have done tons
of work which should be evident in the
way that you speak about it uh I have
lots of ideas about this um the first
thing so the first thing to be a
criticism of people in general it feels
like nobody's capable of having a
moderate reaction to anything uh I'm
going to be honest when I saw the Bud
Light stuff and the I thought it was
cringe but like that's not a reaction
that people can have anymore it's either
the worst [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] thing in the world or
it's like the most important
foundational Bedrock part of LGBT like
can just be like oh that was kind of
dumb oh that was kind of cringer I kind
of like that it has to be 0 to 100 that
so that's really annoying um a second
thing
is uh let's see changing opinions or
people that felt like they had strong
opinions about one thing that have
changed dramatically uh these are two
things I've talk to my stream a lot
about these things watching the
evolution of my parents' beliefs
politically has been unreal to me um my
dad my mom and my dad uh my mom is from
Cuba uh so she's a immigrant very uh
pro-american people in general very Pro
Republican people we all cried when
alien Gonzalez got shipped back to Cuba
under Bill Clinton and hated him and
blah blah blah um my mom and dad are
very patriotic okay 20 years in the Air
Force for both of them my dad when if
you join the military in the United
States it's probably true in every
country in the world when you join the
military you get a ton of vaccines okay
you just they up and down the line it's
like 20 shots you don't even know what
you're getting injected that's what they
do uh my dad actually had a vaccine
injury and it is deltoid such that um he
can't really raise his arm very well
like past this level and that he gets
like paid disability from the Air Force
from that it's a real injury from
vaccines okay despite that when we grew
up you had to get your vaccine it was a
non-negotiable my mom would never even
think for two seconds that like her
children would not be vaccinated it
wouldn't it wouldn't even be a second
thought um today think we've had three
family members so far die from Co my mom
will not get any of the co shots and I
don't think she trusts any vaccines at
all anymore um so the evolution of her
belief on that has been crazy and I'm
sure there's a lot of Republicans that
have follow the same path the evolution
of the treatment of Russia when I grew
up I heard all about the chicoms the
Chinese Communists I heard all about uh
you know red China and the Soviets she
would always refer to Russia as a Soviet
Union um and today for her opinion on
you know the Russia's like H I guess
whatever Stevie but it's not our deal we
don't have to be concerned with it
whatever um that's insane to me the
difference in treatment between the
demeanor of the president I remember my
mom came home one day uh and she was
crying over the Monica Lewinsky stuff
and I didn't understand it I was super
young at the time um and she was trying
to tell me that like you don't
understand like the president is the
commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces
the way that he treats women that rolls
down to everybody and my commanding
officer is going to treat me this way I
already have to deal with all this
sexism in the Air Force and then for her
to listen to those Trump grabbing by the
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] tapes so she's like come on Stevie
boys will be boys it happens it's not a
big deal blah blah blah that is yeah
that that yeah that's wild pivot yeah
it's insane to me um there's two there's
two underlying things here two really
important things to keep in mind that
have taken me too long to figure out one
is that people don't genuinely uh
generate beliefs from some consistent
underlying system they inherit
constellations of beliefs that all kind
of rely on each other from social groups
so if you join a social group that says
um like Andrew Tate is innocent they
probably also think that Donald Trump is
a victim of the deep state that there's
a swamp that needs to be drained they
think that the election was stolen they
think that the vaccines are fake they
think that space lasers probably did
have something to do with Hawaii um they
don't trust the FDA um they think that
um we shouldn't be wasting time with
Russia and Ukraine and Putin is probably
more on the right than we want to admit
they like they all these beliefs that
are part of the con and it's true for
the left as well I'm not like I'm
bullying people on the right but it's
true for the left as well um that they
have these these constellations as well
but the the thing that bothers me the
most and then I'm sorry I'm wrapping
this up I had yeah the thing that
bothers me the most is um I did this for
a little bit and then I stopped because
it was truly depressing I thought that
people are just kind of dumb they don't
do any research or homework you get
these like constellations of beliefs and
you don't realize how wrong you are so
what I started to do was for big content
creators if you're going to make a big
claim and your job is alternative media
bet some [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] money on it okay if you
think that Trump is going to win and
you're 99% sure 99% you should be able
to give me 50 to one odds then on 100
bucks you're 99% sure one to 99 okay
sure when I started making Bets with
people on stuff like that I expected
people to tell me to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] off or I
expected people to take the bet because
they were overconfident but a third
thing started happening that was
incredibly surprising to me that
actually aligns with you know Peter
bosan yes yeah it aligns with a lot of
the stuff I've seen him do somebody will
say something like Trump is winning the
next election 99% and I'll be like oh
okay do you want to bet I I'll take
$1,000 and if I'm right you pay me 100
Grand okay cuz you're that confident and
instead of telling me to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] over
instead of saying you know whatever what
they actually do is they start to speak
and all of a sudden I realize they have
all the information in their brain
they're like well hold on he could get
sick and die he could have some senility
issues he is old maybe for some of the
indictments he might have done stuff
other stuff could come out uh M like
it's it's not even that they are afraid
of the bet or they just like immediately
tell me to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] off it's they actually
do have the information there they're
capable of exercising the the critical
thought process they just don't most of
the time because of the social pressures
for our belief systems that was the
really and I stopped doing I was like
this is insane wait so you know all this
you know all of the reasons why what you
said before was dumb it just took
somebody to put a quantitative value on
your conviction for you to appropriately
scale back your belief that was crazy
and why was that so depressing to you
because I was just told me they were
dumb not that like not that they
actually had all the information but
they were choosing not to apply it I
remember when I IED Glenn Greenwald
recently um who's a hack who the only
reason you've ever heard his name before
is because he happened to be the
journalist that Edward Snowden want to
to dump the uh Snowden papers okay um
and we were debating and he was bringing
up it was over the January 6 Trump stuff
and he was bringing up I studied his
videos I studied the arguments I've read
the papers I know all the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
arguments and he brings up like oh well
there was an elector scheme in Hawaii
and you know they and now they're doing
another one and it's the same thing and
I'm like hold on
the elector scheme in Hawaii the state
legisl approved both those slates of
elector I won't get to the details but I
didn't actually say that I was like well
hold on wait the Hawaii thing what do
you mean by bringing up the Hawaii thing
and then he actually went into detail
about the Hawaii thing I was like wait
so you knew what was going on here but
you still brought it up as a comparison
because he because once you bring up all
the facts it's completely different from
the Trump thing so yeah my my view on
people as like an internet debater try
to change people's minds things has
shifted a lot over the years where at
first I thought like people kind of dumb
and they are they fall into a lot of
these bad thought processes and thought
patterns and cognitive biases and blah
blah blah and we do have those but
people are actually a lot smarter than I
think people realize and if you treat a
person as smart and you present them
with the right information and you try
to break them out of like an echo
chamber or this epistemic circularity
that they get caught in I think people
can surprise you there just has to be
that push to do it and a recognition
that like you're not misunderstanding
this because you're stupid it's because
there's an immense amount of social
pressure that's like boxing you into the
thought prodn in other news this episode
is brought to you by element element is
a tasty electrolyte drink mix with
everything that you need and nothing
that you don't it's a healthy
alternative to sugary electrolyte drinks
and it will improve your hydration you
don't need to have caffeine first thing
in the morning because your adenosine
system that caffeine act on isn't even
active for the first 990 minutes of the
day but your adrenal system is and salt
acts on your adrenal system element
contains a signs backed electrolyte
ratio of sodium pottassium and magnesium
that helps to curb Cravings regulate
your appetite and improve your brain
function best of all there is a no BS no
questions asked refund policy so you can
buy it 100% risk-free And if you do not
like it for any reason they will give
you your money back and you don't even
need to return the box that's how
confident they are that you love it
right now you can get a free sample pack
of all eight flavors with your first box
by going to the link in the description
below or heading to drink LM nt.com slod
wisdom that's drink LM nt.com
SL modern wisdom I had this idea called
the soft signal of effect Effectiveness
that um there is a trend on the internet
for people to be you know the most
vehement like flame sword wielding
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like I'm going to come for
you and I'm going to tear you down I'm
going to make you look stupid it's going
to be filled with sardonic comments and
all the rest of it but I think that that
activates whoever you're speaking to's
defense system that's the antibodies
just come up I don't want to be made to
look like a complete idiot so I'm just
going to Stand My Ground And I think
that sure there's times where ridicule
is a useful tool M and you can use that
to kind of oh my God like that
discomfort kind of kicks you out of
stuff but for the most part because
people just embed themselves into their
beliefs especially if the fear is I'm
going to look stupid or lose status if I
get this wrong that actually going okay
well tell me about that so just walk me
through your thinking and being a little
bit more gentle So Soft signal of
Effectiveness being most of the guys
that are the the real hardcore vehement
piss-taking
people I don't I don't think that they
change Behavior particularly well and
the question is what is it that you're
trying to achieve with this
communication that you're having are you
actually trying to get a good outcome of
bringing people closer to something
appropriating truth or are you trying to
look cool and dunk on the other person
during this discussion yeah yeah and
then you have to be mindful of so much
about like they're changing their mind
too uh this is something that I kind of
bring up but it feels kind of bad to do
this but like if I'm debating somebody
who let's say somebody like Beno okay
who I respect is an intelligent person
he's clearly intelligent he's done
really good with his company but Ben
Piro is a pundit on The Daily wire and
he's the part owner of the daily wire
which is a conservative news Outlet his
livelihood to some extent depends on him
remaining in the good graces of a
conservative audience so if if two
studies were to come out tomorrow the
largest studies of all of mankind prove
that socialism and socialized Healthcare
are the best things to you know increase
the standards of living for everybody
for somebody like me because I'm not
like I don't have a necessarily a
political alignment I can say like oh I
changed my mind these are like cool I I
follow this now but if you're a hardcore
dug in on the conservative side it's
going to be really hard to change your
mind on that because that that's not
what people are coming to you for is to
just hear your unique take some they
want a little bit of the reinforcement
of the um I don't want to say the echo
chamber they're in but a little bit of
the reinforcement of like the social
constellation of ideas they've inherited
and then I'm going to start using more
leftly examples all your conservatives
are feeling very bullied and H right now
same thing with on the left that like
when uh when research and data was
coming out that for a while we got way
too hyped up on the trans kid stuff okay
personally I still think that there is a
strong argument for people on under the
age of 18 to have medications made
available to them um and that's a whole
other thing you get into but people got
way too gung-ho about it and you need to
be willing to critically accept research
that might not reinforce that position
and a lot of people on the lamp totally
unwilling to hear or see any data that
might say that like oh you know um
assistance rates might be like this or
giving medication these people might not
produce the best outcomes or some of
these studies aren't the best that we're
using for this particular thing um yeah
people people have a really hard time
accepting information sometimes that is
contrary to their you know their belief
system and well it's part of their
acceptance within the group and then
it's also a you can think of it kind of
like a smooth ball right if you've just
accepted this worldview wholesale that
it's very easy I don't need to do a turn
of sens making myself I'm going to be
accepted by the group any hole that you
pick in one of those things well what
does this say about my opinion on
immigration or on gun rights or on
abortion or on how we should deal with
the Ukraine or on the sense of agency
what we should do with socialized
Healthcare all of these things sort of
start to crack and crumble underneath
the pressure of one of these threads
becoming unpicked basically yeah and and
more importantly because of the way that
it works as a constellation and not
they're that they're all uniquely
generated they all are kind of
self-reliant on each other yes um it
can't be the case that um oh God my the
past six months has been fighting with
conservatives over Trump so that's all
my example I'm so sorry okay listen
progressives have big problems too but
it just can't be the case that the FDA
is trustworthy that can never be the
case because if that's the case the
whole premise of the FDA being
untrustworthy has to do with the concept
of the deep state it has to do with the
government being against us it has to do
with Pharmaceuticals being corrupt it
has to do on top on top it's they're the
they're all like it's like a Jenga Tower
but there's no Foundation they all find
a way to keep the blocks in the air like
zero gra J yeah and you can't pull
anything out because wait that does
because everything would completely
totally fall apart and the problem when
you're in a social group is you can't
have an in congruency of Applied ideas
because that implies that you have an in
congruency in fun
what you mean the applied ideas as in if
I'm with a group of conservatives and I
say I believe in affirmative action and
a $15 an hour minimum wage and the
conservatives go okay well you're you're
an idiot you uh want to destroy the
economy and you're uh you know bigotry
of low expectations of B okay I don't
care what like our values are
fundamentally different so our applied
positions are obviously going to be
different I'm I'm for and this isn't my
personal position like I'd say like oh
well I'm for a minimum wage of for
Action you're not but that's of course
our applied positions are way different
we have difference in values but if I'm
next to somebody that is near me
ideologically or or supposedly identical
to me ideologically well if we start to
um if we start to separate on applied
positions so maybe I believe that um we
need to build more housing to help
homeless people and somebody else says
well we need to uh enact strict rent
control to keep rents down if we have a
disagreement there that person isn't
going to attack me on the applied
position he's not going to say oh you
want to build more housing rent control
is obviously better that person's going
to go to the core belief and he's oh
well you hate homeless people now the
core belief attack from somebody close
to me hurts a lot more than from the
conservative like wait hold on I don't
hate homeless people right and I'm sure
it's same for you in a manosphere well
you're not I don't I know you've
branched up from that but like if you
think of like a manosphere or like a red
pill person if they're on a show with a
bunch of feminists and like you hate
women and you're damaging to men and
blah blah blah yeah you're a feminist
obviously we disagree but if it's two
red pillars disagreeing with each other
like I think that your advice is
horrible for young men you're not
advocating for them or whatever it's
like wait what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] do you mean
that's my whole platform what do you
mean I'm not them now you've got a huge
disagreement I think this is called I
think it's called the it might be called
the bigotry of small differences but
basically that the the closer somebody
is to you ideologically these little
differences seem to yeah get super
exaggerated I've seen this there's a a
really good little process that I went
through a friend asked me how do you
know if the content creator that you're
consuming is someone that you can trust
basically how do you know if they're
trustworthy and the same thing is true I
think for friends you can actually use
this for friends just as easily as for
Content creators the answer if they're
subscribed to my channel
youtube.com/ yeah yeah that that would
help uh but first one when was the last
time that this person surprised you with
an opinion uh second
one when was the last time that they
publicly admitted that they were wrong
about something uh third one
is does their ingroup bind together of
the mutual love of their ingroup or the
mutual hatred of an outg group and then
the fourth one
was do they speak to people with
differing points of views and value sets
for reasons other than mocking them and
if you go through those four steps and
there's probably like a million others
they're just like kind of obvious ones
for me uh there's no one really that
triggers at least a few of those that is
also a shiter like it's very rare unless
they're doing it performatively and
playing some 5D chess um it's very rare
that someone goes through those things
and I think
that even using that for yourself
whether you're someone that creates [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
online or just wants to be able to make
sense of the world thinking okay when
was the last time that I admitted that I
was wrong when was the last time that I
had an opinion that people would have
probably been surprised by when was the
last time that I consumed a piece of
content that I probably going to
disagree with do the people that I hang
around with do we mostly talk about
things that are shared values or shared
hatreds that's just a nice little
process to go through and that's helped
me you know we consume content too like
the people that make it also consume it
you know you're sat waiting for an Uber
or doing whatever you're waiting for
someone to arrive and you're like well
see I'll watch Taylor Len versus the
libs of Tik Tok lady uh and I'll see
what goes on and you you start to form
opinions about this sort of stuff so I
think it's important like that's just a
really nice self-correcting mechanism or
at least like a process that you can go
through that helps yeah I definitely I
super agree yeah I would add on to that
for um for for an individual that's
listening to this or for Content
creators or whatever too um something
that have helped a lot is don't try to
free yourself from biases I think that
this is a Fool's errand and I think it
lurs you into a false sense of security
I think it's better to just be aware of
like cognitive pitfalls and then try to
correct for them afterwards so for
instance you mentioned that thing about
getting upset people will dig in
I absolutely dig my [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] heels in I
will and if I don't like you enough and
if we're arguing passionately enough
I'll argue that 2 plus 2 equals 5 if I
disagree with you that much and I know
that about myself and I know that that's
the thing I'm not going to claim that
that doesn't happen and I'm not going to
spend my entire life trying to make it
so that that doesn't happen I'm not
going to get mad I'm not going mad but
instead what it do is listen when I
argue I get heated I know that but the
next day if I've got a big argument I'm
going to review it because when I'm
removed from the argument by 24 hours
now I can go over and like okay did this
person make a good point feel like I
didn't have a good response to this like
do I need to strengthen my argument were
they better on some things and I need to
just like take parts of their argument
like being able to um correct for biases
rather than to try to eliminate them is
a way healthier mindset when I was doing
research as well on certain podcasts
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the conservative comes again but
like for um Dr Malone the guy who said
he was the father of the MRNA vaccine
when he was on Joe Rogan um before I
started doing research and I would do a
lot of this on stream um I would write
at the top of a notepad for clim I want
to write the first thing I would write
is I do not like Joe Rogan's opinion on
vaccines I don't trust Dr Robert Malone
at all the reason why write these two
things down is because I know that this
is priming me to disagree with anything
that they say so I have to be extra
careful when one of them says something
like oh well you know oranges actually
make your dick bigger I might just think
immediately this is so stupid and write
that because I hate both of them but I
need to keep mind okay hold on I know
that I'm primed like crazy against both
these guys I'm aware of that so I need
to be careful when I am evaluating their
claims because I might just say that
they're not true because I just don't
like them yeah adjusting your site on a
basically yeah the zeroing on your brain
yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah zeroing on your
brain that's a nice way to put it yeah
you to just like try to correct for
biases or be aware of them but don't
pretend that you can get rid of them you
absolutely cannot there's no way as a
human being do you think that the
debates that you do help to change Minds
obviously you've spent you've got this
big one coming up and you've done it a
number over the last few months and it's
like a high price although you're
interested right you're engaged and
stuff uh what do you think is the net
outcome of you sitting down with Glenn
Greenwald and and Alex Jones or you
sitting down with Norman fing Stein and
and and Lex Freedman or whatever I think
there's several things that happen one
is that hopefully this's a broad broad
broad narrative thing but hopefully it
shapes the views a little bit of both
sides so if you're a pro Palestinian and
you hear me argue maybe you moderate a
tad on some of the things that you're
saying about how evil and bloodthirsty
Israeli citizens are if you're a super
big Zionist and you hear me argue
hopefully you moderate a bit on your
opinion as like okay maybe Israel has
made some mistakes historically and then
if you're homeless in the middle those
are the people that I try to like up
basically are people who email me and
let's say like hey I was really big on
this prop Palestinian stuff but all the
demonstrations and the pro Hamas stuff
made me feel really like crazy and not
at home I'm glad I found somebody that's
reasonable or maybe it's like hey I'm
like a super pro Zionist guy but you
know I'm really uncomfortable with how
much people support like the mass
settlements and you know the
demonization of Palestinians and
pretending like we never have to make
any concessions ever and I'm glad that
you're there so yeah I try to like kind
of scoop up the people who are a little
bit politically homeless right now and
then hopefully I can kind of soften the
positions on both sides depending on
what particular issue that I'm arguing
with which is presumably why you've got
a problem with the short sound bite
thing because it doesn't allow the
entirety of the conversation to be
encapsulated yeah basically and people
I'm I don't like short sound bites
because people don't engage with them
like short sound bites I don't make 30
second videos If you hear me say
something in 30 seconds that's going to
be an excerpt from a larger conversation
if you hear me say something like um
Destiny says that Palestinians have
historically always been violent towards
Israel okay I think that's a true
statement that's a sound bite that you
can cut and what if you have that sound
bite what you would say is like in my
opinion you can say like oh Destiny
believes that Palestinians have
historically always been violent towards
the state of Israel that's fine but you
can't take that and say Destiny thinks
that Palestinians are solely to blame
for the problems in between Israel and
Palestine or destiny only thinks it's
Palestinians whove made mistakes
historically with Israel Palestine like
people will extrapolate so much from One
Clip instead of just watching a larger
conversation or getting more of a
holistic view on what's going on you
know it like the equivalent would be
like you hear a friend like if we
conducted ourselves in the real world
like people treat content creators you'd
be hanging out with a friend and like
hey what do you want to eat and your
from like you know what I could really
go for a pizza right now and you're like
pizza do you hate all Indian food like
what do you mean no I just want a pizza
do you hate steak no I just wanted a
pizza okay well you just said that you
like pizza do you not like any other
type of food or it's just like so
bizarre that you think in 20 seconds you
can get a clip and have a a full summary
of like what somebody has has thought
about an issue or said about an issue
did you watch how much have you got to
watch that Taylor Loren versus Libs of
Tik Tok debate did you watch much of it
I watched there was part of it was
posted on Twitter I think like three
minutes and I watched that was it how
much how much I to get 15 minutes into
it okay and it was a car crash it was so
you say that books should be banned from
schools which books have you read and B
it was I've actually read this one and
this one and this one you think that uh
children's body parts should be cut off
which parts exactly and it was just like
this I don't know like an Unstoppable
object in an immovable Force like just
clashing up against each other and Len's
got this mask on outside which just
seems to be like it's like purposely
sign yeah yeah like is it it's like the
this is my joke that like every single
like if somebody like so many Democrats
got long covid so many Republicans got
vaccine injuries it's just so crazy how
that worked out you know every every
conservative that got vaccinated know 10
people that have died from vaccines and
every Democrat seems to know like five
people with long Co it's crazy how the
it sorted itself out that way you know
yeah what's the because there woke
fishing what's the other one like Trad
fishing I guess but this is like Trad
triggering right it's like purposefully
doing the thing say what you want about
Taylor Len like she knows the Optics of
what she's doing have you seen her
Instagram
uh no I not it's just I you don't need
to spend too much time on it but it's a
lot of like meta memes about what's
going on kind of about the situations
about all the rest of it so she's
obviously playing this like huge oh do
you think do you think that the mask was
part of the meme then absolutely oh I
have so much more respect for her if
that's I thought she just like oh that's
really funny then [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I saw it and I
was just like oh God why are people
still wearing masks outside no it's 100%
because she knew that by sitting down
doing it that I think I I'm not calling
Taylor Loren a media genius like I I
think that she's like pretty reliably an
idiot but there are certain things that
she's able to like certain games that
she's able to play okay where she's
doing that you and the reason that I
think this I've got my biases based on
her Instagram and her Instagram is very
meta it's all about the narratives about
her or about what she's been talking
about or whatever and if you saw it
you'd go yeah like it takes a degree of
sort of stepping out okay from it and
seeing it from where it is doesn't make
her points or her any better of a person
but um interesting yeah I think the mask
I think the mask was a bit I'll check
that out later then that's pretty funny
it's pretty funny it is pretty funny um
the only thing that would have made it
better I guess is if she showed up with
like a little Band-Aid on her arm for
the I just got my yeah 50th booster shot
yeah uh I had this conversation the
other day about whether or not we passed
Peak woke like whether or not we did
about a year and a half ago that's my
guess when would it have been um I feel
like the I think that there have been a
couple court cases one was near I think
it was about two years ago it was with
the Ober it was at a school called
Overland something and I think a black
person tried to steal something from a
bakery across the school and the
students and the bakery called the cops
and they hel the person there and the
students protested saying the bakery was
racist but the college joined in with
the students basically and I think that
uh College basically ended up owing like
$30 million to the bakery over that
lawsuit it was huge um there was that
there was the whole Wasing the Harvard
and the two other uh administrators get
raked over the coals on the weird yeah
yep that was really cringe and I think
most people saw it as such I think a lot
of the pro Palestinian stuff which is
unfortunate because they do need good
International representation but the
marches and the all of that was not good
was not good publicity for them um yeah
and I just I feel like people are
looking at all kind of the council
culture stuff a little bit less like uh
I feel like anecdotally like the word
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is coming back bit more it is sh
used the word gay in his SNL did you
watch this I have not so oh he was gay
and cracker didn't he he's Gray gay
cracker and [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] okay all my chat said
that and they said I need to watch it
because he said gay and cracker I
haven't watched it and [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] okay wow
uh so yeah he he's doing this bit about
uh
how as a young boy you're basically your
mom's gay best friend and he says you
remember that you remember when you were
young you were just gay and then starts
rolling into the G so he kind of tempers
a little bit and plays it down the line
but uh yeah I think you're right I think
like those words coming back into
Resurgence and there was a novelty
around this like actually being woke
being aware of all of the different
social issues and this sort of
performative empathy toxic compassion
thing that was like novel and made you
seem Progressive uh and aware yeah and
now it seems like a meme yeah and it
also it didn't really penetrate as much
as people thought it would it's very
funny because is um the perception in
the United States [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I'm about to
bully conservatives again the perception
in the United States is that the farle
was a huge problem and there might be
some extremist on the right or whatever
but the reality is the far left didn't
make it anywhere legislatively of the of
the Justice stems that got in they've
moderated so much that now the wokies
have abandoned them they're super angry
about Bernie Sanders and his position on
Israel Palestine theyve not liked AOC
for a long time because they thought she
sold out to Pelosi and she's not
attacking other Democrats as much so
they have no power in the lawmaking
bodies uh largely speaking like older
Americans don't Vibe with the super woke
stuff basically at all and the only
place that these people kind of have
power is in like School administration
and even for like some of the school
stuff people are kind of looking at this
like this is getting kind of silly
you're not seeing like the huge protests
and demonstrations like you used to
against like the Milo yannopoulos and
everything uh but on the right uh their
party is about to jump off a cliff
following Donald Trump something like
80% of Republicans would literally
follow Donald Trump to the end of the
Earth which is a big problem for the
Republican party but they seem to not
think that they're kind of captured by
anything so it's funny that for the most
part like the Democrat party and
Democratic voters are basically like
Center left and they kind of like got
tugged along a little bit with all like
the crazy woke stuff but now they're
kind of like H this is like whatever but
on the far right I think it's something
like um I say far right but it's the
majority of Republicans I think it's
something like 70% of them don't believe
in the results of the last election they
think that it was actually rigged that
like when you look at policies in terms
of far right disbelieving the last
election versus allowing trans [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
like child's porn bucks in schools or
whatever the ne the most most recent
accusation is I don't know whether
people would find an equivalency between
those two things the biggest problem
that I think or the thing that people
often times underrate is how pervasive
the belief is so for instance like
Nazism in the altri in my opinion was a
big concern because of the type of
belief that it was but it never really
picked up that much it was a fringe
belief yeah it was a fringe right there
like and then that and I had a huge
problem from 2016 onwards of like um you
know like people on the left calling
everybody a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Nazi like bro do you
no stop they're not even neo-nazis this
do it's not a good label to call all
these people Nazis all these people all
right it doesn't make any sense um and I
agreed like I said for the especially
for the trans stuff although I think
we've moved past like the peak culture
moment for that although a lot of that
was also um it continued to be
perpetuated because conservatives
apparently had nothing else to talk
about besides trans people so they fed
into it a lot as well that's true man I
mean we saw so much of the discourse was
not necessarily about the first incident
it was about the reaction to the
incident and the subsequent reaction to
the reaction and then the the discourse
that came out about that and and also
the overreact and this goes back to the
to the moderated reactions thing I feel
this is a totally unsubstantiated belief
I can't prove this at all just my
feeling I feel like a lot of parents got
mad about stuff in school libraries and
about what their kids were in in class
not because it's gotten worse than it
ever has been but because with Co and
with children staying home for the first
time ever parents were actually looking
at the curriculum of what their children
were learning and for the first time
ever they were like wait what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
is this
like well it's not not a problem just
because you're not aware of it sure
which I agree but I have an issue with
people thinking that stuff has become
uniquely bad something that I believe in
very firmly is I think the downfall of
Andrew Tate I also can't prove this I
think the downfall of Andrew Tate
started with those stories that came out
of the UK about little boys in class
bullying little girls using Andrew Tate
stuff those stories got huge and then
the talk of like our little boys in
school learning things from Andrew Tate
and blah blah blah and it was horrible
and people you know had you know
articles get very defensive about
children in many ways yeah but the thing
that I was thinking was like yeah I'm
sure this is happening and it's
definitely horrible but how much are we
just now seeing you know little boys and
girls bullying each other in school
because we've got cell phones in front
of everybody this isn't a new thing I'm
not saying it's okay but like we've
always bullied the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out of each
other at school you know yes yeah so to
to Circle back I'm not defending the
whatever weird trans books or sex or gay
sex guides or whatever exists in school
libraries I'm sure they're out there and
I'm sure a lot of them are inappropriate
and dumb but like there's switch thank
God it hasn't happened to me yet but
parents like flip a switch when they
become parents where they forget every
single thing about being a kid and
they're like oh my God this is the worst
thing ever I can't believe my kid is
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] seeing this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and blah blah
blah and it's like when I was a kid I
don't know if it was like this UK but I
remember staying up at night where you
would go to like it was Channel 14 and
15 and it was like the Cinemax like
softcore yeah but it was like blurry but
like every now and then it would like
come through kind of see like the boob
and it was like green that's what we did
as kids but I feel like if parents saw
their kids doing it to be like oh my God
it's the wokeness that's like getting my
12-year-old to think of porn or if like
a movie like Mrs Doubtfire came out
today they'd be like wow Robin Williams
pushing the woke trans crossdressing
agenda it's like interesting yeah yeah
that is uh I don't know man the the the
capturing of smart people's attention
Douglas Murray good friend and he said
he can't believe how many people have
spent their time over the last few years
debating about whether men are men and
women are women or not and that's a a
critique I think both of this shouldn't
be a discussion that we're having I.E
sex is something which is binary and
real and also the overreaction from his
own side of this capture when there are
other things that we could be focusing
on he went and did this documentary
around the Streets of Philadelphia
looking at this Tran epidemic yeah like
that's a much that's a huge problem and
fentol and opioid crisis all this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
like those are really really really big
problems but they don't play quite so
well on as the culture War stuff yeah
yes yeah and so you've got like Dan
santis passing stuff in Florida of like
Banning hormone therapy for Trans like
how many people is this even impacting I
remember when Matt Walsh went on Joe
Rogan and I think Rogan asked him how
many kids do you think are on hormones
and this is right after he done a whole
documentary on it and Matt Walsh was
like it's probably in the millions and
the answer is like 5,000 over like some
like really dude yeah yeah I mean
another thing that's played into this
and there's always something new and
dude I'm you know vehemently against
almost all of the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] woke stuff
but not only for the reason I think that
it's in itself is dog [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] but that it
captures everyone's attention on all
sides you get the reaction then you get
the subsequent re- reaction and then
there becomes this big debate and it
gets blown out of nowhere it's like the
especially for some reason especially
the woke stuff for both sides seems like
such a shelling point that everybody can
get super passionate about yeah and this
most recent thing with Gemini with oh
God I don't even know what is this
Google's AI disaster have you not seen
this no my mind has been all studying
for this debate yeah what's this allow
me to educate you go ahead uh Google oh
wait wait is this the thing where when
you ask for pictures it's always of like
black people and Asian people that would
be correct okay I've seen the memes I
don't know anything else about it okay
so I I don't know it in depth but I'll
try and give you a good overview it
tried to be so anti-racist that it ended
up being racist okay and it annoyed
people on the left because if you asked
for an image of some Nazis it was black
Nazis and then it annoyed people on the
right because if you ask for an image of
the founding fathers it was black
founding fathers so everybody got pissed
off and then it sort of hid it did a
combination of hid and erased history in
this regard but people were using it
using its anti-racism to be really
racist so they would say something like
can you give me an image of 14th century
philosophers drinking grape juice and
eating watermelon and it would be four
black people drinking grape juice and
eating watermelon so just the
whole retroactive changing of history
after the Super Bowl thing where they
collected corrected Alicia Key's voice I
think at the start it's all part of some
like a big constellation of different
data points that are making people very
concerned about what's happening to
history and what's an acceptable it also
has implications for whether or not
Google itself is a reliable search is it
going to deliver information in a way
which is actually factual like given
that so many people are going to use
that to try and find something out the
what if all of the real stuff is hidden
down on page [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] five yeah you don't
know so yeah I mean from a branding
position very bad very I could not have
done it more poorly than this and it's
probably according to Mike Baker it's
probably gone through a million
different this isn't the sort of thing
it's not like a budlight thing that
perhaps was just one part of the
marketing department that threw a case
of sixpack at Dylan mulany this has gone
through an awful lot of layers before
it's got here so it doesn't seem like
it's happened by accident so you think
there was like an intentional ploy to
make it like not racist or I think that
they are force-feeding diversity in so
much obviously they didn't mean for it
to be so apparent that like anyone with
the most basic prompt in history could
create something which had a stand out
like you can't make it to make a family
of white or you couldn't get it to make
a family of white people I think the
only way you could get it to make white
people is if you ask for
ukrainians uh but it was like a Native
American president and show me an image
of the the king of Spain from the 18th
century and it's like black guy M so I
think that it was force feeding divers
and you can say ask it things like show
me you're working or ask like explain to
me why you did this and it's just the
most rudimentary basic wokey talking
points like the most cringe like it is
important that we represent people from
diverse backgrounds and we like just it
was that so there wasn't much complexity
to it but this Force feeding of
diversity plays into the Dei concern
that a lot of people have at the moment
and uh it's just more distraction I'm
like God like if this hadn't happened if
you just made it an accurate
representation of what people needed but
now we've got another and we're right
now this very moment could be talking
about something else that would be
really useful but it's an important now
it's another important cultural moment
to try and dissect to work out what's
going on and it just every single time
it pushes us back pushes us back pushes
us back I think there are two huge
issues at play the first thing is I
always tell people um if you're trying
to engage in in real true political
discourse you're trying to understand
people don't ever start with the
assumption that people are doing like
evil crazy stuff I think that um when
you're when you're when you start from
that perspective you've already lost the
ability to understand the other side so
people on the left that want like trans
kids legitimately feel like or a lot of
them legitimately feel like there are
children that are in need that have to
get some medical stuff to make their
lives workable basically they and I
think that probably comes from a place
of compassion generally speaking I think
that when people on the right are
fighting against stuff related to trans
kids I think they genuinely believe that
there are a lot of children that can get
confused and then get swept up in online
communities and then start taking
medication or hormones and they don't
know what's going on and it's going to
be damaging to them and I think it genu
genuinely comes from a place of
compassion I think it's important to
start from there because if you start
from the place of like well my enemy is
trying to destroy the country for XYZ
reasons you're like you're totally lost
right um the people that did the
instruction on January 6th I imagine
they genuinely thought that the election
was stolen they really did think that
that election was stolen and that there
was some crazy stuff happening and
that's why they had to go to the White
House and try to stop the um you know
the confirmation of the vote and
everything I genuinely believe that they
thought that now they were just like
we're going to mess everything up right
now cuz we're some real bad dudes um I
think that I only say that because
usually when when corporations make
mistakes I think that they're usually
trying their best because when when a
lot of people are involved I think
they're usually trying their best now if
it's just like one or two people
involved sometimes like personal agendas
could really mess things up but if it's
a lot of people involved the idea that
there's this top down order of like okay
guys [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] white people we're going to do
this we're going to we're going to edit
them out we're going to make sure that
we're blah blah blah blah blah as
opposed to somebody like we got to make
sure that these are you know diverse
enough we don't want to Happ so every
single thing is spitting out a million
white people and then they probably
overcorrect also a lot of coward I think
coward cowardice absolutely yes it's so
this is Andrew Schultz taught me about
this like his Schultz's razor is uh it's
not coordination it's cowardice sure
yeah because somebody might be SC like
hey are we [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up right now guys
because you don't want to be the one to
for sure and that could absolutely be a
thing too Absol hu I think that's a big
part of it and especially with this
Dynamic we're talking about now because
if you're the guy it's it's like the
being the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] first person that
stops clapping after like some dictator
stands up and gives a speech I'm not
going to be the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] first person
that stop clapping I'm not going to be
the guy that says maybe this whole
diversity thing maybe it's going too far
maybe we don't need to do affirmative
action maybe we should uh keep the SATs
maybe they do actually have a maybe Men
actually need a little bit of
affirmative action at school or maybe
we're going a little bit too far on
having you know 20% of our advertisement
trans oh so you think that women should
you want to get women out of the
boardroom and back into the kitchen is
that right but remember it's because a
slight difference in applied Position
will be interpreted as a huge difference
in fundamental moral belief you want to
cut trans advertising because you hate
trans people you want to get back on the
diversity St because you think white
people are better than black people
right that's always where it goes so
it's so hard for and in these
environments it's going to be a lot of
like-minded people so hard for them to
course correct which is why I talk about
how when those two groups like Branch
off into their own thing that is
incredibly destructive I hate the fact
that conservatives all talked about how
we need to get out of the schools
because they're corrupt and whatever the
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] because well now the people in the
schools are even more [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] insane I
need you there you need to be there you
got to be participating or when left
leaning people don't want to participate
in certain aspects of like conservative
culture when left leaning people don't
want to celebrate success or wealth or
you know business is doing well or
patriotism okay well cool well now if I
have a if I'm a patriotic American I
basically have to be a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
conservative because I'm not going to be
patriotic on the side that's telling me
to hate my country for [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] slavery
and colonialism and white supremacy
recap that so it's the difference in
applied position is indicative of a
difference a change in value that's feel
like yes yes yeah okay so just because
this is something that you want to have
happen in the real world there is a an
implication about your moral stance
because for most people they didn't do
the work to go from the initial uh the
the the grounded ethical stance to the
applied position and since they didn't
do the work it's one and the same to
them that's why if I talk about Israel
Palestine it's still frustrating it
still happens if I talk about isra
Palestine say I don't think I would say
anything happening right now is aparte
or genocide they don't hear okay you
don't think it's aparti or genocide they
hear you think it's okay what's
happening you think that Palestinians
should live in territories where they
never get a state you think it's okay to
kill civilians that's what people hear
the same way that you might say um I
don't know if I support affirmative
action H you you just don't like black
people you think that it's their fault
everything in the United States or if
you say maybe we've gone a bit too far
on the diversity stuff they're like oh
okay well the only reason you can think
that is because you hate diversity and
you're a white supremacist yeah because
they yeah those things are so connected
so it's a it's a it's not a slippery
slope of it's like an interpretation of
slippery sless it's this very small
Iceberg above the water this happen it's
not even a slippery SL it's a horizontal
platform that's it these things are here
when I that's why when you um there's a
where who's the Alex oconor worker
whatever there's a ethical position I
think it's called um it's you can be an
ethical anti-realist who believes in
non-cognitivism and when you believe in
non-cognitivism what you're saying is
when I express a moral proposition I say
that murder is bad what I'm actually
doing is I'm just expressing an
emotional state murder boo I don't like
murderer murder boo uh emotive I think
it's non-cognitivism right no no no is
it emotive positivism [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] godamn it
random philosophy he's he's going to
scream at me he taught me about this two
nights ago in Miami he came out for my
birthday
emotive [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] epistemics or something
like that maybe that but yeah it's
basically I mean this is one of his best
ideas that he taught me and I've now
forgotten but yes it's basically
whenever somebody says that they're in
support of something or against
something it's basically like Yay
abortion or boo abortion and then they
work back from that position and then
just try and they don't even work back
they just sit there yes that's why so
like for instance if a girl releases a
story um I cover a lot of um we call
them rape reviews on my stream it's a
little crude reviews yeah because people
put out the me too stories and then
we'll read through them it's like okay
well what is the do we feel like it's a
credible allegation of what's going on
and for a lot of these things if you say
woman raped you're saying what you're
really saying is what happened to it was
really bad and if somebody else boo rape
yeah or or boo whatever that was and if
you come he's like well I looked at this
I think the guy was definitely pushy um
there might have been like some groping
like not good sexual I don't think it
was rape they hear you saying rape
yay or if you push against the diversity
measures you know white supremacy yay or
if you push against the you know the
trans youth stuff like oh discrimination
yay oh Trans suicide yay because for a
lot of people the applied position and
the ethical position are one and the
same these are inexorably linked and
there is no difference that can happen
which again if you're debating somebody
different than you who the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] cares I
don't care if we have different applied
and ethical positions we're supposed to
but if it's somebody similar to you we
can't be disagreeing what do you mean
you don't think there's a genocide you
think it's okay to murder innocent
civilians like those two things are
linked and they're not it's total nonse
yeah just how unified is the left
compared with the right do you think at
the moment this can be within the
cultural commentary space this can be
within the people who support the side
this could be within the the politicians
that are a part of it do you have a
sense of how fractured each of these are
comparatively
um I feel like the rightest more unified
probably because they have a figure like
Trump to unify around the left is a
little feels a little bit more scattered
but there's also going to become this
also like very dependent on the
communities that you're in like I said
like if you're online on Twitter your
impression of the American left in the
United States is like a crazy woke mob
of like cancel culture children running
around the streets and then you forget
that like if you go you know to like uh
you know like North Carolina or Georgia
and you're talking to like 30-year-old
35y old 50y old like black voters and
stuff these people are not woke protr
people running around on the street
saying like my child needs HRT right
this is not the demographic at all or
even when you look at like older
Democratic voters like generally these
people are going to be kind of the the
the cool old woke people the cool like
the Cosmopolitan Elites who are like
yeah I am a I am a woke person I believe
in gay marriage that used to be like the
the woke position what would be yuppies
or something yeah and but those people
largely had like cool social beliefs
like I think that we should have gay
marriage I think freedom of speech is
important I think that um yeah it was
like we should probably have some kind
of like worker protections and unions
need to come back and bl like those
kinds of work things not the like my
four-year-old identifies as a it its or
whatever ATT helicopter yeah also on a
real quick thing too um because you
brought this up earlier with both sides
on this one of the big issues the left
has
is a situation will come up somebody
comes out and they say my four-year-old
child is trans and I know that because
you know they kicked right in the womb
or whatever and then consider go you're
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] insane okay the what should
happen is is what I do when somebody
comes to me and they bring me a crazy
left-leaning belief and they'll go what
about when this guy uh said that this
thing can can happen when they said that
like all women are constantly being
raped by Men by looking at them then
what I say is oh that's really dumb and
then you move on one of the big reasons
why some of these small issues get blown
up so much is because the people on the
left will take the bait and they will
start defending absurd [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] there is not
an epidemic of people with four-year-old
trans people in the United States there
is an epidemic of people willing to
defend them though and that's the issue
and that's why people on the right feel
so Justified
like culture War even
if yeah it took me a long time to figure
this out I'm always thinking I'm like
why is this such a huge issue it's trans
people are like 1% of the population if
that depending on how many intersect of
the discourse yeah and but when you talk
to conservatives you look at Yugo polls
I think the the one that I saw was I
think conservatives think 20% of people
are trans in the US and I'm like well
why is this the case but then when you
look at the left well how many people
over there willing to defend it and now
I understand more okay yeah wow yeah
that's very interesting so it's like a
it's not about the volume of incidents
that occur it's about the volume the the
volume of discussions that occur around
that people willing to defend it yes
correct whereas if everybody in the was
like yeah this is really dumb then
you've defanged the right because who
the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] are they going to fight against
right so when Tim p and all these people
obsess over these weird books and in
libraries about like guides to gay sex
or whatever like this is brought up to
me I like okay um if that's in those
libraries yeah that's pretty weird it
probably shouldn't be there in schools
and then you're done with it it's not
going to be a huge thing on like well
LGBT people and gay people need to blah
blah blah blah blah like no this it is
weird and it's dumb and just don't
defend it and then move on from it why
would you why would you stake your
position there and die on that Hill when
there's so many more important things to
fight over who do you think's doing the
best work in the political space at the
moment is there anyone that you're that
you watch yourself or is there anyone
that you think even if I don't watch
them I can respect the way that they
work with this stuff um I don't watch
enough because I stream and I work like
all the time so it's hard to like sit
down and listen to like podcast or shows
or whatever um yeah I don't want to
venture any guesses I'm sure there are
people out there but most of what I see
is not good but it's also those are
mostly the people that I debate and
everything um yeah yeah it's an
interesting an interesting world at the
moment I
think looking at wait I will shout out
one guy his name is Josiah or pondering
politics he's a cool guy his channel was
like exploding recently he does a good
job at uh trying to evaluate things like
pretty fairly from the Democratic side
yeah who not Crystal and Saga who's the
other guy that's kind of like slightly
left leaning being on Rogan a bunch
records in that green green he's got
like a neon green behind him no idea
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the guy's name even if you think of
it I'm not going to know him prob okay
well he's he seems to be like kind of
popular um and then you got a debate
with second time actually we the last
time one of the last times that we were
together was at the Vulcan when you were
on stage with Alex Jones and then he had
another crack how did that go uh about
as I expected it to yeah he's definitely
very much like a showman which I can't
tell that makes me hate him more or less
I don't know how' you mean like I think
that he is legitimately uh grifter and
that like he knows he's putting on a
show um like I remember when we were
talking uh he did this thing where when
we were having a conversation back
before I think I started like I started
like mocking him and he looked at me and
I think he put his hand on my shoulder
and I moved his hand I was like don't
touch me um and I remember when we were
you genuinely iritated um no I just
don't like it if somebody's trying to
like show like physical Dum like no get
your [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hand off me we're not going
to do this right if you want to kill me
you can kill me but you're G to put your
hand on me it's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] weird you're
know my dad but I remember after we
finished right and I'm because I feel
very strongly about all my political
beliefs if you talk to anybody in my
personal life they're going to tell you
that like if we go out to eat and you
bring up something I disagree with it's
going to be just like a stream I'm going
to be arguing with you I just feel very
passionately about everything that I
believe in uh but after the show with
Alex Jones you know like I'm still like
pretty like in the zone to debate like
he got was like oh that was that was a
great show it was real funny when you
did that uh get your hand off me thing
hilarious or whatever right and he just
like walks I think for him I think it
literally is just like a big show like
he just has fun with it heo WWE
basically yeah which in one sense might
make me dislike him less because I'm
like okay well he doesn't actually
believe in the crazy things he says but
then in another sense kind of makes me
hate him more cuz it's like well [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
your listeners definitely believe this
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and now I don't know if you're
propagating this for like fun and people
are really taking it seriously even
though you don't yeah I don't know yeah
I understand what you mean that if
someone is compelled because of the way
that they believe that it
legitimates their gregarious position is
like oh well you kind of at the mercy of
your emotions yeah as opposed to
if yeah that's a difficult one this is
why I don't usually spend much time
figuring out like somebody's a grifter
or not because there matter the harm is
real regardless you well if you're on
the internet everybody's a grifter and
everybody is a shill and everybody is
stupid and everyone is in it for the
money and doesn't really agree with what
they believe in and they're just doing
it because they're a part of the
whatever whatever yeah media apparatus
but the PE the followers do so that's
what you have to address even if Ben
Shapiro and all these people are gripers
the people that listen to them really
believe it so that's the second order
it's the second order thing again about
it's not about the instant it's about
how the instant is interpreted it's not
about the the the event that happens
it's about how many people then were
prepared to defend themselves in that
event yeah
yeah well I don't [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] know man it's
it seems it seems to me like a very
messy time and I'm really really hoping
that it's just going to be more sane out
the other side of this everything seems
to be ramping up ready for November but
I don't know
we'll we'll wait and see do you think
the red pill is dying that's something
that both of us have spent a little bit
of time orbiting in one form or another
either you debating it or me getting
abused by it what do you think is
happening with the red pill at the
moment I think most stuff has like a
probably like a two to four year shelf
life for internet content and I think it
kind of came and it kind of went Andrew
Tate and the uh the pre-trial or pre-
indictment imprisonment probably hurt a
bit because it took away a lot of the
publicity I think that the the nature of
like the conversations for the red pill
stuff I think was really bad um I think
the like the content strategy from a lot
of the red pillars I think was very
subpar um how
so uh like for me the way that I've
stayed fresh and relevant for 15 years
of content creation is because I'm
always finding like new stuff to talk
about or a new angle to kind of like hit
something from or like I'm kind of
moving on with contemporary events I
feel like for red pill stuff I feel like
I could have written the script for
those shows after being on two of them
um to where it's like okay guys today
we're going to talk about does body
count matter do guys value you for the
amount of money that you make do women
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] over men in
divorce are men lonely because they're
simps it was like the same topics for
like over a year such that it became
like a meme where when I would show up
on a show some my f would do like Bingo
cards of like okay well when is the body
count question coming up Hy yeah hyper
are women hypergamous or not and then
it's like and then and then it and it's
funny because like the questioning would
always there's a fallacy called all
roads lead to Rome I think if there's
not there should be one we're basically
literally no matter how somebody answers
a question it always goes back to what
you wanted to so I I might say to a girl
have you ever dated a guy you say you
don't care if guys have you ever dated a
guy that's 55 and the girl might be like
no I haven't because you hate short guys
you know you won't and she's like oh no
okay have you ever dated a guy that's 55
yes I have oh when uh when I was in uh
High School actually did got us 55
really are you together anymore with him
well no oh you dumped him because he was
a short King right like yeah or it's
like are you dating a guy that's 5 five
like yeah I am now it's like oh really
is he Rich uh no he's not that rich does
he have a huge dick yeah his dick is
pretty big oh hypergamous you just want
the pool boy that you're probably going
to you know find a rich guy and still
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like there's always a Andrew Tate
actually is the perfect uh example of
the all roads lead to Rome okay when
Andrew Tate had the pre-trial
imprisonment there were never going to
be charges because it was all a scam it
was just a sham uh kangaro court now
that there are charges if if there
wouldn't have been charges and he would
have been released with no charges no
indictment it was because obviously it
was a scam right but now that there are
charges well obviously because it's a
scam of course they're going to make up
charges so now they're going to go to
court and if they go to court and they
get uh if they go to court and they beat
the charges it's because it was [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
the whole time but if they go to CH uh
go to court and they're convicted well
it's because it's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the whole
time they're going to make it up always
so literally no matter what happens it's
always because of your particular
prediction of the world so you end up
with these prediction models that will
predict every single event which means
they don't actually predict anything but
it allows you to escape the cognitive
dissonance of your predictive model not
being correct so you don't have to worry
if you've got a good view like a good
blueprint of the world because literally
no matter what happens you've always got
a way to make sense of it in the future
well this is why that four step process
of when was the last time someone
publicly admitted that they were wrong
when was the last time they surprised
you if someone came out and had a
discussion about this and was like you
know what know what it is actually think
that a lot of the time I do actually see
girls in relationships with guys that
hypogamous I wouldn't predict that they
were in a relationship with that guy
just seems to have game it's not really
about the fact that he's tall or fit or
rich or has status or or any of these
things he just seems to be like a really
nice guy and she wants to have a family
and he ends up being you
go I wasn't expecting that I wasn't
expecting that that was something that
would have surprised me you think okay
well that shows an evolution of talking
points but I don't know how many times
and this is why you know I've
still fascinated in evolutionary
psychology and intersexual and intr
seexual Dynamics and all of that stuff
it's still very interesting to me but
the whole
like lambasting women for having
standards that are too high that that
never was something that really crossed
my world of content creation but even
now it's okay so what like what else is
happening how can here's an interesting
angle here's a much more interesting
angle for me for something that's
contemporary and new this uh skew of
young girls to the left and this skew of
young guys young guys to the right given
the fact that most people date within
their political affiliation and because
politics are becoming more important to
each individual person now that's
interesting that's like a new okay so
what do we do where's this coming from
and what does this mean 30% of democrat
parents are afraid that their son or
daughter would marry a republican that's
inter what what about like parental
pressure and how does that play into it
that's interest you can keep talking
about the same thing but do it with a
different angle on it continuing to just
hammer away in the same points I don't
know it's just fair play if you have
that degree of paat
maybe to be able to just have the same
conversation a thousand times but it's I
don't I don't have that in my toolbox
the description is boring the
descriptive part because yeah it's the
same thing over and over again and then
the prescriptive part is boring because
for a lot of these movements um people
don't actually give you good advice to
kind of navigate it sometimes unless you
can become a top one percenter instead
what they try to prescribe is like a
world that doesn't exist anymore like
this is no good because women have birth
control women are you know earning money
and blah blah blah blah blah it's like
okay well that's not changing so you
have to give advice for the world that
exists now not tell guys you have to
become a top one perent or you need to
earn so much [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] money that the
traditional girls whatever go back to
liking you it's it's never advice geared
towards well how do you navigate the
modern world where women don't need men
as much where women are looking for
different things in relationship how do
you navigate that it's just like we need
to go back to the the days of old and
everything is messed up now because of
feminism and complaining and blah blah
blah blah blah yeah talk to me about the
ADHD diagnosis
um it seems like a big change for you
yeah it's a totally huge change um I
think when my son was seven he had huge
attention problems in school such that
he would like he was like rolling around
on the floor he couldn't sit he couldn't
stay in his chair um between classes
they were having him crawl through like
resistance tunnels to like burn off
energy it was a huge problem of focus um
at home I it was really hard to get him
to stay on task for like chores if I
wanted to go out and like pick up leaves
with him like doing the yard or whatever
it's really really really difficult to
get him to stay on task or anything like
that um and then at some point because
we considered initially like maybe he
has autism or something weird like that
I don't know um and then the school
psychologist School therapist or
whatever floated the idea of ADHD um and
then we took him to get an evaluation
and he got like clearly marked for ADHD
and I didn't buy that because I can play
games with my son we're playing like
Minecraft or something he can sit there
on the computer for [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] 16 hours and
I would like do these [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] test okay
we're going to sit here we're going to
look at each other for five [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
minutes you're not going to move we're
going to sit here and do this I know you
can do this and we would and you could
do these things like this is I don't
this 8 is [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I I don't believe it
I didn't even believe they like Ed she
was really a real thing um so then now
that's my personal feelings on it um and
at the time like that's written at the
top of the dock yeah I don't I don't
believe that it's real I don't I would
never take a brain pill medication
because I don't want to change who I am
blah blah blah but my responsibility as
a father to him supersedes my own
personal views on it so I owe it if if
for nothing else I owe it to him to at
least do the research so when I started
doing reading and research on ADHD I
come across a whole bunch of things that
I didn't understand relating to ADHD and
the most shocking thing was for
everything that I researched because I
was trying to find does his behavior
show up I found all of my old Behavior
showing up um so huge discrepancies on
like standardized testing where I might
do like 998th or 99th percenti on
everything versus like GPA or homework I
didn't ever do homework my GPA was a 2.7
uh my that was curved up up because of
like honors classes and AP classes so my
GBA was horrible um I had to have like a
teacher sign my assignment notebook and
then my parents sign it or else I would
get a detention because I was so bad at
doing homework uh I didn't like to read
I would cry if I got assigned reading
for more than like a few pages I could
never do it I remember in high school I
used to do like I would do like cliff
notes and Spark Notes and extended
readings so that I could avoid doing the
actual reading there was just like a
bunch of really really dumb Behavior but
I always thought because I could play
video games for 16 hours I must not have
ADHD um and that that's like one of
there that's like three of like 15 other
behaviors I'm like Jesus Christ so after
I read all that I was like okay [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it
my son I guess if I'm to believe 0 she's
real my son probably has it so he got
medication it helped him a ton for
school and he's continued to stay on it
and it's helped him a ton for school
seven years later think about like five
or six months ago I've got a friend
that's staying with me and she suggests
she's like listen everybody knows you
have ADHD it's like a joke on streaming
blah blah blah like yeah but everybody
has ADHD everybody has autism like
whatever and she has Aderall and she's
like you should just try this for like a
week and I'm like okay [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it why not
sure um and I enjoy recreational drugs
uh I tried the Aderall and for the first
like 2 or 3 days I was definitely like
amphetamine High okay I don't know if
you've like done amphetamines
recreationally it's just like it's like
a euphoric you feel so good you're like
in a good mood you're super happy I'm
like okay this is cool but like I'm
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] high okay I know it is I know
what like an high feels like um and then
on day four the Euphoria the like
amphetamine Euphoria of like doing a
drug recreationally basically
disappeared um and then when I went to
stream and stuff I noticed that I could
pay attention to what I was doing
without having to have a game going on
in the background which was a really
huge departure cuz if you ever watch any
old videos I always like playing
Minecraft playing video games do
something while watching a video but I
could just sit and like read stuff and
then I noticed over the next week that I
was like holy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I get reset for like
four hours a day I can just sit and read
and read and read and I'm retaining the
information and I don't feel like I have
to do a million other things and that's
basically after that I was like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it
I went to a therapist very easily I
could get an ADHD diagnosis because of
my childhood stuff um and then I got a
prescription for viance and yeah I don't
think viance is um it's a it's an
amphetamine similar to adol okay bit
more powerful bit less powerful bit more
something else um adol is a combination
of four different amphetamine salts uh
viance is one of those amphetamine salts
but it's got an attachment of another
molecule that makes you digest it slowly
so that it like is an extended release
amphetamine basically okay um it's a
it's list dextroamphetamine or listex
amphetamine it's a lysine attachment to
a dexamphetamine thing and then when you
eat it your body I think in the liver
pulls off the licing thing and then you
get the slow relas A Time release
version yeah if this something that you
presumably your research to work out
what it was that you would have
preferred to have had um the other
basically the other option is Aderall XR
basically I think right um yeah but yeah
for the past four or five months I've
learned like the entire history of
Israel Palestine I've read like 100 page
papers on like legal Theory uh for my
debate with Glen Greenwald um I'm able
to research and retain information and
be interested and I haven't played like
basically a single game in like almost
half a year in like four or five months
um it has dramatically changed my
engagement with the world in like an
unbeliev able way so James my business
partner in neonic had an adult diagnosis
with ADHD as well and what does that do
you know you're a person who thinks that
you know who you are you've been you for
like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] 35 years or some [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
like you thought that you knew the
landscape of your own mind and who you
were and and this is me Stephen out in
the world and then someone comes along
and kind of says well this is a part of
you that you haven't been able to fully
understand does that change your sense
of self I think that my whole life and I
think this probably happens as everybody
gets older I'm sure it's happened to you
you're the smartest age that you ever
are is 19 because you know everything
you know what every F if I I've always
joked that like if I go back maybe even
with you I said this if I could go back
in time and talk to myself I wouldn't
believe anything I'd have to say even if
I knew I was coming from the futurea
yeah because at 1920 you know everything
um one of the things I've learned as
I've gotten older is subjective
experiences are very very hard to
understand so I try to be really careful
when I speak about other people's
subjective experiences and your mind and
how you relate to the world is another
one of those subjective experiences so I
guess in my mind and it's funny because
I came across this a lot with ADHD stuff
that ADHD can be simultaneously like
overdiagnosed and underdiagnosed at the
same time to where if somebody's just
like either lazy or has an attention
problem or whatever the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] because for
a variety of reasons they might get an
ADHD diagnosis but if somebody has ADHD
um they might feel so like my feelings
are like if I just focus I know I can do
this I'm just a lazy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] piece of
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] there's no reason why I shouldn't
be able to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] just stay on task for
3 hours everybody can do this there's no
reason I can't do this right um and my
my feeling is that like I'm probably
just more lazy than the average person
and so that's why um but then after
doing a lot of reading and then taking
like a pill for a little bit and I'm
like okay well [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I wonder if this is
like the ordinary mind or if this is
more closer to the subjective state of
other people um yeah it just makes me
has it changed your theory of mind about
other people obviously you know if
you're lambasting yourself basically
saying you should be more disciplined
than this you should be able to stay
focused why can't you just do this thing
without getting distracted every two
minutes or without having to play a
video game or without having to have
three video screens open at once you
know that's an internal monologue that
you've habituated it's a very well-worn
path MH I'm just fascinated by people
that have like oh and now I have a very
different story that I tell myself about
why I am the way I am and what that
means and why that could be the way and
yeah it seems like a huge pivot
yeah I mean I just try to I try to be
open to everything um maybe there's
something that'll you know dramatically
shake my subjective interpretation of
myself in the future but I'd rather be
more open to it than more closed off to
it because I want to feel like I'm
making progress towards a better version
of myself rather than like well I have
figured it out when I'm 20 and know I'm
not going to change my feelings at all
and I know there's a lot of things that
I skew off the norm for like I remember
when I was like 20 21 22 like if people
would ever come to me no it would have
been like from like 22 to 25 on stream
people would ask me questions like oh
like I've got a toxic relationship with
my mom or dad like what should I do and
my answer is always very simple you just
cut them out of your life never talk to
him again that's so easy why would you
why would you maintain toxic
relationships with your parents what a
stupid thing to do like that's so dumb
but then as I've gotten older I'm like
okay well people have feelings about
their family and it's pretty obvious
that most people's feelings are way off
of where mine are so it's pretty stupid
of me to suggest something for other
people and assume that you know it's the
same thing for everybody so I just try
to be really aware of the different
subjective experiences that people can
have and that mine might change in the
future too because I don't want to get
locked in on some dumb [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] yeah yes I
felt quite bad uh watching I didn't
reach out because there was enough
people doing that already but I felt
quite bad watching the entire internet
kind of scrutinize your relationship
over the last few months all the divorce
stuff yeah yeah man like I know that you
appear as like this sort of emotional
punching bag stoic [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] brick where
everything is super transparent and
everyone knows kind of everything that's
going on and you have a a capacity to be
able to deal with discomfort that seems
to be like I know beyond certainly
outside of the norm uh but but that made
me it made me feel uncomfortable like
watching everybody else dissect your
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like this intimate part of a
downfall of a relationship online so I
imagine that like rolled in with a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ADHD diagnosis plus changing the
chemical structure of your mind uh like
that's what I mean like the last 12
months oh it was a lot for sure I
remember I scaled back on my last
prescription request I scaled back a
little bit of my my viance CU I noticed
that my um cuz I I wear these stupid
little things to track like through my
gem stuff my heart rate my resing heart
rate had risen like 17 beats per minute
that's a lot in like 2 months that's a
lot and in the research that I did I
think that the average heart rate
elevation for somebody on amphetamines I
think was 4.9 beats per minute over a
whole lifetime of like doing these
amphetamines so for mine to have risen
almost 20 in two months I'm like holy
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] my something's going on something
is exploding and I don't even know
there's possible with medication but
then but now it's all settled and I
realized it was probably just that
period of like a lot of like stress that
I'm dealing with from my own
relationships from like the public stuff
and you've got to keep streaming through
everything and then like the research
from my debates everything yeah there a
lot to deal with but yeah yeah it was
definitely physiologically it was
definitely tough but I've always felt
like I have the tools to deal with
everything um and in some ways there are
there are parts of my life that look
incredibly difficult that actually make
things so much easier for me uh I talked
with um talked with Lex I've talked with
a lot of people that are more behind the
scenes about this because a lot of
people look at my life and they're like
it's got to be so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hard to have
your relationship and everything else
like out front and center for all these
people to dissect and my thought is it's
got to be so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hard to try to keep
that secret oh my God because if you try
to keep things secret you it's got to be
so scary every day on the internet
something might get leaked somebody
might find something out and now you've
got to like try to figure out like how
do I defend this without revealing too
much and what do I say and what else is
going to leak and blah blah blah for me
there is the added stress of when
everything's public everybody can
comment on it but it's also like this is
it like there's nowhere to hide and you
also you see what you get like there's
never been a time in my 15 years where
something has leaked of me where like oh
my God that's the real Destiny he does
this behind close scenes that's what's
going this never happened like you
basically you get what you see yeah
which in some ways makes things easier
for me a lot yeah will you do the same
thing when next relationship rolls
around or are you have you got a like H
maybe we don't need to go quite so
public with stuff have you got have you
got a a strategy for that I think um now
I'm being really really really critical
of who I would select next like I've got
like a whole list of criteria that I'm
like writing down and evaluating for
people because I'm trying to figure out
like what works what doesn't I've got
like my ex's on this like list of
criteria like what would have worked or
what didn't work or blah blah blah um I
don't know I'll ever be dating again or
if I'll get married or what that looks
like just cuz my life is so crazy if I
do do another relationship it would
probably be another open one I do do
another relationship it's probably going
to end because most relationships do and
when it does everybody if the red pill
sub is popular will say Well it ended
because it's an open relationship
despite the fact that I had four
monogamous relationship for this that
all ended for variety reasons but um
yeah I mean we'll see if I did or not
again it just depends but my life is
like really crazy and really busy and
it's hard to slot anything in there yeah
yes yeah not dating again is a I don't
know like
I wonder I I wonder what will happen
when you're further outside of the blast
radius of your most recent like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
slow motion car crash public car crash
thing it's just it's a lot for the other
person to deal with that's the issue so
you have to find somebody that is
willing to deal with all the public
stuff probably somebody that works in
content creation um because otherwise
it's hard to explain this world to like
a normal human being allow me to step
you into this world that you didn't
choose that you don't really understand
and how do I make you understand why
there's like a whole Forum of people
that obsess over every time you turn
your you know Discord on or off or
people that try to figure out like what
our addresses or why people say I'm a
pedophile or why you know this guy you
know why is it today that Muslims are
trying to find your address to go and
Jihad you and like it's that's a lot for
an ordinary person to be brought into I
think that is a lot for an ordinary
person to be brought into yeah speaking
of that assume that I know nothing about
the Vos scenario because essentially I
don't but I know that there's been stuff
that you've been at least commenting on
uhhuh what's the 30,000 foot view of the
last few
weeks
ah I hate being charitable to him at all
the what's happened is is vosch has made
a collection of Fairly edgy statements
in his past that on their own are
all I would say probably defensible um
but taken collectively against people
that don't like him can present a very
compelling narrative that he's like a
pedophile basically
so like I think for instance there was
like an argument before relating to why
he didn't he was I wish I could remember
I don't want to misquote this because
it's so important to get the exact
wording right so I could be misquoting
you can go find the video if you want
but I think he was in an argument where
he was like it was something like in a
very edgy way he's like I don't know why
people care so much about child porn
because of the harm created to children
but we're okay buying and having things
every single day that are made by
children in sweat shops where they kill
themselves um but then people will hear
something that like oh wait so you want
to make child Point legal but his
argument was really well no we should
probably make sweat shops illegal but
it's like it's just like like a bunch of
stuff like that that's piled up over
time and then so that's like the factual
foundation and then the rhetorical
Foundation or the um content Direction
Foundation is Vos has very intentionally
isolated himself from the rest of the
world and he conducts himself in an
incredibly aggressive bullying way so he
doesn't really have anybody in his
corner to defend him um or to lend him
any credibility because he's made
enemies of anybody that that would be
friends with him and he's been
incredibly uncharitable to everybody
else in in his part of the world so he's
he's done it to himself so I'm not
really I don't feel very much sympathy I
might feel sympathy over the hyperbolic
statements that get blown up because
I've made like a lot of statements that
are hyperbolic that get blown up but I
don't feel sympathetic that this is what
he has to go through right now because
he's yeah he's he says completely untrue
factually untrue things about me all the
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] time um and now watching it come
back to bite him in the ass and him to
have nobody in his cor to defend it is
really funny Freud exactly yeah it
doesn't surprise me or at least I
certainly see looking at the world of
streaming uh you guys put an awful lot
of hours in like you know that in itself
just practically gets you out of the way
of being able to spend time socially
just doing stuff and then because so
much of it is on its own you do streams
with other people sometimes right maybe
even like a good bit of the time uh but
so many streamers are just spending
hours and hours and hours and hours just
them and a camera and a and a screen and
it seems like of all of the different
content creation methods it's the one
that is the most is isolationist like
it's it's that and then only worse than
that are those people that try and like
rebuild ghost towns like on like in
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Greenland or something like that
those are the two that are the worst so
yeah I
mean I have a I have a great degree of
sympathy for streamers overall because
it's a a rough job not as much as to say
it's a harder job than uh like being a
brick layer retail yeah was it retail I
don't you're talking about Hanan right
yeah not that hard that's another funny
example where I actually and I've given
the same thing in the past Hassan was
100% correct his assessment and his
statement he just said it in kind of a
bad way but he doesn't have anybody to
defend him either and it's funny because
he blamed my community completely for
that clip blowing up but um I'm willing
to bet that you would agree with the
entire con of statement and that what we
do for work right now in ways that can
be more Soul Destroyer could be more
difficult than jobs that work prior to
this um just because of all the added
stresses and all the added things that
are going on but you're compensated
generously for it and you have a greater
degree of autonomy chose operate exactly
yeah and that's always the big
difference like a McDonald's worker in a
second would step into my life I would
never step back into working at
McDonald's ever so even if there are
more challenges and and more Soul
destroying aspects of this job which
there are if I got divorced as a
McDonald's worker I don't have to deal
with you know 75-year-old [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Rolo
tomasi you know making arguments about
why this McDonald's worker broke up like
I don't have to deal with that I don't
have to worry about like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] nude
pictures leaking or everybody having an
opinion on some [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I said but I make
100 times the money that I did when I
worked at [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] McDonald's and I get
to choose every part of my life want
engagement so yeah so Assan did have a
point but man for him the the Socialist
guy that lives in a $4 million mansion
and has a $250,000 Porsche and flies in
private jets and wears thousand outfits
it sounds horrible coming from him
Optics are a big deal mhm yeah uh and
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] him I'm not defending him because
yeah that was his fault I could have
been a big defender of him on that art
because I love defending takes like that
because they're they're technically
correct but they're optically horrible
and those are my favorite things to
defend you know yeah dude I you know I I
did a video which is still up on the
channel I think something like uh what
no one tells you about working for
yourself and oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] yes that's the same
it's all of the thing it's all of the
points um if you are both the uh organ
grinder and the monkey if you're both
the Taskmaster and the worker there is
always in the back of your mind is this
the best thing that I could be doing
with my time so not only do you need to
design what you have to do you then need
to discipline yourself to go and do it
and then you need to go and do it and
then you need to review and question
whether or not that's the thing that
you're supposed to do and even when
you're away on holid holiday whatever
that even means there's always this
degree of I could be working a little
bit more and then work begins to bleed
into Leisure Time so there is this huge
big long list and some brought it up on
a Q&amp;A a couple of weeks ago where they
said um lots of people in the personal
development Finance space are
disparaging about nto FES but I actually
really love my netto5 and uh I I feel a
bit bad because I'm like a second class
citizen for liking this like cucked job
type thing um why do you think people
have such bad opinions about it and I
was like that's a first off great Point
secondly it made me realize I've
never disparaged 9 to5 I'm like look if
you can find a way to be able to work
for yourself I think it's a a reli route
toward like having a fun life that
you're probably going to enjoy but it's
not the only route I know tons of people
that have 9 to5 that LE perfectly happy
lives and there are all of these other
side effects that come along with it
like having to be the person that what
when are you going to get up today how
long are you going to stream for well
you choose and if you don't stream for
long enough who says when enough is done
like what's the rules around this how
hard are you supposed to work how well
have you supposed to done your job all
of that gets externalized when you've
got a job which is liberating and it's
just what's your personality what's your
predisposition what do you want people
have an inability sometimes to just like
analyze like the pros and cons things
have to be fully good or fully bad um I
don't know if this would be a huge point
of disagreement for us but you do like a
lot of like health and fitness stuff
right yeah like like a position that I
have relating to like food is I don't
think there's no such thing as like a
good food or a bad food Foods just do
different things if you've got like a
sugary calorie bar or like like a candy
bar that's just like empty carbs or
whatever that's all it is there energy
for the day high in sugar like that's
what it is it's not necessarily a bad
thing if you've hit all your micros and
macros for the day but you need 400 more
calories if you want to eat a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
Kit Kat bar it works right there's no
such like a holy good food or a wholly
bad food something super high in
vitamins or whatever it doesn't matter
if uh you can't absorb it for whatever
reason or if you're not deficient in it
like there's no [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] point it just it
is what it is like understand the pros
understand cons exactly yeah and I think
when it comes to like 9 to FS or
entrepreneurship it's the same thing or
with like renting or buying a house
there are pros and cons to both of these
things right I'm a millionaire and I
don't well I own a house with my kid in
my kids mom that's irrelevant I don't
own a house personally I live in
apartments I'm probably going to live in
apartments for the next like 10 years
I'm going to buy a house and settle down
somewhere but it's but people would
think that like once you got money the
most important thing is to buy a house
because you don't want to set your money
on fire I'm not setting my money on fire
when I'm in a in an apartment any more
than I set my money on fire when I go to
a restaurant and buy food like I'm
literally paying for something that I'm
going to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out my toilet later but
that's not wasting my money I'm getting
a meal out of it same thing with I'm
running an apartment I'm not wasting my
money I'm paying for a place to sleep
and live every day um there are super
big Pros to entrepreneurship if you've
got the mind for an entrepreneur and I
don't mean the mind like you're smart
enough I just mean the mind that like
you enjoy
self yeah you enjoy like the uncertainty
the ups and downs and you can navigate
yeah not everybody enjoys that and nine
to FES I've known people that have
stepped into the entrepreneurship and
then going back to the 95s I'm like
listen I can fund all the hobbies and I
want to do with my 95 and I don't have
to worry about you know where's my
paycheck going to come from is this
going to be a slow month for me uh if
yeah so yeah there there's pros and cons
to both and the demonization of like N9
to5 and your [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] loser because
you're not a rapper or because you're
not a small business owner or because
you're not a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you know Superstar
streamer YouTuber it's like no [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you
you can do whatever you want to just
yeah figure your figure out what works
with the person concert for you yeah I I
think that's that's good and that's not
something that I've heard a lot about
like you know championing it's part of
this disparagement i' I think that we're
on the same page that you're relatively
Pro College as well I'm super pro
College yeah but if you think you've got
a better path besides that then then
yeah by all means go for it but you for
for all these people [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] all these
people will complain about the Deep
State the politicians the lobbyists and
the Bill Gates and blah blah blah when
you look at all these people that you
think have rigged the world and they're
corrupting everything blah blah blah
where do they send their kids they're
not Bill Gates doesn't tell his children
like oh you're 19 you're not going to
col they all send them to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Ivy
leak schools they all send them to the
best schools they get the best degrees
they all supposed to be the most woke
ones they're the ones that will be the
most brainwashed maybe I guess but like
they're going to college they're not
like telling you would think that like
well if they'd figur it out well you
look at the uh Steve Jobs didn't give
his kids iPads type argument which is uh
be aware of what the uh Lifestyles and
Technologies are of the people who are
in power and if the people who are in
power are sending their kids to
universities like if you just want to
model what they're doing they've got
skin in the game with regards to that
yeah for me I mean you know I don't
disagree I learned basically zero when I
went to University but I had great life
experiences and it taught me an awful
lot it was like it was like Navy SEAL
hell week for 5 years of socialization
sure of you know you need to learn what
it's like to get drunk and lose your
keys in Manchester and have an argument
with your friend at 3 in the morning you
need to learn what it's like to have an
argument with a a housemate where you
can just request from the University
that you move Flats uh like that all of
those things when are you going to learn
that 25 yeah 30 part of the
transitioning into adulthood yes so it
just I think It prepares people and but
I understand that you know it's all a
big scam no one learns anything that's
important and in an Ideal World yes
would higher education actually educate
you effectively along with giving you
the life skills probably but of the two
they're like I would give it 50/50 for
what you come and maybe even more on the
life skills side of things to be able
okay well what's it like to
um have your attendance be so low that
maybe you're going to get kicked out of
University because that might happen
with a job in a couple of years time
when you're ill or some other like like
administrative [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] happens is that
the first time that you're going to ever
encounter something like this no like
you can get to do it with lower stakes
and move through that stuff so yeah I uh
and people have this weird thing where
they're like well it's just people
shouldn't be wasting their time on
humanties and English degrees and it's
like the majority of degrees people get
from from colleges are stem degrees I
did business MH and marketing and I've
got two degrees one of which is a
masters can't remember anything from
either of them sure like how I might as
well have done woman's studies sure yeah
or or all the people I think it's like I
want to say it's like 50% of people get
stem degrees anyway like they probably
needed it if you want to I think it's a
really high percentage Yeah somebody
post go look it up you got the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
iPad it's not connected to the internet
oh my God yeah but it's it's a really
high percentage I think it might have
been over a majority of the degrees are
uh STEM related degrees anyway like
that's the vast majority people go to
school for are that but I think people
have this impression that like 85% of
college students are Humanity student
Taylor Swift degrees or the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it is
yeah and then also too and again a
moderated position like there are ways
to do it intelligently like people say
like oh I don't want to go to college
and get $100,000 in debt you don't have
to get $100,000 that's not the average
student loan debt is not $100,000 I
think it's like like $28,000 or
something um it's not $100,000 also if
you want to go to Community College for
two years or do this or whatever like
there are ways to make it more
manageable as well you know you can be
smart about it you don't have to go all
in and be an idiot um it's just the my
the scary thing for me heavily anecdotal
by the way the scariest thing for me is
that when people say forget College
don't do that in my mind the people that
don't need to go to college know that
there isn't a guy who's got this huge
portfolio projects that he's worked on
that's got like all this knowledge who's
18 and he's like God [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] do I need to
go and get a compi degree and blah blah
blah he knows what he's going to do you
know people point to Bill Gates as like
oh well Bill Gates didn't go to college
Bill Gates didn't fail remedial English
okay Bill Gates did not go to college
because he couldn't get his [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] GED
okay Bill Gates did not go to college
because he thought he was going to make
it big trading [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] crypto okay
that's not these are not the same
comparisons uh so if you don't know what
you're going to do and you got like a
general idea yeah go to college get your
degree do that but don't tell people
like oh no don't go to college like the
university has something Grand planned
for you because most of these people are
going to you know [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] around with Drop
Shipping on the internet for a year and
a half hook up with a chick and get her
pregnant and then the rest of their life
is going to be retail or service you
know starting at 21 because they just
didn't really have strong Direction not
Liberation yeah yeah what do you think's
going to happen in November election
time I my belief for a while has been
that I think that I think Biden is going
to win I think he's going to win pretty
handily uh my feeling for that is
because I think the biggest thing that
was going to hurt him was going to be
the economy but I think that the
sentiment on that has already adjusted
pretty heavily and I don't see it going
down I think that we're on a huge
upshoot right now economically um and
the FED is even talking about
considering dropping rates or whatever
so if the economy is fine um foreign
policy Wise It's just Ukraine and Israel
it's funny people give Biden a lot of
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] on foreign policy but if you
compare our foreign policy aims right
now compared to what they were under
trump our involvement is way better I
think that Israel and Palestine that's a
worthy thing to be involved in if for no
other reason than to restrain Israel and
Ukraine Russia that's a worthy thing to
be involved in we're not in Afghanistan
anymore we're not in Iraq anymore Biden
ended the uh participation in the Saudi
Le coalition to go and [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] drone
strike Yemen all the time right the
strikes that we are doing in Yemen are
very specifically on missiles blowing Bo
so that's good I think that the foreign
policy stuff is is good even if people
try to make it into a thing I think
domestically I think our economy is good
um the border is an issue it always is
an issue but I don't think Republicans
can yank the illegal immigrant chain for
you know s months or whatever I think
that they probably pulled that one too
early um so I just basically broadly
speaking I think the road to the
election and all of the special
elections that have gone on over the
past couple years have been really good
for Democrats so I think as long I think
the road forward for Biden is pretty
safe as long as he doesn't his brain
doesn't Le out of his ears think it's
pretty safe that's a big if that's a big
if for Donald Trump though he's got all
of these indictments he's got the New
York case that is I think they're trying
to start that one in March what's that
um the New York case is the where he was
making he was getting Cohen to make
payments to stormmy Daniels uh the hush
payments basically which just kind of
looks bad the porn star [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] cheating
on his wife and all that um so you've
got like all the news of the indictment
stuff you've got whatever crazy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
that Trump says abortion is still really
fresh on people's minds and now you're
getting more stories about like crazy
law it's still fresh on people's minds I
think so yeah um I'm basing this on
opinion pulling and I was with my
community uh doing door knocking in Ohio
for like get out the vote stuff and as
you go around and I I always try to do
at least one day so that I can like have
the experience and talk to people I was
really surprised at how many people when
I knocked on doors there the two issues
that everybody always brought up were
protecting democracy which seems like
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I would hear on Twitter and the
second one was abortion everybody what
sort of people is this a a broad
cross-section older people younger
people it was yeah it's older people
you're knocking on doors in in um
Cincinnati Ohio of like likely
registered voters basically making sure
that they're still registered to vote
and they know about the upcoming
primaries and elections yeah um so I
think abortion is going to be a big
driver I don't think like the
Afghanistan po out I don't think that's
going to be a big negative driver I
think it happened and then whatever um
yeah that's my Broad View I think the
road ahead for Biden is pretty easy as
long as he maintains okay and I think
the road ahead for Trump I don't see it
getting better because he's not in
office there's no way that he can do
anything good and there's a lot of
potential pitfalls coming up that could
be really scary yeah how big of a deal
do you think what's going on at the
border is I've had a number of
conversations about this it does seem
like a really big catastrophe I mean it
always does
like
Republicans a bigger catastrophe right
now always a bigger have you had to look
at the the stats around this like you
tend to have some yeah I've seen numbers
it's hard to know because like they
always change uh like how they count
some things like I think under the Obama
Administration like they were changing
how they um consider like a deportation
ended up being like somebody that was
met at the border and turned away
there's like there's weird things that
go on with the numbers all the time um I
agree that the border is a problem but I
don't believe that it's like a uniquely
felt that's having a drastically
negative impact on the average
American's life I don't think that
that's happening um so it's a problem
because the media says it's a problem
and because people want it to be a
problem the Republicans do for a good
reason because it it probably is the
strongest thing they have electorally um
but I don't think the country is falling
apart or like crazy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is happening
because of stuff going out the Border
but Democrats do need to find a way to
deal with it although right now the
things that suck is that one Donald
Trump had Co which helped a lot because
he was able to do um was it title 42
title 49 um that basically said because
we're in state of emergency I can enact
crazy measures at the border and people
just weren't illegal immigrating as much
because of Co so he had a huge benefit
to his last uh time in office because of
Co and then when Biden came in he
because he got Co no no because because
of Co it dramatically because he got
like it's like you being ill as the
president unlock some super SEC he got
the co event basically right okay oh
right yes Biden tried to use title 49 to
control border stuff but he wasn't able
to and then the amount of people coming
to the border now is a lot higher as a
percentage of like turnaways and
everything the Biden Administration is
doing better than the uh Trump
Administration but there's such a
greater number of people there to deal
with it's just a difficult problem
Apparently that is the rumors that I've
heard because they know that Biden is
going to be soft on them people say that
and I'm curious where the truth is in
that people say so it is true that more
illegal immigrants come to the Border uh
when a Democrat is in office but I'm
curious is it because Democrats want to
let them in or is it because Republicans
say that Democrats will let them in
because remember P Harris's favorite
thing of like do not come do not come
one thing to the immigrants do not come
that was a funny meme of hers yeah of
her saying that and it's not like they
don't let you in just because it's a
democrat in office I don't think there's
like a meaningful change in Border
policy with a with a Dem and office over
Republican but if you say it enough I
don't know maybe that's why people do
come in yeah right okay so this is like
the Shadows on the wall but the Shadows
have been created by the Republicans so
the Republicans could be advertising the
weakness of democratic immigration
policy and that is what is being taken
by people which for the most part is
about the same under Biden as it was for
Trump they ended like certain types of
like family separation at Borders but
nothing I don't think anything
meaningful has changed between uh Trump
and Biden but so I'm curious like I I
haven't seen statements and I'll fully
admit because I've been doing Israel
palese stuff and then the r before that
so I haven't followed this issue as
closely but I haven't seen a bunch of
statements from democratic lawmakers who
are like we want the immigrants to come
to the Border please come or like
illegal we're going to be softer on them
we're going to do something to let these
immigrants in or blah blah blah I've
never heard that I've heard a lot of
Republicans saying that though so I'm
curious like what the statements they
hear are that's very interesting yeah
the difference between being uh like
effective in terms of rhetoric and
effective in terms of the impact that it
actually has on the world because it
could be creating the second one whilst
trying to achieve the first one yeah
well I mean every election cycle there's
been something that's been timed quite
well you know emails for Hillary the
Biden under Biden laptop story I'm kind
of waiting oh for a thing oh dude there
is going to be a thing there has to be
it's like I don't know do you remember
when lost the TV show do you ever watch
that I remember lost I never watch but
just you know you always knew that the
season finale was going to finish on a
cliffhanger like oh my God what's the
Cliffhanger going to be and it feels
like that now but this is the problem
blurring the line between entertainment
and politics I shouldn't be waiting for
the next election cycle to come around
and for whatever the revelatory story is
like I'm about to see Prison Break
season 3 finish it should be treated
with a little bit more like seriousness
I think the issue is both of these guys
have been investigated quite a bit and
by both of these guys I mean hunter
Biden and uh Donald Trump uh so I don't
know if anything new it doesn't seem
like we're getting much new about Hunter
or dried the well on both sides well the
but the problem is on the hunter Biden
side I think that's probably true
because especially now that this
confidential informant was heavily
compromised no I don't think that it
would be just Hunter Biden I think that
there will be something oh no no but
what I'm saying is in terms of what
could leak I feel like for a lot of the
hunter B stuff we've milked this cow but
the problem is for Trump we potentially
have new wells of information because of
the ongoing court cases that gives you a
novel ability to reach in through
investigative power through Discovery
through criminal indictment through
trial to reveal stuff that's never been
revealed before here's a statement of
some kind here's a a court recording
here's a whatever like for the j6
commission um a lot of the people near
Trump pleaded pled executive privilege I
don't have to say what I said because
this is to the president of the United
States which works in front of a
congressional committee doesn't work in
front of a uh criminal proceeding
pleading kind of like pleading the fifth
but it's special yeah for the yeah but
that didn't work in a lot of the uh like
the Jack Smith federal investigation
cases so it could be that there's more
stuff that could come out or as this
stuff is continually brought to the
Forefront of American minds they have
like a slightly less favorable view of
Donald Trump because I do find for
instance for a lot of the Donald Trump
cases when a lot of Republicans all even
Democrats just don't know of the facts
and when you present a lot of the facts
they're indefensible it's not even close
it's like unhinged insane [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] um so I
don't know how much that'll affect
things but also Democrats have been
yanking on the you know Donald Trump is
doing illegal stuff and we're going to
get him chain for four years and it
didn't seem like much came out of that
or for eight years I guess yeah so who
knows I know I bet bet $3,000 on Biden
we'll see what happens okay I bet money
on it I believe strongly in it yeah what
do you think about uh vivc RIS Swani
what on him clone guy that dropped out
because he realized he has no political
future cuz he just served there to yeah
be a trump clone pick up some popularity
write a book I don't
know him yeah that's that's what you
think about him I don't yeah okay yeah
well it was an interesting one I think
uh someone that's young just generally
young at all that's involved in American
politics just stands out yeah young is
cool but he talks like a Salesman I feel
like every time he was talking I was
hearing a pitch for like a new Dyson
vacuum cleaner there's a degree of that
no matter what industry you're in
whether it's in content creation or or
or politics or or Media or anything uh
there is a swing at the moment toward as
much authenticity as much relatability
as possible I guess that goes back into
what you're saying about the openness
and honesty around relationships and
dating and [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] an adult ADHD
diagnosis all of these different things
just being open and honest about them
allow people to
find areas of your story or anybody
story to like hook into and go oh well
that that's kind of like me or that's
like my sister or that's like my best
friend or that's like my whatever and uh
people had a problem with the Rocks uh
appearance on Rogan because they said it
was he kind of seemed very curated and
it was super super smooth and all of
this and what they wanted was you like
who's the man behind all of that yeah
precisely like I want to speak to Dwayne
I don't want to speak to the Rock and I
I think people felt like they didn't
they didn't really necessarily get that
uh and then I think think that uh tuer
Carlson and Putin that interview was
just like the same thing it was like we
got a very well curated Orchestra like a
curated performance uh by Putin and we
didn't really get to see anything that
was real there yeah one issue that I
have with people is somebody being
genuine is not necessarily a good
character trait and people overrate that
too much people can be genuine and be a
bad person a genuinely bad person but
people will give a lot of people credit
just because they're genuine it's like
okay sure like this person might be
genuine but that doesn't that's not
necessarily a good thing or necessarily
a bad thing like they could just be
really bad like they could be a
genuinely bad person it reminds me of um
for a lot of debates that I do God I
hate this I hate this it's going to
happen under this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] video no not
as much going disagree as much when I
debate people that I disagree with I'm
very rhetorically careful about how I
present myself I don't want to come off
as too argumentative or too destructive
to the conversation I want to be
constructive I want to be somewhat
agreeable so finding common ground but
ubiquitously under the every single one
of these videos this is such a great
conversation I love that two people are
talking and they're not shouting to each
other and blah blah blah blah blah blah
blah blah blah blah blah and it's like
okay that is true but like comment on
the conversation now okay just because
we're talking and we're being agreeable
doesn't mean it's necessarily a good
conversation that's a good first hurtle
to get over but now talk like evaluate
the conversation itself yeah and I find
like that happens that same thing
happens with the genuine part of like oh
I like this guy because he's genuine
it's like yeah genuinely evil genuinely
an [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that's it reminds me I'm
sorry [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] so many have you ever met a
in Flag by the way if you have ever met
a in life and you're like oh why don't
people like you what's going on the gu's
like I'm just too honest no it's not
that you're too honestly you're an
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] yeah yes I remember when I was
in school there was uh kids that would
misbehave or whatever and there would be
like
extra dispensation given by the teachers
to uh the kids that were naughty you
know they were the ones that were all
always disrupting class or weren't
handing homework in or weren't doing
whatever and then me as one of the Nerds
I would be held to a higher standard if
I misbehaved in class I would feel like
I got picked out by the teacher and told
like that I shouldn't be doing whatever
I'm like hang on a second he just like
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like kicked a bin over and you
didn't you just sort of went over and
like quietly told him to do that I
always used to feel uh it always used to
feel unfair that like the people that
were able to behave were held to a
higher standard than the people who
weren't able to behave and I guess it's
kind of like this it's like look you can
be yourself but if yourself is being an
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] then
like it doesn't make you more virtuous
that being said is it better for
somebody to be a genuine [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] than a
a lying like virtuous individual yeah I
guess it just depends on what the lying
thing means and that's a really hard
thing personally to sort through for an
individual and it's a hard thing to sort
through um and how you evaluate other
people
so like for instance if I let's say that
I'm meeting a girlfriend's family
okay I'm not going to that dinner as
Destiny okay I'm not going to be making
edgy jokes about how much money would
you accept to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] a dog you know every
single night if you were getting paid
money that's not going to come up in
that family conversation okay I'm going
to be respectful I'm going to ask
questions about the family's job I'm
going to be like on my best behavior am
I being a fake [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] by doing that am I
being disingenuous I wouldn't say so I
think that you wear different hats
depending on who you're talking to the
issue comes from are you communicating
things that don't comport with your core
values when you're talking to somebody
else right so if I if my you know if I
was meeting a girl's parents and they
were racist and they asked me like you
agree that like black people are lazy
and I was like yeah I guess they are
that's a problem right assuming that you
don't actually think that because now
you're violating core principles core
values I find that a lot of the time
when people are criticizing people for
being not genuine it's just because they
they're like wearing a different hat not
necessarily because they're like lying
or or misrepresenting themselves but
yeah that's a hard one to S through
anyway because some people might think
that they're lying or misrepresenting
themselves it's not like we and our
nature and the way that we present
ourselves are transparent to ourselves
either a lot of the time we get skewed
or manipulated just by the situation we
just I I don't know I got caught up I
was talking to such and such a person
and I I was tired or I wanted them to
like me or whatever I didn't mean to say
x y or Z but this is kind of going back
to what you said at the very beginning
which is like giving people a little bit
more grace like hoping hoping for the
best in people and believing like look I
think that if I was you I would act the
way that you are I don't think that most
people are evil I think that they're
trying to do good like just starting
from a place of like more gentleness I
suppose and a little bit more gentle
Stephen uh a little bit more um room
giving people a little bit more room and
and and hoping that they can come along
for the ride uh that seems like a much
easier way a much nicer way to live life
it can be yeah but it's not so much fun
to watch and the eyes are so that's why
I say it's people's fault sometimes
because of the the type of content that
they consume that's the direction that
the content heads in we're not in this
media landscape because the Jews pushed
us here or because there was an
alt-right conspiracy or because the wok
tards got us here we have the media
landscape we do today because it's what
we enjoy watching and we
definitely yeah we got uh we put a clip
up from the P Morgan interview and it
was a a clashing with pi Morgan over
alcohol and going sober he said that
sometimes people that go sober can be
boring I said that that assumes that
people who drink are interesting and we
went back and forth and there was a
bunch of comments hey I'm sorry hold on
he made the argument that alcoholics
that get sober could be boring not
necessarily alcoholics but that uh I was
saying I went sober for a good chunk of
my 20s and found it was good for not
being hung over once every week or once
every two weeks so I like got more
productive and and made changes in my
life and like Yay sobriety even though I
didn't drink that much and he said well
do you not find that if you do that
you're just going to be around people
that are boring and I was like that
assumes that people who drink are
interesting so we had a little bit of a
back and forth on that and then he grown
up in a pub and he said look I've seen
that it helps people to come out of
their skin and you know some people are
a little bit socially anxious and so on
and so forth and I was like well that
also kind of shows that the people that
you're around the friends that you're
around you need to sedate yourself in
order to be yourself with them so you
need to find better friends the issue
isn't that you need alcohol it's that
you need friends that can help you to be
yourself around them and I don't think
the alcohol I think alcohol is actually
masking a lot of those problems and many
people haven't not had a drink
especially in the UK like classic
working-class culture haven't not had a
drink since they were 15 or something
longest time they went from when they
first ever had one to now was two weeks
and they don't ever think but they'll be
concerned about whether or not creatine
or AK or artificial sweetness or
something getting them meanwhile they're
putting like a reliable poison into
themselves and I love me some alcohol
too like I was a club promoe for 15
years I'm a part of it and just trying
to thread that needle anyway like we
titled the episode as clashing with
Piers Morgan over alol and going sober
or something and like so many people in
the comments like this wasn't Clash
where's the clashing this isn't I'm like
well okay [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] debating P Morgan but
like you [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like you clicked on it
like you clicked on it so what is it
what's the game that you want content
creators to play like you is it
clickbait if your interpretation well
the threshold that I have for clashing
is this and the thresh that you meant
for debating is that it's like I and
this is this would be the part to where
I'm critical of audiences but I don't
know how much the culture can change
there this is the part where I would
shift my critical this then to um
content creators uh and I think the left
has had a huge problem with this for a
long time I think the left for a long
time assumed that you just can't defend
left leaning ideas because right leaning
ideas are too easy like it's easier to
just say like affirmative action bad
because it's racist versus well how do
you defend affirmative action but I
think that something way different has
happened I think that people on the
right have spent a really good chunk of
time figuring how to make their ideas
entertaining and fun and funny and
people on the left just assumed that
like well we're right and it's difficult
so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you you either get it or you
don't and I'm not going to sit here and
educate it's quite an elitist very very
very elitist yeah so I think as a
content creator you're you have a
responsibility to two different things
you do have a responsibility to be
factually correct and to not spread
misinformation I think you also do have
a responsibility to be entertaining and
funny you know for all the theories on
Trump I have one [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] theory that I
genuinely believe that a huge chunk I'm
going to say
45% of Trump's
success goes back to all the way back to
the red pill stuff and the game I think
he's a really funny guy and I think that
carries him really far more than being
genu more than whatever identify yeah
the fact that when he goes on stage and
he starts talking he's funny he can work
a crowd really well a lot of people knew
him from The Apprentice where he was
like almost universally liked I'm pretty
sure those were popular reality TV shows
from The Apprentice and everything he's
a funny dude his tweets were [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
hilarious whether you were on the left
or the right and I think that actually
goes really really really really really
far and it plugs into something that I
thought funnny enough because people
always bring up like you know like well
what was it like for you in high school
cuz you were short you were underweight
you had bad acne and my going through
High School I always just thought the
fact that I'm funny makes everything
work I can literally talk to I had huge
groups of friends from different areas I
had no problem talking to girls I didn't
even know that 5 S or 58 was short for a
guy I didn't even think about that
because make somebody laugh like I'm
good to go um and I think this I think
it is true for Donald Trump that a huge
part of his success is just the fact
that he's funny and people will watch
him for that Riz and charm are massively
underpriced by most because most of the
time on the internet at least with the
like performative autism hermetically
sealed box that almost everybody exists
in especially the terminally online
people it's never actually humor they're
not playing with wit and charm and and
interpersonal flow what they're doing is
trying to find some cutting sardonic
like weird dunk take which isn't the
same that doesn't come if you say that
in person in an interview or to a friend
or on a debate it sounds Petty and it
sounds it's usually sounds quite
demeaning and it doesn't sound
whereas uh Douglas Murray against
Malcolm Gladwell when they were debating
about is Independent Media more
important or better than mainstream
Media or whatever it might be and
Douglas got like three laughs big
relatively big laughs throughout the
entirety of the conversation so guess
what he won like he won in the hearts
and minds of so many people and the same
thing goes for this this is what Sam
Harris said if you do a debate and you
get between two and three absolute
zingers where most of the room laughs
it's really hard to have lost that
debate unless you've been absolutely
sideswiped by all of the facts and
everything else and you look like an
idiot outside of that like people like
CH yeah and people will act like people
will say things like oh like that's why
debate is fake because people just go by
who they like more and blah blah blah um
I'm sorry but that is every single facet
of your life every single facet of your
life is going to be influenced heavily
by how other people view you and how
social you are with other people whether
it's for promotions at work or job
performance whether it's relationships
with professors in college whether it's
um you know politics how well people
like you whether it's as a content
creator front of the the group of a
table weight list at a restaurant yeah
whether it's how you relate to a
significant other how many autistic guys
or girls have you heard say something
like I don't know why they're so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
mad I was 100% correct that doesn't
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] matter you think that matters
yeah I know this better than anybody
yeah yeah that doesn't [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] matter
how right you are in the conversation
people like oh you don't care what I'm
saying you just care about how I say it
yeah no [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] they care about how you say
it there's a big difference between hey
I'm really worried about you you're
getting a little bit of late weight like
let's do something like work out or eat
better versus saying like you're a fat
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] piece of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and if you don't
lose [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] weight I'm going to divorce
you right those are two you might be
communicating factually a similar thing
but the delivery is in is incredibly
important and the dumbest thing about
this is people [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] know this people
know this is important because you know
that the way that somebody communicates
with you is going to influence how you
perceive the message and how you take it
and you're going to get irritated when
people are short or snarkier yes your uh
desire for other people to ignore that
doesn't extend to your enjoyment of
other people being humor like full of
humor and funny like you are more than
happy to be Charmed by that guy or that
girl that does that thing and you're
likeu I can't I really don't agree with
most of what that particular content
creator says but there's something about
the way that they communicate I just I
really I really love the fact that uh
Matt Walsh is dry and sardonic or I
really love the fact that like Destiny
makes like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] jokes or I really love
the fact that like XY Z like those
things just cut through an awful lot of
the biases and the and the pre and
meanwhile you're saying to the world no
no no you shouldn't give privilege to
people that are entertaining and a funny
yeah you can't get to have it both ways
and so many yeah I I think John Stewart
wasn't the smartest person in media when
he did The Daily Show you know however
many 20 years ago or whatever he was
really funny it was really entertaining
that's back on TV now he's he's running
it back he I don't know how funny he is
now I'm not sure I just haven't watch as
much I saw I saw one little bit of a
monologue it was him offering that black
Justice lady is there like a black there
like a black lady is it on is she on the
Supreme Court or is it a guy oh my god
oh you're talking about Clarence Thomas
I think yes was that The Daily Show I
thought that was uh Steven Kar am I
making that up oh it might be I can't
remember who it was offering them oh no
no no John Oliver I think was thank you
yes British guy yeah yes offering them
an RV and a million dollars if they year
yeah to step down as a Supreme Court
Justice which is
funny what's next what you doing next
what's the focus um in two days I go to
New York City to do that finlin debate
um my conversation I had a conversation
with Jordan Peterson I think two weeks
ago that'll probably get published
sometime in was that with him or virtual
uh uh no I was with him I went to DC I
think for that um and then next month
I'm trying to find because I started
this viance the past like four or five
months on my stream have been very
research driven I've taken like more
notes and studied on this thing probably
more than I have cumulatively for
everything else in my entire life um so
I'm trying to next month figure out like
something a little bit more chill to do
something more bite-sized something more
uh like culturally relevant so maybe
it'll be like research about like the
Border immigration or something but
something to keep my fan base a little
bit more engaged than me literally
reading the end of like books on stream
and I hope that they weren't enjoying
you playing Minecraft because that's
gone out of the window they fully put
stay to all of your gaming content as a
gaming streamer by taking a drug yeah
but I think it's probably okay I think
people like the political stuff more
that I'm more focused on I just need to
make sure it's like relevant and
entertaining and not like hardcore deep
Dives on the history of like entire
conflex yeah how did you find uh Jordan
interpersonally I don't know how much
time you got to spend with him and and
in terms of your debate and stuff Anor
personally he was fine ideologically he
was about where I thought he would be
which is kind of disappointing I was
hoping surprised
um I have this theory that people get
broken by events and then they're they
never recover um a really good example
of this do you know who uh Brett
Weinstein yes I think is a perfect
example of this have you read the stuff
that he was writing or talking about
during the Evergreen College Fiasco yeah
yeah yeah I thought that all of it was
unbelievably reasonable I thought he'd
seem like a reasonable guy everything
was like cool but I think that event
like broke his mind over the wheel and
then now you know he's on Joe Rogan
saying I think 133 million people have
died probably from vaccines in the
United States I'm like really um I think
for Jordan Peterson I think it was the
c16 stuff um that like the woke fighting
or whatever like people will have this
moment where they fight against another
side and something a switch flips and
because they get attacked by the other
side so much they become entrenched into
the antithesis of that movement and
that's unfortunately because I think
Jord pet has a lot of or had a lot of
really insightful things to say about
philosophy not philosophy I'm sorry a
little bit about philosophy but mainly
psychology that I really appr listening
to but now it's just like all the I feel
like I was talking to a random Trump
voter like I think I was trying to bring
up the frustrating I think I brought up
this idea of the constellation of
beliefs that people have and it was
funny because I think in this interview
that we do in like one minute when I
bring up climate change he's brought up
the WF I think like eating crickets like
the everybody will be poor but own or
you won't own anything and you'll be
happy and um depopulation and 20% of
Europe is dying because of the vaccine
all the overhead deaths because of like
try to and it's just like H yeah the
when when I see mins that it feels like
they get captured because they become
entrenched in the opposite if we ever
bullied them last that just like a great
wasted potential for me and I feel like
he suffers from that quite a bit I don't
know whether those two guys have had
that happen because of that situation
but I certainly know the last time that
we were together I told you about the
peak hate rule which is that uh every
content creator is best known for their
most uh well-known transgression and
their most recent one Jordan would be
like he doesn't he hates trans people
and doesn't want to say their names and
he calls Sports Illustrated models fat
like Hassan would be um he said that
America deserve 911 and he thinks that
being a streamer is harder than working
in McDonald's or whatever like everybody
every Creator is captured by the biggest
thing that they did and the most recent
thing that they did and that's
definitely the way that they're
interpreted and I can totally see I even
see this in myself man like you know the
there's been a big change in scrutiny
and and attention and stuff over the
last year and there's no Media Kit
there's no one throws a training manual
at you to go oh and by the way when you
reach half a billion people a year this
is how you like how you think about
yourself or how you deal with attention
how you deal with criticism on the
internet and if there you have a
constitution like you maybe that's
something that is a little bit easier to
do but even for you it must be like
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hell like it feel this ambient
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] vigilance of an awful lot of
people and then if you have all of the
way down the Spectrum to the person
that's the most sensitive in the world
they're going to really struggle with
that even though that wasn't necessarily
what they asked for but they did ask for
it because they decided to just do this
thing and they keep going and then you
accumulate this audience all of that I
can completely see how one of
the responses from people would be all
right you've made me feel the
the world that I wanted to love me and
validate me jilted me [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you I'm out
I'm never going to listen to you again
you're all shills or part of the WF or
you're all libtards or you're all like
like w you all whatever like racist
transphobic it's very easy to do that
because you never have to deal with the
unrequited love thing again yeah
ever yeah yeah it's it's just
frustrating because it's such a thought
terminating view of the world and then
you end up losing your you know
reasonable faculty to evaluate positions
and now you just bought into the
opposite of whatever the other side said
and it just feels it's it's
disappointing and dumb I think yeah yeah
humans humaning is inconvenient a lot of
the time because there a stuff that they
could have done Destiny dude I
appreciate you man uh good luck with all
the debates and
uh I'm not sure the next time you come
through Austin but we'll have to do
barbecue and a training session or
whatever it is that you've got on sounds
great I look forward to it thank you
very much for tuning in if you enjoyed
that episode you will love my last chat
with Destiny which you can watch right
here go on
