individualism is hampering our ability
to demand any kind of changes because
it's hampering our ability to organize
collectively firstly it's this it's the
foundation of this idea that Society can
be divided into people who Rule and
everyone else secondly it's the problem
that we have with people kind of
projecting their political agency onto
someone else and saying I need this
person to save me which you see
massively on the right today by the way
very very angry people thinking I have
no power Donald Trump's going to come in
and and screw everyone else over and
it's also the foundation of our our
powerlessness right A lot of people
believe that they are powerless within
this like you know immensely complex
World economic system um and the extent
to which that is true hinges on the
extent to which we actually believe that
we are
[Music]
powerless we're told we live in a free
market system free markets Free People
Freedom who could disagree
by implication therefore if you want to
perhaps achieve certain Progressive ends
maybe bring some things into public
ownership you will create less freedom
and that's bad alongside that is the
claim that socialist economies or even
social democracies are characterized by
Central planning command and control and
at the same time free market economies
devolve power they give it away but what
if this dichotomy wasn't quite right
well with me today to discuss all of
that is the one and only Grace Blakeley
she's the author of a new book vulture
capitalism corporate crimes backdoor
bailouts and the death of Freedom Grace
Bley welcome again to Downstream thanks
for having me so happy to have you back
on it's great to be here you were on
very recently yeah not that long ago it
feels like a while ago something changed
I've got glasses no something else
changed I published a book you published
a book that too
I like the glasses by the way where are
they from um they're just from
Specsavers I don't believe you they are
are you going into politics is this some
sort of Normy no I'm going into Academia
so I want people to think I'm smart that
is a joke I'm definitely not doing that
either I'm staying exactly what I'm
doing which is writing books and talking
about them you've you've worn glasses
for a long time I can I can confirm that
they're just new glasses good on you for
not going to like I love cbits glasses
if I had some money that's what I'd get
you've got a book out um I have I'm
enjoying the book good it's very fun
it's somewhat different to what I
expected oh really yes because um it's
very mature interesting um it's sort of
book I'd expect like a 50-year-old to
write because it's got so many anecdotes
yeah okay which is incredibly like to
have this compilation of like off the
shelf and this and this and this it's
one of the better things like getting
older as you start to develop that
that's true and also reading the Ft
everyday helps I suppose as does having
an exceptionally good editor so I think
I have for this book I have to to thank
all of the editors I've ever had for
forcing me out of I think what my
default position is which is kind of
heavily theoretical and Abstract into a
much more kind of relatable uh mode of
writing and presenting my ideas which
does rely on anecdotes and it actually
makes the theoretical arguments stronger
and far easier to understand when you
can apply them so yeah yeah show don't
tell exactly the book itself as I've
already said vulture capitalism
corporate crimes backd door bailouts and
the death of Freedom that's that final
bit the death of Freedom which I think
most people will be kind of perplexed at
if they're not familiar with your work
or all the ideas in it um you start in
the introduction with a great quote
which really sums up actually the
central idea of the book you write this
life under capitalism means living under
a planned economy while being told
you're
free what does that mean so the idea for
this book um came about in that kind of
crazy time at the start of the pandemic
um and the markets were crashing and
governments were kind of like rushing
around trying to think about what to do
and we had all these kind of big bailout
programs um that were initially
coordinated by the big central banks
aimed at kind of bailing out large
corporations and then ex expanded to
kind of the rest of the state propping
up pretty much everyone um to kind of
Stave off the economic impact of of
lockdowns and I remember going on TV a
lot at the time and being asked this was
just after the 2019 election defeat for
labor being asked things like um well
the government's spending loads of money
in the economy now so isn't this exactly
what you always wanted aren't we by
default now getting socialism because of
the pandemic and in the book I kind of
illustrate all of these examples of of
magazines and um you know the business
press saying we've got socialism now
because we've got all this government
spending and it really it annoyed me
obviously being asked those questions
but it also intrigued me because it
suggested that there was this pretty
profound like misunderstanding as to how
capitalism actually works and coming as
I was from a Marxist perspective um I
kind of went back to Marx and started
like reading through Capital again to to
see what kind of you know relevant
lessons I could apply to this and um I
also started looking and reading at a
lot of marxis theory on the state as
well so you're like Rami Ralph millerand
palanas um and I kind of had the light
bulb moment of of realizing that the
reason there was this misunderstanding
of capitalism was because people had
their minds for whatever reason whether
it was the legacy of the Cold War you
know the way we organize our political
systems this dichotomy between centrally
planned status societies on the one hand
and free market capitalist societies on
the other hand and what you realize as a
Marxist is actually the the state is not
this separate entity that sits outside
of capitalist social relations it's
fundamentally imbricated in those social
relations um and so I kind of had this
idea of framing this argument in terms
of it's not free markets versus planning
because you know this often becomes
quite a emotive argument for people on
the right it's like free markets
preserve freedom and that's why we need
to you know make sure we uphold them and
instead I thought well it's very obvious
that within capitalist societies we have
a huge amount of basically centralized
planning whether that's centralized
planning that's taking place within the
state within massive corporations
financial institutions whatever so this
distinction that people have in their
heads between free market you know
capitalist societies and centrally
planned socialist societies is
not applicable to reality and instead we
have these centrally planned capitalist
societies which rest on the kind of
massive inequalities of power that you
might expect to see in you know uh the
kind of theoretical ideal of a planned
Society versus the theoretical ideal of
a free market society which is supposed
to be all decentralized instead
capitalism is this kind of hybrid system
where because of the inequalities of
power that emerge as the system develops
you basically get a number of actors
that are able to basically make
decisions about you know production
about um you know the like the rules to
which we're all subjected um about you
know distribution of resources um and
about many many other things and the
average person is forced to live in a
world in which those choices have
already been made for them by someone
else except there's no real Democratic
accountability because this planning is
all invisible it's all taking place
behind the scenes and it's kind of you
know we're told it doesn't really happen
that it doesn't really exist so I think
there's that that that sense of
disempowerment and anger that comes from
being told that you live in a free
society and you're free to go and do
whatever you want consume whatever you
want work whatever you want and the
reality of living under capitalism which
is this system that has a huge amount of
centralized planning taking place within
it yeah I think about social media
within the same context you know if you
talk about regulating social media you
know the the conservatives recently had
this idea of under 16s can't buy
smartphones I think that's probably not
enforcable but you probably ban them
from schools things like this and the
response you often get is that sounds
like 1984 big brother and it's like we
already have that we already have that
we already have massive surveillance of
our every um action and almost thought
in a way with children they are entering
into contracts whereby these private
companies can use their data to make
money children we're already in that
world the point is can the state be
ballasted against that like the idea
that oh the state is the source of
authoritarian M and the market isn't is
obviously something that the left's been
around talking around for a long time
this idea of the command economy like
this shth of State command economy less
State free market capitalism like this
binary where does it come from because
it's something you be taught in school
you'd be taught that gcsc a level is
this kind of like postc cold war
propaganda or I think it comes from a
couple of different sources so firstly
yes there is the legacy of the Cold War
um which you know uh it aided I think
both parties to construct this really
clear ideological divide between you
know rational centralized planning which
nonetheless comes at the expense of the
individual freedom of the average person
and then the kind of free market systems
that are maybe less rational they have
more financial crisis or whatever but
they protect and promote individual
freedom and are ultimately more
efficient over the long term that was
always the divide and it was largely
taken as given that those were the terms
of the debate right and actually you can
see that sort of debate play out on a
more limited scale within our own
democracies in the debate between kind
of hyans and keynesians so um you know
you had kan's kind of writing um in the
wake of the Wall Street Crash about the
irrationalities of capitalism and how
all societies needed a certain amount of
centralized Planning by the state to
tame the ups and downs of the market um
that had to do with you know investors
animal spirits and which ultimately
undermined the kind of rational
functioning of the economy and that kind
of became just the norm in most
economies during the Social Democratic
era and then Hayak comes along and I I
talk about this in the book and says
this is the road to surom if you have
any level of centralized planning within
an economy you're basically pulling the
economy towards the Soviet system where
individuals don't have any any freedom
and so that kind of dichotomy became
really embedded within our politics
basically because both sides of the
debate keynesians social Democrats and
hians the kind of neoliberals took it as
as given that that was the the issue we
were debating more or less State because
we were debating yeah whether or not
planning could work in basically a
system as complex as an economy um and
the I start the book by basically saying
well what if we took hyek seriously
because Hayek's whole view um he looks
at economies and societies as these kind
of very complex systems that you can't
really model you can't really kind of um
you know you can't really fully
understand all the the links between all
the different nodes within this system
and you can't fully understand all of
their behaviors it's something that you
you couldn't fully model even if you put
it into a really really powerful machine
um just because there's too many
variables at play so trying to kind of
centralize all of that power within a an
institution like the state for example
um that doesn't that isn't able to kind
of manage that the the scale and the
complexity of that data means you're
going to get inefficiencies and you're
also going to get you know corruption um
you know ways to make decisions that
aren't about promoting you know the way
the economy works but instead about
promoting the interest of of of you know
the people at the very top um so I kind
of say like why don't we we take this
argument seriously right like complexity
and really rigid centralized planning
don't go together they create all of
these problems and perverse incentives
but hyek stopped short of applying this
argument to capitalist societies
themselves particularly to kind of
Corporations and financial institutions
he actually says that he would rather um
something along the lines of um you know
he would he would rather submit to like
um the p you know the power of the state
than give his control over some sort of
organized Monopoly give control to an
organized Monopoly over his life um yet
he doesn't really
analyze the extent to which his
arguments about planning and complexity
could be applied to a big monopolistic
Corporation or big monopolistic
financial institution and to the extent
that he does he just says well it's up
to the states to make sure that markets
function as effectively as they can and
to kind of enforce competition there was
a big kind of debate within the
neoliberal movement between people who
thought the state should take a more or
a less
stringent approach to enforcing
competition which kind of divided Europe
and the US and ultimately and again this
is kind of the argument I make I make in
the book um the the way that that
argument played out came to hinge much
more on class power um and its influence
on ideology than it did on the merits of
either case so we got this system where
you had you know neoliberals talking
about free markets and yet because of
the kind of inherent Tendencies of
capitalist systems towards concentration
centralization massive monopolistic
corporations massive financial
institutions on a scale that you know is
hard to imagine throughout most of human
history the kind of the size of these
institutions the amount of power that
they wield and what I look at in the
book is how that undermines hiek
arguments because you know these firms
and and financial institutions are doing
what he said the state couldn't and
shouldn't do which is making complex
decisions in the context of massive
uncertainty C on the basis of power and
authority mainly their power and
authority over their workers but also
their firm's power and authority within
the market context without any
Democratic accountability and without
crucially the kind of correcting force
that the market is supposed to impose
upon decision makers Within These firms
because they're so big and powerful and
even when the market does come knocking
because the separation between politics
and economics that neoliberals rely on
in their arguments doesn't apply in
reality these firms can then just say oh
will the state will bail us out if
anything goes wrong so what you see in
place of this kind of divide between
free market um capitalist systems and
centrally planned socialist systems is
this kind of fusion of public and
private power um in service of vested
interests at the top of society you know
I love to think about the High Street a
lot I always talk about the High Street
and I think the reason why I do is
because for most people it's their
understanding of how a market economy
works even though of course it's it's
not in many ways and actually small and
mediumsized Enterprises employ the
overwhelming number of people the left
likes to think in terms of
multinationals and whatnot but actually
smaller businesses with several people
working there or Soul Traders they tend
to be the backbone of the economy and if
you walk through a High Street in the UK
in particular same in the US many parts
of the world but I think it's worst of
all in the anglo-american
economies it's a mess and we would told
this line of creative destruction
from shamp you saw him in the book
another Economist and we're not looking
at creative destruction we're looking at
destructive destruction it's just
destruction there's nothing creative
about it um on this point as well about
monopolies and how the status quo right
now is so at odds with basically well
let's be honest 300,000 years of human
history but very much the last 12,000
years too since
agriculture it's going to get
significantly worse as well isn't it
because if you look at what big Tech's
done the last 25 years it's created
worth more than a trillion dollars if
you add AI into the mix you know Mark
Cuban was joking about it creating the
world's first trillionaire in 2017 but
it I mean it could and at which point I
mean we're talking about arguably
unprecedented concentrations of economic
power amongst the ultra Rich amongst
certain corporations yeah um and this
trend towards Monopoly um is really
important and it's something that you
see talked about a lot in kind of
progressive economic circles right
theide that we just need to kind of
break up the big tech companies and and
restore Market competition but I think
the really important point to note here
is that the mechanisms through which
like basically anyone within the kind of
liberal political tradition the
mechanisms that they believe exist to
kind of tame the power of big businesses
all rely upon the state and the big
argument in vulture capitalism is that
you cannot see as I've said the state as
separate from capitalist social
relations it is you know deeply you know
embedded Capital social rels really
determine the exercise shape the
exercise of state power um so you know
someone who's like oh we need the state
to break up big Tech that is a position
that really fails to understand the ways
in which what goes on within the state
reflects the balance of power within
Society a balance of power which is
dominated by the firms that are supposed
to be kind of regulated by the state and
the example that I often use here um
because it it happens to be very topical
at the moment as well is the example of
Boeing um so Boeing has gone through
several years of just um abhorrent
safety Scandal so a few years ago um
there was the 737 Max disasters when you
had um two Boeing planes basically
plummeting out of the sky initially
Boeing tried to blame pilot era but
eventually it became clear that there
was a a problem with the planes
themselves I talk about it in detail in
the book if people are interested in
that and it turned out that Boeing had
known about those problems with the
plane this is a technical problem with
the manufacturing exactly yeah that
basically caused the plane to kind of
nose dive out of the sky and there was
nothing the pilots could do to stop it
turned out that Boeing Executives had
known about this problem eventually they
were charged with a Criminal conspiracy
to cover up this um this you know
failing um and not only that but the FAA
had basically been completely asleep at
the wheel so Boeing was being regulated
by the FAA but this was subject to this
idea of self-regulation so ultimately
the people who were supposed to be
regulating Boeing were actually sat
within a unit inside Bo um completely
kind of you know um unable to to act
objectively there were whistleblowers
that were coming out um but you know
they kind of weren't being listened to
until these big uh crises took place um
and you know that that was followed
obviously um by Massive bailouts that
Boeing received during the the pandemic
because it share price suffered and then
you had the pandemic um and the American
government came to the rescue it was uh
the recipient of kind of massive amount
of corporate welfare and it was already
for that one of the biggest recipients
of corporate welfare um in the US so
this kind of shows right you expect okay
this company that exists allegedly in a
competitive market firstly it's not a
competitive market it's duopoly where
basically you have Boeing supported by
the American state and Airbus supported
by Europe kind of you know competing
basically not really over cost but over
sorry not really over price sorry but
over you know different um components to
the production of their plane so over
costs over um you know the to which they
can kind of push down their um their
costs of their employees by kind of
taking on labor unions the extent to
which they can kind of capture
Regulatory Agencies to reduce the cost
of compliance the extent to which they
can extract tax breaks from their
governments which of course um Boeing
was very effective at doing um and um
when you know the market does eventually
come knocking into this kind of
dualistic Market structure when boing
share price collapses because it's been
the subject of you know all of these
scandals the American state just rides
in and saves it because there is this
deep relationship between this firm
which is a really central part of the
American kind of military industrial
complex which has loads of government
contracts which has personal
relationships to politicians and and
various different kind of apparat within
the American state and which you know is
seen as a kind of strategic priority to
protect it's just absurd to suggest that
this massive multinational firm is
subject to some sort of Market
discipline of course it isn't it's
absurd to suggest that um this is an
entity that exists somehow kind of
separate to what goes on within the
American state what goes on within
Boeing and what goes on within the
American state are intimately linked not
least because there's a massive amount
of lobbying there's contracts going the
other way um so this separation that
exists in the neoliberal brain between
the state and the market or indeed
actually within the liberal brain in
general because you see this in
Progressive circles as well where people
saying oh we just need the government to
kind of break up big tech companies it
just doesn't apply in reality instead
you have as I've said this kind of toxic
Fusion of public and private power um in
service of um of the interests of um of
the wealthiest and most powerful and
that kind of sounds a bit depressing I
guess but I spend the rest of the book
talking about what we can expect to
exist or to emerge as a kind of break on
this power if we cannot just rely on the
idea that the state's going to fix
everything for us I'll push back against
that cuz it's not quite the rest of the
book there are other great examples my
point about the anecdotes I think Boeing
is is a brilliant one you know if you
were to
say uh the Chinese system doesn't work
because of political
nepotism um favors patronage networks
and it means that like
say private firms aren't responsive to
competition the price mechanism you
would expect something exactly like
Boeing that's exactly what you would
expect people getting away with massive
manufacturing issues lying I mean
there's even been certain whistleblowers
have died like it's all very
macabra and yet this is meant to be in
the home of of the free market the
United States an iconic American brand
who is speaking of Boeing Harry ston
Cipher so ston Cipher is uh the former
CEO of Boeing um who was probably one of
the people most responsible for the
transformation of of Boeing's corporate
culture um and there's a really
interesting kind of genealogy of the
transformation of Boeing as a firm
um that goes back to its merger with
another firm called McDonald Douglas um
and this was a firm that supplied uh you
know it was really important in the
military-industrial complex it's had a
lot of government contracts and it was
kind of um you know nearly went went
under basically uh and as a result of
that the American state kind of
engineered a merger between McDonald
Douglas and Boeing and at the time
Boeing was this company that was really
um you know prized for its focus it had
this like pilot first philosophy so the
idea was that the pilot was always going
to be you know really um in charge and
in control over what was happening in
the plane there wasn't going to be any
kind of um you know uh software stuff
that was going on behind the scenes that
the pilot couldn't um couldn't
understand or or control and it really
prized engineering expertise um it had
kind of strong unions that were um whose
you know the opinions of their workers
were um often escalated up the the
internal corporate hierarchy um which
gave it this reput
for kind of engineering Excellence
basically and McDonald douas had the
kind of opposite of that it didn't have
the same um the same kind of reputation
um and it also had this reputation for
kind of basically being a bit of a cash
cow and um you know cutting costs and
all those sorts of things um and there's
a really interesting article actually um
by a journalist um and the the article
is called crash course um and I cite it
in the book and um this journalist looks
back through the transformation of
Boeing that takes place during this
merger with McDonald Douglas that's
engineered by the American state and
basically St says under Stone Cipher's
leadership he kind of engineered this
transition rather than the Boeing
culture of engineering Excellence being
kind of pulled into McDonald Douglas
instead the cost Cutting Corner cutting
um of MCD Douglas was was um became the
norm within Boeing and this of course
coincided with the shareholder value
revolution of the 1980s so the whole um
you know the like the thing that all
shareholders were demanding at the time
the thing that the market was talking
about was this idea of maximizing
shareholder value and often that
involved kind of slashing costs within
production in order to increase margins
and and distribute more to shareholders
so ston Cipher became this this this guy
who was basically renowned for uh
delivering massive um amounts of
shareholder value to Boeing shareholders
by pushing through this culture change
that um disempowered engine is resulted
in a lot of confrontation with workers
and with unions and kind of lionized um
middle management basically which was
put in charge of and you know putting in
place all of these Cost Cuts and he
delivered this ultimatum to his
organization saying you have to develop
This Plane um at a very very low cost
basically um and that was part of of
really the kind of cultural transition
that ended up leading up to the 737 Max
disaster ERS um and of course ston
Cipher walked away with with quite a
substantial amount of money as did the
most recent um CEO of Boeing is he still
alive yes he is wow maybe we can do a
Navar expose one one day interview so he
he's he's this gentleman um Harry ston
Cipher I me he's kind of emblematic of
what's gone wrong with American
corporate management governance over the
last several decades Jack Welch at
General Electric of course being the
being the Paradigm there and and we're
still told to swallow hole this idea
that these are the corporate Titans the
captains of industry they're so clever
they're so smart actually what's
happened over the last 30 40 years is
they have
destroyed iconic American and British
companies also they've destroyed a
Bedrock of engineering expertise which
took decades in some cases centuries and
more than a century to accumulate so
we've talked about Stone Cipher tell me
about Henry Ford yeah so this is a big
um a big chapter in the book uh where I
talk about about Ford and the Ford Motor
Company because you know I've spent a
lot of time read like over the the
course of this interview so far and the
start of the book talking about
neoliberals right and the neoliberal
revolution takes place in the 1980s and
so there's an argument to say that all
of these problems really emerge in the
1980s when you get the shell the value
Revolution you know kind of in inverted
commers free market capitalism which
isn't really free um but my argument in
the book is that this kind of balance
between centralized planning and um and
the kind of discipline of the market is
something that characterizes all
capitalist systems throughout the whole
of human history um was pervasive during
the post-war period it was pervasive
during the kind of lass Fair era even
before then it was pervasive you know
all the way back I talk about the East
India Company all the way back at the
very origins of kind of commercial
capitalism this Fusion between um
between public and private power and
Ford kind of exemplifies this right um
because Ford is a company that emerges
in this kind of LFE area of American
capitalism when you know the government
is is not really doing well allegedly is
not really doing as much active
intervention in the economy um and um
the Keynesian Revolution takes place
after the Wall Street Crash which you
know then says oh the government needs
to take a much more active approach and
we get kind of social democracy um and
Ford lives through this period um the
Ford Motor Company survives this period
and then survives into the the ne
liberal period all the way up to today
and what I argue is that by looking at
the development of this company which
throughout this period remain you know a
substantial um retains a substantial
amount of Market power um you're able to
see the way that planning has changed so
you're able to see that you know a a
semblance of planning has existed or a
type of planning a form of planning has
existed with all of these different
types of systems because it is a central
part of the way the capitalism Works
you're able to see this Fusion of public
and private power and how that changes
over time and you're also able to see
how the nature of the planning process
changes and I think that's really
critical because you know the idea that
capitalism requires a certain amount of
centralized planning to function is true
throughout the course of history but the
way that planning operates changes quite
substantially so Ford kind of emerges it
becomes you know a really powerful
basically Monopoly because it's you know
the only firm making cars basically and
Ford is this bizarre figure who is uh
you know hardcore Christian he's deeply
anti-semitic um and there's loads of
examples in the book of him you know his
anti-Semitic activi ities promoting like
the pro Protocols of the Elders of Zion
um uh There Was You Know examples of of
Ford actually supporting the German war
effort in the runup to the second world
war this was obviously a bit later um
and at the same time kind of you know
claiming to be supporting the American
war effort as well um there are he was I
think awarded um a medal by like by
Hitler himself which is crazy that's
written about in the book um and so he
was this you know weird guy very
hardcore anti-site and also very
authoritarian which again well that
surprising so he hated unions um he
hated any attempt amongst his workers
trying and organize themselves and he
was really obsessive about controlling
the day-to-day lives of his workers um
so people often talk about the um the $5
day right which was a kind of you know
allegedly a big shift it was actually
composed of a a $250 wage and then a
$250 bonus which was contingent upon
things like your wife isn't allowed to
work outside the home you're not allowed
to drink Ford was like really keen on
basically trying to control the lives of
his workers he had this immense amount
of power to plan what was going on
within his organization he also had this
kind of Imperial power which
corporations often exercise I talk about
in the chapter on Empire um and he he
used that to buy up a big chunk of land
in the Brazilian Amazon with support
from the Brazilian government and um the
US government as well and created his
own rubber Plantation um because he was
kind of annoyed at having to go through
the British Empire basically um to to
get rubber so tried to create his own
rubber Plantation built a town like um
that was there was this American town
that had like a golf course like
swimming pools like little you know
picket fence American houses shipped all
these American managers out there a lot
of them died obviously on the way from
ill from illnesses and diseases and then
employed loads of local workers to then
actually go and harvest the rubber now
the managers had no idea how to harvest
the rubber the workers were really
annoyed at the controls that Ford had
attempted to kind of impose upon them
and the whole thing ended in Failure
after you know him sinking tons and tons
of money into it and then a synthetic
alternative to Robert was found anyway
but this experiment it shows the extent
of Ford's kind of Imperial Ambitions the
extent of his desire to plan and to
control everything that was going on as
well as you know the the relationship
that he had with his workers and what
was interesting is that before the
second world war this power is largely
unimpeded um so you know the state Falls
in line generally behind whatever Ford
wants to do he doesn't have much
resistance from his his workers because
they're not as as strongly organized and
he's able to plan without any challenges
really coming from anywhere else what's
interesting about the shift that you see
after the second world war is not that
planning recedes in importance it's not
that you know um Ford Ford's power is
reduced or it's not that the power of
the state kind of you know becomes much
much more significant it's more the the
interests that are involved in the
planning process process start to shift
so rather than for being on his own
basically being able to do whatever he
wants and supported uncritically by the
state because you see the growth of
organized labor for lots of different
reasons you know the imperatives of Full
Employment like the efforts of of
organizing that had taking place within
the UAW um the automotive work Union yes
yeah um you you know the the US economy
merges from the second world war with a
much stronger labor movement and that
labor movement is able to make demands
of Ford that previously of the Ford
Motor Company that previously it
wouldn't have been able to do and
because the power of organized labor is
is kind of broader and deeper within the
whole of society you see a shift within
the state to this kind of corporatist
model whereby the state kind of mediates
between labor and capital between bosses
and workers in an attempt to create this
kind of system of like organized
planning which is not just Ford goes out
and does whatever he wants and the
American states falls falls in line it's
everyone gets to have their say as to
what is is happening within the economy
as to what the you know the policies of
the company are as to what the policies
of the government are and then there's
this broader discussion as to whose
interests ultimately win out and there's
an example in the book of this um
experiment in in kind of corporatist
planning called the triarte committee
which the Kennedy administration sets up
and is supposed to literally mediate
between um bosses and workers so bosses
get Representatives on this including
Henry Ford unionists get Representatives
on it and there are there are politician
on it as well and their task is to
basically manage the relationship
between workers and bosses to maintain
America's competitiveness to kind of
retain jobs and to think about longer
term questions like how are we going to
manage the process of automation how are
we going to kind of manage investment
all those sorts of things what's
interesting about this experiment it
doesn't last very long and ultimately
breaks down over this question of
automation because workers start to say
we don't want to just bargain with you
over wages we actually want to say in
the invest decisions of this firm we
don't want to be participating in a
governance structure that's going to see
us lose our jobs over the long run and
that's when Ford starts to the Ford
Company it's obviously no longer the
same Henry Ford starts to say absolutely
no we're not having any any truck with
this because this um attempt by workers
to uh have a say within what should be
in a capitalist economy the you know
tightly guarded prerogative of managers
and um and shareholders which is
decision over investment over what
technologies the company is investing in
that was under threat because of this
shift in the balance of power because
workers were saying you know we want to
actually have some say in how the
economy is being run and that scared
businesses greatly and my argument in
the book is that the shift towards
neoliberalism it was couched in terms of
this language around planning right
about you know freeing the free market
and um cutting down the power of the
state but what you see shift from the
70s through the 880s isn't the size or
power of the state particularly in the
US it is actually who gets to
participate in the planning decisions
that are still taking place so you know
in the lass a fair period Ford gets to
do whatever he wants the state just does
what he says in the post-war period Ford
has to manage this relationship with
workers and he has to manage this
relationship with the state and all the
three of these parties kind of come
together and try to decide what happens
next what changes in the neoliberal
period is not that the state gets
smaller or less powerful or less strong
it's that the decision-making power is
basically returned solely to capitalists
and their allies within the state so
workers are cut out of this planning
process you know there's an assault on
the unions um there's you know a shift
in the like structure of the economy
which um disempowers workers quite
substantially you obviously have you
know the imposition of capital Mobility
so businesses can say well if you don't
do what we want we'll just leave all of
this sort of stuff um that massively
disempowers workers and means that they
lose their seats at the bargaining table
and once again the power to plan is
restored to capitalists but also to
their allies within the state that are
increasingly minded to kind of not
necessarily fall in line behind the
interest of capital but certainly to
negotiate you know quite substantially
with bosses with capitalists with
businesses as to the direction of policy
in the way that they aren't minded to
negotiate with workers or really any
other social groups so if we're looking
at the fundamental ideas within the book
like I say life under capitalism means
living under a planned economy while
being told you're free if we're looking
at that through the prism of Henry Ford
fordism the Ford Motor Company there is
planning before 1945 significant amounts
of it as there are are always in firms
they're the they have the most you know
planned infrastructures management
hierarchies objectives kpis if you want
a successful company you have to be
relatively organized and and that's
something that you know you draw on from
the Republic of Walmart great book but
it's you know Marx David Harvey they've
always talked about this about the firm
Coast as you know distilling huge
amounts of organization of the
non-market forms and and processes so
there's the planning there pre 1945
there's the planning there post 1945 as
you just talk about and then there's the
planning in a very different way even
under near liberalism planning is always
there I suppose somebody who disagrees
with maybe some of the the ideas put
forward in your book as they would say
okay well that's fine maybe Henry Ford
was an anti-semite maybe he was a bad
person but I prefer the
planning pre 1945 for XYZ reasons it did
create high level of innovation he was a
smart person right he was a you know
unlike most captains of industry today
he did create something of genuine value
to the market in a way that firms
generally speaking don't anymore some do
I people make the same arguments about
like Elon Musk type figures today don't
they yeah well the thing is so that
that's absolutely the case and it's
actually why I think the things you're
talking about when I was reading the
fordlandia story about you know Brazil
and how Ford this was a crazy stat 50%
of the B24 planes were built by Ford in
the US and onethird of the trucks in the
German Army were built by Ford just such
an insane statistic and I thought that's
that's what a multi-polar world looks
like and that's kind of the world we're
going back towards now you do have you
do have private firms in the US thinking
we we do kind of like the Chinese market
you know you've got Elon Musk or um Tim
Cook going over to China being like we
do kind of like here guys and then you
got this completely different like
political signaling coming from
Washington like they're the enemy well
the capitalist class aren't quite so
sure and it's very similar to Ford and
also with that point of musk it does
feel like we're returning to a world
more like the early 20th century than
you know the 60s or the 70s or the 80s
so I think that's really interesting but
like I say somebody on the right who
disagrees would say but Ford was
creating genuine Innovation you know
when he was asked about you know
building the Ford Model T he said if I
gave the consumer what they wanted I
would have given them a faster yeah
horse and c I didn't I gave them a car
do you think there's anything to that
this is the argument that is made for
not
necessarily just capitalism but for the
existence of hierarchical societies um
and this is actually the real argument
that I want to take apart in the book
because it basically hinges on the idea
that some people are better smarter more
capable more brilliant more Innovative
and they deserve to be in charge even if
that means they get to exercise
authority over everyone else um and even
if that makes everyone else less free
and that is but hold on those are
separate points aren't they in what way
well so I mean you probably do agree
that there are some people who are
smarter than others the question is does
that mean they therefore get more
political power does that mean that
other people should be unfree what I
believe I couldn't build a multi I
couldn't build a multi-trillion dollar
company that's like fabulous in terms of
um standardized manufacturing process
and so on other people can what I
believe is that that um kind of the
creation of that dichotomy between the
smart brilliant
entrepreneur and everyone else is a lie
and we see this all the time because
workers are able to organize and do
things that entrepreneurs are supposed
to only be able to do very frequently in
fact they're able to manage themselves
in a way that we're told they're not you
know this again this idea that you have
you have to have entrepreneurs that are
brilliant and that exercise authority
over everyone else because everyone else
is lazy and stupid and won't do what
they're told so they need to be tightly
controlled and managed maybe they need
to be managed kind of algorithmically
now which again is very limiting on
their freedom you can respond to that
argument by saying oh well you know it
limits their freedom but it's good for
the rest of society but actually that's
not true because you see throughout the
history of kind of experiments in
Democratic planning in moments where
workers have come together to actually
take control of the infrastructure of
the corporations in which they work they
have come up with brilliant fantastic
ideas that are if anything better for
society than the kind of you know
visions of like billionaires who want to
go like build societies on Mars and
leave the rest of us to to and I want to
use an example quickly please which is
the example of the Lucas plan um which I
write about in the book uh where a bunch
of workers in Lucas Aerospace another
Aerospace company came together um and
their their firm was kind of on the on
the bring of collapse they went to the
labor government and asked for
nationalization labor responded no but
Tony Ben came back to them and said you
you can put together a plan to kind of
determine how to save yourselves
basically and they came up with the
Lucas plan which was this incredible
document it not only contained all of
these ideas to transform Lucas Aerospace
from this manufacturer predominant
weapons to manufacturing um you know
climate technology kidney dialysis
machines all of these socially useful
technologies that would have been better
for society than just producing weapons
it also contained all of the mechanisms
through which the transfer would take
place like how it would be managed how
the workers would organize themselves
all of this sort of stuff just knowledge
and expertise that workers aren't
supposed to have have that we're told
that they don't have because they need
to be managed really really tightly and
that spawned this movement um for kind
of democratic planning that took root in
the GLC in other parts of the country
and which Thatcher crushed now she
crushed that because she was terrified
of it because that like human power the
collective organizing of people who work
all day every day on the calace of these
institutions their power to kind of come
together and say we want to reorganize
Society we want to take control of the
way we work that is the biggest threat
to a system based on hierarchy and
domination and control so a few things
and you you're WR about this very
lucidly as well it's not just Lucas the
Lucas plan which I'd heard about before
but also you talk about the the people's
plan center with regards to the
docklands being remade and actually you
know the greater London Authority
greater London council at the time
wanted to with with a great deal of
input from local people wanted a
different kind of development there
co-ops different kind of infrastructure
and in a way I'm reading that I'm
thinking this isn't even especially
radical this is just this is just kind
of what they would have done they just
would have done this in like Sweden yeah
right that's it's not like you know
nobody's done this before it's just a
very different kind of you know way of
things but it's it's still very legible
to us today and I I think that's
absolutely true and I think Lucas AOS
space is a great way to look at this you
know I was I'm late I was late here
today I left you waiting and I was late
because the signal system doesn't
doesn't work properly they constantly
break down for trains it's the number
one reason why trains are delayed in
this country we're talking about traffic
lights we're talking about traffic
lights for trains how do they keep
breaking now BAE Systems employs more
Engineers than any other company on the
4250 I'm sure if you went to 100
engineers at ba systems fix this yeah it
would take them three months right it
would take it wouldn't even it probably
take them a week you and we saw that
with um the madna vaccine with covid
like something happened okay how quickly
okay sequence the genome create the
vaccine it took literally days because
there was necessity there right and and
like you say right now we don't operate
with necessity in terms of social value
social use people the necessity is
shareholder value profit maximization
but I agree with all that um but with
Lucas you're talk you're still talking
about engineers so do I think that
Engineers are very capable of problem
solving more than the average person
going back to my point originally that
we're not all the same and S of soling
problems I I'm a terrible engineer I can
just about basic DIY yeah so like in
terms of the um processes that you'd
want to build management standards
protocol systems for an organization of
several thousand people I couldn't do it
could an engineer do it be more ined to
say we're all Engineers or we're all
Medics I am saying is distill that there
are certain parts of the labor market
where what you're saying absolutely
applies but then there are other parts
where I think I'm not so sure well
luckily I have a bunch of other examples
in the book as well um so I think yeah
as I said I'm not saying that we're all
Engineers or we're all Medics or
whatever what I am saying is that
workers within a sector who have
expertise in that sector do not need to
be managed they can manage themselves
and actually if they are given
Democratic control over the means of
production they will make decisions
democratically and collectively with
obviously input from the rest of society
through other Democratic measures it's
not like you just give the workers
within one company that has an immense
amount of strategic importance complete
control over that there have to be other
Democratic oversights but largely
speaking if we like delegated power to
the people on the calace of this
organizations who understand it then
they would make decisions that would be
much more in the collective interest
than the ones that are being made by
shareholders fely purely for the
purposes of extracting profit and you
can apply this yes you know to the
Aerospace industry to Engineers you can
also apply it to you know Healthcare
right we're constantly being told um
that you know we need see efficiencies
in the NHS and that always equates to
new layers of management managers and
managers and managers and managers right
actually the people who know the system
and understand this system and whose
feedback could make the system work
better are the people on the front lines
of the healthcare service you saw um a
kind of an attempt to democratize and
decentralize the provision of healthcare
and a slightly different context in
Chile under aende you know his um
approach to democratic socialism was
based on this idea that you hand power
to the people who are working to the
workers basically to the people who are
working within these organizations um
and you know at the same time you hand
power to kind of communities to patients
to people and you allow them to kind of
come together within Democratic fora and
make decisions about the structures of
society that predominantly affect them
so his approach was to kind of
decentralize and democratize the
Healthcare System he relied on you know
not just Frontline healthcare workers
but also local community organizations
particularly um strongly women were
particularly strongly represented in
those and those kind of took over a lot
of the control over like PR ition and
Community healthare uh within um the
first years of of this program and a lot
of other examples in the book rest on
this idea that most people if you give
them power and if you you know give them
the resources that they need to come
together and make decisions and act
cooperatively will come up with
brilliant ideas Brilliant Solutions to
problems and to the mechanisms to
implement them and that probably sounds
the reason it sounds so mad is because
every single element of our society is
geared to telling us that the opposite
is true that we need to be controlled
that we need to be ruled we need to be
governed by people that are infinitely
more intelligent than us that are just
better than us that is I would say the
fundamental legitimizing ideology that
underpins capitalism but also like most
other social systems that are all based
on hierarchy and domination and control
and when you look at experiments in
participatory budgeting for example when
local people come together and say this
is how we want our Municipal budget
spent who shows up to the meetings it's
women it's workingclass people and they
say we want more money in healthcare we
want more money in education um if you
look at um you know the example that I
love in this book which is of blind knog
which is the small village in North
Wales um this was one of these Left
Behind towns um a former slate mining
Community really high rates of poverty
because all the roofs are made of slate
um and one of those places that the
government basically kind of as as class
as this kind of Left Behind area and
instead of just taking that on the chin
a bunch of people in that local area
said we're going to start setting up
Community Enterprises um and as those
Community Enterprises were set up the
rest of the community was like well if
they can do it then we can do it so all
these Community Enterprises Blossom they
have this community Energy company now
um that uh uses hydroelectric power to
provide cheaper energy to the rest of
the community it's become the place in
Welles with the most social Enterprises
per capita um and it really exemplifies
this model of like bottomup Community
wealth building so much so that the
Welsh governments now come in and trying
to provide a lot of support to see how
that model can be spread and this is all
just people looking at the problems in
their local area and rather than saying
oh someone else who's smarter than me
and better than me will fix it just
working together to fix it themselves I
actually think this is a pathology that
we have on the left as well it's the
alienation of our political agency to
people that we think are going to come
and save us and my excitement and my
optimism for the future comes from
knowing that actually the best and most
exciting political movements come from
people not kind of surrendering their
political agency to someone and saying
they're going to do things for us but
people actually organizing on the ground
fighting back against individualism and
building Alternatives I agree with
everything you've said about public
services I I agree with 90% of what
you're saying so for instance I spoke
recently to a former local Authority
Child Protection lawyer she is
immeasurably more qualified or local
social workers immeasurably more
qualified to work out how to spend job
protection budgets than these
bureaucrats who head up these
organizations I read this the other day
it's incredible the second highest
earning individual for the authority in
Bournemouth Bournemouth um Christ Church
pool Council I think it's unit Authority
he's on £193,000 a year he's the head of
child protection services and you have
social workers who literally have to
work in six minute blocks and that's why
kids fall through the net so I agree he
should have less power they should have
more power I agree with all of that but
then I look at a company say like xiaomi
this Chinese company who just developed
this new car they've developed a car
that looks like a Porsche it's it's
starting price is like I think it's like
$30,000 I think it's about
£23,000 um it's got a 700 km range it's
an EV obviously and that to me is like a
stunning Fe they've clearly stolen a
hell of a lot of American IP but
whatever it's a stunning feat of
engineering excellence and I suppose
it's something that I thought about a
lot and I think the left doesn't often
think about is that management is a
skill now doesn't anybody can be a
management anybody can be a manager I'm
not suggesting otherwise and of course
there should be massive um input from
workers from the from the shop floor
into outcomes they might even lead those
outcomes but management is the thing and
I think you're talking about like the
left I think one of the problems
mistakes the left's made over the last
30 years is to think it's not and that
everything can be flat so I I look at so
many organizations as I get older I
won't name names certain trade unions
and I look at the staff there if it was
down to the staff that trade Union would
collapse in six months right it it would
they would award themselves Infinity pay
Rises and they wouldd all work from home
four five five days a week now I know I
sound like somebody from the daily mail
but that's not in the interest of their
members because actually the interests
of their members aren't aligned with the
interests of the permanent bureaucracy
who are meant to represent the members
and so when you have work representation
which I support something similar can
happen all of a sudden the
representatives are looking to maximize
their own interest status pay whatever
which is an anarchos syndicalist
critique of trade unions historically
and that can lead to very poor
management outcomes some people would
say that's why trade unions with regards
to UK Manufacturing in 70s didn't have
the same outcomes as say in Germany I
don't buy that but that's that's one
argument
so does management matter is it real
does the left neglect it so I think
there are a couple of different points
there the first one comes down to the
nature of innovation and technological
development under capitalism right which
as Marx talks about in the gr re so it
becomes like an industry and and of
itself um and that is something that's
unique about capitalism in the history
of all social system systems is the
centrality of innovation and how
Innovation for innovation's sake because
it can you know have all of these
applications that ultimately lead to
lead to significant profits as well as
often kind of supporting the development
of of society and fixing social problems
that that technological development
takes pride of place within a capitalist
economy um and Marx was wrote in kind of
glowing terms about the kind of
innovations that he sees taking place
within capitalist societies and how
incredible and and amazing these are now
the question which is as yet kind of
Unsolved I suppose is whether or not you
would be able to continue to see that
kind of innovation within uh socialist
society now there are a couple of
different arguments about this firstly
the Mariana masakado argument which is
that a lot of the innovations that do
take place actually are undertaken
Within These like centrally planned
systems that don't have the same profit
based incentives that um are allegedly
supposed to be behind the generation of
this like you know incredible technology
um that is supposed to you know be
taking the World by storm the second
thing is uh like the direction of
technological innovation right because
it's not like the direction of
technological innovation is is neutral
um we see you know you talked about the
EV that looks like a Porsche like
arguably what Tesla is doing at the
moment right pouring all this money into
a cyber truck when actually what it
needs to do is develop like a a cheap
affordable electric vehicle and it's
doing that because Elon Musk has all
this power and he's able to basically
say this is where technological
innovation is going to go rather than
necessarily allowing it to be in the
interest of of everyone um so so I would
say that even outside of a a capitalist
economy there are still um you know
plenty of incentives for Innovation
largely because the the systems of
innovation that do exist within our
societies the the ones that are most
successful are generally often the ones
that are most insulated from the
imperatives of of profit profit making
because you know it's the scientific
ethos it's like the ethos of of research
and development is to just produce and
and develop and come up with new ideas
and new applications just for their own
sake and I don't think that's going away
anytime soon that's just an inherent
part of of humanity and arguably we need
to fund it more and support it much much
more to have General um and you know
socially useful applications rather than
just Outsourcing these decisions about
the future of technology to a bunch of
billionaires that are saying let's build
a cyber truck or let's you know build a
you know territory on mars or whatever
um and the second question is is this
question about management and the extent
to which you know you could build um
with this model of kind of pric self man
management lots of little Thoms
basically where everyone's looking after
their own interests um I agree with you
that this is this is a problem and I
think it hinges on the design of these
systems so how do you build a Democratic
Society is it that you just say workers
within the the corporations that they're
already working take all the control
over those corporations and then they
just do whatever they want and that's
how we imagine the system I don't think
that's quite right I think we need to
balance different layers and levels and
um mechanisms of of implementing and
deepening democracy y um at you know the
community level at the organizational
level and actually at the state level
and at the international level so at the
end of the book I have all of these
chapters on how we democratize the state
democratize The Firm democratize
financial institutions and democratize
international organizations and when
viewed as that kind of you know
widespread project it's not just saying
the workers in this firm get to take
control of everything and they decide
what's what it's about the kind of the
creation of much broader and deeper
Democratic institutions for example like
I wrote In my first book about this idea
of a people's asset manager or a
people's Investment Bank yeah so you
have kind of unionists and Democratic
elected citizens and um all different
kind of stakeholders sitting on the
board of this thing saying what are our
priorities for the development of
technology and and having input from all
different areas of society in order to
to you know push our resources into
developing the things that we actually
need um you know combine that with like
you know um devolving power within State
institutions to Frontline service
providers for example balanced with
obviously Frontline service users um
it's also about you know subsidiarity
and promoting experiments in kind of
community wealth building and and all
those sorts of things there's some
interesting uh ideas as to how you can
kind of democratize the international
economy as well which is I think the the
area we haven't really talked about it
that much but the area this area of kind
of imperialism where you see just the
brute raw power of capital exerted most
effectively um so I think you know we
have to see democratization as this
Broad and deep project but crucially and
and I think this is the main point we're
talking about like policy shifts here
and it all hinges on our capacity to
just demand something different and
organize to shift Society because if you
think about the arguments I've been
making here it's basically that all the
major changes that we've seen over the
past Century um in the nature of kind of
political economy are reflected by shift
in the balance of class power so you
have Capital getting to plan on its own
then Capital having to share some power
with workers and with the state and then
capital and the state kind of fusing to
just um to just plan together and that
all comes about because of these shifts
in the ability of people to organize
collectively and one of the biggest
things that come out of this that's come
out of this book and I spoke about it
the last time I was here is the extent
to which
individualism is hampering our ability
to demand any kind of changes because
it's hampering our ability to organize
collectively and I think this this is
related to a lot of different things
we've talked about here firstly it's
this it's the foundation of this idea
that Society can be divided into people
who Rule and everyone else secondly it's
the problem that we have with people
kind of projecting their political
agency onto someone else and saying I
need this person to save me which you
see massively on the right today by the
way very very angry people thinking I
have no power Donald Trump's going to
come in and and screw everyone else over
and it's also the foundation of our our
powerlessness right A lot of people
believe that they are powerless within
this like you know immensely complex
World economic system um and the extent
to which that is true hinges on the
extent to which we actually believe that
we are powerless um and I think the
thing I really wanted to do with this
book is to show people that yes you know
there is this concentrated
centralized um forms of power that are
exercised you know throughout the
economy and society and really impact
your freedom on like a daily basis but
they rely on legitimacy they rely on the
fact that we are going to kind of obey
that people aren't going to Rebel
they're not going to start pushing back
and fighting back and that again relies
on the fact that we all see ourselves
these isolated atomized individuals who
are up against this big powerful system
that nobody can control rather than
members of groups that can build things
and can change things and can start to
demand something different you know I I
love this and it it goes back to what I
was saying um with regards to
engineering and I think also speaks
about the death of a certain mindset in
the west if you watch bridge over the
river qu great film great film and it's
about these you know this well this one
mad English man who basically wants to
build a great bridge to show the world
that you know you know we know what
we're doing we can do this and it came a
moment the ow of manura when you know
Britain had literally was exiting that
moment of being this Imperial
technological
superpower and we're not that anymore My
worry is with this stuff when we look at
Elon Musk and American corporate culture
like of course they're mad of course
they're crazy it's a completely decadent
ridiculous I
think I think probably dying culture in
a way I think it has so many internal
contradictions but then I look at
China um and I I I think that's probably
the thing that we should be you should
be looking to critique in a in like
interesting ways you know again another
cultural reference point before I go to
the final question the three body
problem have you read this book no but
it's the show on Netflix at the moment
isn't it the book is so good and the
book is really people engineering
solutions to deal with existential
challenge to humanity and you watch it
on Netflix and it's transposed to a UK
context you've got the Royal Navy and
you think the British State doesn't work
like this it's outlandish and it's so
interesting for me how it's a it's a
real interesting snapshot of of a belief
in engineering Excellence human problem
solving a humanistic culture a belief in
the state to solve problems and in the
UK you this is not how Britain would
respond to this kind of Crisis anyway I
thought that was I wanted to talk about
bridge over the river quir and Chinese
sci-fi both very good um I've got two
questions for you at the end yeah you've
mentioned the word unfreedom multiple
times so what is unfreedom and then
finally do you have any faith in K St
solving any of the problems you've
highlighted today right so freedom and
unfreedom freedom is often presented to
us um in this kind of you know fairly
black and white way either you're free
to do something or you're not free to do
something if someone's standing in your
way or or legislating against you or
regulating you or whatever then you're
not free to do that thing which makes
you less free um and I suppose what I
look at in the book is firstly you know
we're told that we're free and actually
we're not even free on that kind of very
narrow definition of freedom of people
not standing in our way you know we've
got um ridiculous laws against protest
obviously you know the small neoliberal
state attacks Miners and in full force
there's loads of constraints on our own
autonomy that come from basically you
know the state um enforcing the interest
of capital but there's also this wider
understanding of Freedom right which is
your agency within the world around you
and I think this is where people feel
really really disempowered because you
know we're told you're free you can go
and work wherever you want consume
whatever you want and yet you look at
the world and you think there are so
many problems there are so many issues
that seem completely beyond my control
and yet which are constraining my
freedom every day so things like I have
to pay rent which is really high you
know I have to get a job in this you
know really hierarchical organization
that's controlling me using some sort of
AI machine or whatever and because of
those constraints that exist outside of
your control you feel this sense of
unfreedom right the you're aut you're
autonomous you retain the capacity to
respond to the situations that you're in
but there are all of these kind of weird
institutions that exist around you that
hem you in and I suppose what I'm
talking about in the book I kind of
hearken back to this this Marxist
socialist idea of freedom which looks at
yes individual freedom and autonomy but
also your freedom as a member of a group
to shape the conditions that affect your
life and your existence so to have
Democratic control over your housing
situation over how your government works
over how your community works and that
being a much more expansive and more
human understanding of what freedom is
um than the one that's presented by you
know either the kind of Social
Democratic left the kind of Keynesian
left which is you're free when you kind
of submit to a state that has your
interests in mind or the neoliberal view
of Freedom which is just your free when
you know you live in a free market
basically and do I think what do I think
about about Labor you know I'm not
particularly optimistic about um about a
a labor government um because it seems
as though even if they do kind of make
any real macro macroeconomic changes
which it doesn't seem like they will I
was reading an article the other day um
which cited an interview with Andrew
Bulls Ed bulls' brother Chief investment
officer at Pimco uh this massive Bond uh
Bond fund um obviously they're looking
at you know government bonds or
government debt so they're very
interested in the kind of policy
situations in different countries and he
was basically saying we've just
basically priced in the idea that
there's not going to be any difference
in macroeconomic policy between a labor
government and a conservative government
so those kind of big levers of power
that the state has toward the way the
economy Works Labor's highly likely just
to keep their hands off them right so we
can't expect I don't think much radical
change but to the extent to which we can
I think it's going to be of this kind of
like centralizing
bureaucratizing um top down kind of
Keynesian Fabian tradition right maybe
um which basically says people are
people can't really be trusted to make
decisions on their own behalf the state
has to step in as a class of kind of
enlightened bureaucrats to basically
tell them what to do and you can trust
us you can alienate your political
agency to us because we're the good guys
and this is often how social Democrats
have the worst social Democrats have
presented themselves um throughout the
at the course of human history and my
concern about that is firstly people
aren't going to be noticing much change
in their daily lives um you know because
there aren't going to be these
substantial changes in people's living
standards and then there's also going to
be this resentment that comes from the
feeling of giving up power to someone a
politician who says I'm going to fix
things for you I'm going to save things
for you and then them lying and you
feeling like well I can't do anything
about that and you just come away from
the whole experience thinking
politicians are all the same democracy
is pointless and often that pushes
people towards the far right right where
they say I'm gon to vote for this person
who is GNA give a kicking to all of
these Elites even if it means deepening
this authoritarianism and it comes from
again this frustration with this idea of
unfreedom the fact that you know the the
biggest and most important factors that
affect the way that most of us live our
lives are not decided by us they're
decided by someone else out there and I
think people resent even more when those
people come to you with this offer of
I'm I'm going to make your life better
trust me and then fail to do that then
they do voting for a far-right populist
politician who doesn't even say that
they just say I'm going to burn the
whole system down but hold on and I I I
agree with all that but if you're let's
say I'm a right-winger watching this I'm
a brexit party vter I want immigration
I'm not completely mad I want
immigration 100,000 100,000 people a
year yeah maybe early 90s levels I'm not
saying like zero but very very harsh
immigration policy I might not support
Rwanda or whatever I might just say look
I don't want pres levels of immigration
they might say grace Blakeley I love
what you're saying yes I feel unfree
because I've voted consistently to have
lower immigration year after year for 20
years and it keeps going up and and I
suppose and this is I'm I'm I'm using
that figure to to gesture a point which
is ending the unfreedom of some people
will lead to policy outcomes you're not
particularly fond of I'm not sure that I
agree about that because I think that I
suppose my idea of kind of democracy in
its ideal form this kind of like um
decentralized form of decision-making
that allows people to have input over uh
decisions that affect their lives
generally on a kind of relatively local
scale it I suppose and you can critique
this comes back to this kind of habam
massian ideal of how people talk to one
another when they are in these
Democratic settings and there are stakes
and they have to make decisions within a
group right um and I think you know when
you look at there have been lots and
lots of experiments of bringing lots of
people together and saying discuss this
policy outcome and you expect it's going
to be crazy you know right Wingers and
crazy left Wingers gouging each other's
eyes out and then coming up with these
insane policy ideas generally speaking
they converge around a norm that is
vastly more Progressive than anything
that you see within the public sphere at
the moment and I'm not saying that's
going to take place all the time and
everywhere but I am saying I have faith
in that process and I'm also saying and
this is where I think people can
disagree with me that giving people
freedom is a good in itself giving
people the capacity to have decisions to
make decisions over their own lives and
over the structure of society is a good
within itself I mean actually on the
immigration point I actually entirely
agree with you I think if you had you
probably would end up with something
like yes we need immigration for the
care system for Health Care some people
with Asylum yes we need students yes if
it helps the economy but you'd still
probably end up with significantly High
immigration but at least they would feel
some investment into that into that
conversation
Grace one sentence answer
mhm are you optimistic about the future
of this country where are we going to be
in 2030 I am optimistic because I'm
optimistic about people for all of the
reasons that I've just told you you know
part three of the book looks at loads of
different experiments in kind of
democratic planning all over the world
you know across time and space and the
thing I keep coming back to is when
people believe that they have the power
to change things and when they feel
connected to others around them rather
than isolated they do extraordinary
things so that's kind of what I feel
like my mission is at the moment it's
like going out to as wider audience as
possible and saying you do have power
you just need to take it manifest
socialism yes I like that I like that
this has been a wonderful conversation
thanks so much and it is a brilliant
book so much so much in there I hope it
does very very well thanks for joining
us here on Downstream thank you
[Music]
