there were just so many aspects of the
way the world is now which reflect a
sort of right hemisphere brain damage I
mean human is almost dead now you can't
make any jokes I feel so sorry for
comedians people trying to change the
words of books as well yes oh absolutely
it's the did I say that the left
hemisphere was in charge of manipulation
it they want to manipulate everything
but I think the single most uh absurd if
if we call it the
sloganizer tweeted trans lesbians are
lesbians teaching children for example
that there are no differences between
men and women and they come home and
they're like totally confused and we
spend our time fussing about how
traumatized we are because somebody used
the wrong word or even the wrong pronoun
are we heading for
collapse the first thing is that pretty
much everything that most people have
ever heard about hemisphere differences
is wrong and and so they have to put
that out of their minds um I I was very
much discouraged by my colleagues from
going into this area because it was
famously pop psychology and was now
known to be quite wrong but the fact
that we'd answered the question wrongly
didn't invalidate the question it
suggested to me having a better go at
answering the question and what I
basically found out was that there's a
good reason why all the the neural Nets
and and and brains A4
or have a kind of distinction between
the two halves are asymmetrical and this
even goes back 700 million years at
least we know that um and this
distinction is um in order to be able to
manipulate the world to get stuff out of
it to grab things to eat to build a nest
all this sort of stuff uh you need a
very kind of precise attention to a
detail that you already know what it is
you know you want it you go and get it
whereas if you that's the only kind of
attention you have you soon fall prey to
a predator while you're getting your own
meal you become someone else's and so
you need a completely different kind of
attention which is Broad open
uncommitted as to what it might find
sustained Vigilant and to begin with
when I realized that the main difference
betweeners was attention I didn't the
penny didn't really drop immediately
because I'd been trained in the
cognitive
uh Paradigm whereby attention was just
another brain function but it isn't it's
much more than that it's how the whole
world that we experience comes into
being so what I mean by that is that
depending on how you pay attention to
something you see something different
there and so the world that comes into
being to meet your attention is in part
generated by the kind of attention that
you're already
paying and if you've got these two very
different kinds of attention you get two
kinds of phenomenological worlds in
other words experiential worlds and what
are they like in the case of the left
hemisphere it's full of things that are
known already they're fixed they're
certain they're detached they're
decontextualized they're abstract
non-unique and they are explicit that's
what they are and you know that you want
to Target it and get
it however in the case of the right
hemisphere it's something completely
different it's a web in which nothing is
ever completely separate from anything
else ultimately in which nothing is ever
completely certain completely
fixed that doesn't mean chaos it just
means that there's room for maneuver if
you like so this is a world in which
there's subtlety in which there is a lot
that is implicit is picked up by the
right hemisphere the left hemisphere
doesn't understand the implicit messages
that are so important to meaning in life
um
and the right hemisphere's world is a
living one not an inanimate one like the
left hemisphere's one it's a is it's
it's one which has meaning and value in
it and so really what you've got is a
map in the left hemisphere and the world
that is mapped in the right hemisphere
that's probably the easiest way to put
it I see and just to be sure so the left
is that from me looking out and that's
my left the the left is what you see
when you look out you you know which
your left hand is the left hemisphere is
the same side this would be my left
hemisphere on my left it is that's right
but because of the way we're made the
left hemisphere governs the right side
of the body and the right hemisphere
governs the left side of the
body but how is that so that's what's so
strange for me because obviously what
you've explained is the left being quite
uh stuck and not not necessarily stuck
but okay these are my fixed ideas and
the right being a little bit more fluid
and nuanced oh absolutely and yet
they're both responsible for controlling
other sides of the body yes so should my
left side be slightly more nuanced well
actually there is an expression at the
at the motor level but I'm really
talking at a much higher level than that
of motor but for example the left
hemisphere governs the right hand with
which we do the grabbing most of us and
the manipulating of things and in fact
when people people's um people have
damaged to the brain in such a way that
the natural function of that hemispher
is
liberated they randomly grab stuff with
their right hand even
if they're just kind of grabbing stuff
that's in the environment all the time
whereas the left hand if it is released
in the same way does explor movements as
though it's feeling its way to something
and touching it and finding it
wow that that is incredible I just I
find all of this absolutely incredible I
do need to ask you as as as we were
talking about before obviously my show a
lot of people watch it we we sort of
talk about culture issues culture wars
and those kinds of things yeah let's go
that great then how how does it let's be
it's controversial as possible how how
does it influence the kind of culture
wars that we're seeing at the moment
well I think it's not just the culture
wars but I we'll come to that but it's
it's the way we see the world in general
now which is a very simplified model a
reductionist materialist model in which
there's lumps of stuff that have no
meaning or purpose in themselves that
are pushed about in a sort of random way
colliding with one another and that this
produces a a mechanistic world in which
um there is no real life life is a sort
of uh a sort of artifactual emergence
from mechanism which nobody has been
able to explain and I don't believe um
so when it comes to the culture wars
some of these differences come out so
for example one of the things one finds
is extreme positions being adopted it
because the left hemisphere doesn't do
Nuance it's either this or it's that
there's a famous picture which Vicken
Stein used in his philosophy which was
derived from a Victorian children's book
which shows What's called A Duck Rabbit
if you look at it one way it looks like
a duck if you look at another it looks
like a rabbit and the left hemisphere is
like well come on is it a duck or is it
a rabbit whereas the right hemisphere is
get mate it's a dark rabbit I think mine
said it was a horse's head it reminds
you of the horse's head yeah yeah mine
was a just a horse when I saw that
picture I'm seeing a horse oh really I
think so or maybe that's I think I've
got I've got a third brain you've got a
third brain in there Andrew yeah that's
very good no really what I'm saying is
that any any subtlety any Nuance
anything that comes from Context and
context Alters
everything um everything that comes from
the realm of the implicit is missed and
the realm of implicit by the way
includes everything that we really value
so it includes for instance the beauty
of nature poetry music narrative myth
ritual sex love the divine all these
things remain implicit they can be made
explicit but when they're made explicit
they change their nature and they become
less than they were and they may become
completely other than they were I mean I
sometimes have this little jokey thing
but it just illustrates very nicely how
um the context changes the meaning
radically so in America there are four
sizes of cereal packets there is jumbo
which means very large then there is uh
uh economy which means large then there
is family which means medium and finally
there's large which means small so the
the context changes the meaning of
everything and what's worrying of course
is that on social media things are taken
out of context remarks are taken out of
context they may have meant something
very different in the context that they
were being used um also the right
hemisphere is much better at something
called theory of mind which basically
means understanding what's going on in
somebody else's mind so the left hemis
is not skilled at this and so it
misunderstands what is really intended
by someone especially if there's any
hint of irony humor a metaphor being
used they're all taken terribly
literally I see this all around me I
mean humor is almost dead now you can't
make any jokes I feel so sorry for
Comedians and I also feel sorry for us
all because frankly humor is the stuff
of life if you lose your sense of humor
and can't find things funny you've
you've lost a lot you've lost a certain
degree of life and you've certainly lost
a sense of proportion which again very
obviously has gone a Miss in the culture
wars there is no sense of proportion and
is this because we've moved towards
focusing more on the left
hemisphere well it's because we've
become more reliant on it you know there
are various reasons why that may happen
I think it happens inevitably in a
civilization after only a few hundred
years you can see it in certainly the
ones that I know about the Greek and the
Roman and I in an hour since the
Renaissance um and it's it's strange but
the philosopher aan
whad said the civilization is in its
finest flower before it begins to
analyze itself and what happens is that
if you're brought up in contact with
nature in a living tradition that is
that of your culture if you most
probably go to a church where various
things are imaged in in ritual in in
metaphorical language in in in music in
pictures this conveys things to you in a
subtle way which you know in your heart
to be true so when you start
to have a kind of legalistic argument
about the nature of things you're also
very well embedded in an intuitive
understanding of what's going on on but
I think in the modern world we've lost
that embedding in any intuitive thing
that would allow us to sense meaning and
so we argue about the nature of things
and if you do you must be um not
contradicting yourself nowadays the
worst thing you can do is to appear to
contradict yourself but actually since
truth is complex many faet and there are
different points of view Each of which
may have something to be said for them
there's no place in this culture for
that much more wise deep and reasonable
way of talking in which yes on the one
hand there's something in that but what
about this and we've we've just lost
that we have to go for a single very
simple black and white message and most
of those that go on in the culture wars
are the most ridiculous examples of this
taken to an extreme what do you have an
example in
mind do I have an example in mind are
you concerned I'm tricking you into
saying controversial you are you are yes
I'm going to resist it because I think
every listener will have examples that
they know they won't be puzzled by my
remark I'm intrigued I wonder which each
has and which is I think and I've said
this before and I know some people might
think I'm obsessing them but I think the
single most uh absurd if if we call it
the
sloganizer are lesbians because it's
just that's just what even what is that
I didn't want to get bugged down in that
particular
discussion um but I think a lot
of a lot of suffering is being generated
by the confusion over these things
making people feel unsure unhappy
insecure and above all teaching children
for example that there are no
differences between men and women or my
my Spanish colleague Alex Gomez Marin uh
showed me some pictures that his little
girls have brought home from school I
think they're seven and 11 or something
like that and basically they have to
place the penis on the woman and place
the vagina on the man and this is this
is how they're being taught and they
come here and they're like totally
confused but could okay so then just to
sort of raise that argument uh are we
being to left hemisphere I must sound
like a complete plonker talking to you
about this but just I'm a lay person so
are we being to left hemisphere by
saying like oh and taking it too
literally and should we be engaging our
Hemisphere and going well they mean
metaphorically and you
know I think what we ought to do is is
redevelop a sort of wisdom and kindness
which is we do what seems reasonable and
right we don't get dogmatic about it we
don't force it down everybody's throats
the whole time um in in the course of my
career as a psychiatrist I looked out
after a couple of people who were as we
now say transitioning um I I didn't
think anything of it they were perfectly
happy doing it they didn't need anybody
crusading for them but I think that
what's happened is that in rather
patronizing way um a a white middle
class liberal in inverted Commerce
culture which is actually profoundly
illiberal has taken the role of speaking
up for people that were never asked
whether they really wanted this bunch of
people to be speaking up for them in
this way uh I mean when I ever rais this
or have the conversation raised around
me with people who might belong to
protected as we call it um
identities they tend to be
rather unhappy and unwilling to be
treated in this way they feel like it
doesn't give them a chance to stand on
their own feet to demonstrate that they
can do this for themselves and all the
rest so I think it's it's I think it's
problematic in a lot of ways one thing
that um we haven't talked talked about
is interesting in relation to this is
that all that stuff that used to be said
like the left hemisphere
is rational non-emotional and reliable a
bit like a boring accountant but the
right hemisphere is kind of fanciful and
flighty and given to painting pictures
this is
wrong in fact if anything the right
hemisphere is much much more reliable
than the left the left is frankly
deluded a lot of the time and I'm using
that word in a loose only metaphoric
way those syndromes that result in
delusions are practically all caused by
damage to the right hemisphere there's
hardly anything that is caused by damage
to the left hemisphere
that that leads to a delusion so of
course when when the right hemisphere is
damaged the left hemisphere is going it
alone and it's it has no moing in
reality because it's very given to
schemas theories and two-dimensional
constructs of what reality is
like the right hemisphere has the job of
going well let's test this against
reality I don't think this is right we
don't listen to that voice anymore at
the very moment when we need to be
listening to it more but anyway what I
was going to say is that the left
hemisphere is emotional the single
emotion that lateralizes most strongly
is anger and guess what it lateralizes
to the left hemisphere the left
hemisphere tends to be narcissistic the
right hemisphere tends to be more other
related more able to feel what other
people are feeling think what other
people are thinking and so on it's more
egotistic and I believe that a lot of
the culture war is dependent on groups
of people getting
narcissistically excited about something
that they feel that they Beyond reproach
because they're so good they've espoused
this position when actually a good
person would not wish to gratify
themselves by wielding power in this way
but would think what is really going on
here for these individuals and how do we
treat them with compassion that's a
fascinating point is is there then a way
to teach people to be more in touch with
their more empathetic uh more
considerate right
side
well there's two levels to this one is
how can we literally teach people but
the other is is teaching people the only
way in which we man um manage to produce
a
change and something I know both from
personal experience and from being a
psychiatrist is that often you know what
people ought to do but if you tell them
right away they won't do it because they
need to be brought to the place where
they see it for themselves and then they
won't need to be told what to do so at
that level I I feel my job is to do
something that I
feel um I'm very lucky to be doing and
the feedback I get from readers is that
whatever it is they've read has changed
their lives so this is a message that I
think most readers would be very happy
to have once in a lifetime your book
changed my life but it is honestly a
message I get every day I'm very
grateful to people for writing and
please don't stop writing and telling me
because I I I need to hear it because
sometimes I doubt whether I'm getting
across but I think now I can accept that
so that's one level if we can show
people what it is they're missing what
has been taken out of their lives all
the things that Inspire awe and wonder
before the world its beauty its true
complexity its creative nature it's
profoundly creative nature whatever else
the cosmos is creative um if we've
stopped seeing this and stopped seeing
ourselves as part of it you know
alienated ourselves from nature and
started calling it the environment which
literally means something around you but
no it's not around you it's in you and
you are in it you know we are nature
that's what we come from and where we
return so if you are able to see that
then you begin to inhabit the world in a
different way and so people say you've
changed the way in which I think about
everything so I now see it differently
once you see this lens of these two ways
of being you see it all around you to be
a little bit more down to earth if you
like
but I think no more
helpful is
um yes we need to stop denigrating the
humanities um and really seriously build
um Humanities into the core of our
education because really the humanities
are more of an education than the rest
the rest is often the learning of
technical procedures but it's the
humanities that teaches one how to think
how to examine one's presumptions how to
see un less something that can't be
reduced to figures but actually needs to
be understood not just known about and
we stop at the realm of knowledge we
inject knowledge into people and then
give them a certificate and say on you
go but actually what the purpose of
education is is to teach people how to
think for themselves and how to evaluate
evaluate what it is they know but
there's an issue there which I think you
or possibly agree with which is that I
mean I studied English literature at
University and I'm a big fan of the
humanities but I'm sure you're aware
that a lot of people who study the
humanities and who teach it um are not
that open-minded and are very much very
homogeneous um leftwing very left wi
very much on board with a lot of the
progressive social postmodern woo woo
stuff yeah so what do we do with that
well
um I gave two lectures this last week
one a Darwin lecture in Cambridge and
another an exitor lecture in Oxford and
in the Oxford lecture um my Tru my my
theme was truth and what has happened to
truth and is it related to the falling
off of applications to University and
indeed the rising costs of University
the rising costs I put down to the
sudden explosion of administrative and
managerial post which are very
expensive um and although they may be
necessary up to a point when you have as
much as we now have they become
counterproductive they reduce
flexibility they slow down um people's
ability to Think Through projects uh and
you know the weight of this kind of
thing which is all about making sure
that the outcome fits the narrative that
has been laid down which is you know
there must be equal everything
represented um which may or may not be a
realistic Prospect are we talking a
little bit about Dei uh Dei yeah
diversity equity and inclusion
officers um and interestingly a lot of
it is about abolishing diversity and
and and actually not um producing a kind
of equity but in inequity in order to
prove their own Theses correct
however the truth I was talking about
went much further than that it was first
of all what has happened to truth in the
humanities well when I was reading
English which is probably a long time
before you were um the fashionable
things were Marxism and
deconstructionism and I thought they
were pretty Grim really because they got
between us and a magical body of poetry
and literature that was a gift and if
approached in um a generous Spirit would
introduce you to things and give you
insights that you would never have
gotten otherwise but now it's a business
of confirming the hypothesis you start
out with there is a Marxist take on this
and this is what we will find there is a
feminist take on it and this is what
we'll find we had to do Judith Butler
was Art we had to study that's right and
and you know now there's a whole platter
of isms that will substitute um not
Reading literature and writing rough
shot over it for paying um open
attention to it for what it can teach us
people trying to change the words of
books as well yes oh absolutely it's the
did I say that the left hemisphere was
in charge of manipulation it they want
to manipulate everything so that it
conforms to a theme that they're already
familiar with the left hemisphere sees
this things that it knows what they are
it doesn't have any argument about what
they might be Rach chandran calls the
right hemisphere The Devil's Advocate
and you know it might be but it might be
something else let's find out so the
right hand is is much more open-minded
the left H is is very Clos minded it it
already knows what it knows and it can't
break out of this Loop now because
everything refers back to it and I think
that the Advent of these large language
models like chat GPT will make this
worse because if you ask chat GPT to
answer a question what it effectively
does is a trolley Dash around the
internet and comes back with a um a
um confection that it has made out of
this and a lot of the stuff that is
increasingly being put up on the
Internet comes out of chat GPT and it's
like already so that
this this business involves putting out
there stuff already generated by the
left hemisphere and then looking at the
world and finding oh yes that that's
exactly what we thought so how do you
break out of this Hall of
Mirrors it won't surprise you that I had
Richard Dawkins on and he said some
gender critical things uh I don't think
in any extreme way but he just said no
no that's not possible we're not fish um
we there's a particular kind of fish
that can change sex but that's not what
we are well clearly the number of people
in the comments who weren't even being
particularly angry or anything like that
but who said what a shame to see a hero
of mine uh who clearly doesn't know
enough about about this and you just
think like what has gotten into these
people who are just you know like a like
me a Joe blogs lay person to then think
the the world's preeminent biologist
doesn't know as much as I do about
biology very very odd but that you see
again brings up the famous Dunning
Krueger effect and the Dunning Krueger
effect is very simple it isn't rocket
science but it's well worth bearing in
mind which is that the less you know the
more you think you know whereas people
who know a lot are aware of what they
don't know and are much more willing to
accept possibilities
so there's that and there's also a very
interesting other piece of research that
Dunning and Krueger did following on
from that which I've had reason to think
about a lot when I look at organizations
around the place which is that when you
have espoused a theory and you're sure
that this theory is right when you start
implementing it as they say uh in an
organization and you find that lo and
behold it doesn't seem to work you don't
have a little moment of ah well maybe we
should reflect on this and see whether
we've made a mistake no they double down
their efforts it's never that we were
going in the wrong direction or maybe
and this is very important going in the
right direction up to a point but have
now taking it too far and it's gone
wrong um but the answer is only more of
the same please which which doesn't work
because as I often say not only is space
curved but mental space is curved when
you push far enough in one dire
Direction you find the very thing
meeting you that you've been running
away from so reminds me of the the you
familiar with the fixed mindset and the
growth mindset yes I always forget her
name but I think it's Carol D or
Caroline D yes I've heard of it I I
couldn't tell you about it but the
concept the the fixed mindset uh things
are not really going well and rather
than have the humility to have some
growth and look at what other people are
doing and go oh they're succeeding in a
different way I can learn from that
they're just going and going and going
and still doing what they were doing
before they're fixed they're stuck in a
loop and blaming everybody else but
themselves well you know when I use the
terms left and right hemisphere people
think I'm I'm using them metaphorically
but all these things are based on
actual either experiments or on
observation of patients who've got
damaged to one or other hemisphere but
the left hemisphere perseverates which
is a a technical term in neurology which
means it carries on answering the same
thing in the same way never wishing to
change um and and bring brings the same
mindset to everything you ask them do a
different question and they bring the
same mindset from the last question so
this is there are just so many aspects
of the way the world is now which
reflect a sort of right hemisphere brain
damage I can't put it you know wow
differently from that that's how we now
are we're becoming more and more like
machines which is how the left
hemisphere on its own thinks of itself
and thinks of the world so people who've
got
um no functioning right haveit there
tend to see people as either robots or
zombies for example which of course have
become fashionable things to debate in
philosophy um and a lot of philosophy
I'm afraid is very captured by the left
hemisphere at the expense of the wisdom
the right hemisphere might have opened
up would that be a sign of narcissism to
see the rest of the world as potentially
robots no I wouldn't say that exactly um
no it's a it's a terrible Distortion in
which you you no longer can see see what
life is um but narcissism is another
aspect of left hemisphere capture um and
the certainty that you are
right and and this is now gone to the
point where as as I say in the
humanities there was no longer any idea
that there's a Truth worth trying for
now of course there doesn't have to be
single absolute truth there won't be but
nonetheless the are trer performances of
a piece of music and worse performances
that are not true to it equally there
are interpretations of Hamlet that are
true to it in the sense that they really
enrich our understanding and the ones
that just go contrary to it and so we
all believe in a kind of Truth however
much we say oh there is no truth in fact
to say there is no truth is itself a
truth statement and so that doesn't work
and we wouldn't get out of bed if there
was nothing to be true to
so we need to recover the idea that is a
truth and it's worth seeking for and
actually Asing pieces of nonsense that
are being given to us and put in the way
of it and this actually liberates us
into the idea that there are POS there's
a possible range of truths here I'm not
trying to narrow things down to one
truth that's what Dogma does but the
reverse of Dogma is to say well that is
a point of view but there's also this
other one and so forth and now do you
know this is affecting science so we're
now aware that if you have a paper you
researched which produces a result which
is contrary to the current narrative you
either won't get it published or people
call it pseudo science that's a very
common one even though it may be
impeccably researched but pieces of
frankly sudo science that go to confirm
the current narrative will be waved
through and published and much lorded so
obviously there's an enormous
disincentive to anyone to investigate
anything it might come up with a result
that would um
be
politically interesting interesting yeah
are you are youare of the um the
grievance studies guys Peter ban Helen
plose Jamesy they made up fake papers or
with very spurious evidence about mad
things and they got accepted into into
major Publications but but what really
worries me is this thing that you know
proper research and proper science is
being barred because if in the future we
we can't rely on science to answer our
questions dispassionately how are we
ever going to know what's right do you
have examples of the kind of thing
that's not being let in are we talking
I've heard some people speak about just
wanting to study Eugenics for example
not eugenics in the Hitler way but just
an intriguing oh I wonder if people are
different because of whatever what kinds
of things well you're right
differences differences between the
Sexes difference is in races differences
in cultures all these things and you
know they they do exist I mean
manifestly um there are open physical
differences and there are different
diseases that go with different racial
I'm Jewish I'm more more prone to T
disease and so of course what was that
one TX is didn't even know that
neurological disease is that Jewish
African Asia Jews another one I I KN I
knew of Crohn's Crohn is CR popular
popular but no I mean diseases um tend
to be commoner in C racial groups
reactions to medications and treatments
vary between racial groups all this has
to be taken into account and we know
that the cardiovascular system is
different so so it's kind of
counterintuitive that you would say that
say other parts of the body were not
going to be possibly different but to
find out what they are might actually be
quite helpful as it's helpful to know
that you know what you're looking at
when you're looking at a a physical
dysfunction I'm a multi linguist I like
I love languages I'm really into my
langu and I I found a similar thing in
languages that nobody wants to look at
which is do you know the Sapp WF Theory
so for anyone for those who don't sappa
Warf the movie arrival about the aliens
which was brilliant have you seen that
no a it's a bit sci-fi in Aliens but but
genius beautiful the theory is you learn
the aliens language and you experience
time differently they begin to realize
that and the whole movie goes in a loop
absolutely fantastic and and it's the
idea that's been much debunked but there
are some aspects that appear to be true
uh that if you learn a different
language you can um have these sort of
superpowers and one of those might be a
different sense of space uh because
people use cardinal points instead of
left and right in some languages so
that's one example and I remember I
asked John McWater like how much
Credence do you give uh to the sappia
Warfare and he said the problem is we
can't even look at it because people are
only interested in Academia in looking
at what advantages other languages have
they never want to look at what the
Western language have over those so it's
just he was I don't even I can't even
look into it so it doesn't
matter well yes and um sapper WF has
largely been discarded I think rightly I
mean all this stuff about if you haven't
got a word for it you can't see it well
this is not true and I've written about
this in the master and his Emissary and
actually the esim don't have 100 words
for snow they have about seven and we
have quite a lot we have sleep we have
slush we have and we still understand
different states of snow states of snow
so and you know people who don't have a
word for pink can recognize pink in the
warp paper catalog just like anyone else
so
um so that bit is wrong but what is
interesting is
that when one learns a language one
learns a whole way of looking at the
world at a less specific level than a
single word either being there or not so
when for example a Frenchman says
he means something different from oh I'd
like to get something to eat because the
whole concept of eating what it means
what it's like where it fits into life
is different from ours yes and Gerta
said something
like many langu you Liv Many Lives Many
Lives I had to butt in and show off I
understood sorry go go on it's very
important because one doesn't get to do
that very often in life I spend a lot of
time learning languages now when do I
use it when do I use it well you just
did beautifully never never use it so
what this really shows is that you know
you do actually experience the world
differently when you're speaking a
different language yes I think so and
then I'm reading about I can't remember
the name of the man which is unfortunate
but he's Israeli and it was it's called
something through the language glass or
through the language ceiling something
like that is brilliantly written and he
contends that there are two or three
places where the sappier warf theory in
a way is sort of true one of them being
spatial others being uh colors the way
that Homer uh didn't have colors or
whatever well we don't yes Homer is
controversial one actually but yes well
yeah oh he he spent like chapters on it
and fascinating though uh but why was
the see wine dark excuse me yeah the sea
was wine everything was wine an amazing
to see that every every group of people
every language of started with black and
white and then they added red as a color
and then everything was either black
white and red and then people used to
think it was that they couldn't see the
colors but of course they could
but absolutely fascinating to to think
of on language then okay so language is
on is on one side of the brain which
side is
that well I mean your native language
the the most of the dictionary is in the
left hemisphere but it's not as though
the right hemisphere doesn't have quite
a large lexicon including unusual and
abstract words so it it's not as simple
as people make out and different aspects
of utterance are served by the right and
left hemispheres so the left hemisphere
has a more complex and sophisticated
syntax than the right but there are
certain syntactical things that the
right hemisphere gets right and the left
hemisphere gets wrong but outside of
that there's a very important aspect um
well there are two important aspects one
is um proy which is the internation and
you know the internation changes the
meaning entirely you know if I say yes
or I say yes or yeah yes and yes I mean
the right that's the right a modifier
and yes but also it is the one that
understands the meaning overall of an
utterance so the left hemisphere is a
bit more like what a computer would do
if you gave it a the complete Oxford
English Dictionary and a set of rules
and asked it to say what is being said
but the right hemisphere understands
what is being said if you like between
the lines so that you know if I say it's
a bit hot in here today the left
hemisphere very literally goes the
temperature is too high could you turn
on some air conditioning whereas the
right hemisphere sorry you know unwanted
meteorological information actually it's
the right hemisphere that says what I
really mean is you know could we open a
window so all the indirect expression
which turns out to be much of what we
use is better understood by the right
Hemisphere and I had this experience I
went to research in um NE Imaging at
John's Hopkins in Baltimore and we were
looking at asymmetries in the brain in
the brain of people with
schizophrenia um and the first three or
four weeks I kept talking to people and
having this puzzled reaction and they'd
go really and then I go no not really
but never mind and basically everything
I said I hadn't realized how much of
what I say is tinged with irony is said
to amuse is you know and everyone
understands that in an English culture
but they clearly don't in America this
is an observable fact I'm not the only
person who's noticed this
so and I think that all the things that
I've pointed to as undesirable aspects
of the way we think and speak are
probably strongest still in in America
and you know I thought at the time this
is going to that was there in '92 and I
remember thinking this is going to come
our way and it is beginning to come our
way people don't get it when you say you
know you have to be very straightforward
and certainly don't try and make any
jokes or anything for God's sake well
could it be just to build that side up a
little bit that we just have different
habits that we're used to different
kinds of irony because I've always heard
it said oh Americans don't get sarcasm
and then you think of friends and
Chandler who's like the you know could I
be any more sarcastic like he's the
sarcasm guy okay so it might be that we
have slight and we're more used to their
cultural Ms because we watch the TV with
all the American stuff where we're
saying things with little accents and
they think we're all just very serious
professors I mean you are you are a
professor but you're not always serious
are you but you're expected you're
expected to be what about um swear words
are they in the different part of the
brain swear words are very
interesting the urge to to utter a swear
word seems to come from very low down
neither from right or left but from the
Basel gang
which is why people who have a condition
called Tourette Syndrome which most
people will know about but for those who
don't involves compulsive um twitching
movements of of one's Limbs and sudden
utterances of a swear word in the middle
of something which is quite embarrassing
for the person they can't inhibit it and
um the these words come and we know that
tats is a problem with a basal ganglia
that's where they come from but um there
is evidence from hemisphere damage that
suggests the right hemisphere is
more conducive to these Expressions it
may be
because um the left hemisphere needs
explicit context and a sort of ability
to analyze an utterance to see what it
means so it is hot in here today okay
but uh now why where does that
come whereas the right hemisphere is
receiving an
emotional expression of a whole cast of
mine right
now and so it is true that when people
have left hemisphere um damage one of
the things that can be preserved in the
right hemisphere is is swearing to begin
with before you get other things um but
the other things that you get are very
interesting say for example people may
not be able to speak uh sentences at all
but they can sing a whole song so as
long as the words go with music they can
utter the whole thing and one of the
ways of encouraging them to get their
speech back is by helping them to sing
things that they know and extraordinary
it is yeah I saw a video on YouTube and
that the reason I asked about swearing
and if it's in a different part I think
it was Steven fry he had to hold his
hand in cold water oh yes and the long
the more when he SW the more he swears
the longer he can keep it in yeah that's
M and and then so that's interesting
with regards to the changing nature of
offense and swearing there's this Theory
I mean I was again it was John McWater
the linguist and I found it fascinating
that if you look over the last couple
hundred years swearing has gone from the
religious um damn hell go Carnation or
whatever is it Carnation is that what
people say yes Carnation it must be
tarnation Eternal damnation tarnation
tnation um and that and then gradually
those sort of wore out and it became
bodily as we became obsessed with uh the
sex and things and and all
that and today the ones I wouldn't even
say today would be the identity ones the
nword the f word for gay people they're
sort of different though because they're
not words one's inclined to utter in the
same way that one goes um that's
true they're just words that
once's been taught to censor which is
different um doesn't mean that they are
square words it means that they're not
allow words now um but they go they go
in a sacred space it feels they go in a
separate Sacred Space yeah I would
resist the word sacred because it is an
important word and I I think it can be
misused but if you mean a sacur sanct
area where you know as it were in common
parland um I mean yes I think what
happens is that attached to them is a
range of of sort of warning signals so
that when your mind gravitates to them
there this very strong inhibit no no no
no no
um which which would also possibly be
recruited In some cultures by certain
swear words but it is it is intriguing
that's the word that I presume the the
the identity ones even though you're
you're absolutely right you wouldn't
suddenly you don't have that urge to
shout them out in that sense that would
maybe encourage this or or stoke the
strongest response in you if somebody
suddenly said those words I imagine so
that's what I'm wondering I'm just sort
of wondering I don't know what my
question here is except when we talk
about offense and the nature of offense
it has moved towards identity and I feel
like swear words and these kinds of
sacran words have play A Part well of
course they've become at the same
time completely unsanctioned you can use
I mean for example I've just used one
twice bodily ones the bodily bod ones
the CW you can't know because the
CW
hasis and an identity yes so it's to do
with identity so that's that's bodily
and identity yes yes I know
but I mean get on with it I mean
honestly there's so many things in the
world to worry about that are really
important we should be moving our minds
to you know there are crisis all over
the place and we spend our time fussing
about how traumatized we are because
somebody used the wrong word or even the
wrong
pronoun well you know I'm sorry I I
think that shows a complete lack of
sense of proportion and I I don't think
that shows that I'm just an insensitive
white male I me no doubt lots of people
will say that but I I I don't think
that's it actually I think that it's
that we would all get on better if we
took certain ideas about ourselves
slightly less seriously and and in my
experience over my
lifetime I've seen something really
interesting I'm 70 and over my lifetime
I've seen the relations between the
Sexes and the relations between the
races which used to be relatively unpr
problematic become seriously problematic
and I've also noticed and this is not
just me noticing it but that certain
other things have happened there's a
widening of the gap between the rich and
the poor not a closing of it there's
been the widening of resentments as
we've fallen over ourselves to try and
not cause offense resentment has grown
and you see these are the little
paradoxes the left hemistry doesn't
understand because it's very
simpleminded we do this and surely that
will help and it's going in that dire
but it isn't actually what it's doing is
having all kinds of other effects that
you're not taking into account and one
of the effects is going to be one that
nobody will like which is the sort of
what I could call for short the Trump
effect now a lots of American viewers
and listeners don't like me using Trump
as an example of somebody who's not too
bright and I think actually it's wrong
to use him as an example that because I
think he probably is perfectly
intelligent different kinds of
intelligence different kinds of
intelligence but I think that the
explanation for how a lot of educated
and intelligent people vote for Trump
it's just that they think that
somebody's got to take a stand against
the whole culture of political
correctness and the Distortion of the
educational system the the the sheare
Injustice that's Meed out to anybody who
is white or male it won't get to
University even though they may be the
strongest candidate because others have
preference now that is that's a it's
extraordinary that people in the name of
Justice can do that and not expect this
of a strong reaction to it it's a
misunderstand or misreading of history
as well because we've been here we've
been the Bolsheviks did similar things
doesn't end well no no Foster's
resentment I I started doing this
podcast and forgive me everyone who
knows this already but Ian might not
know because I I was making sort of the
I tried to make Louis through kinds of
documentaries and things you know uh exp
going to hang out with neo- Nazis or
whatever it might be and all that stuff
and made some that went to BBC and HBO
and stuff like that and I started
getting told that I I if I was to
continue I would have to be off screen
and to have somebody in my place who's
from a minority and that fostered
resentment in I was living I heard it
about 100 times from a 100 different
production companies and then to go to
my friends many of whom obviously you
know studied the humanities at
University those kinds of things but you
can imagine the politics they had they
just said well that doesn't happen they
or they just told you that to spare your
feelings maybe because you weren't well
that seems a strange thing to tell me to
spare my feelings we don't want you on
screen because of your skin color and
gender or you know so and all it did was
was Foster resentment and push me away
from from a cause another thing is I
used to not be offended I remember
growing up 20 15 years ago I have
friends who made jokes about me being
Jewish and I understood that they were
they come from a good place and I'm not
so stupid I guess the right hemisphere
could understand okay it comes from a
good place this person is married to a
Jewish woman or whatever it might be but
now as it becomes so uh we're so
offended by everything else if I've got
a woke friend who makes a joke like that
I am offended now because I go well why
won't you make those jokes about other
minorities what are you saying about
Jews Jews exactly right and of course
it's visible that certain groups are as
it were a fair game and Jews seem to be
one and you know and others are very
clearly not and so what are these double
standards what is this about Justice
what is and and the thing that is so
about humor is first of all humor
doesn't have to be um in any sense
derogatory but also when you pull
somebody's leg about anything it's a
sign of It's actually kind of a bond
it's a way of showing that there's some
sort of we understand one another and we
we're safe to talk in this way and yes
you don't think I'm an enemy here and
and so it actually helps to heal often
you know being allowed to make a few not
not burned Manning type jokes I mean I
once thought what is this Bernard
Manning and I actually clicked on a link
to find out what he was like and I
thought he was very a boring and and be
rather disgusting and not funny so but
this a racist comedian from a few
decades back just for those who don't
know yes a RAC racist comedian but you
know what one one should be able to make
these sort of make joks I mean I
remember seeing Richard PRI at Sunset
Strip which a film of Richard PRI on
stage and one of the funniest things he
did was um a sketch of a Chinese waiter
with a stutter now um nowadays I don't
know where that would go but it didn't
make me think less of the Chinese at all
it didn't make me think less of Richard
prior and and I suppose you also had an
awareness of okay if we do this too much
then it's not good for Chinese people
it's not fair on them that's exactly the
point that there is a happy medium
between nothing and everything but that
is never possible now to make a graded
response I remember being taught at
school that it was said in the 19th
century the whole point of an education
is to enable somebody to give consent or
dissent to a proposition in graded
terms now I think that's a very
important idea and if we could get that
back if well is the idea of listening to
one another and being allowed to joke
with one another a bit but let's leave
that sticking to the wall because that
will never happen anymore but you know
um being able
to have a civil discourse I mean civil
discourse could avoid so much aggress so
much violence so much stupid unnecessary
banging together of heads for example I
don't know if you've ever had couple
therapy but I think that almost
everybody should have couple therapy
whether they in a couple or not because
in couple therapy Y what you do is you
you get one person talking and the other
one sort of said but hang on and then
you say no no let him or her speak
you'll have your turn in a minute and
you won't be interrupted so you hear
what the person has to say and then they
stop and then the first thing you say to
the other person is what did you just
hear
said and that is so valuable because
very often they go well thank you for
telling me that cuz that's not at all
what I was saying and if people were
more willing to do
this the world would be in better and
happier place it's like the um is it the
Socratic method where you have to build
up the other person's argument until
that person is satisfied yes so they can
keep they okay so what you're saying is
this and you go no try again and you
have to keep doing until they're satisfi
only then can you engage in the debate
yes that part of it yes yes I did a lot
of therapy over the years particularly
because I spent six years in Bonos Iris
which is the world capital of therapy of
therapists okay they are they're very
Freudian uh which I know is not very
invogue now I suppose but you know it
still helps if there a good therapist
there a good there someone to talk to
and it was like an effectively a free
Spanish lesson it wasn't free but it was
uh very affordable because there were so
many it was about10 equivalent per per
hour whatever uh and my word did it help
me my word and I didn't I went in going
I don't need any help and I spent the
first few times just telling this poor
man about how everyone in my life is to
blame for everything that's wrong in my
life and he said to me six months later
when I came to realize that wasn't
necessarily the case uh he said it's
amazing how many people come in and he
and blame everyone else around them and
his job is to very very subtly start to
make you understand that it may well be
their fault it may not be but you have
to accept and and choose what you're
going to accept and choose what you
can't change and that that changed a lot
for me not not having that impulse to
try and make everybody fit what what I
what will make me comfortable absolutely
and one of the misconceptions is that
psychiatrist will tell you oh it's all
the fault of your parents but a good
psychiatrist will never tell you that a
good psychiatrist will say well let's
not go into blaming your parents they
probably did the best they could we
don't know what their problems were but
whatever the story there you have to
take the situation as you find it now
and what are you going to do about it so
take
responsibility and you know behind the
wish to blame everyone else is the
unwillingness to accept responsibility
for any your actions which of course is
absurd is treating yourself as a child
whereas you know you you are an adult
and you therefore take responsibilities
for the things you say and do and
whatever happens to you we have this
kind of again mechanistic which is very
left hemispheric the way I am is because
of things that happen to me this is
almost invariable view I hate that well
it's it's so often untrue that it's very
rare that it is true so people can be
traumatized by having been through
nothing that anyone would recognize as
remotely traumatic other people can have
been through genuinely traumatic things
in wars or torture or so on and pull
themselves together survive and be tough
and get on with it so I'm not saying
there's no there's no such thing as
trauma that clearly is and I've treated
people for it but I think our tendency
to hide behind that is is a shame which
weakens US and makes us less able to be
resilient m and you know once again this
I'm sorry to relate everything to but
it's just such a clear picture but it
does relate to the left hemisphere
because the left hemisphere always is in
the right and it never has a problem if
there is a problem it's someone else's
problem and the most dramatic example of
this is one i' afraid I've often talked
about but this is what happened when
somebody has a right hemisphere stroke
and so they've got a left paralysis in
in in their arm their leg whatever
and you come see them and you say are
you okay having had this stroke and they
say fine you said but what about moving
your left arm you know can you do that
and they say yes well go on show me and
then they to go that and nothing
actually moves wow and and and and then
if you bring it around in front of them
and say now move that they say oh that
that's not my arm doctor that's your arm
or they don't say that yeah or it
belongs to the patient in the bed over
there or it's my mother's oh so really
because of the stroke they've become
delus
because of the right hemisphere stroke
they've become delusional and they one
of the ways in which this is expressed
is that everything is somebody else's
fault so this goes with the tery of
being locked into this shallow
emotionally shallow angry aggressive
narcissistic I'm right it's down here
anybody who disagrees with me must be
wrong this is a toxic way of Behaving
and a very silly way of Behaving and if
only people realize how foolish they
make themselves by behaving so badly we
might have a a happier world you know
more a more compassionate world a world
in which we try to understand one
another's positions don't rubbish them
and think that they must be stupid to
hold a different position and so on I I
don't think that people who take these
positions are stupid I think they've got
locked into a a pattern of behavior that
they could be helped to free up and
leave behind it's I can only speak
anecdotally but I I certainly see people
who are are more often victim signaling
or showing what a victim they are and
and bullying traits there there has been
research showing I believe that that the
dark Triad trait some people who victim
signal and virtue signal more often are
more likely to have dark Triad tra
absolutely there's no question about it
that virtue signaling is a cheap way of
getting special privileges being treated
you know in a certain way being um and
and people manipulate that and uh I I
you know I'm not saying there's no such
thing as having had a rough experience
in life of course there is but it
doesn't actually by the way always
correlate with the results it's also
something that I want and I feel like
you feel this way as well I want
everybody to experience what it feels
like to be able to accept that not
everyone else is to blame because I do
feel like I got stuck in that Loop a
little bit and maybe a lot of people
when they're younger do I don't know I
feel like when you're young you're quite
self-obsessed and everything's your
parents thought El's fault and obviously
it hurt at first to start recognizing
that maybe things are my own fault and
it's painful but after that you feel you
feel Invincible you go oh wow I can just
do my thing and not worry that other
people are like oh they've judged me
they've said the wrong thing to me
they've done this everyone's done oh
well as Jordan Peterson he's popular
because make your bed you know make your
bed and what a what a what's the word
the feeling it gives you it's a not I
guess
emboldening Bolding or emboldening yes
yes as we say now empowering empowering
yes as they I know that's become a buzz
word I've lost it for my mind and guess
what the the the only value of the left
hemisphere that it recognizes because
it's the one that's to do with using
getting grabbing is power and the
subtler things like Beauty goodness and
Truth go out of the window and the right
hemisphere is much better at
reorientating us to these values there's
a lot more to say about that but I've
said it
many times and it's in my books well
well here's a question then um you said
before it feels like we've got sort of
brain damage and the right as a as a
society I'm talking very loose yes
exactly so then I wonder what what has
happened is it that we have created a
society that incentivizes I mean if I
think about this YouTube I'm
incentivized to have binary thinking and
to make the title something
sensationalist and I hope people will
click and listen and see it's not
actually that sensationalist and it will
do well and I think they all different
parts of life now where we are incen all
social media so is that what's
happening well yes I mean I mentioned I
I think I mentioned that I've seen a
certain pattern in western civilization
where there is a sudden it's not a
gradual it usually happens very quickly
there's a sudden efflorescence of what
the best of the left and the right when
they work together can
produce and by the way left is not
science and right the humanities left
and right are important for Science and
left and right are important for
humanities but what we get is as at the
6th Century BC in Greece or again around
the Year Dot in Rome and in the
Renaissance a burdening of everything
you know of of mathematics of cosmology
of music of drama of of lawmaking of all
the things that make a society civilized
and
these then produce stability for a few
hundred years and then after after a
while the thing degrades Always by
shifting more towards the left
hemisphere's point of view and I think
this is due to many things but one is
due
to a civilization overreaching itself
either territorially or commercially or
whatever so that it has to administer on
a huge scale and this automatically
makes things crude they have to be S
simple paradigms that can be rolled out
as we say anywhere in the world whatever
the culture there is
and the individual is lost the life in
it is lost um it becomes steeply
hierarchical it becomes very doctrinal
and dogmatic and you can see this in the
art as the civilization declines it
becomes more stereotypical more more um
less empathic towards its image figures
and so forth more hierarchical so that
is a pattern and I think it happens
because we overreach ourselves but there
are a few other things I mean one is
that it's um money for old rope to put
across the left hemis point of view
because it's so darn simple it's just
that there are bits and we put them
together and they make something which
is how you make a machine but in the
vastness of the universe There is almost
nothing at all is at all like a machine
there's just the few machines we have
made that are like machines nothing else
is not only is life not like machines
for eight or 10 reasons I could give you
but it's not that the inanimate World
behaves like Machinery either we now
know indeed that physics doesn't obey
those Newtonian mechanics so and we've
known that for at least 100 years so we
we need to break out of this this
mindset and it's partly that I think
that is pushing it and it's this
business that I mentioned that Whitehead
said that once you start analyzing
yourself it makes everything very crude
because the answers to these questions
have to be derived from public discourse
such as we're having now um and in which
if I say well on the one hand and on the
other which would be very reasonable um
I appear to be either contradicting
myself or have nothing important to say
whereas actually that's
truthful um
and as I said we've lost the the skill
to listen to things that speak to us
implicitly even the Arts now have to
speak explicitly so when you go to an
art gallery you look at a painting of
the 15th century and you only need to
see the painting there's things that an
art historian can draw your attention to
and so on if you go to a modern art
gallery there'll be a text by the artist
saying what he had in mind or she had in
mind when he made the picture or the
installation or whatever it is the same
thing with music you know what the
composer before it's given its first
performance what I was trying to achieve
was bark never said that and didn't need
to because we only have to listen to it
so things that speak to us in
intuitively speak to us profoundly when
they reduce The Superficial level of
everyday language you're reduced to the
language of a you know everyday use for
a dishwasher manual and and as n said
words make the uncommon
common wow and Roland Barts the death of
the author seems to no longer apply
because the author's getting a bit
involved isn't isn't it well I think the
trouble with that is that it's
dehumanizing the utterance because these
things are utterances of people
and the idea that they're not is a I
think
a I would identify that with the general
move to dehumanize the humanities
actually I see I see um but with
everything that you've said and based on
previous civilizations then are we
heading for
collapse well I think we might be yes
um in a way these are natural cycles we
shouldn't expect a civilization to go on
forever there's a wonderful little book
called immoderate greatness um and and
the author so it's only about 80 pages
long without the notes it's a model of
Lucidity and it's a wonderful afternoon
to read I do recommend it the author is
called offel and I can never remember
whether it's Patrick or William one is
his real name and the other is his
pseudonym but any what of use that was
the Pud was now it's yes I I want to say
to him if you wanted to hide it was
offel that needed to go not Patrick or
William but anyway um there it is and he
he basically says there are six reasons
why civilizations collaps and three of
them are to do with external constraints
like the environment and the Damage
that's done and exhausting resources and
so on but the other three are to do with
an cast of mind and that's much closer
to to M although he doesn't talk about
hemisphere of course but because he
wrote before I'd written um and but but
one of the points he makes which I think
is's very good is that in the beginning
of a civilization people are very
um self-denying um they they risk their
lives to build something they often have
to fight to keep off people they build
something strong and secure and they
devote themselves to that the Next
Generation comes along and they're able
to build on that what we think of a
civilization you know the Arts civil
discourse philosophy all these things
wonderful but after a while after
perhaps a couple of 300 years people no
longer see the connection between what
they do and think and the existence of
that Civilization they become entitled
they think they're entitled to what you
know it's my right to have this that and
the other well actually where does that
right come from it's actually something
which should come from the reciprocal
relationship between you and a community
you and a society the society help form
you who you are and give to you and you
must give back to them and help further
the goodness of that Society whereas now
we have this at Mystic thing where it's
each of us against everyone else to grab
as much as we can the left hemisphere
spirit and also I can be anything I like
which was never true and never will be
true I mean yeah entitlement I've got
one more question for you but first tell
us where people can go and find your
work and and those things well I have a
website called Channel
mcgilchrist um which some people think
is an imperative but it's just a
description
and I'd love to Channel some Miguel
Chris I think that sounds great and um
on it you'll find a lot of um most of it
is open to anyone you don't have to pay
and there's a lot of my stuff there many
many many clips and some papers and
things like that there's also a members
area which if you want to go deeper you
can go into I'll put a link below for
that and people should go please do go
support my guest who's come all this way
to to to talk about this um who's a
heretic you admire
Heretics well they're mostly people who
are now dead like beron the philosopher
Hy beron who was a heretic in well he
wasn't so much a heretic in his time he
became called a heretic but actually
he's very profound thinker
um yes and what what what's the sort of
line on on
[Music]
him he he was
very he saw a lot of things that we've
lost sight of which are to do with the
difference between the parts and the
whole for one thing which is for me a
very important Insight that the hole is
not the same as the bits that you get
when you break it up and summing them up
doesn't bring back that hole it's in the
connections everything is in the
relations and in the connections and he
had an amazing ability to
understand the difference between time
thought of as a line or as moments in a
line that string together to make like a
chain of events or a chain of moments
and the idea of it as something that is
indivisible and that we live and it's
not made out of of a now and now and now
and now that sounds like a small point
but actually a lot hangs on it which is
to do with seeing life as more like a
melody than like um a series of events
in which each note is taken up with what
went before and what comes afterwards
and it only is what it is when it has
become a seamless hole so which isn't to
say that you know if it breaks off it
does mean anything but it even the
melody that breaks off meant something
for that time so I think he's very great
who do I admire that's writing now and
speaking now I like Douglas um Douglas
Murray Murray oh he's great yes I like
that he uses Antiquated insults uh
Christopher Hitchens used to do that a
lot Christopher would say what brain rot
what brain rot possesses these people I
I no one talks like that you know and
and Douglas Murray also he just says and
they're very much playground school
things so I I get that it's a little bit
maybe the left hemisphere too much
coming in but he will say to people well
you're just you're just in your pajamas
all day you need to get out the house
and things like that and I know it's I I
know it's a guilty pleasure listening to
him say these these things I prefer not
to
abuse but I think he's good yes and you
know other predict people like Lon nor
who I think is a very clever writer and
also very brilliant novelist I mean I
think her novels are full of interesting
ideas well this this conversation was a
topic we need to talk about as as Lionel
shriver's uh book was titled we need to
talk about Kevin wasn't it was that
Kevin yes we also needed to talk about
this please do support Ian's work and go
read I mean people love Ian so do go in
the description and uh check of that out
this is one of my favorite interviews
I've ever done so please make it go out
there into the world hit the like button
that's that works that does it if you
subscribe most of you aren't even
subscribed you click subscribe makes the
video go out and people need to hear
this I think in today's Times I'm sure
if you're still listening or viewing at
this point you agree and keep watching
this
channel
