Bueno
okay
I'm going to be speaking about the art
world for the last 120 years
now human beings have been doing art and
enjoying arch for tens of thousands of
years there's something that is deeply
human about engagement with art
but if you know art history the last
century 100 years has been the most
unusual Century in the world of Art
and for most of us who love art or who
are interested in are to have some
engagement that's all of us right uh we
encounter what is going on in the modern
art world the postmodern art world and
most of us initially are confused we are
bewildered sometimes we are disgusted we
don't understand we shake our heads and
so one of the questions I'm going to ask
today is why did the art World become so
unusual over the course of the last 20
or sorry 100 years and there are reasons
for it the behind the apparent nonsense
there is sense right but it's uh it's
not necessarily a sense that fits with
your understanding of what is sensible
and so forth now I'm a philosopher by
training and by profession and one of
the reasons why art has changed so
dramatically is philosophical and I want
to argue today that the most important
reason why art made its major change
1890s
1900s the generation before the first
world war was a series of revolutions
that had occurred in the philosophical
world and artists even if they're not
philosophers by training are nonetheless
very philosophical
when we do art and when we experience
art we are always asking ourselves what
really matters
and that's a value question and you have
to go deep in yourself and all artists
will talk about going deep in themselves
who am I
what do I want to express
what do I want when I communicate with
other people what do I want them to
experience and if I want them to spend
money a thousand dollars ten thousand
dollars uh what is going to be so
valuable to them
that I can add value whatever that value
is to their life and how do I know that
I have succeeded and we know when we
experience art art it
affects us profoundly and we decorate
our homes with art we spend money on Art
we spend time and most of us at some
point entertain some aspirations of
being creative I will do poetry I will
write a novel I would like to do scripts
I would like to try painting so what is
going on there and what has happened in
the last century of the art world now
there's a follow-up question that I want
to address and that is one thing that
has been characteristic of art history
is the rapidity with which the art World
changes different styles different
motifs different genres and so if you
take a course on the history of art
particularly once you get into the last
1 000 years there are so many different
movements and changes and dramatic
breaks in style and one very interesting
thing about the last century is how
little has changed that it's the same
sorts of themes the same territory that
is being worked over and over and over
again and we are four generations five
generations into it to it why has the
art world not moved on why is there not
another new radical break to another
movement and so forth it seems stuck
and the reason I'm going to offer is
that again philosophy is important that
at the turn of the 20th century about
100 years ago there was a philosophical
framework that was broadly adopted and
it was a very skeptical cynical
in some cases nihilistic understanding
of the world and that was picked up by
the artists and communicated and it
required some fairly dramatic changes in
how you do art if you have a very
skeptical nihilistic value empty
understanding of the world and not much
has changed in terms of The Guiding
philosophy of the Contemporary High art
world so that's going to be my thesis
and for the rest of the time I'm going
to start working my way through that so
art is very personal
at the same time it is very Universal
and it's one of the interesting things
about art so if we read the story of
Romeo and Juliet for example we all know
this story and we get into the story and
we start to care about Romeo we care
about Juliet they are particular
individuals and they matter to us but at
the same time they are abstract types
it's the young man and the young woman
and it's love and that's a human
Universal and in this case there's a
family Dynamic the families hate each
other and there are obstacles and that
also is a universal and of course this
one ends tragically and that's another
Universal but because we care about
Romeo and Julia as individuals it
affects us both personally and
universally it's not just a sad story
about two individuals it is a sad story
about two individuals but we also take
it as saying something more generally
important about the human condition and
that's why every generation we go back
to Romeo and Juliet and here we are 500
years later and we all know actually not
quite 500 years later but we all know
the Romeo and Juliet story so
this it's a painting by Vermeer okay and
in one sense this is a particular young
woman
and she's rather lovely and it's a
lovely blue and gold and that's a
beautiful contrast but there's also
something that we respond to that
combination we have this look in her eye
as it turns out this young woman is
probably vermeer's daughter
and so for him she this particular young
woman is very important and so he's
trying to communicate something about
that but why do we respond to this
painting 400 years later
we don't know vermeer's daughter and we
don't care about her but this is a
lovely young woman and there's something
that is captured here and we value young
femininity and she's taken some care to
dress a certain way and of course the
centerpiece the lovely earring so it's a
particular young woman but it's also
General femininity and we evaluate both
so in ancient peace this is at the the
Vatican and the scale of this is
stupendous I don't know if you've seen
it right in person larger right than
life this is layaku one and at one level
it's a particular story layakawan was a
Trojan he was a priest and he got on the
wrong side of the Gods and then the gods
do what the gods do when people get on
the wrong side of them they send
punishment and so there's a particular
story about atrogen priest and his sons
and they are killed but then at the same
time we respond to this piece two
thousand years later even if we don't
know it's a Trojan priest or the
particular background it's a human being
and we have various nasty forces of
nature that are out there waiting to get
us it's again a tragic a horrific death
piece and we respond to it we feel his
pain and so it's mankind against nature
and nature is often hostile and trying
to kill us and that is again a human
Universal so it's a particular and it's
a universal hey guys
okay
now these decisions right about what
matters to us and art is unusual because
it does have these broad philosophical
messages but it captures them in
particularized form it's not just a
journalistic account but it's not an
abstract philosophical statement it is a
capture and so over the course of the
history of art because of the power of
art we have these very deep ongoing
philosophical debates about art so if
I'm an artist the biggest question I
always have to answer is well what am I
going to portray and one of the ongoing
debates is am I open to the entire world
and art should be about all of reality
and trying to capture all of reality or
is it the case that art should only be
about portions of reality that some
parts of the world are off limits and so
for example we might say as this passage
here from Exodus says Thou shalt not
make thee any graven images now that's
archaic English so let me translate it
into modern englishes right you cannot
make representations
in art you cannot do figures
and this is now a Divine commandment
because the natural human impulse is to
make representations and figures and to
capture the way the world is if you are
interested in religion you want to know
about God or the gods and you want to
find in your art because the gods are
important how to capture the gods and
the Supernatural and the Divine in your
artworks and then this says no you shall
not do it
I know that then is to say that the most
important part of reality if you are
religious is not to be captured in art
and at the same time from this religious
perspective you might have the view that
this natural world the physical world is
not very important it's a lower world
you're only here for a few years and
then you die and your soul separates
from your body and you go on to your
eternal life and that is what you should
be thinking of and focusing on but put
those two together if you are not
allowed to do representations and
figures about the Supernatural and the
divine and at the same time you're not
supposed to be very interested in the
lower physical world you should be only
contemplating the physically the higher
spiritual world then there's no room for
art art is almost banished and this is a
philosophical position and what is very
interesting in our history is those
religious Traditions that have taken
this pronouncement seriously have not
generated traditions in painting
traditions in sculpture traditions in
theater and so forth
so that's a metaphysical debate what
should artists be allowed to represent
the entire world and engage with it or
portions of it now what's the reason for
this prohibition here
and again there's a philosophical reason
the argument is that the spiritual world
that God cannot be represented because
he is a purely spiritual being and the
physical is low it's base it's in many
cases disgusting so if you try to take
something that is pure and high and
beautiful the gods and capture them in
physical form that is blasphemy that is
a degradation and you shouldn't do that
so again before we can be an artist we
have to make some religious and
philosophical decisions about what our
subject matter is going to be
now we're interested also not
necessarily in the world out there and
the gods or God who are also interested
in ourselves
well
who are we what is it to be a human
being and then we look at those Greek
statutes and what we see is human beings
are beautiful
powerful erotic Noble dignified and when
the Greeks are portraying the Gods
and of course many gods they are
portraying them in human form like the
gods are just really awesome human
beings
and we get the sense that we as human
beings are pretty special ourselves and
if we work on ourselves we can become
almost Godlike
and how wonderful is that
and that is a very powerful
philosophical assessment about what it
is to be a human being
but at the same time we know there are
many who will make the judgment about
human beings that they are sinful that
they are weak that they are hypocrites
they're disgusting right they engage in
all sorts of betrayals and they know
what is good but they do not do what is
good and so they should feel ashamed of
themselves they should feel guilty and
they should fall to their knees and
press their faces into the dirt and ask
for forgiveness
now if you are an artist and you are
going to portray what it is to be a
human being
you're going to go in very different
directions right the Greek Direction
versus the human beings are shameful and
should cower and fall down
and what about politics
should we in our art say anybody can be
represented we're interested in all
human beings from all walks of life or
since we know that art is so powerful is
Art something that should be politically
controlled
and only artists who are doing
representations perhaps of Kings or
Aristocrats or generals who have
accomplished something maybe Olympic
athletes who are doing something very
special but only aren't because if it's
important is allowed to do special human
beings and people who are not worthy
those should not be the proper subject
matter of Art
so do we believe that art should be free
and accessible to all human beings that
we should be interested in the full
range of Human Experience or is Art
politically something that should be
controlled and reserved for Those whom
the political leadership considers to be
important and then the subject matters
what do we think about sex what do we
think about race what do we think about
power and Justice the whole range of
values do we let artists Express
anything they want
or do we say some viewpoints are morally
wrong
and they should not be allowed to be
expressed
so the point of all of this is now we're
raising questions about metaphysics and
the nature of reality what it is to be a
human being what are the important
values should people be free or
controlled should we be egalitarian or
elitist and all of those philosophical
questions have great bearing on how
artists to be an artist you have to
engage with those questions and that's
part of the power of our it also
explains why in art history art has gone
through various cycles of Engagement and
disengagement higher aspirations and
lower aspirations depending on what the
prevailing philosophy of the era has
been
now that said I want to jump to our era
right and I want to bracket it by the
year 1917 because
it was about a century ago so it's the
the mathematics is almost perfect right
because we're 19 or 2019 now but three
things happened in 1917 that are
indicative of the time period and what
has changed or not changed since 1917.
so I want to give you the first one
here's the first one
all right I could do this as an art
history test right down who's who's
whose work is this so this is Marcel
Duchamp
this is a work called Fountain and it
was exhibited in New York in 1917.
New York had just recently become the
new center of the art world
sort of the interesting things we'll
come back to this is that if you go to
the 1400s it was Italy by the time you
get to the 15 and 1600s it's moving to
uh to uh Amsterdam and the low countries
in Holland and then into the 1700s it's
London and 1800s it's Paris and then by
the time we get to the 1900s it's the
United States New York Hollywood and so
forth so this is a statement what's
going on in New York in 1917. now
Duchamp is an artist this is well you
recognize what this is right
yeah well not really well maybe but yes
he went to a hardware store bought a
urinal
uh took it back he put this our mutt he
just wrote that on there sent it in and
of course the date 1917 and this is his
statement about art now why this matters
because if you go one century later
we are now into the 2000s and there's a
survey done of British and American
artists over one thousand of them asking
them to name the most important
influential artist on their thinking and
development as an artist
now we would come up with all sorts of
names right we might say Andy Warhol we
might say Pablo Picasso and those guys
came in second and third
number one most important artist of the
20th century according to
Leading 20th century artist was this guy
Marcel Duchamp
and that's interesting so what is going
on with this
such that not only is it part of the art
world but it is judged by those inside
the art world as the most important
piece of art of the past Century and it
is still with them
foreign
1917 also in Michigan in Dearborn the
brand new high-tech Ford Motor Company
mass production Automobile Plant opened
and it is of course a Marvel of modern
engineering right the number of cars
that can be produced the cost of those
cars the quality of those cars and of
course Ford is a household name so in
1917 there are those who are saying this
is amazing awesome what the modern world
is able to do Henry Ford is a hero of
the business and Engineering world but
the reaction in the art world was
negative consistently negative still in
France in England and in the United
States so I've got one representative
quotation here Alfred stieglitz speaking
for the artistic Community uh in the
early 20s every time I see a Ford car
something in me revolts
so he looks at that and he says that's
disgusting
that's repulsive I hate where the modern
world is going
so what's going on there
right well we can say well this is a
mass production facility and everything
is broken down and here we have human
beings but the machine is going along
and the human beings have to keep up
with the machine and the the new part
comes along I have to do what the boss
told me to do what the machine is making
me do and so the modern world with its
engineering and its business
achievements and the entrepreneurship
that is built into this is then seen not
as a progressive Force but is something
that is
dehumanizing us it amounts to a threat
an attack on what it is to be a human
being and so a huge part of the artistic
movement is then a reaction against
industrialization against mechanization
against businessmen like Henry Ford who
can make a million dollars so that's
also 1907.
and then also 1917 the Russian
Revolution it's a bit of a cliche of
course artists have always been engaged
with politics it's always there but one
of the very interesting things about the
last 100 years is how much politics is
front and center in much of the art
world so it's not just that art is about
family life and religion and nature and
human beings and sex and politics too
right for much of the 20th century
politics has come to be the most
important aspect and for many artists
and sub-movements within modernism and
post-modernism it is explicitly and
almost exclusively a political exercise
and of course the portion of the
political Spectrum you know I don't know
how you divide the political Spectrum
right or if you need multiple Spectra
but the portions of the uh political
spectrum that are most dominant within
the art world for the last century is
relatively narrow it's a small portion
of the political spectrum that has been
dominant so
foreign
let's
ask why now I want to give you some
quotations
that was 1917
and what you might expect is the way art
goes is that for 20 years 30 years maybe
40 years there's this new artistic
movement new approach arises it
dominates for a while but then people
get bored they get tired they want
something new and the artists themselves
get bored and tired and say oh we've
already seen that many times I want to
do something new and fresh and original
so by the time we get to the 1960s
that's already then been 40 years or 50
years of a certain approach to Art and
we see certain themes be starting to be
repeated over and over again so let me
give you a series of commentators This
Is 50 years ago I'll start with one from
the russian-born novelist iron Rand
speaking about what has happened in the
modern art World quote when modern
artists declare that they don't know
what they are doing or what makes them
do it we should take them at their word
and give them no further consideration
now notice that that's 50 years ago and
we have a perceptive person working
inside the art and literature World
saying okay we've listened we've given
you your chance you're saying you don't
know what you're doing and you've been
doing it for 40 years let's stop
listening to these artists anymore and
go and do something different 50 years
ago
40 years ago the Mexican poet the Nobel
Prize winner Octavio Paz
today Modern Art is beginning to lose
its powers of negation
so modern art was about negation
critique and so forth but it's losing
its powers why well because we've just
been hearing the same thing over and
over again right for some years now its
rejections have been ritual
repetitions so positive ritual you're
just going through the motion it's the
same thing over and over again Rebellion
has turned into procedure
criticism into rhetoric Etc negation is
no longer creative pause right there
what an insult to artists to say that
what you are doing is no longer creative
it's like the worst possible insult you
can give to an artist
I'm not saying that we are living the
end of art we are living the end of the
idea of Modern Art
so 40 years ago Modern Art was over
according to
octaviolets 30 years ago
egyptian-born literary critic I have
Hassan
the postmodern period is driven
repetitively by a vast will to un making
affecting and dissolving the body
cognition eroticism the psyche and the
entire realm of discourse of the West so
what he's saying 30 years ago okay
modern artists are dissolving everything
they're breaking everything down but now
they've done everything everything has
been broken down to emptiness
20 years ago art critics American art
critic Donald cuspit quote in the art
World such facile nihilism okay that's a
nihilism emptiness no value so that's
dominating the art world but it's facile
and that's an English word that means
kind of juvenile and empty
uh such facile uh nihilism passes for
critical profundity when in fact it is
simply farce and farce is silly comedy
right you know it's the three stooges
and right silly stuff so 20 years ago
perhaps the leading art critic is saying
it's over it's done it's empty it's
facile right and so forth and I'm
starting to feel like an old man over 10
years ago when I started to write about
art I wrote and this was my prediction
right
uh the world of post-modern art is a
run-down Hall of Mirrors reflecting
tiredly some Innovations introduced a
century ago
it is time to move on
right unquote all right so the question
then is if everybody recognizes that
okay something happened negative
critical nihilistic perhaps uh 100 years
ago and we basically broke everything
down and destroyed it and negated
everything and by the time we get to the
1960s we recognize that this has
happened and so it's time to move on and
then the seven 1970s oh it's time to
move on the 1980s it's time to move on
and here we are almost 2020 and what are
we saying it's the same thing over and
over again and is it time to move on
well okay why not why are we stuck
now
now I want to give this as the answer
right and to argue
realism that is to say the kind of art
that was rejected by the mark the uh the
modernists when they started to break
everything apart when they started to go
into abstract expressionism and you go
to the gallery and you look at it you
say what is it I don't know you try
looking at it this way you look at it
that way and you talk to someone who is
supposed to be very smart about what's
going on in art and they say some words
right and you're an intelligent person
and then 30 seconds later you have no
idea what that person just told you and
what it is supposed to mean so right why
is that and that then is to say but
notice what he is saying here this is uh
the uh the guy who's the founding editor
of the new Criterion much more
conservative in their orientation than I
am but nonetheless Hilton Kramer is a
very perceptive art critic for the New
York Times realism lacks a persuasive
Theory
so you want to paint nature you want to
do sculptures of human beings
realistically right we don't have a good
theory about why we should do that
and the argument goes on to lack that is
to lack something crucial you have to
have a good theory the means by which
our experience of individual works is
joined to our understanding of the
values they signify
now that's values individuals Theory
realism that is to say the philosophy
that grounds and makes possible realism
has lost
and there is no such thing as a good
convincing Theory to support realism but
what the moderns have and what the
postmoderns have is theory and that
theory has convinced the intelligent
thinkers intellectuals critics and
artists of their generation so even if
we can recognize that it's the same
thing over and over again we don't
necessarily like it those of us who are
not on the modernist and post-modernist
side of the equipment we're defenseless
in the intellectual battle and if you
don't have a good intellectual game good
theory good philosophy you will lose in
the high art world so why does realism
lack that theory and here again we need
to go back in time now this is huge when
you talk about art
right poetry painting sculpture music
literature musical theater right Opera
there's a huge number of genres and what
I'm going to do is uh cheat a little bit
and just focus on one genre uh
literature because what was going on in
literature similar things were happening
in poetry in music painting sculpture so
I'm going to use literature as an
example I'm also going to cheat a little
bit and focus just on the United States
and what was going on in American
literature now in some sense this is not
cheating because uh by the time we get
to the 20th Century Paris is no longer
the center of everything
artistic instead the action has moved
across the Atlantic and it is going to
be the United States that is dominating
and setting the trends in literature in
movies in music and various other genres
painting sculpture and so on so in order
to achieve this is the the Norton
anthology of American literature this
book sells tens of thousands of copies
every year if you go to a university in
the United States or pretty much
anywhere in the English-speaking world
and you take a course on literature this
is likely to be the book that you will
read and what it will do is excerpt all
of the major authors that if you are
going to become an educated person you
need to know something about these
people so you have excerpts from all of
the major American Authors so what I've
done is that the editors who are all
very well regarded professors of
literature uh speak to who are the
important
authors that educated thoughtful people
need to know about and what do they
stand for and what do they mean in their
work so quick mark so this is F Scott
Fitzgerald The Great Gatsby have you
guys read that book or you've heard it
okay movie version right and so on so
the American Dream all right now it's a
very optimistic portrayal of the world
but F Scott Fitzgerald at the beginning
of the 20th century American Author he
believed it to be deceptive proposing
the satisfaction of all desire as an
attainable goal and identifying Desire
with the material it can only lead to
dissatisfaction hence the movement of
all his work is toward disillusion
now I've pulled this quotation out it's
important I agree with it and I've
highlighted in red the important
Concepts deception dissatisfaction
disillusion
so we take all of Fitzgerald and reduce
him to those three concepts
Frost
two rows diverge into yellow wood and I
took the one less traveled do you know
those lines okay we all learned those in
high school as well
well what is important about Frost
beneath the home spun folksiness of the
speaker's approach that is to say he's
kind of a out in the country rural guy
not a fancy New York City sophisticate
is a vision characterized by bleakness
okay I don't know if you know that
concept that's empty
gray brown everything dyeing
seeing the world as composed of desert
places reflecting a design to frighten
and appall
poems about Winter all right winter is a
metaphor for
death right are more common than poems
about the other seasons and even in the
spring and Autumn poems the speaker
always remembers winter
always thinking about death
frightening and appalling
T.S eliot's the Wasteland okay the poem
was not affirmative well yes
the desperate quest for regeneration in
a kaleidoscopic landscape Kaleidoscope
you know Kaleidoscope right so it's just
right landscape of sexual disorder and
spiritual desolation remains unfulfilled
I should have also done unfulfilled in
red as well so desperation disorder
depression unfulfillment the world is a
kaleidoscope
Eugene O'Neill a great playwright
often we go to literature for
understanding of human characters
good versus evil mixtures Heroes
flaggers and so forth if however
one looks for understanding of the
characters in the sense of reasons
provided for their behaviors why do
people do what they do right that's what
we want to know
well one will be disappointed
so by implication people do what they do
and nobody has any understanding why at
least according to O'Neill it's a
mystery O'Neill's characters could
neither help nor understand what they
did
the playwright presented their behavior
as essentially inexplicable that's the
philosophical move there
simply as the inevitable Human Condition
William Faulkner
is about his favorite novel The Sound in
the fury
the sound in the fury tells a story of
grief and loss it is in four sections
each with a different narrator each
supplying a different piece of the plot
three of the narrators are brothers
Benji the idiot Quentin the suicide
and Jason the business failure each of
them for different reasons Mourns the
loss of their sister Carrie
so the four important people here are an
idiot a suicide a failure and a dead
person
Ernest Hemingway
he brought more to his writing than
disillusionment or cynicism
I don't know that I just makes me
chocolate all right disillusionment and
cynicism that's not enough we need more
right
you brought an Ever Vivid sense of
betrayal
what is life about how to live with pain
became his theme
John Steinbeck The Grapes of Wrath he
combined naturalisms with symbols
techniques to depict his characters
plights
and it expressed simple but strong
responses to their sufferings compassion
outrage and admiration
all right plates desperate circumstances
that you find yourself in and you don't
know how to solve your problems
Tennessee Williams A Streetcar Named
Desire the author of that famous
playwrights mid-century we're less
concerned over criticisms plays for
their violence and their obsession with
sexuality which was regarded by some
critics as an almost morbid
preoccupation with perversion murder
rape drugs incest nymphomania
we now know that the stroller voices
were attacking Williams for his
homosexuality which we must remember
could not be publicly spoken of in this
country until comparatively recently so
you get past the homosexuality issue and
this is
the center of Tennessee Williams writing
and this goes on I'll just highlight
loneliness haunting people we're driven
to extreme behavior and there's plight
again
so I take all of those
the ones that I highlighted before and
put them together
this is the world the best American
Writers that the smart literary critics
say you need to read these people
and if you want to be a significant
artist yourself you need to enter into
this world and this is your world
and it's all negative
empty desperation death pain cynicism
there's not a hint of a suggestion of
anything positive redeeming beautiful
heroic
and that is the philosophical framework
within which the American artistic
Community the dominant one of the 20th
century has been operating
now the question then is why right and
why perhaps in the United States of all
places right the place of the American
dream right some of the richest people
in the world the freest people in the
world so much progress and opportunity
that is going on but the artistic
Community is totally rejecting it
and looks at the world from a completely
different
framework
what's going on well
now we get all philosophical right
and this is where my people the
philosophers go to work because
what happened then is artists are not
necessarily philosophers but they are
smart people they are sensitive people
and they do think deeply they read
original sources they talk with other
artists and other intellectuals and they
pick up on what is important and what
resonates with them so if we scale out
to the broader philosophical world what
was the intellectual climate who are the
giant names and in fact still the giant
names in understanding where we are in
the world and how we are to think about
it well Friedrich Nietzsche everybody
has to know something about Friedrich
Nietzsche the most important philosopher
on the 20th century his influence is
everywhere it cuts across political
boundary you find people from all parts
of the political Spectrum influenced by
Nietzsche it cuts across all religious
influenced by Nietzsche he is the
deepest most significant philosopher and
he died in 1900 so in some sense the
math is perfect but one of his famous
phrases of course is God Is Dead
now what he meant by that was not that
there had been a God and God had you
know died it's metaphorical right
religion has died
and religion had been part of human
condition for
basically forever
but think about what religion does for
people and did for people it gives them
a sense that they were created
that we are special and that there is a
God who is looking out for us and
telling us what we should do and there's
ultimately Justice in the world because
the bad people will get their punishment
good people will get their rewards when
you die you don't just get put in a box
and rot in the Earth
you go on you have survival
but what happens then if you stop
believing that
religion is yanked away from you
you go through a crisis of faith and you
can't believe in God anymore and what
nature is arguing is that's what has
happened to us in the modern world
because it's very hard for us to believe
those old stories that we're told to
mostly illiterate people in the desert
two or three thousand years ago before
anybody knew anything about science and
how are we supposed to believe all of
those stories come on
but has happened very fast
and we wrench out this very comforting
story of the way the world works and
what are we left with
the sense that we're on our own
there is no God looking after us we're
not special
and maybe when we die it is a cold empty
grave
and that's where we are culturally and
nature says a big part of trying to
understand the end of the 19th century
is how do we wrap our minds around that
so everybody reads Nietzsche we also
read Darwin
Darwin published in 1859 Origin of
Species he did not say anything in that
book about human beings
but the implication is clear
well if we did not come from a God and
we are especially created and we have an
immortal Soul where did we come from we
came from animals and how do animals
operate well animals operate by
competition for scarce resources and
they fight and it's brutal the winners
win the losers lose and it is a brutal
fight for survival and it's not nice
people who survive it is the Predators
we are born of this is not Darwin's
phrase but nature read in tooth and Claw
so the red of blood is on our Claws and
our teeth because life is a predatory
struggle among animals for survival
now that's not what Darwin necessarily
believe but that's the philosophical
interpretation many people took from
Darwin's views
Karl Marx
we don't believe that there are moral
standards that come from God about
equality and the lion lying down with
the lamb and everybody getting along in
heaven instead we are animals on Earth
and it's about power and wealth and it's
strong versus weak and the strong
particularly under capitalism according
to Marx exploit their weaker people and
use that wealth to control politics and
further Dominate and the whole Human
Condition then is
ugly exploitation and oppression Sigmund
Freud yes Darwin is right we are
born of evolutionary processes and like
the other animals we have instincts that
have been bred into us and if we are
going to survive as animals animals need
to be successful as predators and that
means they need to be aggressive they
like to hunt they like to kill they like
to tear bodies apart and devour them and
the animals that had those instincts the
strongest the aggressive instincts
particularly now think about males and
how easy it is for them to fight and to
like to dominate and humiliate right
other human beings we are ourselves
aggressive predators and we got to the
top of the food chain not by again being
nice but by letting those instincts
Dominate and of course we have to kill
and eat but we also have to have sex and
reproduce and so those who have the
strongest sex drive and combining that
sex drive with aggressiveness those are
the ones that survive so those of us who
are here now we are
at the end of a chain that goes way way
back and every single one of them was
very good at killing
and getting someone to go to sex have
bed with them right or if they didn't
want to
aggressively raping that person
and that's who we are sex and aggression
are our dominant instincts that's what
it is to be a human being
now the point is if you put this right
we have Nietzsche
Darwin
Marx Frey by the time we get to the 20th
century those are the big names
everybody knows those names and they are
international names they are setting the
new philosophical framework and then we
can add science entropy discovered late
19th century the idea is that there's
all this energy all over the universe
but what happens is that energy flows
from
high concentrations to low
concentrations but once the energy is
equaled out nothing can happen
and so the prediction of this scientific
theory is that there's not a God again
organizing the whole world and there's
an ultimate Happy Ever After in heaven
but rather the whole universe of its
energy is eventually going to spread out
evenly and the universe will just die a
heat death
so
that's see you
that's the world and notice it is a
philosophical world that is a early 20th
century creation and the leading
architects of it with the best arguments
convincing the most intellectuals are
Nietzsche Freud Marx Darwin and then
some of the more pessimistic
interpretations coming out of the
sciences and there's not anything
positive or redeeming or Progressive
about that philosophical framework as I
have sketched it now I'm not saying that
I agree with this framework I'm saying
now as an intellectual historian that's
what was going on for the smart people
100 years ago this was your education
now if you then put yourself
in a historian shoes and you start
living in the 20th century you've read
your dear Darwin and your Marx and your
Nietzsche and Freud and so forth maybe
you agree and maybe you don't but what
is actually happening in the world it's
not just philosophical Theory
in the 19 teens we have World War One
breaks out and all of the so-called
civilized nations of the world
are killing each other
millions of people die
wives destroyed names and we're
developing new technologies better to
kill each other and the whole world goes
on a frenzy of killing for four years
what happens 10 years later
an economic depression horrible
this guy
almost takes over the world
at the end of that
we learn about the holocausts
and now we're into the 1940s
and then in the next decade we're back
to war again in Korea
and
the Cold War the Soviet Union and the
United States now have
nuclear weapons and missiles that can
fly thousands of miles and they have
more than enough to blow each other up
multiple times over and this is the
1960s and then we go to war again in
Vietnam
and you might not know this one this is
Kent State University in Ohio a nice
Midwestern University peaceful student
protests that are going on the governor
gets the little Panic he sends in the
National Guard which is kind of a
military force and they end up shooting
some students
in the streets of the United States
Detroit Philadelphia riots over racial
issues
unemployment at an all-time high rate
ghettos and so forth and so now we're up
to the 1970s and the point then is going
to be it's not just philosophy Theory
it is if you pay attention to what's
going on in the world and you read the
history a certain way it's negative
negative negative negative negative
and you're an artist
how do you capture the reality
that you think and feel the world to be
alienation
from reality from other people from
yourself
destruction you get so frustrated you
just want to destroy and express your
rage anger and frustration
and so it's not then I think accidental
that the most sensitive and the most
intellectual of the artists are going to
be unrelievably negative
now this takes us back to Marcel Duchamp
in
1917
and what has changed
if art then is a reflection of the way
the world is well go back to the urinal
and think of the urinal as a urinal
what do you do with the urinal guys you
piss on it
okay you can try that as well
piss on it right
piss on everything it's all [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
it's all pointless
right and that's the mood that you have
okay I've got some more quotations here
I want to uh
then put it in
philosophical form
if you want to say art is about truth
that's a philosophical commitment
well what is the truth
and another artistic cliche is to say
is not only the content matters but the
form matters what you create and how you
present it the what in the how the form
and the content both are there
for your truth
what forms are going to be useful at
expressing your truth
now if you think that the world is ugly
and fractured and hideous
and that people are disgusting even if
they might look pretty sometimes what
forms are you going to use
and the argument is going to be if the
world really is
ugly nasty alienation empty aggression
predation then using those old realistic
forms where we have nice colors and
proportions and perspectives and
everything is nice and neat and fits
that doesn't work to capture this truth
we have to break up the forms we have to
explode the forms we have to rip off the
surface
prettiness to get to the ugliness and
the emptiness that is really inside and
so the truth is negative and the forms
have to be negative as well
so here's Jackson Pollock
uh the drip painting right so he would
put a huge canvas on the floor and then
just right and various things
and he's philosophical about it notice
what he says here Modern Art to me is
nothing more than the expression of
contemporary aims of the age that we are
living in the modern painter cannot
express this age
the airplane the atom bomb in the old
forms of the Renaissance or any other
past culture each age Finds Its Own
technique what were the old forms what
we learn in our history it's about
proportion and perspective and we
learned the mathematics and so forth but
those forms don't work anymore because
those presuppose that the world is
ordered causal everything fits and so
forth we need to explode that we need to
somehow destroy all of those forms and
go for the form less what seems like
chaos and Randomness and perhaps
something out of that will emerge
Picasso is explicitly doing that we look
at things from one perspective according
to our eyes but that only gives us a
partial perspective and we are always
traditionally looking for Symmetry and
proportion and we want things to be
beautiful but if the truth is
ugliness fracture disproportion then we
need to take the human face apart and
re-put it together in a way that is
deliberately
ugly right you don't want to kiss that
face
and that's the point
this is
a self-portrait
offering yourself to the world right
well who are you
you're stretched out at the same time
you're exposed and vulnerable and
there's not much substance to you right
it's a desiccated vulnerability
and Salvador Dali right we take a lovely
young woman
and we want to
violate her and to spoil her in various
ways
Francis Bacon
what do we want to do about
traditional authorities religious
authorities political authorities people
we look up to well we hate those guys
for all of their corruption and their
hypocrisy and here we have one of the
popes sitting on a pope-like chair but
it's also an electric chair right we
just want to cause this guy
to experience that
man and woman
de kuning did a whole series of women
portraits and they all look like this
what do you think guys
horrific she's crazy she's a predator
right she's going to bite the flesh off
your body
rauschenberg took one of the decoonings
and says so great I feel inadequate and
what do we often do when we feel that we
are inferior and people who have done a
lot better well we hate those people and
we just want to smash their stuff right
um
people who are driving an old crappy car
and you're not sure it's going to start
the next time
and it's a cold night and you need to
get home you go out into the parking lot
and there's some guy with his new
Ferrari parked there
and you hate that guy take your keys and
you just scratch the paintwork hey yeah
that's right right so if you feel
inadequate you want to destroy and you
give in to that so what rauschenberg did
was took one of the kooning's paintings
and he worked for hours
over the course of several days to just
completely obliterate it and destroy it
and the message is it's only by
destroying the past better achievements
that I can somehow redeem myself and
possibly become an artist
and the theorists are coming along now
this is a March through the 10s 20s 30s
and 40s of the 20th century
formerly in art history you read the
textbooks they'll typically say around
1960 1970 modernism is ending and we
start getting into post-modernism and so
there are some variations there but
they're not going to get into those but
you find the same thing happening
philosophically there are the modernist
early 20th century movements but by the
time we get to the 60s and 70s the
postmodern philosophers are coming along
Foucault Dairy DAW and I will just give
you a quotation from each of them
speaking about effacement
and just destroying human faces and so
forth here's a quotation from Foucault
about his writing I Can Lose Myself
I just paused there
traditionally we say when we write that
I want to discover myself or find myself
and now we're in opposite I Can Lose
Myself
at appear at La last two eyes I will
never have to meet again
I am no doubt not the only one who
writes in order to have no face
your face the most personal
part of you your expression of who you
are to the world
and you want to
destroy that
and the extends that more generally to
the human species man is quote an
invention of recent date that will quote
soon be erased like a face drawn in sand
at the edge of the sea
we're welcoming the erasing of all human
faces
Dairy dog
about ugliness
the world is ugly
we're all monsters
and the postmoderns are the ones who are
honest about it we do not quote turn our
eyes away when faced by the as yet
unnameable et cetera et cetera Etc but
the point is
the formless
is the mark the mute not able to speak
and express infant terrifying form of
monstrosity yes the modern and
post-modern philosophical and artistic
worlds are hideous
but the honest courageous person will go
into it
and he is urging that
all right now I'm going to skip along
one more
from the same time this is Kate Ellis
philosophical
writer of the time about post-modernism
the apolitical pessimism of both
postmodernism by which creation is
simply a form of
defecation defecation a fancy English
word for taking a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
right and so manzoni uh an Italian
artist on the time said well yes
Duchamp did the urinal artist something
you piss on well what else can we do so
we took these tins empty and he
defecated into 30 something of them and
sealed them and then offered them for
sale as his work of art yeah if art is
something special that comes from the
artists all right well what really comes
from the artist
what are we really
all right and one of these within the
last 10 years sold for over 50 000 U.S
dollars
uh apparently they've never been opened
there's a possibility
I don't know if you want to open it but
there is an intellectual part of you
that says did he really
and how would we know right but of
course if you open it so you might be
playing a game but the wait there is
something right to them but the point is
everything is [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and we want to
basically spread [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] over the world
now that's a negative portrait but
partly my purpose tonight is to try to
explain the unrelieved negativity why it
has been so prominent and to say that
there are deep reasons for it and those
deep reasons are philosophical
if you read the major intellectuals of
the late 1800s and early 1900s this is
the world they portray artists absorb it
and artists do what they do and they
find unique ways to express it in their
artworks and there is a logic to the
apparent ill logic there is a sense to
the apparent nonsensical nature of the
art World here
I want to end on a positive note the
last few minutes or so I am running a
bit long but I'm having fun so I hope
you can bear with me for a bit there are
signs in the last 10 or 15 years that
things are changing right fairly
dramatically one sign of the change is
the increased amount of humor by artists
poking fun at modern artists or
modernist artists and post-modern
artists so here's a Spanish artist right
the model's reaction right so as a
lovely young woman who is apparently
posed for a modernist artist right and
then finally she gets to see what he has
done and she knows that she's beautiful
and lovely and young and right this is
the reality this is what the modernist
Arts right and who has done the better
job so it's meant to be poking fun right
at it we're not going to take you guys
to too seriously yeah if that's what you
want to sleep with okay fine right but
30 reality is much more attractive
this is the decoony
right represented there and again right
uh this I believe is a Cuban artist
right a lovely young woman and somewhat
classical form of classical motifs so
Rebirth of the classical understanding
of feminine beauty and then what have
the postmodern's been doing well they've
been in effect doing graffiti and
defacing all things lovely and Beauty so
we're turning the tables on them and we
will reject you okay
another uh I think I have a theme Here
Right lovely healthy looking young women
uh Timothy Tyler the constructionist
this is a technical term within
post-modern literary criticism jock
Dairy DAW and so forth so here's his
deconstructionist and there's some
interesting references here right we've
been in a box we've been taking again
healthy lovely real people and we've
been putting them in a in a box in an
artificial environment where they can't
survive and flourish so she is
breaking her way out of the box she's
also not waiting for Prince Charming and
the hero to come and rescue her she is a
strong Modern Woman she is going to free
herself and go off and live her life and
we have some references here Moma the
Museum of Modern Art again in New York
there's Andy warhol's soup can right and
there are a few other things if you look
closely but again we need to break out
of this post-modern framework there also
are signs that if you look at the Modern
artists and the postmodern artists you
would never have any sense
of the astounding things that have
happened over the course of the 20th
century with their focus on yes lots of
bad negative things happen in the 20th
century but life expectancy around the
world at the beginning of the 1900s 1917
I looked it up life expectancy was 41
years
it is now 67 years over the course of
the 20th century there's been an
increase of 25 years of life
when is that ever talked about or
celebrated in modern and post-modern art
the number of people living in poverty
has gone down the number of people
living under slavery has gone down the
number of children dying before they
reach one year or five year has gone
down we have made astounding progress as
a result of chemistry technology science
and so forth and those facts need to be
taken into account and then further
afield there's a there's a lot of sign
that younger artists coming along are
interested in what has made progress
possible yes of course there are
negative things and art should be about
the negative things as well but it
should also be informantly making a
judgment call and take into account the
positive things and if you look at
what's going on in biology right in uh
exploration Under the Sea uh out in
astronomy
and fractal mathematics if you were all
in interested and curious
the scientific worlds are opening up
brand new parts of the world that have
never been explored before and if you
are an artist and you're looking for
territory and you are creative and about
Innovation then go where the new
discoveries are being made and become
cognizant of those and see how those can
inform your art but again that requires
breaking out of this fairly narrow box
that modernism and postmodernism
some contemporary artists uh that I
think are doing good work Martin vachell
a French woman
and we start to see just in the last
generation a return to the human figure
and what's interesting here is obviously
a healthy powerful
male figure but also
he's an older man and that's interesting
so you can be viral and healthy and
beautiful and if you respond to that
even sexy for a lot longer life is not
about by the time you're 40 or 50 years
old it's over and you just subside into
nothingness that's progress It's the
Nigerian painter and those of you
interested in light will appreciate the
way he's playing with all of the light
and the reflections of course we have
horizontal lines but the light going
vertically and the way things are
balanced and picking up and Reflections
and so forth foreign
California artist Michael Newberry
saying the Greek myths have spoken to us
for Millennia and there's a reason why
we always go back to the Greeks and here
we have the Icarus Legend but what
happened in the original Icarus Legend
well he and his father they flew up into
the sky and they got too close to the
Sun and it's a tragedy the sun melted
their wax wings and they plunged to
their deaths well is that the way life
has to be if you are daring and
inventive and willing to fly high and
test your outer limits and here we have
Icarus at the end of his flight and it's
been successful and he's landing and of
course there's some Christian imagery
that's being played with here but rather
than a symbol of sacrifice and suffering
and death it's turned into success
he has succeeded in his flight so
there's a lot that we can learn not only
from The Sciences but also the
traditional Greek and traditional
religious myths those are not yet
exhausted further afield this is an
Australian artist Peter shipperhein
there is for perspective but you know
this is like a six foot and he's a
pretty big guy himself this is a
Monumental zerathustra right now that's
an explicit Nietzsche reference right
and there's other aspects of nature that
are worth reading not only the diagnosis
of nihilism that many of the modernist
and post-modernists but Nietzsche and
positive value creation and being a new
a new creator of values but again on a
Monumental male scale
our lovely feminine figure a young woman
just the curve of her lines this is an
American sculptor in Pennsylvania this
is on a park outside of Philadelphia and
a young child and a somewhat balanced on
her shoulder but the child is ready to
go off and explore but still to some
extent protected by and supported by his
mother in this case and that's positive
and again returning to something that is
eternal and deep in The Human Condition
and then further afield a painter from
Utah saying look artists there are some
things that we've done over and over
again but really the world is so wide
and so open and we're just now starting
to go to new worlds and if we are
willing to go to those new worlds we
will see things that have never been
seen before so a young woman obviously
out in space put a new perspective on
there so the point is
the battle has been joined in the
artistic community
but the reason we're stuck is that the
philosophical and intellectual battle is
now being joined but it's still early
stages and as long as Darwin Nietzsche
Freud and the others are the dominant
intellectuals they are important they
need to be read but we need other
intellectuals to replace with a positive
Vision as well so if you are creative or
you are sponsoring creative or
interested in encouraging creative
people uh of course have them learn
their art history and their art
techniques but they also need to be if
not philosophers at least philosophical
I don't know who the Contemporary
equivalents to
Freud Nietzsche Marx Darwin and the
others will be but we're in the process
now of sorting those out so of course we
read Jordan Peterson and we read Stephen
Pinker and that's important because
they're both really smart guys one is
more conservative politically and one is
more left liberal politically that's
fine we can learn from both of them and
we will sort out who has something to
offer and the point is that both of them
in their own way are trying to get out
of the nihilism and on to something
positive and there are dozens of others
out there as well so I'm going to stop
there and thank you for your attention
and to the extent that Maria is the boss
says there is time I will field
questions thank you thank you
[Applause]
okay should I just field them myself
I think so
I feel exactly the same because and then
people is really uh well sometimes they
don't understand why it's so ugly but
they understand bad things or whatever
what you're saying but it's very
interesting for me to see that the thing
you like yeah
yes uh yeah so
promise yes so some artists are they
don't agree with that negative world
view and they are in some cases
rediscovering and reworking traditional
forms but also there's been a huge
amount of development in art technology
the new paints that are possible and of
course all of the new media and what
computers can do for us so uh people who
genuinely want to do something positive
are they're trying and so there are lots
of new more representational and
classical and figurative schools that
are opening uh and there are now
conference this is from an academic's
perspective uh encouraging signs that
there's enough people interested that
are now conferences bringing together
art critics and artists and philosophers
and in some cases Vision scientists or
sound scientists to talk about the new
directions in art so uh it could be the
beginning of a new I don't know if
Revolution is too strong but at least
some new directions that can compete
so
yes
my pleasure
but all the way through
nothing about
um
you don't know nothing
okay so you you okay
okay
that's I always always worked in
thinking that people also be something
about the nature of human beings
that's the things that they are that
attracts our attention is yeah that
provokes
so all the philosophers you've been
mentioning their statements has have
always been provoked yes and
nobody cares about people that want to
present something that's agreeing on
sure
mentioning Shakespeare
a few years ago
these stories were also about initially
of human
beings really badly
and so that's that's one of our foreign
it's it's so distinct to our it was the
last century that's the Arts yeah the
influential Arts have been been so
powerful right
all right so uh a few interesting things
right in what you're what you're saying
there uh no I am not saying that art in
the past was not interested in the ugly
or the pessimistic or the cynical that I
think has always been a part of our
history and I think it should always be
a part of Art and art history I think if
you are an artist and you are engaging
with the world and with yourself you do
have to recognize that there's good and
there's bad there's Beauty and there's
ugliness uh so there's positive and
there is negative and if you are aware
only of one side or the other then I
think you are right partly blind and I
think uh part of then of being an artist
is like being a philosopher being like a
human being is engaging with the world
as it really is
now there's a follow-up question though
say there is say beauty and there is
ugliness there's good and there is bad
which is the most important
and which do I want to work toward
furthering so there's two additional
value judgments that you have to make
so what you can say is I think the world
is say equally balanced in good and bad
right now and that's a descriptive claim
but then do I want to just through my
contributions to the world maintain the
equal balance of the good and the bad
now if you then make a judgment call
that says yes I do then what you're
saying is I really don't make much of a
difference to the world the world is
just going to carry on equally good
equally bad independently of my efforts
so you're making already at that point a
philosophical Claim about yourself
and if you take yourself as a
representative human being you can
generalize that to say human beings
can't make a difference to the way the
world is
but if you then say I think the world
right now is equally balanced between
good and bad but I want to make the
world a better place and so what I want
to do is emphasize the good whatever I
think the good is and in my art
emphasize the good then you're also
making a philosophical statement about
yourself you're saying I think I have
some competence
but I can make a difference in the world
and I'm saying that to me I think the
good is more important than the bad yes
there is the bad but I'm going to
prioritize the good over the BET and
that says something about your your
moral character the same I think would
go the other way if you say yeah there's
good in the world but I'm not going to
focus on the good I'm going to use my
agency and my power to spread more
ugliness and and
negativity in the world and what I want
to do is use my power to create
something that is provocative right but
the provocative Direction I want to go
is and to make you uh have in your life
more negativity
and that also then is a philosophical
Claim about our social relations I want
to make your life more negative that's
what I want to do and that's a
philosophical claim now the point about
uh
you get a lot packed into your question
so maybe I will come back but the the
word provocative uh I can come back to
that if we have some time because
there's another interesting set of
issues there so go ahead
sure thank you my pleasure
and the other day I was talking with a
French friend because the Paris
neighbors and I can become the
exposition so we're just talking about
that and he told me oh breaking his
house with another plan
don't you think it was a it's kind of
crazy for me but okay anyway and I have
a Prejudice Prejudice yes
about one
uh
I think I I was thinking about other
mother
post-modernity yeah
I think
I have to
I discovered with you two things first
audio is not necessary but I believe
it's it's
edition of humanity and I think when I
saw all the
pictures and you're talking it was a
coverage to myself that yes of course I
mean if if we uh we we try with art and
with everything that
she met humans are perfect for their
beauty I think it's also helping
to bring some everything I say no no
we're not perfect so I think at that
part of the story is really necessary to
rebuild something uh
we are so
really appreciate your location okay
yeah but I at the end I escalate your
your show the new vision and
I don't know it's not bad I mean yeah
when you broke something you can
build something okay
yeah that's that's nicely said
um
sometimes I I think about literature
examples so suppose you think about
literature that works
and so Shakespeare and uh
Charles Dickens and Victor Hugo and uh
Rand and so on
the literature that works is not only
right positive beautiful right to
characters so at one level
uh if the literature is going to be
successful it has to have an
understanding of the actual human
condition which is very complicated so
there's good and bad beautiful and ugly
young and old right living and dying and
so on and the great works the Epic ones
they have everything in them right
that's a that's an important part of it
so if it's too one-sided then we start
to say this is uh this is too fantasy
right this is not realistic
because
partly what we want is for the art to
engage us philosophically because we're
all grappling with our own lives and
however good or bad our lives are they
are also mixed and we're trying to sort
out the mixture and make decisions in
our own lives about what I can improve
and what I can't improve and what my
short-term goals and long-term goals are
going to be so that has to be reflected
in the literature so you will have good
characters and bad characters you have
honest and dishonest just and unjust
beautiful and ugly and we're trying to
sort out all of these but then at the
same time the artist does the literary
artists need to make an overall judgment
and is it just that I'm portraying this
is the way the world is and I just leave
it at that or am I going to be
optimistic and emphasize one side over
the other so yes I don't know take a a
detective story right so somebody gets
killed and then the detective comes in
and in a good detective story there's
lots of very different sorts of people
and most of the time they have some good
and they have some bad and they have
different kinds of motivations and we
learn a lot about human motivations and
human types and all of the rivalries and
so forth but by the time we get to the
end of the detective Story the author
has to make a decision
is the detective going to find out who
the Killer is or not
and that's a philosophical decision and
some detective stories they will say the
detective fails
and that's a philosophical statement
right we will never ultimately figure
out the Bad and the bad people will get
away with doing bad stuff and the good
ultimately are impotent but of course if
you go the other way and you say the
detective figures it out Miss Marple
Agatha Christie right or whatever your
detective is she figures out and that
then is to say it's a moral lesson as
well the bad people yes they exist and
all the people in her stories are
mixtures of good and bad but the
important thing is
the bad guys get caught Justice is done
and we celebrate the fact that human
beings like Miss Marple are very
intelligent and they can figure that out
so you do have to you have some
philosophical skin in the game you have
to make your commitments if you're going
to be successful in art so
yes oh sorry am I out of order okay go
ahead
um about margins for Ceci and his
comments from Ireland entertainment oh
yes I saw something going through my
Facebook feed but I don't remember what
it was
basically
he said that about the movies were at
Art and I wanted to relate it to to this
because for example movies like Mario
the MCU The Marvelous magic universe and
all the movies that they they show each
year
can I just enter just give me an example
is this Iron Man yes okay all right so
that's the Marvel guys okay okay
foreign
well how do they fit into this into this
category of postmodernism and how do
they
get out of that because for example
comments about for example Mark Hamill
who is the actor who portrays Luke
Skywalker in Star Wars he talks about
the industry of escapism and how that
does that feel that does that does that
fit uh into this Panorama about art in
the in the postmodern world uh what is
the stateism for people okay for
families and how does that connect to
the human in all of us yes
well another uh Rich set of observations
right uh in in a question so we have
Martin scorsese's initial claim that
Marvel Comics and the movies or are not
actually works of art
uh now I don't know what his reasons for
those are but my initial reaction would
be to say he's wrong they are a form of
art they are a fictional representation
of characters they have uh characters in
Conflict there's plot and there's
resolution and there's a moral of the
story so I think it's art now he might
be then making a shorthand claim their
art but they're low art or they're just
not good art but absent knowing what his
reasons are for saying they're not art I
can't comment on that unfortunately well
the other part then is uh escapism and
that was the other big Concept in the
second part of your point and uh I guess
I would first ask what do you mean by
escapism and sometimes that's used as a
pejorative or as a as a negative of
saying what happens when you go into Art
Is You Leave the World Behind and you go
to a pretend reality but by calling it
escapists it sounds like you're saying
I'm not saying you but the people who
use this concept that you shouldn't do
that you should always stay in the real
world and art is not real it's just make
believe and so it's childish and and
unreal
now if that is what is meant by Escapist
then I would say it's the wrong concept
to use when you're talking about art
because precisely what art is is meant
to be in some cases an abstraction on
and in a creation of alternative
possible worlds and that's precisely
it's positive values one of the
wonderful and important things about
human beings is that our cognitive
apparatus is aware of reality but we can
also disengage from reality and consider
in our imaginations theories and other
possibilities
uh in order to learn about the world and
about ourselves uh the way the
philosopher Carl popper put it she said
this is the most important thing about
human beings is that we can let our
theories die in our place so that is to
say we precisely can come up with
imagined Alternatives and imagine worlds
and figure out which ones work and which
ones don't work uh and then the ones
that don't work don't try those ones
whereas animals who are not able to do
that they just have to live in the real
world and if they make a mistake then
they die so to speak as a as a result of
it so the point is that
escapism we need a positive concept for
that to capture the genuine value of
considering alternative realities that
are made up so
uh with that clarification am I being
fair to your question I think yes
I wanted to add something about okay
those sort of
two positions like negative and the
positive one yes and the positive one
being like you said
about escaping from the reality that we
are but uh today because sadly because
we are indifferent to it and we have to
go to that other places so that's why I
wanted to
intertwined with the postmodern approach
to Art yeah and you are having you have
the necessity to escape from the
ugliness of the world okay instead of
working inside yeah so let me say right
it is possible of course that you are in
a bad situation in your life and so one
value of art can be that you are just
fighting hard to get through your life
for 12 hours a day
and what art can then do is give you an
escape and so it's like you go on a
vacation for one hour music a novel a
movie and it refreshes you
psychologically it's by the break
because you forget all of the negative
and then you wake up the next day and
you are refreshed and you're able to
fight again so I would then say art as
escapism for that kind of person in that
life situation is enormously valuable
and there are millions of people who
report that that is exactly what it has
done for them but also if you are in a
negative situation what art can do is
help you break your concentration with
the world that you are living in because
it dominates your Consciousness and give
you a sense that there are other
possibilities I can be in a terrible
situation I'm living in the south side
of Chicago surrounded by gangs and
people are being shot but I can read a
story right about people living in Japan
doing something or other creating video
games and I'm a young person and that
inspires me and I realize there is
another world it doesn't have to be like
south side of Chicago for me and then I
can not just get through the day but
then I can say all right I'm going to
somehow get out of South Side Chicago
and I'm going to go to Japan right or
I'm going to go to Hollywood and so
forth but I would say art is more
Universal than that but even if your
life is going well uh and beautiful you
have a beautiful family and you love
your work and you have a lovely home uh
we still respond to Art because we are
curious about the rest of the Human
Condition we're interested in what's
possible 100 years from now so we read
science fiction uh and so forth and so
art enlarges our sense of possibilities
and gives us a sense of maybe I all of
these things that I'm doing right now
are great and wonderful but there's
something I never considered before and
maybe I should pursue that other
positive value as well
I think I'll have to come back just
because yeah there'll be some other gig
at the back Gabrielle and
postmodern art yes and I
something else I've noticed about people
who admire more postmodern art that
there's also some type of
pretentiousness and it says like
superiority to training to admire that
type of art yeah
well I think we know from all walks of
life that some people
are interested in achieving something
and they have their own independent
judgment about what counts as
accomplishment and they want to
themselves accomplish something and of
course then be respected socially based
on their accomplishments
and there are other people who want that
recognition from other people but they
don't want to earn it or work for it and
so they learn the games to play in order
to get counterfeit
honors and so forth so the art world is
not unique in that regard so you find
that in all walks of life you'll find
people who are pretending to be more
spiritual than they are to gain
religious Kudos or to be richer than
they are to get into the right country
club or whatever so the art world is a
world that some people enjoy and so they
want to have status and then there's
always then the question are you going
to be a genuine artist or Genuine art
critic and so earn your status or are
you going to find ways of playing games
now one of the ways in which modernism
and post-modernism help a certain sort
of person is that it is right
deliberately obscure and often
deliberately playing around with
meaninglessness and so if you have some
gift of verbiage playing around with
words then yes you can play social games
with other people you can make it sound
like you know what you are talking about
and that person they're naive they don't
understand what you are saying but
they're going to say oh he sounds like
he knows what he's talking about the
fault his mind and so you'll get an
indirect
boost of prestige so the point is then
that in contrast to
non-post Modern forms of art where you
have to say here is my theme and you're
trying to make it clear and here are the
techniques that I use and you can
explain what those are and uh so their
Clarity and communication is a premium
if your philosophy is anti-clarity and
anti-communication it does open the door
to to all sorts of hangers on as well so
I would say the the art world is more
populated by that sort of people now
than it was in other eras
yes
oh I am sorry I'm sorry
a trend in children's literature
Classics are too harsh
foreign
so it's an accident it's not a murderer
okay yes
yeah so the question is about children's
stories and classic children's stories
oh there's two questions then okay good
yes
so yeah I was going to repeat the
question yes
so the question is about classic
literature classic children's literature
and when you look at it a certain amount
of it is very harsh so the first
question is a question that we would
each ask as parents and teachers of
young children which classic literature
is their Classics and we're all supposed
to know them do we judge are still
appropriate for our children to learn
and at what age and I would say that
there's no straight answer to that that
is going to be a judgment call by every
parent that is going to be for your
children and it's not going to be
they're six years old so they can handle
it because not all six-year-olds are the
same so it's going to necessarily be an
individual judgment call by parents and
teachers for for each of their children
so I remember for example uh uh with my
my daughter when she was young thinking
oh the Grimm fairy tales right from the
brothers grim and all of the classics
and so on I'm going to read her these
stories so I bought them and I read them
I said no I'm not going right because
they're really nasty right and horrible
and that then leads to the second part
right of your question what about the
phenomenon then of taking the classic
stories and revising them in a Kinder
gentler right nicer whip
yes that's right and then I would say uh
um that you should not do that
right but I think what you should do is
write your own story and just to have it
have a different version of this uh
change the names of the characters and
change the change the outcomes as well
so other people's artistic Creations
don't change them that's theirs
that's right that's right okay uh sorry
go ahead
I'm here I have time okay
[Music]
oh yeah yes
so that was uh art basil Miami or just
art basil Switzerland which one was that
it was Miami okay
this is this is for Gabrielle right
that's right ooh I bought the uh hundred
thousand dollar banana I think it's the
duct tape that's really worth about
ninety thousand the banana is only ten
thousand dollars
so uh there are a lot of issues
all right
[Music]
we're going to solve a discussion around
yes that's right cars yes
yeah no that's uh yeah and that one in
particular I just again saw that
floating through my Facebook feed so I
didn't follow up but there are you know
thousands of variations on that every
year that are going on at a certain
point you say oh my goodness all right
right
okay so this time it's a banana okay
great yes that's right yeah okay so yeah
so who cares all right is it does it
matter that it's a banana as opposed to
what if it was a rutabaga or a
watermelon right so it was duct tape
right uh would it matter if it was
painters tape right it's like no it
doesn't really matter so it's just a
it's a gesture but I think the the thing
you were saying toward the end is what's
more interesting is the discussion about
the work rather than the work that's one
of the very interesting things about
Modern Art and post-modern art in
general because almost no one buys those
Works in order to enjoy them as works of
art instead they buy the work because
they want to have a big debate and
discussion about them which is to say
the work is almost just a symbol
for a set of ideas and of course this is
part of what conceptual art is all about
but the actual object doesn't matter
it's all about ideas and then the the
whole point of the work of art just is
to generate a certain kind of discussion
so in this case we would say well this
is meant to be a discussion for people
who are already in the art club right
the kind of people that yeah
the painted work yes that's right so
it's in one sense it's deliberately
exclusionary right we want to make sure
that 99 of all human beings have no idea
what's going on here because we are part
of the one percent and we understand
that this is a banana and two years ago
there was this guy in Zurich and he did
something with a carrot
and so it was you know and it wasn't on
the on the wall it was on the ceiling
right uh and so we're having a
discussion and it's among us and what we
then get is the sense that we're in a
club and we're excluding right other
people and then the person who pays the
hundred thousand dollars right or
whatever that's someone who really wants
to be in the club and they've got a
hundred thousand dollars to burn so
please let me enter the club
and so forth but of course the people
who are the art critics and the other
artists right they might let that person
into the club but they're really going
to laugh behind laugh at that person
that what an idiot right that he's a
pretentious right hanger on and so on so
I I lost I lost track of the order
well yes
I don't think there's a we and I think
that's that's the the hard part because
uh I think right now what we have is a
large number of subcultures so there's a
long-standing divide between High art
culture and popular culture so the kinds
of movies that come out of Hollywood and
that 99 of the population enjoys the
kinds of movies that are I don't know
this is an overstatement right the
French existentialist movie where
everybody mopes around for two hours and
then commits suicide right so we've seen
that movie 30 times right right but the
one percent where I say oh that's really
deep right and so forth but the 99 who
like Hollywood movies they hate that so
there's a huge right cultural divide
there as well but then at the same time
uh you know within if we just stick with
the movies right there are people who
love the romances and the actions and
The Westerns and the detective stories
and so on and some people like science
fiction and some people like all these
and some people people like new movies
so I don't think that we have right now
a
universal art culture anymore I think
particularly now that we are Global we
have
hundreds and hundreds of different kinds
of niches the interesting thing though
for me though as a philosopher is who
gets the stamp of approval by the
professors of art by the philosophers
who study art what foundations have the
500 million dollar endowments so that
they can do grants to artists so they're
the ones who have the power and what art
critics are writing for the New York
Times and so forth so what is going on
there because that is a decisive
culture shifter and that's the terrain
that I am I am working working on
so I think High art culture is still
largely post-modern but I think nobody
believes the post-modernism anymore I
think 20 years ago when I started
writing about art you find uh Museum
directors and art critics they still
believed in post-modernism but I think
they don't believe they just uh it's
part of their salaries to write about
this stuff they have their reputations
are based on it or I I have been working
at this museum for 15 years and now I'm
the assistant to the the main curator of
the museum and so I'm on a career path
the only way I'm going to become the the
main Museum director is if I continue on
this path because already on the board
the people who write the million dollar
checks every year right and they're
writing the million dollar checks
because they want to be in the club but
they don't necessarily believe in it
anymore so to some extent it's a
self-perpetuating uh culture but it's
still uh important culturally and
they're not going to change until better
ideas replace the existing I think
they're open to it the rest of the
culture definitely is open to it but
the the philosophy needs to to come
along compellingly
so we have to stop there you say okay
thank you really good questions
[Applause]
