welcome to another episode of I found
something mildly infuriating that I
looked more into and now I'm furious
imagine yourself shopping on Amazon.com
for some new slippers you see these ones
that look particularly comfy and you go
down this rabbit hole and find out
they're called Cloud slippers topping
Cloud slippers into the search bar
you're met with hundreds or thousands of
results from Brands like tab vazu Bronx
jumra V and ulch these two are literally
the same picture they don't even try to
hide it so many of these products don't
look like unique versions of the same
shoe they look identical down to the
same photo being used on Amazon because
most likely they are the exact same
product being sold for similar prices
through different front-facing companies
this is a result of something called
Drop Shipping and I know a lot of you
know what Drop Shipping is okay but a
lot of people don't like Joe Biden you
think he knows what Drop Shipping is
having manufacturers sell the same
mass-produced product to different
companies to sell to customer
is not a new phenomenon but it's gotten
worse like way worse and way more
prevalent with the convenience of online
shopping online shopping has made life
for a lot of people easier more
convenient and more affordable in a lot
of cases and we can't deny that but at
the same time it's caused a hyper
consumerism Madness an influx of cheaply
made shitty products from factories
across the world whether that be China
Mexico Indonesia to reach more people
faster than ever since we don't
physically see much of a product anymore
before buying it it can be hard to tell
that this Cloud slipper being marketed
as soft and cloudlike is actually just
hard plastic it's not very soft trust me
I've seen it in store now this concept
neither crossed my radar nor bothered me
so much until everyone started talking
about and demonizing this Amazon
competitor so as they Market themselves
as teu or temu I don't know anymore teu
has become the most downloaded shop app
in the United States teu is cheaper
aggressively promotional programmed to
sell you useless stuff and it's totally
addictive already we're showing the
stats 51 million monthly active users
it's the number one most downloaded app
in this country Lightning Deals ending
today 90% off electronics and home sales
down to 39 what blew my mind about this
whole debate at the time was that Teemu
wasn't doing anything new that Amazon
wasn't already doing so I was perplexed
as to why everyone was acting like timu
was some sort of new evil terrible
working conditions alleged sweat shop
labor and extremely cheap items that
make it feel like you're browsing
through wish.com if you know what that
is like this 87 Cent avocado slicer how
is it on sale for 87 Cent it was already
$2 and I wrote down 87 but when you go
to it now it's 58 this the prices could
keep how does it keep going down like
they have to be losing money on this
let's look at the reviews cheap well
yeah and not knowing if this product
would even make it to you at all or
arriving to you broken let's get
something straight before we continue
because I think it's important to know
sit down class because Professor balls
is
here no I still cannot see okay there we
go drop shipping by definition is when
an online store sells a mass-produced
product directly to Consumers without
ever keeping that item in stock it comes
directly from the manufacturer the Drop
Shipping Company has to do little work
to get this going they don't Supply the
items they have little control over the
quality of the items and the items are
not unique to that store drop shippers
usually have no deal with the
manufacturer to work with them
exclusively it's just anyone can sell
the thing which is why they are 10 of
the same Cloud slipper on Amazon also
Tik Tok shop is full of these then
there's white labeling when a third
party creates a product or service and
then it's rebranded by another company
to sell as if it were their own the
company that's reselling typically
doesn't doesn't have control over the
product quality or how it's made but
they control their own branding
marketing and typically take on the
responsibility of having inventory a
good example of this is Dollar Shave
Club they purchase their razors in bulk
for a lower price this is called
wholesaling from another company and
Brands them as their own they hold the
inventory or hire someone else to and
offer the service of delivering razors
and plenty of other products to your
door every month this is a good example
of white labeling but there are plenty
of lazy examples as well by the way if
you just the razors they sell them on
Amazon for a fourth of the price you're
welcome lastly we have private labeling
sometimes private labeling and white
labeling are used interchangeably but it
really depends on the contract that the
company has behind the scenes with the
manufacturer private labeling is like
the standard way in which you would
think that products are developed the
purchasing company Works closely with
the manufacturer to create a unique
product customizing it to their liking
branding and selling it as if it were
theirs because because it is Trader joe
isn't cultivating the yogurt himself but
they work closely with a company that
makes yogurt and probably has an
exclusivity contract so that their
yogurt is their yogurt with their
formula a recent example of private
labeling is pokem man's Mina Mina minus
Midnight Cookies yes the cookies that
everyone was really up in arms about
claiming it was Drop Shipping or just
white labeling it actually technically
was Private labeling according to her
and her team they worked closely with a
company to make the cookie and customize
the ingredients the amounts they added
vitamins or whatever to their liking
with 2 years in the works thus releasing
Mina minina minina
cookies cannot pronounce while many
products are similar to another of its
kind it's not the same exact thing that
anyone can choose to sell she's not Drop
Shipping cookies that she has no control
over sometimes it can be hard for us as
consumers on the front end to see and
discern what companies are doing behind
the scenes past the product so when you
hear Twitter users throwing around the
term drop shipping to the point where
they're calling every product Drop
Shipping and it's lost all meaning now
you know okay we're about to get into a
doozy as they call it and film into the
night and this is definitely not being
filmed the morning after so I'm going to
need a meal break with Factor bars two
minute microwave meals that actually
taste good and get delivered right to
your door they have meal kits for every
diet whether that be vegetarian vegan
calorie smart or literally none of those
and you just want some yummy yums in
your tummy tum you can choose from their
menu of over 35 weekly meals and add-ons
like smoothies my personal favorite and
now these wellness shots that you can
get for free using my length these wake
you up let me tell you that much bust
these out at your next rager they save
time when I'm busy writing or just
feeling extremely lazy and I don't want
to cook let's be real here's a quick
tutorial Ready set go take off the
protective film put it in the microwave
for 2 minutes or oven if you're fancy
played it beautifully and dinner is
served it's super easy to get started
started just head to factor75.com or
click the link below and use the code
gatekeep 50 to get 50% off your first
Factor box and free wellness shots for
life you get two free wellness shots
from three available flavors for every
order while you're an active subscriber
thanks to factor for sponsoring and now
let's get into the juicy stuff and I'm
not just talking about my Factor ma a
lot of the exact same products you see
on Amazon are on Teemu and it's spilled
over to Etsy a that's supposed to be a
Marketplace for handmade custom or
vintage goods from small sellers or just
individuals I made the mistake of
wanting higher quality earrings instead
of the $4 earrings from Forever 21 that
turned green in a week like these ones
so I went on Etsy to try to find
handmade jewelry made from higher
quality metals and to support small
businesses in the process because I'm a
good person and it was flooded with tons
of cute earrings from one seller taking
up 39 out of the 48 spots on the front
page Caitlyn minimalist everything about
her profile touts that this is a small
business from someone named Caitlyn
handcrafted with love it says on the
Etsy store profile on Instagram this
company is Asian female founded and
again jewelry crafted with love Opie
come here yes she's so cute I was ready
to buy from this small Asian
female-owned business this small
business business with almost 3 million
sales and 30 employees where several of
their products are found on alibaba.com
A Drop Shipping or wholesale website for
cheap mass-produced Goods to mark up
like this $3 ring she sells for
$27 while marketing it as a higher
quality product than it actually is I
mean all the listings say it's handmade
which is just an outright lie okay I
should probably clarify that while
earrings are made in fact factories
overseas they are technically handmade
at certain points just at mass
production scale with often poorly paid
workers questionable working conditions
and at worst which we'll get into later
forced labor which is not the
connotation we typically associate with
marketing something as handmade and
every product on their own website says
that they're handmade as well and it
shows because people on Reddit have
become suspicious of this seller also
finding their own examples of their
products on Alibaba and complaints about
the cheapness of the ring and how
quickly it tarnishes it's $3 for a
reason the 18 karat gold finish might be
so thin that it rubs off pretty easily
exposing the silver underneath with no
coating leaving it to tarnish this pair
I found the exact same photo and you can
tell because the Reflections in the
earrings are identical on another
Jeweler's website of handmade jewelry
selling it for
$138 I was wondering who stole from who
at this point when I noticed that Judith
photo is much more cropped in than
Caitlyn's and then I found tons of
Caitlyn minimalist jewelry on this other
website selling her $20 earrings for
nearly $100 a piece what is going on
continuing my search I found them on
Amazon Amazon Etsy and AliExpress
warning this product can expose you to
chemicals including lead and cadmium
which are known to the state of
California to cause cancer it may
contain lead what I don't even know what
the source of these images really are
whose product is this and who stole from
who it just makes you question whether
these are really carefully crafted and
made to last and if these photos are
really theirs which I suspect that they
are because all the photos on their
website look like they were shot by the
same person get out of here then that
just perpetuates the ginormous problem
for sellers of lying on the internet to
sell your drop Shi shipped product that
might not actually be what's advertised
once again people just go on the
internet and tell
lies unbelievable if you look into it
more you'll see that Caitlyn minimalist
products ship from California so it
couldn't be Drop Shipping where it comes
directly from the factory in Alibaba
right well this is a great example of
what thousands of companies do these
days which is order and bulk wholesale
from a manufacturer in China order it to
a company on American soil that will
fulfill orders for you as they come in
it's an extra step from just drop
shipping and what this does is ensure
that customers don't have to wait 2
months to get their item directly from
China like teu which we'll get into
later and it makes shipping overall
cheaper as well instead of hundreds of
individual orders shipping from China
you pay for one bulk package to the US
or wherever so unlike Drop Shipping they
technically run the risk of having
overflow of unsold Goods we'll also get
into later that this is how a lot of
drop shippers just ship Wholesale direct
to Amazon fulfillment centers to have
their products shipped out by Amazon
themselves since it's almost impossible
to tell what the source of every single
product ever is another way that their
jewelry could have ended up on
alibaba.com is if they worked directly
with the manufacturer to create a unique
design but then this manufacturer just
directly uploaded the product themselves
to Alibaba another way that this could
happen is if it's just the same Alibaba
manufacturer but on Etsy if the same
manufacturer just has this American
looking front-facing business like I
don't think the specific one is but that
is something that happens so once again
tell me how 3 million orders are
handmade with 30 employees they're not
whether they're wholesaling or Drop
Shipping they're not handmade not with
love at least it doesn't take a genius
to know that but I just found it
surprising when I found the source of
where these products might have come
from and the Very deceptive and
dishonest marketing that they do now I
know what you're thinking because I like
to bully myself in the back of my my
mind when I'm writing scripts this is
the most basic way a lot of retailers
function obviously Caitlyn isn't
painstakingly making 2 million pieces of
jewelry Handmade by yourself Trader Joe
isn't crafting each delicious Samosa for
my consumption at its core many
businesses Outsource some product from
someone else and sell it for a profit
but the difference usually lies in the
honesty work put into it and quality of
the product Caitlyn may be allegedly for
example selling cheap Chinese Factory
jewelry on a website for handmade small
business goods for nine times the price
claiming that it's handmade when it's
not taking up 81% of the first page
results for earrings for suspiciously
affordable prices pushing real Etsy
sellers out of the search results oh and
did I mention several items from this
store are etsy's pick apparently hand
selected by etsy's style experts for
Quality items I'm not so sure that this
store and stores like them should be
allowed on Etsy unfortunately they're
far from the only one as they're just
taking advantage of etsy's lack of care
because it obviously makes them a ton of
money Etsy users and sellers have been
complaining about mass-produced drop
shipped items on Etsy for a while this
company also sells on Amazon and the
blurb under all their products say we
put our love and care into each piece we
craft whether this brand is wholesaling
or Drop Shipping directly it's still
dishonest and I don't like it like I
said this is far from an isolated
incident on Etsy it extends to rugs
bedding door mats Furniture clothing
lamps pants green Goose guava juice
milkshake chocolate cake and sellers
like this first of all make online
shopping a hell especially when you're
trying to find quality or unique small
business products without seeing them in
person first so it's easy to mask the
quality and price and photos pretend
that it's handmade and makes it
impossible to shop because it's easier
to over charge for Worse products while
we're here let me give you some
practical advice let me show you a quick
way that you can check for yourself if
you're getting overcharged or check if
the product you're interested in is a
resold one or not who knows you might
find it cheaper on a different website
as
well so I searched handmade on Etsy
let's scroll down let's scroll let's
find something we like this mug seems
pretty cute handcrafted ceramic mug for
$19 this is pretty gosh darn cute
wouldn't you say well well well here's
what we're going to do and you can do
this on most websites you're going to
right click on the image and you're
going to go to this silly little guy
here that says search image with Google
and there's this new thing on Google
Chrome that it will just pop up on the
side Google Lens it's their like reverse
image search and uh wow it's crazy how
this handcrafted mug is on Amazon from
be Deco and
Sheen and this is the listing Etsy and
Walmart and roomy living and
AliExpress and eBay wow that's really
cool oh look it's even cheaper on Amazon
that's definitely the same mug right
like down to the imperfections in the
the mouth spots what is it called The
Rim the rim down to the bottom of the
mug being a slightly different material
you can see that here as well this is
the same mug is what I'm trying to say
secondly this forces out legitimate and
honest small businesses from becoming
successful and from being seen in a lot
of places this also creates a more
challenging landscape where for example
small handmade earring sellers now have
to compete with cheap drop
shippers who spend their time optimizing
and hacking search engines on Amazon
Etsy to have their listings live at the
top of the search results since Drop
Shipping has such a low barrier to entry
the market is overly saturated now with
poor quality products that make it more
difficult for consumers to discern the
quality if you're just straight up lying
about it being handmade then I'm I'm not
really getting what I'm paying for am I
ironically in the age of unlimited
access to online shopping they're
directly competing with Giant Drop
Shipping manufacturers and have to
differentiate themselves in a crowded
Marketplace that ironically offers
little variety due to the predatory
practices of Amazon and companies like
it forcing out competition making it all
so bad for the customer but that's all
part of running a small business I hope
you like the set change I'm going for
like a single man's apartment uh
aesthetic baby competition and doing
things better and smarter than your
competitor are part of the game on how
to be financially successful learning
valuable marketing skills like search
engine optimization and effective social
media strategy are part of running an
online business these days whether
you're selling hand sanitizer or blinker
fluid at some point you could say don't
hate the player hate the game that's
just how things work now but it's just
that much more frustrating when your
competitor has cutting Corners methods
of getting to the top and more
monetarily successful than you doing it
life's not fair and dishonest people get
to the top I get it I'm just sitting
here I'm just standing here saying it's
annoying because it is you know what
this feels like it feels like the people
who only want to do YouTube for the
money without wanting to put any of the
effort in to get there so they automate
everything and you get like the worst
amalgamation of douchebag business bro
who is selling a course obviously I own
over 30 YouTube channels a combined Subs
of over 10 million a combined revenue of
60k a month the best part I don't even
show my face not in a single video
here's how you can too model what works
I hate when people subscribe to the idea
of originality isn't that right guys I
hate when the creators I watch are
original get that sh out of here
originality is just a myth wow that's
how these people think that's crazy
monetize meditate on this YouTube
revenue is not just about AdSense rev
diversify your income it's also about
Community Partnerships product sales
affiliate marketing dude this this reads
so much like I have no idea what I'm
talking about here's another one how is
an automated YouTube channel ran roles
include everything that running a
YouTube channel uh has a editing script
writing voice overing ideation like you
can't even come up with ideas yourself I
never tell beginners to Outsource and
spend more money than they can afford in
hiring a team learn each task on your
own first your knowledge is the most
valuable asset in building the channel
once you start scaling and make money
then leverage your time by Outsourcing
so your advice on how to be an automated
YouTube channel is to Outsource
everything but you actually have to
become a successful YouTuber first in
order to Outsource everything perfect I
have no questions thank you but in our
case it's I want to be a successful
entrepreneur with a shortcut so I'm
going to drop ship cheap Goods directly
to Amazon and watch the profits roll in
and also sell you a course on how to
make a quick Buck obviously was that an
AliExpress product of course brother so
as you can see this is the type of
person that Drop Shipping is typically
associated with in modern times in the
era of overly egotistical La Bros who
invested in crypto on
podcasts while at first Amazon might
have offered a fresh new reliable way to
reach customers outside of your local
area at the same time Amazon Now
controls 50% of online spending in the
US according to house investigations
most online Shoppers start their search
on Amazon since Amazon is so dominant
small businesses feel forced to sell on
Amazon in order to reach potential
customers in doing so you have to pay
Amazon like most website Marketplace
hubs from at CA Craigslist you have to
pay to sell on there on Amazon you have
to get a subscription plan everyone's
favorite where you choose from either
The Limited individual plan for 9 cents
per item sold or the professional plan
at $40 a month so if you sell more than
40 things a month on Amazon you should
probably invest in the professional
account but hey that's not so bad oh but
this is just the subscription plan after
you already pay them monthly you have to
pay additional fees based on what you're
selling if you're selling water bottles
you have to pay an extra 15% fee for
each item sold if someone requests a
refund it's either $5 or a 20% fee of
the refunded amount whichever is less
once you're on Amazon they now control
your sales which is a scary thing for
your business to rely on and here's why
I don't want to say forced but basically
you're guided to be part of the
Fulfillment by Amazon program where they
house your inventory and handle shipping
for you this is this is what causes a
product to have that beautiful blue
Prime badge that ensures two-day
shipping and reliable returns having
your products be prime infinitely boosts
your item in the Amazon algorithm and
search results at a cost if the item
you're selling is over £3 per se that'll
cost you an extra
$7.25 per item as you can see it's
pretty costly to sell on Amazon in the
first place especially when Amazon
strictly limits contact between Sellers
and customers most sellers can't see the
names and addresses of the people buying
their products they deliberately try and
stop brand loyalty from happening on
Amazon and you'd think all these fees on
sellers would cause products on Amazon
to become more expensive but things stay
relatively affordable on there why well
Drop Shipping first of all keeps costs
low but Amazon also enforces prices to
stay affordable through their bot that
detects if a seller is offering a lower
price on another website and then
demotes them in the search results or
even taking away their Prime badge
according to house investigations in
Bloomberg this can destroy a business's
sales since Amazon's monopolized the
space so much that people need it for
their businesses to survive while
competing with the businesses on their
own website considering them internal
competitors I know it doesn't end it
feels like I'm calling my sister to
gossip about my ex no way and then he
did this no way it's getting dark house
investigations and Wall Street Journal
found and I quote from IL sr. org that
Amazon has spied on Sellers and
appropriated data about their sales
costs and suppliers it's then used this
information to create its own competing
versions of their products often giving
its version Superior placement in the
search results Amazon has also been
caught using its Venture Capital fund to
invest in startups only to steal those
startups ideas and create create rival
products and services in some cases
Amazon's decision to launch a competing
product devastated the business in which
it invested wow that's the Amazon brand
stuff that you see they're out competing
the very people that pay to sell on
Amazon not to mention also according to
house investigations that they also
destroy smaller companies by for example
selling their diapers at a lower cost
for long enough to destabilize
diapers.com forcing them into a merger
they've eliminated competition on Amazon
itself with Amazon brand products and
algorithm suppression if you're not a
drop shipper you're losing money Amazon
favors and encourages it by the way they
run the site it ironically limits the
variety of products for the consumers
while being in the most diverse era of
online shopping possibilities I feel
like most people Loosely knew that
Amazon was an unethical company but it
just it just keeps going the more that I
look at it and I personally didn't know
all of these specifics and and I know
that there's probably more Amazon's
press Center uh paints a different story
saying more than 60% of sales in Amazon
store are from independent sellers most
of which are small to medium-sized
businesses I wonder how many of those
independent sellers are drop shippers no
really like this mushroom NightLight
being sold by 50 different sellers that
is cute but the longer you look at it
the more you feel like you should look
away actually an article by Vox paints a
bigger picture of this over 60% of
Amazon sales are from independent
sellers but almost half of these sellers
are based in China so presumably at
least a third of Amazon's sales are
being drop shipped or mass produced
directly from China now add that to how
many drop shippers Source from those
manufacturers but are technically based
in other countries like the US the
number I have no idea what are you
asking me for but it's more than a third
I can tell you
that teu or temu is like Amazon but with
cheaper stuff and its endless Scroll of
cheap non-essential quirky items reminds
you of wish.com if you're familiar with
that according to them teu competes with
Amazon by cutting out the middleman and
offering wholesale prices in other words
their entire site and business is Drop
Shipping every order is shipped directly
from the manufacturer to the customer
timu doesn't hold any inventory the
exact definition of Drop Shipping they
say that they're streamlining the supply
chain and this is how their price stay
so low well there's that and since items
come directly from factories they're
usually in smaller separate packages
that avoid the tax on shipments over
$800 to the US thirdly well uh the US
select committee on the Chinese
Communist party got that need an acronym
released an interim report alleging okay
don't sue me please that there's an
extremely highrisk teu supply chain uses
forced weager labor an ethnic group that
in simple terms China doesn't like very
much which is not only illegal in the US
but very very
bad like I said earlier plenty of teu
products exist on Amazon
so yeah whether Amazon wants it there or
not it can be pretty difficult to really
Trace back the source of the materials
for anything you buy and even for
sellers AliExpress works similarly
selling directly to Consumers and
connecting drop shippers directly to
manufacturers Alibaba is designed to
only connect companies with
mass-producing manufacturers but it's
not only for direct to Consumer Drop
Shipping for example people will also
get supplies from here for their
businesses in bulk like blank t-shirts
blank phone cases and UV printers to
print onto those cases so now we know
why Drop Shipping kind of sucks for
consumers and for other Sellers and how
companies like Amazon teu AliExpress Etc
May Thrive off of it and where there's a
way to make a quick Buck there's a will
to sell a course to make a quick Buck
here's the best way to start Drop
Shipping if you're completely brand new
to this business and have never even
done it before these are just a few of
the products I sell on Amazon that make
me over
$20,000 every single month I bet you're
wondering what's the best business model
I could start right now the answer is
easy it's Drop Shipping you may or may
not have seen sponsored posts like this
on Tik Tok or Instagram stories they
make it temp showing you how much money
they presumably make from Drop Shipping
I'm going to be showing you guys exactly
how me and my team are able to do
numbers like this on a consistent basis
these SI coffee glasses make me over
$5,000 a month and these thank you cards
make me over $10,000 a month I make too
much money out in other places and they
always talk to you as if they can teach
you the big secret and all you have to
do is sign up for their course you too
can live the lavish lifestyle with
practically zero effort yeah there we go
you too can pretend you're a big smart
businessman with zero knowledge work
ethic experience or expertise just
choose the right product from AliExpress
so at this point you guys all we're
doing is actually finding a winning
product I used data that comes straight
from Amazon that shows me exactly how
many people are looking to buy items
just like these that basically you could
spray beer into people's mouths I was
like bro I promise you this will do well
just like take a chance on it first week
right messages me yo we've got 3 million
views on the video overnight right I was
like why have we not got any sales what
the's going on open my phone logged in
3K sales you finished that day 14k in
one day God okay that editing is
actually making me motion sick holy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
okay now you're going to make a Shopify
website which by the way takes 5 minutes
with a free template and offers a 3
months for $1 promotion to sell the
product I don't even make these Market
your I mean the product for marketing
all we're going to be doing is scrolling
through here and literally just watching
these videos and REM making them
ourselves then profit all I do is figure
out the products I want to sell put them
on Amazon and watch the sales roll
in wait no first sign up for the course
so make sure you just go ahead and go
here and then go right here so I can
show you and teach you the rest so first
you're just going to want to pug your
phone and you're just going to want to
open up Tik Tok once you're on
T I'm watching this
on Tik Tok this goes for most of these
online courses especially those that
want to teach you how to make a quick
Buck they love acting like they're going
to teach you some big secret so you sign
up for their course it reminds me of MLM
recruitment messages I feel like we need
a new color for this hey girly haven't
talked to you in
forever I just wanted to let you know of
this opportunity that helped me be
financially free and allowed me to
become a digital nomad
can I send you the info you can make
around
$5,000 a week with this opportunity just
working for yourself I also have a
course on how to do it just make sure
you go to my profile and click the link
in my
Vio hope to see you
there I want to go back to this guy I
talked about earlier because he is
clearly nervous first of all he can't
even explain what the product he was
Drop Shipping even is is my most
profitable product was these
sanitizing uh tablets that you would
utilize for like uh cleaning clothes so
you would put them in uh the dishwasher
you would put them in the um washing
machine or in the plate washer it's a
tablet for cleaning clothes that you put
in the dishwasher or the plate washer or
the washing machine sorry what is it
it's like all these guys want to be mark
cubin on Shark Tank and it realiz Jordan
Belford with completely missing the
point of Wolf of Wall Street entirely
then he has to come big balling over the
other guys to prove himself dropping the
most lukewarm knowledge of all time as
if it was a bomb of wisdom and Insider
business know how was that an AliExpress
product of course brother but how do you
what's yeah what are the everything
every when you say AliExpress product
what do you mean let's let's let's break
down the myth of AliExpress what myth
brother what are you talking about wait
is there a myth surrounding AliExpress
do you know that AliExpress are actually
drop shippers mhm it's people that are
Drop Shipping manufacturers yeah dude if
he didn't know that he wouldn't have
asked did you know it was you're talking
about you drop shipping on this podcast
it's people that are Drop Shipping
manufacturers So when you say AliExpress
only a noob drop shipper pulls anything
from
AliExpress I had to get more context
from this clip because he ends it off by
saying only a noob drop shipper pulls
anything from AliExpress so I'm going to
pone this guy epic style Noob 360 no
scope on Rust by looking into where a
pro drop shipper sources his products
like him okay in the meantime of finding
the context for this clip there are
YouTube shorts of this podcast he posted
he's not the host of the podcast by the
way he was a guest but there's this one
clip they turned into a Tik Tok to say
$10,000 is a lot of money it's not a lot
of money per day bro it's not a lot of
money it is nothing it's nothing in the
context of what I want to accomplish you
can live off of $10,000 very fine for
what I'm trying to accomplish in life
it's not enough I have to feed 100
families in order to build operations of
scale you need to make a lot of money to
think that oh it's a lot of money is
capping your mentality and possibility
of scaling so to me not a lot of money
are you saying to get a clip no you need
the mindset of saying hey there's
potential there's scalability as opposed
to saying this is enough this is good
people can say this is enough this is
good and they can cap themselves there I
just choose not to what do you mean me
and you're feeding a 100 families is he
the guy that was a Serial sperm donor
and now he's the father of like 200
children was that him and then he gets
called out by one of the hosts asking if
he's just saying this to get a clip are
you saying it just to get a clip he's
just saying [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and thinks he has a
point he's like the definition of saying
a whole lot of nothing and pretending
it's profound also just obviously
$10,000 is a lot of money I get his
point that if you cap your mentality at
thinking that 10K is a lot then you'll
never have the mindset to achieve more
which by the way is kind of wrong you
can still make a lot of money and
recognize and be thankful that it is a
lot of money and be proud of the
achievements that it took to get there
it's not capping yourself you're just
saying like hey that's a lot that's
pretty cool anyway back to finding the
context for that one clip only a noob
drop shipper pulls anything from
AliExpress because people from China are
listen in in Drop Shipping those same
products and then going to the
manufacturers I have my own
manufacturing I have my own 3pls I have
my own private party Logistics so in the
essence of can you find my products on
AliExpress sure because manufacturers
can literally post them there like you
would post them on Amazon but they
weren't AliExpress products they were
sourced and manufactured by my own team
so translating Dropship bro to English
basically what he's saying is what I
mentioned earlier is that he and his
team made original products using those
manufacturers in China and that
manufacturer took that product and put
it on AliExpress themselves then he
developed his own supply chain methods
and started managing inventory which is
what 3pls is as the host calls out this
is just not dropshipping anymore you
start scaling even higher you have to
call the manufacturer see if they can
produce in time so it goes from Drop
Shipping quickly becomes e-commerce so
that's that's not Drop Shipping into
that it's that well you transition from
it right so only a noob drop shipper
source sources from AliExpress and a pro
one sources from the same factories on
AliExpress got it genius he goes on to
talk about how the top dogs test with
Drop Shipping and then immediately go
into white labeling when it works and
they talk about how he made his fortune
from Drop Shipping and then investing
all of that into
crypto so you had this huge come up with
Drop Shipping and then you funneled that
money into crypto all of it while the
barrier to entry in Drop Shipping is low
and the market is overly saturated with
drop shippers I should say that not
everyone succeeds in it people use it as
a getrich quick idea to sell a course
but you still need some knowhow in order
to be really successful at it I looked
more into this dude's advice and it's
clear he just wants to be Tick Tock Gary
ve at some point something has to
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] give at some point you just have
to be sick and tired of being [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
sick and tired look at the dude sleeping
look at the dude sleeping that's most of
you [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] bro he thinks the only
valuable end goal in life is to achieve
endgame capitalism like he wants to get
to the point in Animal Crossing where
you take over Tom nook's flesh and he
offers some genuine marketing and
business advice if you can see through
the alpha male [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and of course It
All Leads back to selling a course
that's $369 a year or about $30 a month
stress my fellow glitches is a silent
killer let me repeat that stress is the
silent killer everything is designed to
cause stress in your life a lot of you
are out here chasing women chasing
relation and that is this
guy that's not that's not the same guy
more headaches more problems to your bag
that are going to equate to more stress
stop there and a lot of you want to be
winners a lot of you want to build
businesses a lot of you would to have
your dream life but you can't tame
something like stress and if you can't
tame it my friend is going to kill you I
swear some people will do anything but
just go to therapy you can be
financially successful and invest time
into a healthy relationship and a happy
life that doesn't only revolve around
money that's my advice Now give me $30
come on Fork it over Fork it over and
under the veil of filming videos and his
Rolls-Royce on purpose he explains
generally what products to Market to
what audience and how to Market
effectively which is a lot easier iier
than it sounds to just make a Tik Tok go
viral instantly and sell millions though
like YouTube where there's a low barrier
to entry there are lots of people
willing to take advantage and cheat to
get to the top like just straight up
copying someone else's Tik Tok what
we're going to be doing is scrolling
through here and literally just watching
these videos and remaking them ourselves
or lazily copy pasting someone else's
YouTube script into your video we
created Willy Walker Chocolate Factory
in real life we're spending the next 100
hours in go I gathered some of my
friends and whichever one of us builds
the craziest Minecraft item to impress
in this briefcase I have
$25,000 there are 10 YouTubers I have
Sid game recreated every single set from
squid that's Mr I recreated every single
set from squid game in real life this is
Mr be Island the island that this
contestant won during his we surving the
next 24 hours in this desert but the
only thing we have is $1 million
night, it's the same [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] thing like
have you no shame hey son does this give
you a headache me too and yes it also
gives me a headache my point is that
this isn't unique to drop shipping but
God it's still annoying in every
genre so even after all we've covered
today no one is the perfect consumer and
no one is the perfect seller lots of us
still have iPhones
and so I don't think it's very
productive to name and shame people who
choose to buy from these Services it's
almost impossible to trace back the
source of every single item you've ever
owned there's also something to be said
about the culture of today's hyper
consumerism and buying a ton of cheap
stuff you don't need which is how teu
thrives if you want my personal opinion
and you don't have to agree with this I
think you should do what's best for your
morals ethics and budget and I just
wanted to spread what I've learned about
this so you can now make educated
decisions on what you want to do because
not everyone can afford
earrings to make sure that they're
handmade and made out of pure gold
that's ethically sourced so don't worry
I'm not going to come to your house and
bully you and throw rocks at your window
I know you were worrying about that but
I'm not going to do it I won't yeah
so why don't skeletons fight each other
they have no
guts I'm just trying to end this off on
a high note oh
