I would like to thank our top sponsors
Fergus Ryan and Diego for making this
show possible and welcome to the cave of
a palace
blissfully unaware the art World loyally
parrots the 18th century philosophy of
Emmanuel Kant
tonight's conversation will deal with
his Aesthetics but also show the
negative impact of his metaphysics and
epistemology on classically minded
people
if we cannot know reality then painting
it becomes naive
if nothing is objective then we cannot
trust craft rules and if nothing is
universal then we become miserably
estranged from the Mythic perspective
my guest is a professor of philosophy
host of the open College podcast and the
author of explaining post-modernism
Stephen Hicks I'm glad to have you on
the show yeah thanks for the invitation
so
this is your book
first published in 2004 2004 yeah right
so should we start from that before we
dive into the main character of the
evening I guess it's the main character
of your book too right well yeah yeah my
claim is as a matter of intellectual
history that post-modernism has its
roots uh I mean two figures and one of
them certainly is Emmanuel Kant you know
so post-modernism is a sprawling
intellectual movement but is now
saturating many parts of contemporary
culture as well but that is a phenomenon
of the 20th century and but in culture
and in intellectual movements things
moved slowly and in this case when you
trace the most important strategic moves
you end up back in the 18th century and
I think especially for
the uh sometimes on sexy issues in
metaphysics and epistemology they're
unsexy but they are absolutely
fundamental for philosophy and for a
philosophically Charged Enterprise like
art art at its highest uh Kant is the
most important philosopher to Grapple
with in the last now two and a half
centuries right so just to stick with
the whole thrust of your book what do
you outline if you give us some bullet
points and the whole like a synopsis
short synopsis
yes okay
well so the idea is uh by the time we
are in the 18th century we are at the
height of the Enlightenment and the
enlightenment is of extraordinarily
optimistic intellectual framework that
finally after centuries and Millennia of
ignorance and poverty and Superstition
we human beings have figured out
something fundamental we can observe the
world we can use our powerful minds
rationally to figure out the way the
world works that we need not be bound to
superstitions and authority figures who
came to power in many cases prior to
human beings being rational and having
any glimmer of Science and and
naturalism so we can figure out the
world we're having a strong sense of
what
individuals can do in their own lives if
they become educated literate know
something about mathematics they can
take charge of their own intellectual
lives their own religious lives many of
them can become amazing engineers and
scientists and we can expand extend
rather this not only to males who first
foster for it but uh males of all
traditional economic classes but also to
women and then also to people whom we
have looked down on for all of human
history basically everywhere slavery was
normalized that even slaves should be
freed and can become self-governing
rational individuals so the idea that we
can come to learn the world that we
become be rational that we can extend
the power of individuals to govern their
own lives economically religiously
scientifically technologically we should
be able to live longer solve many of the
disease problems that have plagued human
beings live more comfortably live more
adventurously and more peacefully with
each other all of that is part of the
Enlightenment project and to some
significant extent we still are living
in that Enlightenment that Enlightenment
project but there were many
intellectuals who were unhappy with this
modernist direct and I'm using modernism
in a philosophical historic sense not
not historical senses exactly right at
this point so we're going back to the
last four or five centuries of
intellectual and cultural development
who thought that all of the the old gods
and the old the old traditions were
being destroyed either were being
destroyed too quickly or that uh without
those as an underpinning the modern
world is eventually after a short burst
of apparent creativity and progress
going to regress into some sort of new
barbarism so there was the beginnings of
a counter Enlightenment and a kind of an
anti-modernism that said we needed to go
back to some earlier form and so
traditionalism and some forms of
conservatism started to reassert
themselves in the face of this powerful
Enlightenment movement there were others
though who wanted to say we can't go
back the the cat is out of the bag so to
speak or the genie is out of the bottle
to uh to change metaphors so in some
sense we need to go forward
but at the same time we need to go in a
non-enlightenment direction the
enlightenment has been oversold it's too
optimistic or that it is fatally flawed
in some of its fundamental mental
assumptions about reason
and the capacity of us as rational
agents to come to understand the world
and so there was a new forms of
skepticism that came to prominence in
the latter part of the 1800s and David
Hume is a very famous name here he is
the one who famously according to Kant
whom we'll be primarily talking about
awoke him from his dogmatic Slumber is
his language that he had complacently
bought into some of the Enlightenment
Mythos that would have been that was
being created and then Kant realized
that the skeptical challenge was much
deeper and needed to be faced uh and so
he is going to offer some very
sophisticated and Innovative arguments
about human cognition and its capacity
to know the world that also are going to
undercut the aspirations of the
Enlightenment so the Story begins
according to my book in the late 1700s
with a turn away from Enlightenment
objectivity and Enlightenment optimism
so in the midst of that you have the
reaction to the enlightenment yes that's
right yeah and so uh the the the
technical historical term is a counter
Enlightenment which is itself a broad
movement of people who are opposed to
the enlightenment for various reasons
uh uh and the thesis then is going to
develop that the counter Enlightenment
became increasingly more powerful in its
arguments essentially in its negative
arguments undermining the enlightenment
philosophically on through the 1800s
these things take a long time because
the issues are complicated on into the
1900s until by the time we get to the
middle part of the 20th centuries and
from a very
well-educated well-read set of new
intellectuals they
belief comes to be that the
enlightenment has been entirely
discredited so we have to abandon the
indictment we have to abandon the modern
project of Transforming Our cultural
institutions based on the enlightenment
intellectual framework so the modern
modernity has reached the end of its
course it has a fail it been a failure
we need to become
post-modern and that's where that label
comes from self-consciously so the
postmodernism grows organically directly
out of what you labeled on the counter
Enlightenment that's right and and so
just
really get it visually clear like what
are the main bullet points for counter
Enlightenment well the enlightenment is
uh is abroad it says something about
reality or the nature of reality reality
is the the natural world and the
physical world first and foremost we
might be able to have arguments that
there also is a a religious Dimension or
Transcendent Dimension but if we're
going to get there we're not going to
get there through simple-minded faith or
seeking mystical insights we're going to
have to adopt some sort of rational
scientific method and argue for the
existence of a God so what you find in
the enlightenment epistemologically is
we start with nature and maybe nature is
the entire project and so we have a
physicalistic understanding of the world
or it might be underpinned by some sort
of god-like figure but the kind of
god-like figure that we are able to
argue for and provide evidence for
because we're going to use scientific
method is going to be a more deistic God
a kind of science-friendly God who
perhaps created the universe and and and
formulated the natural laws that the
world operates in accordance with
science cause and effect where the ones
that science is discovering the cause
and effect so maybe you can do that but
if we can't prove it we're not going to
believe in the existing of that kind of
God the enlightenment also is
individualistic it's individuals who
have rationality in the capacity to
observe the world and to use their minds
to become self-governing moral agents as
well as cognizing nature kinds of agents
and the issue of Freedom uh that people
need to think for themselves they need
to be free to experiment in their lives
just as scientists do and to to to to
earn the fruits of their experiments if
they are successful but also to Bear the
costs so nature individual Freedom uh
individual moral dignity and the power
of developing one's rational capacity
all of those themes so the counter
Enlightenment then is going to be an
assault on all of those human beings are
not rational
they are not fundamentally individual
they do not have agency and autonomy and
any sort of dignity or moral capacity
they have is going to be in a
non-individualistic form it's going to
be more collectivized or in some forms
of counter-enlightenment from a
Transcendent uh type of source so what
we then get by the time we work out all
of those things in the uh in the
enlightened the counter Enlightenment is
a skepticism a very thorough skepticism
about the power of human reason
a dissolving of the individual into
impersonal forces sometimes impersonal
Natural Forces some but more often
impersonal Collective social types of
forces so we stop believing in
individuals we stop believing in agency
and this Progressive idea that we can
figure out the world and improve our
lives individually and socially
it gets replaced by a cynicism about
human relationships and an overriding
pessimism about the human condition that
has been created by the middle 20th
century so there's a kind of
indifference that comes in when it comes
to living in the actual physical world
so to speak
it can be an indifference but it will be
a cultivated indifference because almost
all of the the people who become
post-modern uh this starts to become
biographical right about them but they
are born into the world and as moderns
there is almost an inescapable uh sense
of progressivism right that that we are
figuring out more and more about the
world scientifically the technologically
we are
developing tools that enhance the human
condition that we've been very
successful at extending freedoms and
Liberties to all human beings first all
males and then all females and then
members of other religious groups with
religious tolerance and eliminating
slavery in this Century so that progress
is baked into now modern culture and I
think it's it's an Institutional
psychologically institutional part of
modern culture so what happens though I
think is that the the the people who
become skeptical and jaded and cynical
they unlearn all of that as a result of
their education in many cases these are
extraordinarily well-read intelligent
individuals so they will talk themselves
out of or learn themselves out of that
Enlightenment progressivism and it might
then be that as a perhaps as a
psychological self-protection mechanism
you cultivate a kind of stoicism right
you know I I thought the world was going
to be this great beautiful wonderful
place but now all of that has been
exploded and stoicism we know is one way
of dealing with psychologically a world
that is too disappointing for you so but
that is a cultivated indifference and it
is one it is one strategy right because
I I've talked about time and time again
of how and I want to direct this towards
uh as I said classically minded people I
mean I'm a painter myself also but it
would of course also affect the
composers writers philosophers obviously
in the art World absolutely yeah and you
can see it very clearly in the in the
art world and also
um for classical figurative painters
um that the awareness of what is in your
head more or less unconscious cultural
principles will guide what comes out
through your hand and on the canvas
right so and that's why I want to to
devote some time now to Mr Khan because
I have read the critique of judgment and
been very concerned with that what he
writes about the genius and we'll get
all of those things but I've
through
reading about Enron and through Reading
re-reading explaining postmodernism now
has have understood that his ideas of
metaphysics and epistemology are the the
whole fundament upon which everything
else is built yes absolutely so so the
the Aesthetics is sort of straight on
telling what you shall do and what you
shall not do but metaphysics and
epistemologist is the is the basement of
this so first of all what is metaphysics
and epistemology and then what is
particular about consulate yeah well the
the primer point on Kant is going to be
that self-consciously and explicitly
when you read leading philosophers of
Art in the 20th century who are
reflecting on modernism and
post-modernism in the Arts they uh and
here I'm thinking of people like you
know Arthur Danto uh right and others
and the leading art critics people like
Harold Rosenberg Clement Greenberg
explicitly uh who are not only
reflecting on what's going on in the art
world but actively shaping and picking
the winners and the losers in the art
world in the 20th century they are uh
explicitly kantient and all of them are
saying you cannot understand Modern Art
unless you understand Emmanuel Kant
right explicitly so just you know one
anecdote a representative painter here
would be Jackson Pollock at the kind of
the height of modernism in the 20th
century he was discovered by Clement
Greenberg and Greenberg explicitly says
you know this when I saw him uh the
effect on me was volcanic and that's in
a way a Kanti and a piece of language
right there that I immediately recognize
that this is the great painting of our
era and Greenberg is an explicitly in
his uh his art critical Works deeply
philosophical saying that he is
concerned with the artistic Sublime
as the organizing and understandable
concept and that is a purely kantian
concept and he he labels it so now Kant
wrote three big books uh the critique of
pure reason critique of practical reason
critique of judgment and he wrote them
in that order they do form an integrated
almost organic whole one way to think
about this is to say the classical
philosophical project is to concern
yourself with truth goodness and Beauty
all right those are the big three truth
goodness and beauty
uh critique of pure reason is about the
issue of Truth
practical reason about the issue
fundamentally of goodness and then
critique of judgment about beauty
aesthetic Theory and so on and Kant is
reaching fundamentally negative
conclusions about everything up to his
Generations at that point so if we're
going to plug into critique of pure
reason obviously the important concept
there is the concept of reason and this
is the organizing aspirational concept
for certainly for the enlightenment the
claim that reason is is competent that
reason is is efficacious at uh
objectively being able to discern facts
about the world and then as we uh
self-reflectively figure out how our
minds work developing a a more powerful
reasons and more powerful tools of
reason to understand the increasing
complexity of the of the world so what
project is is to say what exactly can
reason know and what can reason not know
are there limits to reason now everybody
at some level will say there are limits
to reason right so our our minds we
cannot know an infinite number of things
at one time we can only attend to a
certain number of objects at a given
time when we are engaging in a process
of reasoning and we're going through
this step and into this step and into
this step there's only so many steps
that we can pay attention to at a given
time so we are not Gods with an infinite
capacity for reasoning reasoning has to
be done carefully it has to be done step
by step we need to write things down uh
we need to double check our work it is
hard work so everyone recognizes that
there are there are limits we get tired
we get emotional we make mistakes and so
on but what Kant is arguing is that at a
fundamental level reason is not able to
know the things that philosophers and
everyone wants to say are the most
important things about the world
that what we call the world most of us
in our common sensical fact is not in
fact the real world the the world of the
senses is a construct by a made by
subconscious or unconscious structural
factors of which we are unaware that
create this world for our minds
attention but it is what he calls the
phenomenal world and it is to be
distinguished from The Real World or the
numeral world and those are pieces of
technology and he wants to argue that in
principle
uh it's not just that it's difficult to
get from our apparent world that we are
observing it is impossible for us to get
from the sensory phenomenal world to
reality as it is and behind all of that
is a whole battery of very sophisticated
skeptical arguments developed by earlier
philosophers and by Kant himself
extending them to say that we are cut
off from reality cut off from knowing
reality reason is a subjective capacity
and it knows only a subjectively created
reality it has no objectivity to it and
no capacity for knowing real reality now
what this then is to say is that if we
are saying well what is the nature of
reality and that is the philosophers and
everybody else's Quest you know is there
really a god for example or a
multiplicity of Gods uh is space and
time real do we live in an eternal world
or did what we call the world come into
existence at a certain point in time is
the universe infinite in space or is it
spatially bounded in some sense uh and
all of these metaphysical questions uh
is nature cause and effect or are there
exceptions to cause and effect uh
elements of chaos really out there in
the world or are there miracles of some
sort so what really is the way the world
works and we want to know reality Kant
is saying as a matter of principle we
cannot know if there is a God
we cannot know actually it says
something different about space and time
we can know that space and time are only
subjective Creations we can't know if
reality out there is really in space and
time we cannot know if reality is
governed by cause and effect or if it's
a matter of Miracles or some sort of
chaos out there we cannot know if we
really have a soul for example that is
Immortal and that when we suffer bodily
death our soul will separate from our
bodies and go to
another reality or some sort of some
other dimension we cannot know if we
have free will
and Free Will is absolutely important
for us to be moral agents we cannot be
moral agents if we don't control the
choices we make so we can't know any of
these things Kant is saying uh about
reality we are deeply skeptical
so this is where I understood
the immense importance of that if of
that four your whole outlook on life and
Enron has this idea of a sense of Life
reflected in a painting or in in
literature and if that is your sense of
life
then it's a self-defeating profit
process I'm just trying to tie it in and
see how does this with this what you're
saying now affect a classically minded
painter
you cannot know reality so why I don't
know if the book is there or not and I'm
not you you lose the conflict with the
physical reality that you use as
something yeah to imitate right and if
there's no if there's a question of free
will or or interconnectedness then
that will affect the type of motifs that
you paint yes uh now it might be you
know you and Kant is willing to say you
know I'm looking at this book right
that's sitting on the table and I'm
looking at you I can know that there is
this book and I know that you are there
and that I am looking at that uh uh but
if you are an artist and you're a
serious artist you aren't doing trivial
things so if all you want to do is just
you know do pictures of the book sitting
on the table
uh if you though come to believe that
the book on the table is just a
phenomenal construct in my mind
that it loses its importance yeah it
loses its significance so there there
comes in a sort of a indifference to
what you're looking at and that just
jumping is slightly forward a little bit
in the critical judgment where his big
idea is the aesthetical indifference you
don't okay so to illustrate the the
painter he would not endorse would be
Rubens with the fat women and the
essential fat women and the strong men
right that's too appealing to the senses
and then then of course that's trusting
the census and you get all of those
philosophical problems that you don't
have if you just see a beautiful fat
woman and you want the painter right
so yeah so so you know that then the ESU
is what is the importance of the sensory
world
and uh you know going back to the Greek
concept of Aesthetics right which is you
know a sensory uh engagement yeah yeah
then suddenly what we are saying is the
world of the senses is not real in a
fundamental sense it's also not
objective in a fundamental sense and it
becomes less important in a fundamental
sense so that
reminds me of something it seems like
that that what Kant is doing is taking
for example Aesthetics and he takes it
and twists it to the opposite of what it
actually originally was so he takes the
Aesthetics out of art is one way of
putting it yeah that's a bigger bigger
discussion too because if you're talking
about the art and you're talking about
fine art as a system that came the data
center that that he helped construct is
the the the grandfather of the whole
thing uh but he he I mean okay this so
let's just jump back and forth in the
critique of judgment he does say that
it's only when you don't know what
you're doing that you're creating art ah
yes explicitly saying that that's wrong
so if he should use the old art term as
a knowledge he would say you only know
things when you don't know things yeah
right and that that kind of verbal play
is uh is worth exploring and it does
come out of this tradition as well but
another way to put this is to say that
obviously in art history there has been
a long tradition of saying of this
satisfaction with the sensory world with
the perceptual world with the physical
world the sense that there's a a higher
world that is non-sensory non-physical
and in some sense what the artist needs
to do or the philosopher needs to do is
turn off their senses in some cases turn
off their minds disengage from their
physical body and try to disengage from
the entire physical world in order to
tap into or or be revealed to by this
non-sensory non-physical higher world so
this that metaphysical understanding of
art has also led to a devaluation of the
physical what Conti in a way is doing is
taking that tradition but not putting it
in a on a metaphysical footing first and
foremost he's approaching it through
issues of cognition and through issues
of epistemology to use the philosophical
one right which is which is to say that
what we call the object of knowledge is
created by our cognitive faculties and
so what we have then is a subjectively
created world that we take to be reality
and beyond that is an unknowable numeral
realm or an unknowable real reality so
this is a connection with the whole
postmodern I did too that there's a
constructed reality subjectively
constructed reality right yeah so yeah
yeah down the road is going to come out
in that form as well right
so also then if we wanted to come back
just on the sensory issues so if you
want to say it's important for me say as
a classically trained artist or as a
representational artist to look very
carefully at the world and to become a
very good Observer and to use my senses
very well and then also to start using
the tools of science measurement and
perspective and understanding geometry
on the assumption that all of that is
revealing
real features relating empirically to
the physical world right yeah so there's
an integration of the rational with the
empirical right so I want it sensorially
and rationally to be correct and so I'm
going to be using all of the tools and
Technologies of science uh so I'm
developing myself as a good Observer as
a good mathematician and I'm going to
learn about the chemistries of paint and
all of the Sciences so
um there's a certain objective things
you can learn so I'm doing all of this
classically and rationally and it's all
integrated into a whole well what can't
the continent move then comes along is
to say is that well all of that
is subjective
well that's right so space is uh an
inbuilt category of your subconscious
mind and when whatever comes in from
external reality goes through our senses
gets filtered and it gets constructed
into a spatial reality and the same
thing for time and things in cause and
effect relations those are also
subjective categories that are added to
it so all of this rational concern with
getting the spatial proportions right in
the temporal portions right is again
devalued you are only becoming very good
at studying this subjective phenomenal
world but what's reality what's really
out there yeah you're missing all of
that so it Taps into in some way
it Taps into to the spiritual religious
surround
it's a it's a it is a happy coincidence
if you start from a traditional
religious perspective right
um that kantian skeptical conclusions
will give you a shot in the arm they
will give you a revitality and Kant is
explicit about this in critique of pure
reason in his family there's a famous
phrase where he says I am denying
knowledge of reality and our reason is
not going to get us knowledge of reality
in order to make room for Faith so so
there is a kind of religious Heritage
that he wants to make space for and this
is part of counter Enlightenment because
the enlightenment project is corrosive
and had been corrosive to a traditional
religious worldview the enlightenment
projects as we start by observing the
world and we don't observe gods
and we do science and we rationally try
to figure out the world and maybe we do
arguments to more theoretical constructs
and so forth but if those arguments get
exploded and defeated then we're not
going to believe in those theoretical
constructs so it becomes from the
enlightenment perspective if you are
going to believe in God it can't be a
faith move it can't be just a tradition
move you have to show the evidence show
the arguments for the existence of God
and so a big part of the Enlightenment
was this century-long very intense
engagement at a highly sophisticated
level with all of the arguments for and
against the existence of God and one of
the things that Congress exclude
concluding explicitly is that all of the
arguments for the existence of God fail
because on their own terms and he's
adding this philosophically heavy duty
conclusion they have to fail
because if we're going to try to argue
we are using reason about what's really
ultimately out there in reality and he
philosophically is cutting all of that
off we cannot know if there is a God out
there so if we are rational we cannot
believe in the existence of God but that
leaves open the door as he said if we
are going to believe in God an immortal
soul that we have a god-given say free
will to become morally responsible
agency that has to be at a deep level a
matter of Faith right and reason cannot
attack that Faith because reason is
limited only to its subjective
constitutional world so that is going to
open the door to a new kind of or a
resurgent kind of religiosity in the
modern world so again from a from a
Pinterest perspective if I understand it
correctly Kant is saying that we can we
cannot know anything about whatever is
metaphysical correct and we cannot know
anything about what is physical what we
can do is redefine knowledge right so
what we can then say is we do have this
perceptual world
that we have to understand it
philosophically as a subjective
construct but it's not it's not saying
that we're literally constructing
everything in our heads I mean it's like
in the Devils by Dostoevsky you have
that what's his name who commits suicide
to eradicate the world yeah but that
Khan is not in that position he's not in
that way we call that solipsism and
that's that's a later possibility and
many philosophers in the post-continent
tradition are grappling with how to
escape solipsism but he is saying that
we literally are constructing phenomenal
reality but it's not your conscious mind
that is doing it all happens at a
subconscious level and we can redefine
we can use the concept of knowledge and
the concept of Truth and objectivity but
at all philosophically has to be nested
that's right quotation marks that's
right it has to be nested with an
understanding that ultimately we are in
a subjective reality okay so this is
this is when we stop thinking about it
we start feeling about it well nope not
for con that's going to be in the next
Generation
yeah he is very much anti-feeling right
about about this okay but your your hand
gesture a moment ago was exactly right
again some centuries uh Generations
later as this broad kantian movement
works out through a number of variations
we start finding thinkers who will say
knowledge and we put it in quotation
marks or truth in quotation marks and
that's and you see very intelligent when
you say knowledge that's right well
that's to indicate a skeptical uh
distancing from from that point and that
is post content and that's interesting
too then so
okay so there are a couple of things
here how this manifests in in painting
you have uh so so there are several
examples I can I can mention one thing
is you have Edward Monk
who that's also quite famous quote it
talks about when it becomes so-called
modern modern
um he he says he sort of writes about
the critics and he says that they cannot
understand that to me the sky is green
and that is more or less as I understand
it a direct consequence of the
epistemology then of Imam alkant right
because there's a subjectivism there it
appears so to me yes I think there's a
couple of moves that have to happen
first so okay monk is a century after
Kant right so his his turn is I think in
the 1890s
right and Kant is doing this writing a
critique of pure reason in 1781 the
first edition uh Second Edition 87
critique of judgment is a a couple of
years later 1790 yeah uh so partly
though Kant had want to to argue for a
kind of universality so he says yes it
is a subjective creation
but all human beings have the same
subjective Constitution so there's
there's some kind of objectivity
quotation marks all the time now
so objectivity is not quite the right
word here but he wants to say it's
Universal so it is not objective
because objective is to say there is an
object independent of me that is what it
is and I the subject I'm coming to know
it so what Kant is saying no no it is
subjective but your subjectivity and
mine and everyone else's is the same we
all have the same because it has that
term subjective objectivity doesn't it
well uh technically speaking that's
that's playing with uh with oxymorons uh
if you want to say it is a property that
holds for the whole category or for the
whole class the right term is universal
okay right so it is subjective
universalism that Kant is arguing for
and so then he wants to say we can be
inter-subjective notice we're doing this
again yes that's right
so that's right so it's not that I'm in
my own subjectivity and you are entirely
in your own subjectivity because we have
the same Universal constituting factors
we can be inter-subjective or there's a
universal subjectivity but what happens
though in the next Generations though is
to say well how does Kant know that
how does he know that your subconscious
constituting factors are doing the same
thing that my unconscious constituting
factors are I can't jump outside of my
subjectivity and into your subjectivity
or into your unconscious subjectivity to
see what's really going on there that is
an assumption that Kant is making and
that assumption can be challenged and a
certain number of the philosophers in
the next generation will start to
challenge that precisely now we don't
want to talk about Hegel and Marx and so
forth but they are exactly a Nietzsche
in the next generation of developments
in German philosophy all of whom
challenge that assumption in various
ways so there's a relative advisation
getting even more subjectivist or or
getting subjectivists well they are
already inside the subjectivity but now
they are abandoning the universality for
a kind and the contrast to Universal is
relative right so it's the next part of
the the rocket at least the last part
and then it continues that's right so we
then say well there are different
subjectivities out there ah and those
subjectivities cannot be translated
right across so maybe different economic
classes have different subjectivities
and that's the Marxist version maybe the
constituting factors evolve across
generations and that's a more hegelian
evolutionary kind of move
uh and so it can also though devolve to
the individual level maybe my
subjectivity and your subjectivity are
fundamentally different that we
literally create and see the world
differently and that I think is closer
to Monk
right and then that's where I see that
so if you zoom out a little bit look at
the current situation we're not going to
get into all aspects of of wokeness but
it seems to me that the content
epistemology metaphysics and also the
later development through Hegel and
Etc
they
really had have had a
free playground within what we call Art
because we've gotten used to that this
is my understanding of reality and
that's different from your understanding
reality we gotten used to that through
actual visual images so we learned that
there are different subjectivities for
each one because as Concepts in the
Judgment we'll we'll get to quite soon
there is that originality you have to
express it's it's it's my personal view
of it and then what happens now is that
so the principles of art or the the the
activities within art the way of
thinking within art is just let loose on
the rest of society right absolutely
yeah so those those two things are are
both important the subjectivity right
which comes from the relativity is added
by the later position because people are
arguing that con can't maintain the
universality right so we're going to
claim that on con proper that part yes
okay uh now but I want to say though if
we talk about classically minded
painters what the kantian move means
first and foremost for classical art is
that the entire representationalist
project is suspect at best or to be
abandoned if you are doing any sort of
representational art you are now in the
kantian universe by definition not a
serious artist
you are only concerned with how things
look and how things can be rationally
reproduced in various ways and that is
all just the phenomenal world that is
the less important world and any
self-regarding artist
who says I am about serious stuff uh
has to be interested in what's reality
real so figurative art more broadly
representational art are relegated to a
lower order of Art and then as that
tradition works out they become non-art
they just become trivial right and the
pejorative is kitsch right by the time
we get to a century later and that's
what uh
just recommending this book can't art
and art history by Mark cheating he
talks about how Khan has influenced the
the modern idea of art not only through
his Aesthetics but through his General
philosophy as well and clearly saying
that when Greenberg attacks kitch
he just he Greenberg's kitchen is Khan's
barbarism but can't talks about being
emotionally gripped and liking a picture
because of that yeah and it's about very
pleasingness yeah sensuality being
emotionally gripped all those things
that that interfere with a pure
objective judgment right so yeah so so
give us the bullet points then on the
critique of judgment like what is main
points that uh underbuild what do you
decide well yeah broadly uh speaking
then the con two main Concepts uh in
this in in artists and Aesthetics are
Beauty and the sublime and they
represent the highest achievement in
their respective domains so significant
amount of critique of judgment is
analyzing the concept of beauty and
examples of beauty so all of the
standard examples are going to be
naturalistic physicalistic uh sensually
uh available items so we can talk about
a beautiful landscape or a beautiful
woman or a beautiful Seascape or
whatever a beautiful arrangement of
flowers on a on a lovely old wooden
table and uh so Beauty can be applied to
all of those Concepts and the issues of
sensory appeal and getting the
proportions and perspectives correct and
so forth in a way that's harmoniously
integrated and pleasing to our cognitive
faculties at that level our senses and
our and our our reason we like looking
at these things we like reflecting on
these things we like admiring the skill
and the craftsmanship of the artist who
made all of these things so he has an
analysis of of beauty that is kind of
sophisticated but in one sense
traditional
so the big move though in critique of
judgment is when they says we take all
of that and in fact we put it in a box
all of that is only about the phenomenal
world
and it is its sensory appeal and its
pers and its rational appeal but what we
have learned then from the earlier
critique critique of pure reason is all
of that is subjective
right and now lesser
and so what we are interested in if we
are serious artists and he wants to say
some serious artists have had this
intimations of this is as we would be as
a serious philosopher as a serious
artist well what really is important
what really is real and that you're not
concerned with superficial
things that are merely pretty or things
that are merely an appeal to your senses
or merely appealing to your reason now
because your reason has to be seen as
subject to these severe limitations
so I want to get the truth I want to get
reality I want to get to the most
important things I want to get to the
sublime
now there's a tradition of course of the
concept of the sublime which uh to some
extent has been captured in art but
there's a broader sense of the sublime
as the highest
psychological experience one can have as
a human being right something might be
pretty or pleasing something might be
beautiful and that's a greater
compliment but then to say that is just
Sublime is the highest experience a
human being or it can can have so uh
sometimes in intellectual historian
history so mathematicians for example
have been working on some
extraordinarily difficult problem
but they succeed they will say you know
this solution is Sublime right and it's
not just you know a merely pretty thing
but there's an elegance and they know
that they have unlocked this some sort
of secret of the universe and they are
experiencing that highest or those of us
when we are uh falling in love and fully
captured by the other person we have
fallen in love and all of our being
is elevated and I feel like I'm being
the best person I can be and sharing
that so deeply and intimately all of the
important things with this other person
that love as Sublime experience and then
in Aesthetics the experience of uh
nature or certain capturings right of
nature right or some aspect of reality
that is capable of elevating us to that
kind of experience or when music at its
best can grip us and take us over
entirely and make us feel that every
fiber of our being is alive and uh
energized and that I am really connected
with something deep in the nature of the
universe that Sublime experience in
music so there has been a tradition in
art of trying to figure out what is
going on in the sublime and how can we
understand it philosophically and uh and
and artistically so in critique of
judgment Kant makes a significant
transition from his concerns with beauty
to concerns with the sublime and what he
wants to argue is that this maps on to
the early or metaphysical and
epistemological divide that had been
developed in critique of pure reason so
to put it shortly and this is finally
getting to a bullet point
but D is only about the phenomenal
Sublime concerns itself with the numinal
or the beauty at most is only about this
subjectively created reality Sublime is
giving us intimations or possible access
to real reality
so we are left in the at the end of the
first critique with the idea that yes we
have this physical world that's
available to the senses and to our
reason and we can do our science and
talk with each other and and so forth
but the big metaphysical questions is
there really a god do we have free do we
have free will is our soul Immortal we
cannot know the answer to those but
nonetheless those are burningly
important questions to us and Kant does
want to it spends a great deal of time
figuring out ways in which we can
operate on the assumption that God
exists that we have an immortal soul
that Free Will exists and so on but at
best he wants to say those are just
regulative ideas I can't prove that they
are true or that they are real but they
are going to govern govern our existence
if we are uh uh if we are good we are
good beings but still
I want something more I want to have
access to real reality I want to know
and feel uh and they also say that all
humans have this you know this the sense
of being in the presence of God
the sense of being part of the infinite
I can't know it but somehow we can have
intimations of it or access to it and
what he is suggesting then is that the
experience of the sublime
is one possible vehicle for doing so
and that's going to open up a huge
amount of territory for post-contian art
Theory so yeah so he delegates that
through also the
somehow sort of shamanic role to the
autism
yes that's right and so one of the
feeder threads for then Romanticism as a
broad philosophical movement I'm going
to say one of the the feeder threads is
explicitly coming out of kantianism and
the the critique of judgment and this
concept of the sublime and they are
bullet point version is going to be to
say that we cannot get to Ultimate
Reality by our senses it's not
observable we can't get there now by
Reason by thinking and arguing our way
to it but maybe there is something
special and unique about
artistic and aesthetic experience right
so we feel about it we don't think about
it yeah that's right and so if we are
the right kind of artistic I don't want
to use the word sensibility or I'll put
it in quotation marks again we're just
cheating all the time here with these
quotation marks that if I am the right
kind of aesthetic person and I Channel
my aesthetic
something other so we find this in
shelling we find this in some of the
romantics then through aesthetic
experience I can either go into
Ultimate Reality or at least I can open
up a space in my psyche for
communications from it
the other big dishes let me say one more
bullet point named schopenhauer wants to
say it's explicitly not painting not
sculpture because those are too tied to
the sensual to tied to the rational
they're not going to get you there but
music what she wants to say is kind of
you can't look at music and you can't uh
reason about music too much instead
music just seems to right take over
another part of our soul it shuts down
our rational Minds it shuts down our
sensory Minds we just Retreat into the
music and that music is a kind of
vehicle for us to get out of the
phenomenal world and into the Ultimate
Reality
yeah so so there are okay there's a
strains from or point in the
epistemology and metaphysics that come
together in the critique of judgment so
when he's anti
um well at least in the the tradition
from him being anti-realists that makes
it so that we cannot trust any kind of
craft because we're trusting we're
trying to trust our senses we're trying
to trust some objective rules and that
doesn't work because you can never get
to the physical reality right Ultimate
Reality yeah yeah
so
um and also there's um there's a
anti-sensuality to it too because he's
saying and speaking of schopenhauer and
there's a funny uh passage in in the
critical judgment where he he uh
um sets up the different Arch according
to value
and I think isn't it so that he places
um poetry on the top because and this is
my my understanding of it because
letters are just
abstract science they are not if you
write Apple it's not a it's not an
imitation of an apple it's just abstract
science giving you the idea of an apple
in your head yeah so that's would be
sort of a perfect illustration of the
content I did if you try to paint an
apple it's it's naive but if you just
write Apple then you create Apple in
your head then that's that's a purely
abstract rationalism and that's a very
cunning thing that Khan does I mean he
gives uh
how difficult or bad he writes he is
very skilled at giving compliments
because it's saying then that that
um you are the one who creates Beauty
right yeah it says to the audience and
then it says to the genius the artist
you are the one who decides what is
right or wrong for you in terms of what
you create right yeah so to to make one
other example but jumping ahead if you
think of mcgree right and the pipe yeah
or you're saying this is not a pipe yeah
he's exactly playing with this issue of
the object the perception of the object
and the verbalization of the object and
then that aesthetical indifference comes
in yes which is a key component in the
critique of judgment yes and that that
is the the uh okay so there's
he's saying then that that uh one of his
major bullet points is that the genius
or art is the opposite of craft because
craft is something you do just to make
money so here's the the Protestant
ethics too he has an anti-commercial
yeah yeah absolutely absolutely uh so
that the artists will will accept that
they shall suffer and not get paid
that's a positive view
um yes so so
he he undercuts all the possibilities
you have to show your skills and to
actually capture physical reality so he
continues the idea presented in the two
first critiques in the idea of the
genius who then you take away his
ability to base himself on craft to take
away his ability to trust his senses and
you say don't be essential don't be
sentimental in any kind of way don't be
intense don't be sensual don't be
emotional don't be rational right
there's the other big part to be added
so there's not much left that's right so
so necessarily the real artist the
artistic genius is going to be
irrational yeah and that comes out in
his understanding of the genius right
and that's what I'm thinking so if you
jump ahead or jump forward
um
and I I believe this to be a I don't
mean it polemically I I but I I do think
it really comes from the content way of
thinking
so there's a specific example in Austria
there was this uh this uh mass murderer
called the yakunta Vega he was
imprisoned he had killed and raped a lot
of women and then in in prison he
started writing poetry
and suddenly the intellectual Elite the
artist got interested in him and they
argued that he should be let free and at
a certain point he was and of course he
raped and killed more women before it
was caught and I'm thinking that is a
perfect illustration of the genius who
has no boundaries who has has no rules
to follow who just is just feels what he
shall do right I mean like in the
extreme case that is the that is the
consequence of the whole liberated
genius who is not bound by any kind of
physical restraints or physical rules or
moral rules yes now the concept of
feeling is tricky there so again we
would have to say Kant would not
celebrate the feeling root he would
celebrate the anti-rational route but in
his personal philosophy he is still very
much anti-feeling so it's going to be a
post-contin maneuver which is then to
say well
if we are interested in the sublime
uh how are we going to get there and
Kant has said we're not getting there by
our senses we're not getting there by
Craft we're not getting there by reason
it has to be some anti-rational or
non-rational capacity but what that
capacity is there are a number of
candidates that post content thinkers
will follow some might argue that it is
through uh religious feeling or through
music or through some sort of revelatory
faith that comes from the other side and
so those are all explicitly
anti-rational post-kantian moves but uh
uh there will be post contents who will
say look Kant was just a prig to use
that English word yeah no he was a prig
and it is more just you know it's very
upstanding uptight
anti-feeling you just have to follow
these strict moral rules without
thinking about consequences and so on
but that was just a peculiarity of con
and we have to perhaps
resuscitate the idea that through
feeling that we have another cognitive
capacity that feelings are not just you
know subjective and not to be trusted
babies feelings are the vehicle through
which we are ultimately going to access
the nominal world or have it revealed to
us so there's a rehabilitation after con
of subjective feeling as one possible
vehicle so so you could call this post
content genius yes because he was he was
then again quote unquote Sublime in that
he was fully into his emotions just
expressing himself and now having no
restraints at all so the again jumping
ahead of century expressionism is going
to be the consequence of that strain of
post-contianism the idea there we don't
really observe the world like the
impression is still exactly we don't
think too much about it instead we try
to shut down our minds shut down our
senses just feel about it that's right
we're just subjectively feeling of
whatever comes out that's my art okay so
yes absolutely that is going to be one
possibility of of development and then
the so so more intellectual uh idea
would be than the whole argument which
is
uh what are those art cliches that
cubism shows you the whole reality from
different perspectives at once so it's
more true somehow yeah right yes yeah
that's yeah that's the slogan there yeah
yeah right but that you could say that
you could attribute that directly to
cons I when I say so I would not I would
say there's another right to development
that goes on there
um
uh because one standard interpretation
of cubism is to say that we have a
cognitive limitation with respect to our
senses that we only see things from a
particular point of view in a moment of
time and that what we are trying to this
is the like the good news cover story
version of cubism is to be more
scientific what is said about that
that's right and then uh say that the
the truth is that the object is
multi-dimensional and persists across
time and so there are multiple
perspectives and so to be true to our we
need to find a way to capture the
Persistence of the object and the only
way to do that is to break the object up
and put the different perspectives on
that and just by coincidence that goes
together with a complete destruction of
the idea of craft or essential Central
representation yes that's right so
that's why I want to say that's that's
partly a a cover story now there's
there's an interesting issue about how
you try to integrate a third dimension
in painting and that's you know that's
an interesting project how do you try to
integrate changes across time in
painting because painting is timeless
and and two-dimensional so uh the darker
version then is to say what we want to
do is just show the limitations of
painting with cubism like the painting
really is just superficial and it's only
capturing right and elements that we're
going to try to break up the canvas we
should also break up your psychology as
you're trying to understand the campus
and we're not interested in any sort of
harmonious integration the cubists are
always fractured and a little bit
tortured so there is other stuff that's
going so so the the the right
consequence from contest that you
you cannot capture reality because you
don't you cannot trust your senses and
you can't cannot understand reality
because of our limited reason right yes
so it's so that's the destructive that's
right now where you go from there
there's going to be 10 different options
once you say we're not going to be
sensory one and we're not going to be
rational what follows from that yeah
well lots of weirdness is possible yeah
because yeah and what this does is
there's so many things that comes out of
this I mean one other thing that that
count has as a major bullet point of
course is the originality
so what he does then is also to
what's the word sever your ties as again
I'm talking as a painter sever your
talks if you take can't literally or
today many people just think like that
or feel like that unconsciously a
consequence of that is that oh
I cannot look at them but oh I cannot
look at Northern I mean how many times
from people who don't know even know how
to spell the word philosophy have I
heard well when are you going to to
liberate yourself from nurdrum and
become yourself they haven't they don't
know they can't ever lived yeah and they
are spitting images of that one idea so
for a a painter to unconsciously like
buy osmosis having acquired those ideas
yes is extremely destructive for your
development as a painter because every
time you see someone in the past who's
your soul mate so to speak yeah yeah oh
no no I must never I mustn't touch it
yeah there's a couple of ways of getting
there I mean the explicit remarks Kant
makes about originality and severing it
from from tradition uh so there there's
an idea of continuity and an idea of
progress that people are figuring things
out uh and you can learn from those and
then add your own individuality but in a
in a cumulative cumulative Direction
so that is also a part of the
Enlightenment project which is to see
Art and Science as brothers or sisters
in arms so to speak so no scientist is
going to say I just ignore everything
that has gone on the scientific
tradition and I'm just going to figure
out something brand new and original
rather it is meant to be a cumulative
project of standing on the shoulders of
the Giants who went who went before view
but there's another uh
line that's worth mentioning here right
now so that's about time
so if you are in any sense a
traditionalist or learning from those
who went before you're putting yourself
on a time line and uh and seeing
yourself as a continuance of that
timeline but then philosophically Cod
what does he say about time
is not an objective feature of the world
time is a subjective
additional construct
so again if we want to get outside of
the merely phenomenal world and outside
of the merely sensual world we have to
get out of time and so the only way you
can be out of time is by breaking with
all tradition yeah
and so you just whatever was going to
happen and it's got it has to be
something completely shocking to the
sensibilities of people who are still
stuck in the physical phenomenal world
and it has to be completely new and that
is going to be the marker that you are
actually an artist right
and that that's where I still think you
can talk I can't direct it to this
yeah because he does something did
something that is so
apart from what you would even think of
doing yeah I don't know that particular
example so I would need to talk about
research it a little bit
there's some later developments that
it's you know explicitly a rapist and a
criminal whom certain segments of the
art community want to rehabilitate and
use so I think there's a at least a
cultural perhaps a political agenda that
needs to be added to that well yeah you
could say that but it's um
yeah
so in the critique of judgment
there's the anti-sensuality
anti-rationality that you shouldn't
because you shouldn't learn craft
because then you're hindering your own
inner voice and then there's a subject
subjectivity of the genius right yeah
and
what I'm thinking about that is the
fourth or it's connected with these
settings are interconnected
um another thing that that is a highly
destructive idea that comes from it is
that okay when you have this idea of the
statical indifference that things are
subjective you also distancing yourself
if you buy into that from a more
archetypal or or Eternal perspective
because there's not no such thing as
something that is archetypal or if it is
you shouldn't try to capture it in a
central manner right yeah so you are
then also
severing yourself from that's the irony
of it I mean at the same time as it says
to deny knowledge for it to make room
for Faith he is also through the
critical judgment
denying that you should have contact
with with the sense of being a part of
something bigger as people typically say
of an eternal context to it
um yes that's right
um so yeah the the concept of time their
Eternal is still a little bit tricky
because in some sense we have to say I
could type A then yeah in some sort of
universality now there is another road
that we can explore uh here one is to
say uh for the Post contents Kant has
said there's Ultimate Reality or numeral
reality out there and in principle we
cannot know it through reason or through
our senses
um uh so that then opens the door to
those who want to say well I still want
to get there to come to know Ultimate
Reality and I will explore various
non-rational ways of doing so the other
way though as another postcardian root
is an estate bakant has also said that
what we call our subjective phenomenal
reality is a result of unconscious
subjective forces that are kind of
objective and Universal and built into
the human
so what I need to do my project is not
so much to get out there but as to get
deeper into my subjectivity and so there
becomes an inward turn to try to figure
out what are these Universal unconscious
structures but you find them from
yourself that's the genius or you'll
have to start with your phenomenal world
and somehow get back there and Kant
tries to do a certain amount of analytic
and reduction to to get there as well
but again to jump a century later to
thinkers like Sigmund Freud who has then
interested in to say well obviously the
conscious mind is just superficial and
not really dealing with reality and it's
a certain amount of ego construct the
real action is in the unconscious and so
the exploration is to try to figure out
what's going on in the unconscious so
I'm totally uninterested in the
perceptual world I'm totally
uninterested in any sort of Ultimate
Reality with gods or Transcendent being
or the scientific project to figure out
what the ultimate unifying forces of the
universe are I am totally interested in
the unconscious and or the Deep
subconscious or deep subjectivity and so
that entire inward turn is also another
movement that comes out not only in
Psychology but it comes out in
literature and the Arts more broadly
and you you see it visually in modern
art yeah and I think that's that's a yet
another part of the tragedy if you as a
classical painter think like that that
you are limiting yourself to what is
going on in your private person then you
lose out on what makes it work classical
which is to go out and say see okay what
is
universally human
and so then you could say okay there are
a lot of examples in within modernism of
of sort of more spiritual painters who
have an idea of reaching something
Universal which is which could be
understood this archetypal but then
from the critique of judgment you are
banned from from uh capturing that in a
mimetic form yes irregnizable form there
is a passage I just need to interrupt on
this
section 29 I'm not sure a critique of
judgment we can look it up where Kant
says the most Sublime Passage in the
Jewish scriptures and so there's the
word sublime in the Jewish scriptures is
Thou shalt make no graven images he says
that he says that explicitly
right so what he's then saying and we
know from Jewish tradition and now in
Islamic tradition exactly on scriptural
Authority is the visual representational
arts are forbidden yeah and what God
then is doing is reaching that same
conclusion but without basing it on
scripture reaching it through
philosophical sophistication so it's
very interesting then that modernist
painters and modernist sculptors and
people in the modernist movement
who will obviously think of themselves
as not just old scripture Thumpers and
True Believers are reaching the exact
same place so yeah so that sort of uh
scriptural fundamentalism and modernism
uh which seemed like cultural opposites
both of them are sharing fundamentally
an attack on any sort of
representationalism figuratism and
naturalism in the Arts the filthy lowly
body Yeah well yeah exactly yeah so I
know this absolutely arguments to be
made that that the
forbidding images is a misunderstanding
of that idea
but what you're saying is that Kant is
taking that literally to mean that you
shall not create a Graven image well the
the traditional idea is there's a
metaphysical dualism right so you know
the gods or God is purely spiritual
captured physically yeah so it can't be
captured physically just as a
metaphysical point but also it's a
sacrilege to try to do so because the
higher world is better and this world is
lower and vulgar so you're trying to
bring something that is higher down to
something lower and that is a bad thing
bad thing to do
um so you know whether that's a
misinterpretation or not of course
that's an interesting issue but he takes
it to mean that yeah absolutely and you
know the tradition you know the fact
that there is not a tradition of of
Visual Arts in Judaism and Islam means
that that is the mainstream
interpretation of of of of it so Kant is
saying that they are capturing something
correct but he wants to give a
non-religious justification for that
capturing
and I'm thinking also so even though you
you don't get caught by that that part
of it but you're a classical painter and
you have this idea or these unconscious
content ideas in your head and I know
there are many classical painters who
Focus very much on beauty
when you have Roger scrutin writing
about beauty of course
and I think that is also a a dead end
because what happens is that if you
contradict that with the Greek idea
that they didn't have in the the 18th
century understanding a term of
Aesthetics meaning just disinterested
contemplation it was a matter of getting
it as so alive as possible this idea is
about the the Aphrodite figure being
sort of defiled by this young man this
was wet stain on her thigh the next
morning because it was so vivid right
which is complete the opposite of the
aesthetical indifference where you judge
the object that was compiled and it's
it's something that doesn't relate to
your sensuality in any way so if a
classical painter then has this idea of
of uh beauty that immediately comes in
some sort of a distance to it it's just
making then you get that idea of making
just pretty paintings very easily and
the whole idea of creating an emotional
drama A baroque drama gets totally
sidestepped because that is that is fake
that is manipulative that is tricking
the audience that the sketch as it was
called
um so you have
the origin of working classically in
first place to create this great dramas
which is at least 50 of the the the
value of classical work that is then
just completely taken out the Eternal
aspect is completely taken out and it
just becomes ironically a figurative
illustration of Khan's ideas
because because I think that that's
that's an interesting thing we're not
talking really about abstract versus
figurative because there's a lot of
accepted figurative art but it has that
the expression totally aesthetical
indifferent expression which can satisfy
his uh aesthetic philosophy yeah
no yeah that's a that's a rich comment
uh so if you think of the classical
Traditions up to 18th century they're
working toward art that is
extraordinarily robust so it has a
sensory appeal or a physical appeal but
it also appeals to our minds we like to
look at it and analyze in various ways
or we like to think about the abstract
themes uh and what they what they mean
for broader human concepts of dignity
and morality and uh you know what it
means to be a human being and they're
also emotionally engaging so the idea
here is that the human being as this
complex
we have this uh thing that we you know
we're recently calling art that is able
to uh
interest and excite us sensually
integrate excite us rationally and
emotionally and in an integrated way all
at the right moment so it's like you are
fully uh being engaged with and pressed
by this thing that we call the the
artistic experience
so uh one way then of reading Kant then
is to say that he is explicitly
recognizing that art is on this
trajectory of it's about the sensory
it's about the rational it's about the
emotional at their highest level and all
of them integrated and his project is to
disintegrate all of them so twists it in
the completely opposite direction again
yeah but as far as and this is to use a
20th century term he starts with a
deconstruction so first you know it's
reason versus emotions not reason
integrated with the emotions it's reason
versus the senses right rather than
reason working with the senses and it's
the senses versus emotions rather than
them working with each other so we break
them all into so it's a divide and
conquer strategy and then we say well
that's merely sensual that's merely
rational and then for other reasons
exactly and it's really irrational so
it's first a disintegration and then a
destruction of each of those elements so
that you get if you accept the premises
you get two options
either
sort of very simply put either abstract
art or figurative but yes without so
that the abstract art and becomes like
pure spirituality and the figurative
painters think we're going to make
really good images it's going to be
really you know exactly how it is and
they forget the whole
Eternal context the metaphysical content
of it that's right so uh yeah you can
say all right well if it's all fractured
then I'm only interested in the the the
perceptual that's right and there's no
deeper meaning sorry and it's not meant
to be emotionally engaging there are
other figures then who will say well I'm
not interested in the sensual or the
rational I'm just purely all about
emotionalist expression and so on there
are of course others who then will say
I'm not interested so much in the
sensual or the emotional I am interested
in the hyper rational so I'm looking for
perhaps the underlying structures that
can be mathematically expressed
so here
um trying to think of some examples so
um you know if if we want to then say
you know it's just about lines
but I'm just interested in very cool
minimal sensory appeal presentations of
lines in various geometric forms and
that's all my heart is about now that's
a kind of reduction yeah yeah that is
going to come out or I'm only interested
in
basic colors and I'm kind of making a
rational right point about it or maybe
I'm even being rationalist about uh
about the senses rather than seeing by
my sensory experience of the world and
kind of van Gogh fashion where it's you
know very vitalistic and movement and
dramatic and and appealing to my emotion
instead I just take a scene and I just
reduce it to a number of dots right in
in soy rot fashion where you know it's
just this color and it's kind of
scientifically placed next to this color
next to that color and so on and it's
emotionally very cool so that's
interesting so you get tricked into
separating things that were integrated
before because that you see that in
that comes it's a gradual transition but
it comes in the 19th century where you
start getting a
of course you had it to some degree
before too but it becomes an explicit
point of being a Portrait Painter or a
landscape painter or a still life
painter all these things that a skilled
Master would integrate into one whole
image it could be a universal painter
anymore right that's right so you are
tricked into
believing that just being a Portrait
Painter just being this or that is the
way to go right right so so again you
lose out of this the human drama the
central which with a richer image that
encompasses all aspects of human life
yeah that's right yeah
wow okay so
done with Kant
okay
how do we build up something positive
from here
like if you talk because we're talking
about the general basic ideas uh is it
there's a teal and epistemology and
metaphysics or like what would you set
up as a as a as an alternative well yeah
broadly speaking Yeah I am Aristotelian
in my in my Approach you mentioned Rand
there's a huge amount that we can learn
from Rand as well so there are people in
Neo aristotelians objectivists and
others and not limited to those who are
still working on the on the on the
broader project so I'm going to speak
though as a as a philosopher because
the argument I'm going to make is that
Kant is the most important philosopher
of the last two centuries and if the
conversation that we have had is that
and there's still work to be done that
what is going on in art critical theory
in the decisive Decades of the 20th
century with figures like Greenberg and
and and others is kantianism you're kind
of updated with with respect to uh to
Evolutions
uh and if we can take the major
sub-schools of modernist and then later
post-modernist philosophy and do the
intellectual history well to see them as
Downstream from what is ultimately a
significant kantian term culture is
Downstream from Kant that's exactly
right and there are you know this is
extraordinarily controversial in the
Contra literature uh but you know I and
then some of the leading con Scholars
who are reflecting will say we are this
is slightly overstated we're all
kantians now right uh or we are all
working in the shadow of Kant
and so when first-rate philosophers are
making claims like that we need to pay
attention to that so what I think has to
happen is we do need to go back to Kant
he has distinctive Theses in
epistemology in or implications for
metaphysics he ends up being
anti-metaphysical for the reasons that
we have talked about kind of dismissing
it entirely as a possible concern for
philosophy
particular Theses in moral philosophy
and as we've talked with respect to Art
so if we really are about truth goodness
and beauty and Kant is fundamentally
negative on all of those but he's the
most important philosopher and what that
means is that the First Rate people need
to go back understand their con and
figure out what the alternatives to him
are so that we can in fact come to know
the world that we can in fact see the
human being as an integrate uh that we
can in fact figure out positive answers
to Value questions to questions of
Beauty and the sublime and work out that
intellectual framework because the way
it is right now is it's you know it's
partly institutional if we just look at
the the high art world you know the high
art world has done basically nothing for
a century it's all just variations on a
on a theme pharmaceutical indifference
that's right yeah so Duchamp 1917. so
we're now a century past Duchamp there
has been nothing significant or
fundamentally new in the art world for
over a century that should be a huge
embarrassment for artists right to think
that we are just recycling old tropes
that are now a century a century old so
there is a stagnant a stagnance there
but artists you know they can be very
sensitive and very clever I think you
use the word osmosis right they're
drawing it out of the out of the
intellectual atmosphere but they're not
necessarily art critics you know
educated in art history at that level of
you know PhD sufficiency and they're not
necessarily philosophers and they're not
necessarily on the front lines of what's
going on in Psychology so they're very
good as artists but artists function in
a broader intellectual and cultural
framework so they do need to if we want
to rescue The Argus or the artists want
to rescue themselves they need to
realize that they have been put in a box
right they're only allowed to play in
that box and to figure out what that box
is and find a way to break out of it
right so you start with the immediate
constraints so to speak go immediate
awareness
and understand what Kant is all about so
that you can take a better choice
according to what kind of Direction you
want to work to go to go in I think
there's a division of labor there you
know the psychologists and the
philosophers and the art historians and
the artists all have you know part of
the package and so they do need to work
together I would say though uh probably
the most important thing is going to be
though For Young Artists uh you know by
the ones I mean when they're in your
teens and you've not yet gone off to
formal art school to find whatever way
of strengthening your resolve What
attracted you to Art in the first place
because the post-contins are now very
sophisticated and they are
institutionalized when they get their
hands on you when you go into art school
they are very good at deconstructing you
and turning you into another zombie so
that's where the fight has to be yeah so
just be aware of the main components of
kantian and content influenced
philosophy can help you to understand
what's coming because and I think that's
uh
well so we're not going to discuss the
kids term as such but that that's my
argument or one of the arguments I have
for the kitchen term for classical
painting is that it gives you a clear
understanding of these two value systems
where the spherical indifference or
sentimentality with the genus not
needing craft or basing yourself on
Craft being original or being more
archetypal and then you can say check
check check and say where am I I think
that's a very good starting point in a
case that it's a way of orienting
yourself and finding out what is my
direction and when these contents or
post contents come then you can
recognize okay it comes from that point
but that belongs to that value system
and I'm here yeah the more
intellectually armed you can be
certainly the better yeah the the hard
thing though is that if you want to be
an artist you need to pour yourself into
doing your art and you can't also get a
PhD in philosophy or psychology at the
same time need to have a certain amount
of intellectual armor in your defense so
you can't let it you can't let it slide
yeah because don't let calm fully
because one of the things it does say is
that the genus doesn't know what it's
doing so he needs a philosopher to
decide to rationalize yeah yeah so
you're you have people have then
accepted that oh I'm not supposed to
think that's what the philosopher shall
do for me that's right and then so
you're stuck in the box right no exactly
right that's to just become almost full
circle that's what Greenberg did for
Paula Pollock would have been an
obscurity or because nobody's going to
go in and see what Pollock is doing in
his studio and say oh this is great art
it takes a kantian intellectual like
Greenberg who has a social status right
to say this is it and then suddenly oh
yes he's a genius and
then the money and the prestige follows
and then everybody starts to imitate
Paula because they want to be in their
Club but then the slight dangerous as
cheetah mentions in his book
um um this this painter I think his name
was Ferno and he started reading content
lecturing on Kant for some
painters in Rome
and the end of this story was that he
stopped painting because he was reading
Kant you see perfect yeah yeah right
right so so I I mean that's why you
that's why I'm thinking okay to read
can't understand him but always have
something else that builds you up yeah
so if you want to give us some sort of
famous last words on that Allah like one
of those bullet points again on that
what
what is the well if you're an
assertilian what about Aristotle's
philosophy as such because we've been
talking about epistemology and
metaphysics and and Aesthetics and his
in Aristotle's case Poetics yeah no I
would say yeah I'm broadly Aristotelian
I think Aristotle is uh is the greatest
the philosophical Genius of all time but
it doesn't necessarily mean that you
have to become an Aristotle scholar I
would say yeah read some Aristotle it
will be it will be enriching to you I
also want to say that Aristotle was 2400
years ago lots of things need to be
updated so there's a still a significant
amount of work for philosophers and
psychologists and and and and art
historians to uh to do but the main
point here is that Aristotle is a
naturalistic philosopher you know the
the natural world is is the real world
we might be able to argue our way to
something Beyond uh on the natural world
as well right but that's where we start
and uh it's real it's knowable and the
human being is capable of really
magnificent things uh if he or she
develops as core capacities for
sensibility for reason for passion in an
integrated way uh you will put together
a full life you will become something
special yourself and you will uh if
you're going to be an artist to be a
contributor to the the already then
impressive traditions of great art so if
you read content you can deconstruct
your subconscious presumptions and then
you can you read Aristotle to build
yourself yeah he's the foundation for
sure okay the next this has been various
should we say enlightening
nice word thank you for coming to the
cable pelvis okay pleasure thanks and
thank you for watching Remember to head
over to cablepolice.com subscribe and
become a member today I'll see you next
month
foreign
thank you
