all right here's a game for you go to
Wikipedia and click on the random page
button then from that page click on the
first link and then just keep repeating
that always hitting the first link what
do you think is going to happen will we
wander aimlessly around Wikipedia
forever or will we eventually hit a dead
end well neither because actually
roughly 97% of Wikipedia Pages lead to
philosophy and I had a lot of questions
about this like what's so special about
philosophy or why should we stop at
philosophy or is this something that's
specific to the first link or will it
work with any link that we choose you
see despite the fact that the philosophy
game has been around for a long time it
even has its own Wikipedia article which
yes does also lead to philosophy I've
never seen an in-depth analysis of it so
in today's desperate attempt to get my
own Wikipedia article written about me
masquerading as an education video we're
going to take a look at the structure of
Wikipedia and figure out why almost
every Wikipedia page leads to philosophy
with a giant
asterisk the problem with making a video
about Wikipedia is that Wikipedia
changes a lot and since I originally
recorded that intro months ago someone
broke the philosophy game and then
unbroke it and then broke it again let's
just say making this video was a wild
ride but I think it's really cool how it
broke and how it could have been even
worse so first let's take a look at the
philosophy game as it was when it was
working and and then we'll go into how
it broke of course things may look
different when this video goes up but
the approaches we'll use will stay the
same if anything I guess it's fitting
that a video about Wikipedia is changing
as it gets made feel free to assume that
was
intentional okay so there are in fact
several types of Wikipedia link games
for example how many links does it take
you to get from say banana to Neptune
the planet it took me seven but that's
not what we're talking about about today
the philosophy game is on the surface
really simple like I said at the start
we go to a random page and keep hitting
the first link over and over we'll keep
doing that until we hit philosophy hit a
loop hit a dead end or exceed over a 100
jumps so that last one never actually
occurred for me we'll collect the
Articles and keep track of how they're
linked together in order to make our
network but how we actually Implement
that was a bit of a pain because telling
a computer what the first link is is a
bit trickier than it first appears after
all the first link is not this but
rather it's one of these icons obviously
though these aren't really in the spirit
of the game so we'll ignore them next
we'll also ignore International Phonetic
Alphabet pages and citations these
aren't true Wikipedia articles they have
slightly different URL addresses so
we'll ignore those as well lastly and
most importantly I want to introduce the
language exclusion rule but don't worry
we'll also compare without this rule it
goes like this the first link on many
Wikipedia pages is just the language of
the name of the article specifically
these ones in parenthesis the language
exclusion rule is to disregard these
hear me out for a second plastic love is
a famous city pop song from 1984 by
Japanese artist Maria takauchi without
the language exclusion rule plastic love
goes to Japanese but with language
exclusion plastic love links to Maria
takauchi which links to City poop which
then links to Japanese pop music and so
on and so on the first link path is now
representing more what plastic love is
rather than what country it happens to
be from but more importantly I think it
also gives us better insight into how we
as humans write definitions for things
which is to me the most interesting
aspect of all of this and we've got
enough to start tackling the question
that started this all off do all
Wikipedia articles lead to
philosophy coding everything we talked
about just now was not easy but after
some hair pulling a lot of coffee and
moving to Germany for unrelated reasons
here are the 5,000 articles that I found
for the Wikipedia first link Network and
here's the star of the show the
philosophy article right in the middle
of this big chunk of nodes and arrows
this giant component represents all the
articles that I found that have a path
to philosophy percentage wise it
contains
97.3% of all nodes in the network which
agrees quite well with other estimates
I've seen online so no not all articles
lead to philosophy but the vast majority
do let's take a second to appreciate
some of
[Music]
them orange juice the best juice arrives
to philosophy in 13 steps while orange
juice the best band arrives to
philosophy in nine apple juice being
further from the light of God
appropriately takes a longer 15 Steps to
reach philosophy the game Celeste takes
14 jumps and it might fill you with
determination to learn that undertale
takes 15 both the Calgary Flames and
Edmonton Oilers take 16 clicks each
which I guess I should just be happy
that the Flames can tie the Oilers in
something at least and finally
philosophy arrives to philosophy int to
wait what U maybe let's put that one
aside for a second and we could keep
going trust me I did though maybe it's
easier if we instead summarize it as a
graph the x-axis shows the number of
steps it took to get to philosophy while
the y- AIS shows the number of pages I
found that took that many steps as you
can see the number of articles with a
given distance from philosophy is
bell-shaped with an average of around 14
[Music]
steps the physical structure of the
network is also kind of interesting I
found 10 articles which link to
philosophy we can think of these 10 as
roads to philosophy if we color the
different parts of the network According
to which of the 10 roads they arrive on
we'll find that the vast majority of the
network belongs to only one of three
Paths 53% of Articles representing
mostly science and countries arrive to
Philosophy by way of analytic philosophy
25% of Articles arrive by awareness
these articles are mostly about
institutions whether they be political
or academic though interestingly all of
mathematics is here as well lastly
philosophy of logic which accounts for
15% had a lot of Articles focusing on
well logic but it also has a focus on
languages so effectively speaking 93% of
the Wikipedia first link Network can
actually be thought of as three giant
lobes joined together by philosophy but
what about those articles that don't
lead to philosophy well I found two
articles with no Links at all ending the
run honestly though I'm just going to
ignore these given how rare they are and
the fact that Wikipedia actively
discourages pages with no links they
feel more like mistakes to me much more
likely are clusters that end in Loops
for example if you somehow reach the
page node parentheses networking you'll
never get to philosophy because it links
to Tele Communications Network which
then links back to node parentheses
networking similarly mathematical
optimization and discret optimization
make a loop and so do information
technology and information and
communication technology which yes
apparently those are two separate pages
the very largest loop I could find was
the single cycle of three the one on
screen right now everything else was a
cycle of two but I think the fact that
some pages don't reach philosophy raises
an important question should they
like it seems somewhat arbitrary to me
that they don't as an example that's not
really related but speaks to what I mean
dog Cow and Chicken all link to
domestication but cat links to
domestication of vertebrates a different
though weirdly similar article why don't
they all link to the same page I don't
know and what's more have you ever seen
what a cat can do with its body cats
don't have bones this is clearly a
mistake now I have to admit I did do a
bit of a lie I set that the largest loop
I could find was the one with three
articles and that is true if we're only
talking about these small islands that
don't connect to philosophy there is
actually one more Loop hidden in the
main body of the network and it's a big
one a full 11 nodes or 16 nodes if we
don't use language exclusion and that's
the loop containing philosophy yeah
that's right following the first link
path from philosophy and hopping across
10 other nodes leads you back to
philosophy which I mean the fact that
there is a loop isn't that surprising a
good Wikipedia article should have at
least one link and so we should be able
to keep clicking forever but because the
network is finite the only way that's
possible is if articles repeat hence a
loop but at the same time doesn't a loop
make the philosophy part of the
philosophy game kind of arbitrary why is
it not the three-dimensional space game
or the geometry game both of which are
ALS Al in that Loop what makes
philosophy so special it turns out that
the answer to that is a bit
tricky one of the most common ways of
identifying important or special nodes
in the network is just to see which ones
have the most connections Network
researchers often call this degree
centrality where degree just means the
number of connections and centrality is
another word for importance personally
though I like to call it the popularity
centrality essentially the more popular
you are the more important you are
maybe don't read too deeply into that
one in my network philosophy connected
to 10 other nodes though of course these
were just the ones I found but relative
to the rest of the network 10 isn't that
high seven other nodes including
mathematics also have 10 connections and
18 have a higher number of connections
association football is the most popular
at 51 and my favorite coming in in
fourth place is the article moth with 17
incoming connections yeah moth had more
Connections in philosophy and it's not
called The Moth game though maybe it
should be now that being said even
though philosophy is not the most
popular article in the network it is the
most popular within the big loop which
is a good first step to motivating that
it's not arbitrarily chosen but it's
also clear that popularity is not the be
all and end all luckily for me instead
it could be that philosophy is important
because of how it's positioned in the
network structurally speaking we already
saw that we can kind of view the first
link Network as three big globes
connected together by philosophy but can
we make that a bit more formal well yeah
but bear with me for a second the Corpus
colossum is a thick bundle of neurons
that connect to a bunch of things but
it's mainly famous because it's the
bridge between the left and right
hemispheres or lobes of your brain so by
virtue of being a bridge it's important
when Network neuroscientists want to
measure the uh bridess of a neuron in a
network they measure something called
betweenness so let's use that for our
Network as well unlike degree centrality
which assigns importance based off
popularity between this centrality
quantifies the importance of a node in a
network by measuring the number of
shortest paths to pass through it
applying that to our Network and
resizing the nodes so that they reflect
their scores we'll find that philosophy
is the node with the highest betweenness
not just in the big loop but in the
whole network so philosophy really is
acting as the bridge between all these
different concepts which brings us back
to the big question given that
philosophy is in a loop isn't it kind of
arbitrary how important is philosophy
actually well it's certainly special
it's got a relatively High number of
connections I maybe downplayed it a bit
when first talking about it but Top 20th
Place out of 5,000 is pretty good on top
of that philosophy has the highest
betweenness centrality in the whole
network no other member of the big loop
has both of those features of course the
fact that philosophy is in a loop to
begin with means that you can never miss
it and you're also most likely to enter
that loop on philosophy as well so I
think for those reasons yeah philosophy
is important and even though it's in a
loop it's not arbitrarily chosen it
makes sense to call the philosophy game
the philosophy game a nice an easy
conclusion congratulations
except except none of that is true
anymore because someone broke the
philosophy game so what exactly happened
remember how we found that Wikipedia can
be thought of as three big globes
connected by philosophy and how the page
for awareness connected 25% of the
network to philosophy well someone
redirected awareness to instead point to
psychology links get redirected all the
time so that's not a problem in and of
itself the ISS isue is that psychology
is within that 25% meaning that whoever
did this made a new Loop and in doing so
cut off a quarter of the network from
philosophy but it gets worse even though
75% of Articles still lead to philosophy
there's no compelling reason to stop
there it's become completely arbitrary
it's just another of the 97% of nodes
that now lead to awareness the awareness
game if you will all things considered
this attack if you will wasn't so bad
this is because awareness was also a
member of the big loop meaning that even
though awareness no longer pointed to
philosophy there was still a path back
to it so 97% of Wikipedia Pages still
led to something I'll leave it to the
philosophers among us to debate whether
that's something should be awareness or
philosophy though I suspect they might
be a bit biased but regardless the
overall shape of the network is largely
unaffected it could have been much worse
though if someone decided to redirect
analytic philosophy to somewhere else
not only could they have cut off 50% of
the network from philosophy but because
analytic philosophy wasn't part of the
big loop they would have actually split
the network into two completely separate
halves with no path from one half of the
network to the other the structure of
the network would completely change and
arguably there wouldn't be a star of the
show analytic philosophy was actually
redirected since I originally recorded
that section but the reason it didn't
break the philosophy game is because it
wasn't redirected back in into its own
lobe like awareness was it was sent to
one of the smaller ones and this idea of
attacking the weak points of a network
to ruin my YouTube video is probably one
of the most important and applicable
parts of network research using
essentially the approaches we took in
this very video we can identify the weak
points of a network to either attack or
defend it to be clear I'm using the word
attack in a general way a targeted
attack on a city's electrical grid is
obviously a really bad thing but a
targeted attack on a metabolic Network
of a cancer cell is a really good thing
attacks also don't have to be targeted a
tree knocking out a power line is a
random attack as is an attack from
neurodegenerative diseases like
Alzheimer's on brain networks though
that's obviously a bit more complicated
targeted or Not by knowing the structure
of the network we can predict and
prepare for how these attacks will
affect a city or a patient and help to
defend against it before it even happens
which begs the question was the attack
on the awareness article random or
targeted
well if we go into the article history
for the awareness page we'll find some
juicy drama on April 5th 2024 someone
made a change logging the following
changed order of psychology and
philosophy so it doesn't break the rule
that every first link brings to
philosophy now I know awareness did
first link to philosophy when I started
Gathering data in early 2024 so
presumably someone had changed it at
some point and this person changed it
back I think it's worth pointing out
that one day prior I posted a short
short preview of this very video to my
patreon subscribers obviously that can't
have been a coincidence so thank you to
my amazing and patient subscribers
anyway on May 22nd 2024 someone undid
that change and wrote see talk page for
why psychology is first now I'm not very
familiar with this backend part of
Wikipedia so I couldn't find whatever
they were referring to on that talk page
regardless all of this has me convinced
that this was in fact a targeted attack
meant to ruin my video and make me look
like a fool but the jokes on them I'm
already capable of doing that all by
myself anyway let's go back to the
awareness page for a second notice that
even though philosophy isn't first it is
second which gave me an idea and it's
something I haven't really seen anyone
talk about at all what happens to the
philosophy game if we don't use the
first
link well we've done it before so let's
do it again go to a random Wikipedia
page click the second link this time
repeat until we hit a loop then start
again rewatch all of Neon Genesis
Evangelion while the code runs okay it's
done generate the second link Network
realize there's a bug in the code that
affected the first link Network as well
and go back and regenerate that Network
reanalyze and question why you do this
to yourself repeat the previous steps
and finally here it is the second link
network but why stop there why not the
third link Network why not the fifth
link Network why not the 100th okay well
maybe not that one and here they are the
second third and fifth link
networks as you can see unlike the
original first link Network these are
much more fragmented the importance of
philosophy is also heavily diminished
the probability to even reach it is 2%
for the second link Network 1% for the
third and my program never even found
Philosophy for the fifth link Network
what's more interesting though is how
the network is changing shape part of
this is because it's becoming
increasingly likely that will run into a
page that doesn't have enough links to
continue the walk which is why I stopped
at 5 that that explains the fragmenting
but not why the connected components of
the network are changing shape and
becoming kind of stringy what we're
seeing is I think our Collective
Agreement on how we discuss Concepts
early links tried to contextualize a
topic within a broader concept while
later links reflect individual
properties of that topic Neon Genesis
even gallian and Gorden legon are both
animations produced by Studio gyx about
giant robots and making friends giv
their similarities it's not a surprise
their first couple of links are also
very similar whereas the later links
reflect more of their individualities in
other words for larger link numbers the
chance that two articles point to the
same thing decreases instead they just
continue like a string you can really
see this effect if we choose links
completely randomly the network just
looks like it dissolved in some soup
hopefully you can see how the second
third and fifth link networks are kind
of trending towards that the main
difference being that anytime you reach
a page with fewer than five links the
fifth link walk stops while a random
walk can continue with just one link and
it's this trend that's interesting to me
if the structure of the second link
network was already very stringy it
would suggest that there's no Collective
Agreement in how we describe articles
beyond the first link but that's not
what happens while greatly diminished
the second and third link networks still
show some residual agreement and from
there gradually Trend towards the random
Network we're essentially seeing the
functional decay of our Collective
Agreement on how we write definitions
for things wasn't this supposed to be a
math video or something though actually
I think that's what's really amazing
about this we're using math and we're
analyzing the structure of an abstract
Network to learn something about how we
communicate and connect the world around
us in our mind Wikipedia is this
uncoordinated mess that tries to
encapsulate everything that we know
about our universe and in doing so
sometimes reflects a bit of who we are
if you know where to look looking into
Wikipedia is kind of like looking into
the night sky staring into either for
too long makes me start to think where's
my place in all this and that's when I
realized maybe I don't need a Wikipedia
page about me maybe the connections I
was looking for were already all around
me I guess what I'm trying to say is
it's a great big and amazing universe
but you're what makes it mean
something especially if you're signed up
to my Patron
[Music]
