hello good morning um thank you so much
for coming at 9: in the morning yeah
thank you very much for the invitation
it it's a real pleasure to be here on
the stage uh to share one of U the most
representative project that we has been
working on after 20 years already so the
title of the presentation is humanity in
real time that means that I'm trying to
the challenge of the day byday uh
Humanity uh how we are changing our our
our way of U incing life in many
different ways and perspective um
through technology um how we can
actually add uh this layer of
Consciousness on top of on top of
it so uh I would like to begin with uh
with this fire the fire for me was the
very first um attemp to really control
technology but we are not aware of of of
the fire until it burn us so that means
that also uh we are also not the word of
day of the fire until uh it shows the
Beast hidden in the bottom of the cave
in the right side of my of the image we
have alamir that is one of the most
important caves uh archaeological caves
of n dental uh in Spain um the one that
Picasso mentioned that after this uh
intervention uh there was no art anymore
uh because the the animals are really uh
designed on on the top of on the on the
ceiling uh corresponding with the
exactly with the relief of the of the
cave that that means that they were
working in a distance of 1 meter and a
half and they have this perspective this
consciousness of the space that allow us
allow them sorry to really create these
amazing shapes or you know in the cave
in the surface of the cave but for sure
uh when we are really know noticing and
we we are really uh working with
technology and we are evolving in many
different perspective we have some
consequences this is a a relief of uh
promos promos is here in the left side
of the image and Theos is um you know
punish him and enchain him because he
stole the fire from the olymp
Olympus um it was something similar uh
when we go back also to the Egyptian
culture and we found that they were also
very very confident with the with the
with the with the control of technology
in that case in a very positive way they
were able to really find even what mean
Consciousness and what means the this uh
panal uh gland that is inside our brain
and normally is the one that give us
Consciousness in many different ways so
the representation of the orus eye is
not more than the representation of this
gland in the in the brain so how they
they already knew that this small piece
of our body was giving us the
consciousness of our our environment
that means the technology at that point
opens even our third retina our third
eye that we have already wearing in our
brains but I would like to go uh further
in history um and I think that this
maybe is one of the most important
paintings on our history from the
painter Monet in
1875 um for me this image has a lot of
different uh compromises about the time
that were produced so if we analyze this
image uh we can say okay the train is
representing the Industrial Revolution
that means that the artist was already
concerned about what was happening in
terms of the technology of that time uh
secondly we see one more time the fire
of fromus you know in the in the very
top of in the very front of the of the
train it that Fire Control now in in in
shape of of light it was controlling
where to go um in third part uh we have
already the reification of the body the
body has a shape that is not uh there's
no Contour in the in the shape of human
that means that the the the human
becomes like a part of the scenario it's
not it's not the person who is the
protagonist of the image but it's
something that is belonging to the to
the landscape and we have for sure the
beginning of the anopen in this image
you know the fire the S Mode that is
going outside the train is representing
already the pollution that we are all
today and facing so basically and
finally we have also another very
important thing that is the medium I
don't know if you can see uh through the
because the stand but the medium is the
message that means that the brush Trace
is a metaphor of the current time this
is the beginning of the impressionism
this is the beginning of a new way of
thinking of a new way of uh observing
life because the artist was uh in the
trend train passively watching through
the through the window and watching how
the landscape was in movement and so he
said okay now the the landscape is in
movement now time has another dimension
and I can I should paint that in the
canvas so time is included in the image
and this is the very beginning of the
revolution of n media in many different
ways but because what does it mean that
it means that the is the open door of
the Consciousness applies to the CH to
the changes derived by
technology um to go ahead with that um I
would like to introduce you briefly some
of of some of our projects for example
now thanks to this uh regard thanks to
this uh way of thinking we can imagine
how Wi-Fi signals could become like a
some kind of input for creating Audi
visual Symphonies is the case of grid is
an installation an imersive installation
that is taking in real time the ways of
the mobile phones from people and is
manipulating this information to create
a new uh interface and a new sound that
is becoming like the most important
visual aspect of the installation that
is coming through uh through the data
but it's not not only the only example
we have also High meshes when the body
becomes a data set for AI and this point
at this point we did this installation
in Valencia in Spain in uh in the center
of culture um provided with 36 cameras
we were scanning real people naked
people that were
giving his body to the science uh to
really fit a ecosystem of AI that was
interpretating the body but not
depending off your your physical skills
or your religion or your economical
status no it's pure data it's pure
vertex and points that are uh here
analyzed to connect people like in micro
communities that becomes itself like an
sculpture for the 21 century I want to
left the video a little a bit more just
to see uh just to show you the final
final result of of the interaction with
the people in The Other Side people was
passively participating because because
it was their phone who was really
capturing the data and sharing it with
the system and at this point I'm
provoking people to be inside naked uh
to be represented into nature into
technology so um what means also the
space of the frontier we are really in
facing a very complex time we are still
struggling for a piece of land uh with a
revolution of technology so Celeste it's
another project that is talking about
how and how we can actually understand
the sky without a limit the sky is not
the limit but it's a universal Dome and
in this in this uh project uh what I'm
doing is capturing in real time
different uh skylights in many different
places around the world and in real time
the system is able to capture and to
drop different pix from all those images
and then those pixels are going to our
our algorithm to create a unique
interface that is representing this new
Universal Dom and this Universal Dom is
talking about the space of the nonf
frontier that is uh provoked and this is
and is possible thanks to technology
that was done in Matt Lisbon and we were
in connection with other places like
Valencia Paris and many other ones uh
this is the final aspect of the the
installation all those colors are coming
from the different places around the
wall and feeding the the
system um also technology trace the
boundaries of our body you know for
example in bounding box this is a second
version of this Hardware that has been
done in
2016 in in Shanghai in the Chronos
Center here I'm talking about the
possibility of being of to presentence
the system is capable with artificial
intelligence to recognize the body
inside the light box and then when you
are to spacing the bounding box that
means the limits of the cube there's
another cube of good end that is uh
kicking from the inside and then making
noise and vibrations so that mean that
that box could be there in the in The
Gallery at that that moment I you are
hearing
sound let
me when the when the when she she put
out uh the
hands this body is uh receiving the the
the energy of the body of the digital
body so that mean that through
artificial intellig intelligence we can
even be like in many different places
around the world um also the technology
is also framing the limits of our own
world it's the case of Li limy limy is a
very special project where we were
launching a beon to the stratosphere uh
this beon was provided with a GPS on top
uh we were tracing the path of the
information until the information is
gone and that means that we have also
limit of our in our technology and this
Pro was exploring the possibility of
really uh to find that place um it was
really funny because finally we lost
information we lost information in the
karma line Cara line you know is the
this this virtual line that it's
separating our world from the universe
and in reverse the universe from our
world so this is the this is the
sculpture that we sent to the to the
atmosphere and then the information was
lost and I trace all the path of that uh
of that Beacon and with that we create
this kind of light sculpture that was
representing uh like a visual data was
presenting the the information
obtained and if we can go now in the
micro micro reality this is the project
OA in OA we are also transforming the
Mother Earth Products in the connection
with the digital world this is a very
special olive oil we created our own
smart contract the smart contract was uh
uh augmented with molecules of DNA that
was representing the content of the
smart contract that means that these
olive oil is itself as some kind of
biobank the biobank means that inside
the olive oil you can trace the smart
contract we have also in the institute
ofas in Seva we have the biot toen that
means we have the the the DNA in
bacterias so if we make grow those
bacteria that means that we are growing
the data of the smart contract creating
a new ecosystem of of economy that could
be potentially one solution for a space
art for space New Missions to create a
new ecosystem really profoundly
connected with nature to respect it and
to keep it safe so here what is
happening that was done in Dubai is that
this robotic arm is performing in real
time trying to get the same value from
the tank on the left side to the one on
the right side because the one on the
left was augmented with the DNA and the
one on the right not so it's you know
moving and just spacing the olive oil
from one tank to the other and around
that I create like a lot of different
digital art purely on the blockchain and
purely purely uh full
digital to not makeing uh so large um
this is my hard disk Museum it's a
museum I founded in 2013 that mean that
we are also changing the concept of
tangible what means the creativity today
where the creativity today has to be
stored so on the right side there
already a m Stone on the the art history
is a is a museum that is already fully
stored in a hard drive is the hardest
museum museum in a hard drive now we are
more than 150 artists um and we are
looking for partnership to install the
museum physically uh as a new equipement
cultural equipement and in the in the
left hand in the left hand I have
another Museum that is the backup of the
museum in DNA so it's totally intangible
we cannot even even even even see the
content but the content is there and
it's very curious because the
materiality of both elements are you
know this kind of metal that is
represented in the Hightech architecture
that this was also very important in the
' 90s with museums like the pompo or
Tate mod or
MAA and to go through the end of the
presentation an ear is not an ear
anymore and this is the beginning of the
project Manifesto Tera this what we are
watching are the items in the lab to
create an ear printed in
collagen in which DNA we have the
manifesto Tula text a message for the
humanity
so basically um it is the challenge is
how we can really uh res signify natural
environment through the connection with
digital how what what's going to happen
with our Legacy if we are putting the
ecosystem in RIS like we are doing so
basically this project has been
addressing the possibility of having
like massive hard drive of information
in
glaciers um and this was the very first
atem with this ear that was containing
my Manifesto Tula the manifesto Tera for
those that don't know Latin man if Tula
it's earthlings it's the people who is
inhabiting the Earth and culture for uh
Tera Cola that means to culture or to
cultivate and Terra for sure is Earth is
G so basically if the the environment is
changing and we are earthlings that
means that if this this environment is
changing we will we will be become some
another kind of spe at the same
time and it seems like an speculation
but not I was uh in Mars recently the
last year I was in Mars in uh esbal bar
in uh Norway uh I was doing this
research I was looking my uh looking for
the right place to install the this year
um we did it it was in as I mentioned in
Mars uh finally we left the year in
inside a gler is an ear is a message
that is already in Risk because the the
the velocity of the melting of the in
the gler is super super fast so
potentially in a couple of year that ear
will be in the surface and the message
will be lost because collagen is already
in nature collagen is one zero impact
for the environment and the DNA as well
is already in our in all of us this is
myself revealing the content of the
manifesto inside the cave of a glacier
mar3 um yeah but finally there's a lot
of many different layers of data that
are addressing this project uh basically
uh this is not an year anymore this is
an year that is representing a Manifesto
for the future of humanity um for sure
also uh it's a story in AAA that as I
mentioned you know B is already
signified with the the seed bout that is
one of some kind of hard drive of of
seas and the diversity of our of our
Agriculture and
and and food um the idea is now to to
keep another kind of message already
there because in my perspective
technology uh plus con without
Consciousness that means a weapon this
is an image done by artificial
intelligence that is Imagine uh some
kind of biohackers drones that are uh
spreading some kind of VIIs uh in a
world um but sorry uh but if we add the
Consciousness to our to this ecosystem
and this is a very interesting graphic I
did that means that from is a herzan
system our brain is emitting waves
around in between s and 11 Hertz um the
Earth was uh thanks to um human fre uh
measurements the Earth was spinning
around
7.8 83 Herz at the same time and the
question here is that our brain when we
are about to meditate and when we are
about to sleep we were exactly in the
same range of frequencies than the earth
and now that's not true because the the
Earth is now increasing the level of of
of frequencies so the only thing that we
can do is actually increase our level of
Consciousness to technology if not we
will be one more time un balance with
the Earth so thanks to that finally we
can say that technology plus
Consciousness becomes art and that's the
most important thing I would like to
tell today that this is the the very
first thing we have to to to accomplish
because there's a lot of companies we
are creating lot of Gadget we are
getting a lot of different things but
without any kind of Consciousness around
of that uh we have a lot of things to
think about um this is also the B waves
recently done in which we are proposing
the possibility of having a a music
album containing a map of the brain
waves in DNA and at the same time uh
make an interpretation of that sound
with uh brain W uh brain WS of of whales
from the sea and we are also planning
this possibility of having a meeting
point for talking about these topics
this is the terca space that I'm
designing now it could be uh is should
be and it going to be like a permanent
installation where people go to refine
themselves in terms of Consciousness and
in other kind of uh futuristic uh
perspectives so basically we need a
common space to reshape our our
cosmology as a uh as unique
humans um basically what we need to
address are two different sentences two
different concept here that are not
existing are are are designed by myself
is the intellos spere we have many
different speres around the world but we
we hav't like an intellos sphere this
intellect tohere should be created by
the by the Mind thinking like people
like people like you that are we are
sharing today these days to reshape the
B reality B reality is a new terminology
that is addressing the the way that we
are today understanding the world
through the additional different layer
of technology and and our our
perspective for EMB body but now we have
new fires to rethink we have biotech we
have artificial intelligence we have
Quantum Computing we have a space art
how we are envisioning the possibility
of being in the space Also with art um
as I did with the institute for f
Technologies with the manifesto tulas
Institute for Technologies is um it's an
um an Institute in in in Paris in Lon we
were developing together this man Ricola
is what we are doing now uh imagine uh
Quantum Computing possibilities and I
would like to invite to the states to
Fabian and Philip they are coming from
from tomb University uh to explore
possibilities in my perspective like to
create universal language through the
connection of qu to Computing and
everything is happening in the T
University I give you the word
thank I don't think you can hear me now
can you yes
no okay so thank you very much Solan so
we have a new project at a Technical
University of Munich it's called quent
world and what we are doing there is we
want to bring the world of Arts together
with the world of
quantum when we are thinking at thank
you of Quant world so maybe just the
basic SFI is a
2.0 million euro project it's funded by
the Federal Ministry of science Science
and Arts we have five artists in
residents one of them is soliman we have
three stipendium cohorts and we have
nine Quant World challenges when we were
thinking in the beginning of 2023 how
can we rethink Quantum Technologies we
said okay there are different points we
have to Target one is we need
responsibility in these Technologies in
the development of these Technologies
and we have to incorporate our whole
society and then we were thinking about
how can we do this this and what we are
doing is that we said okay we need
Society responsibility Quantum
technology art and application and this
is what we will do over the course of
the next three years together with
artists of soliman who will help us to
translate these abstract future
Technologies and to incorporate
Consciousness responsibility and
everyone sitting here in this room in
our Quant world so what we will do is
that we will have a new form of learning
environment including Arts including
Basics but also giving all of you some
future scenarios where we can be with
Quantum Technologies in the next years
so we are mainly working with Mobility
with medicine and security because this
is where we expect a change and where we
see the most potential for everyone to
be included in the next revolution of
Quant Technologies so what we try to do
here is taking all the things you just
heard in this wonderful presentation by
Solan together in one learning platform
to introduce a new century of learning
new century of learning where we try to
include Consciousness responsibility and
the society yeah thank you very
much so thank you very much um I would
like just to thank you uh Natalia just
kage from from my Studios is the person
who did this presentation possible uh
I'm going to invite you to continue
talking about this topic around around
the day so thank you very much for your
time and it was a
pleasure thank
Youk
