on November 10th YouTube announced that
whether this impacts you negatively or
not the dislike counter was going away
the stated purpose of this change was to
reduce dislike attacks a kind of
targeted harassment that YouTube
confirmed disproportionately affects
smaller channels it's a valid problem
and a noble goal to be sure you'll just
have to forgive me for doubting that
that was Google's entire motivation like
the are you okay book that they left on
my bed at a summit their public concern
for Creator mental health brings a
little Hollow to someone who has lived
inside the machine for as long as I have
not because I cynically believe that
they are too heartless to care but
rather because they cannot care the
platform fends off competitors like
twitch and Tick Tock by frantically
serving his viewers that's you as many
hours of satisfying content as possible
regardless of the Creator's feelings
about it and the cold hard truth is that
no machine learning algorithm is capable
of caring about your sadness or mine I
don't blame them for any of this I mean
all they did was build the wheel when we
choose to run on it but the road that I
travel is littered with dead and dying
internet Superstars and as sure as the
sun sets each day I will join them at
some point maybe soon and YouTube's
wheel is going to keep on turning
without me I promise
so if removing dislike counters is
unlikely to change this ruthless
meritocracy that uncaringly churns
through its stars like professional
sports and
what was the actual point of any of this
and what can we do about it well step
one is to get our dislike counter back
and I'm going to show you guys how after
I show you my sponsor thanks to jackery
for sponsoring this video their Explorer
1500 power station provides a huge 1500
watt hour capacity support for up to
seven devices charging simultaneously
and it takes four hours to go from zero
to eighty percent battery get 10 off
with code Linus Tech tips at the link
below restoring the YouTube dislike
counter takes less than 30 seconds head
to return YouTube dislike.com install
click your browser icon and add it you
can also manually look it up in the
Chrome web store if it doesn't work just
uninstall the extension and try again
according to Dimitri the Project Lead
there are some bugs in the Chrome
developers manifest V3 that make it
randomly fail about five percent of the
time once that's done voila your dislike
counter might take a second to load in
but it's back the incredible speed with
which the open source Community
identifies and wreck defies problems
like this never ceases to amaze me I
mean huge props to the dozens of
contributors and donors who are keeping
the dream alive but as cool as it is on
the surface this project raises a lot of
questions for me which is why I made
this video starting with is it even
accurate
well immediately following Google's
announcement it was extremely accurate
because the workaround was a relatively
simple one you see the YouTube app and
the website had been updated to hide the
dislike counter but the YouTube API
which allows developers to access key
stats on the back end was still
reporting true dislike counts so
creating an extension that would just
pull that data and then automatically
inject it once your page loaded was
simple enough but then on December 13th
API access to dislikes went dark so how
does it work now
the bad news is it involves a fair bit
of guesswork Dimitri who goes by anarios
on GitHub pulled as much data as
possible in the time between YouTube's
announcement and the API cut off true
stats for about 250 million videos but
while that's going to allow you to
smugly affirm how right you were that
YouTube Rewind sucked it is far from a
complete picture and it only allows the
extension to show historical data for
videos that were uploaded prior to the
cutoff
good news is that YouTube already uses a
lot of guesswork in its analytics anyway
so no loss there and the project is
poised to become a lot more accurate and
useful in the short to mid term first up
thanks to the efforts of a digital
Heritage preservation group called
archive team Dimitri is working on
integrating the metadata from a whopping
4.56 billion videos it's going to take
some time since that's 69 terabytes of
data to ingest nice but once that's
complete extension users will have
accurate historical counters restored
for nearly every video on the site that
is pretty incredible like this new
hoodie on hiltetstore.com
but what about new videos that's where
you come in by using the extension
you're going to be contributing your own
likes and dislikes which can then be
compared against publicly available
views and light counts to extrapolate a
probable dislike value in theory then
the more people install the extension
and interact with videos the more
accurate it'll become
unfortunately this raises some serious
privacy concerns your YouTube viewing
behavior is extremely valuable
particularly to advertisers and while
there's an argument to be made that once
you've given your data to Google
Pandora's Box is kind of open anyway
I don't wish to promote that attitude
thankfully as Dimitri lays out in this
document addressing privacy concerns the
project code is mostly publicly
available and open source and it appears
as though he is collecting nothing more
than what's required to log dislikes and
prevent the same kind of spam behavior
that contributed to Google's removal of
the counter in the first place
or at least that's what he's collecting
from viewers one of the ways the project
could really get to the next level is a
commitment from YouTubers both large and
small to share their own true stats to
help the extension validate its own
guesswork but this gets pretty hairy
pretty quickly while I could use oauth
to Grant access to my own stats even
with the limited scope of YouTube
analytics read only which can be
configured to exclude Revenue numbers
there's some really sensitive data in
there and it's not the kind of thing
that we give away willy-nilly even if
someone that I've never met before
offers a pinky promise not to misuse it
torn right because how complain about
the lack of accurate counters if I'm not
willing to do my own part to ensure the
restoration
well maybe they can be good enough
without my help let's take a look at a
couple of my own videos that were
published after the changeover here's
one that was well received the ratio of
likes to dislikes is actually very close
when I compare the YouTube player page
to my own stats
meanwhile here's a sponsored showcase
that didn't perform well for us at the
time of writing this my browser
extension reported 12 000 likes to 940
dislikes a ratio of about 12.77 to 1
while the true stats tell a slightly
less favorable story putting us at 11.63
to 1. so that's a bit farther off but
still accurate enough to reflect the
audience's general displeasure with that
video it's possible though that
extension users are over represented in
our audience meaning that our videos
might be more accurate than say for
example a video on a makeup Channel our
upside down build video for example had
a whopping 2 000 votes from extension
users out of 14 000 total though
curiously I wasn't able to verify this
one because I believe YouTube is doing
some funky things with the counter after
live streams so I would love for other
creators particularly if you're from a
different vertical to chime in in the
comments with a couple of your own
comparisons if you'd be willing for my
site though it's looking pretty good so
far which you might have realized
doesn't help anyone that wants to use a
mobile app for YouTube unless this is
the straw that finally breaks my back
and makes me install YouTube vanced yeah
I went there Dimitri is currently in
talks with that team to include his data
and for those who haven't heard of it
vanced is a side load only alternative
YouTube app that among other things
enables background playback and ad-free
Playback without a premium subscription
both things that hurt my livelihood as
well as those of my employees and my
fellow creators
and advanced isn't my only unlikely Ally
here one of the policies that served me
very well in my life is to never take a
deal where I don't understand what's in
it for the other party Dimitri claims
that the project started as a simple
effort to restore the dislike counter
for his own use presumably so he can
quickly and easily filter out junk
content that's fair enough that's a
pretty big deal for anyone who's ever
tried to find any kind of obscure DIY
tutorial especially anything to do with
software but by his own account he
hasn't even had time to actually watch
any YouTube video since this project
began surely that's not sustainable and
that's even ignoring the fact that
running the infrastructure to support
this extension is a non-trivial Endeavor
that may not be able to rely on donors
or a small patreon forever I see a
sponsorship link from a VPN that I've
never even heard of at the bottom of the
page so
it makes me wonder what's his end game
here truthfully I don't know is getting
my dislike counter back really worth
violating my principles here promoting
online content piracy groups and
collaborating with parties whose
motivations I don't fully understand
I'm not sure yet
what I do know is I sure as hell didn't
choose this path YouTube chose it for me
when instead of coming up with better
ways for creators to moderate their
communities they decided to just get
away one of the few publicly available
video quality markers that we still had
left
the only answer I've been able to get
from YouTube is that going forward
you're supposed to just use comments to
gauge video quality or validity but it
takes about 30 seconds in a YouTube
comment section to figure out why that
is not a silver bullet they're full of
spam and misinformation and they are
much easier for a malicious actor to
control I see the benefit of this
control four marginalized creators I
truly do having a bunch of jerks come in
storming from some hateful subreddit to
dislike Brigade you is something that
nobody should have to endure
but I also do not believe I just do not
believe that YouTube a multi-hundred
billion dollar company or at least their
parent company couldn't combat this
through a combination of origin and user
Behavior tracking and all kinds of other
AI black magic that they have access to
and if they really felt that these
negative interactions weren't valuable
all they had to do was remove the button
altogether so if YouTube still thinks
it's useful and it's still going to
affect your video performance anyway and
so far anecdotally it doesn't seem to
have actually changed how many people
are interacting with the button what
purpose are we really serving here
I mean I've seen every conspiracy theory
Under the Sun YouTube wants to protect
itself and its corporate Partners from
embarrassment or the woke mob is running
the show over there now blah blah blah
blah blah but honestly the more likely
one to me is the simplest explanation
monkey see monkey do so many platforms
are removing any way of negatively
interacting with anything and YouTube
seems like they just wanted to follow
suit and probably the most frustrating
thing about all of this is the
dismissive way that Google has addressed
the collateral damage here I mean I'm
glad that creators can protect
themselves from unwarranted attacks I
really am but malicious actors can and
will use these same tools to create fake
positivity around their content and to
moderate negative comments mark my words
the number of kids that are gonna get
fished with Robux scams is going to
increase and making the internet safer
for one vulnerable group while making it
more dangerous for another is not a
clear-cut win and some of the benefits
of dislike counters like nuking
misleading content and punishing
creators who honestly really had it
coming are going to be sorely missed at
least by you maybe I'm going to be
running the return YouTube dislikes
extension
and I'll be telling you about our
sponsor thanks to nordpass for
sponsoring today's video do you know
what the most popular password on the
Internet is yeah it's one two three four
five six and that's pretty scary our
friends at nordpass have put together a
list of the 200 most used passwords out
there and though we can laugh at how
stupid some of them are it's also a
reminder of how vulnerable you can be if
you're using the same simple password
for all your accounts you may have
received new gifts or signed up for a
few new services this holiday season so
now is the perfect opportunity to switch
over to using a password manager like
nordpass to keep everything organized
your passwords will be stored in a safe
secure place and you can stop doing the
password reset song and dance every time
you try to log on to something hey but
listen even though Christmas has come
and gone don't worry you can still get
70 percent off nor pass premium at
nordpass.com Linus or by using the code
Linus plus you get an additional month
for free so check it out at the link
below if you guys are looking for
another video to watch maybe you could
check out I don't know the last time I
was this mad is probably when they
renamed USB again it's over on the tech
quickie Channel though
