[Music]
but when you mistake a map for the world
you've made a huge error and I believe
that's where we now are these seem to me
the primary paths to reality one is
science another is reason a third is
imagination and a force is intuition and
we live in an era in which imagination
and intuition have been sort of
tarnished as false hello and welcome to
the Science Fiction podcast with Damien
Walter long-term listeners to the
podcast will have followed up
evolving journey in what we're talking
about when we talk about science fiction
so sometimes the Science Fiction podcast
is a fan cast for Denny Ville new and
the his upcoming June 2 movie but we're
also trying to discuss the uh what
happens when science and fiction meet
these apparently very to opposite things
science which is all about the the facts
and realities of our world and fiction
which is all about the stories uh and
we've encapsulated this in our in our
logo with a series of words that
represent something of a duality so
science and fiction reality and fantasy
reason and emotion and Mythos and logos
and I'm incredibly honored today to be
joined by I think the the leading
thinker in the world about this apparent
division that runs through our culture
that seems to run through humanity and
that seems to run really down the the
center of our brain and the the two
hemispheres of our brain so I'm really
happy to welcome uh Ian mcgilchrist
hello and welcome Ian oh thank you Daman
I'm delighted to be here well thank you
for joining me it is literally a
tremendous honor I've spent dozens and
dozens of hours listening to you on
other people's podcasts and to your uh
audio explorations of your most recent
book as well I wonder if I can ask you I
hope this isn't a left question for you
and you it would be totally okay to say
no but do you have any relationship to
to science fiction would you say you're
a science fiction fan uh some people
really dislike science fiction and if if
that was you that would be fine as well
that would be an interesting Direction
no I mean I certainly don't dislike
science fiction I don't know a lot lot
of Science Fiction and one of the sad
things about the last 30 years is that
I've had to keep up with so many uh
science and philosophy books that I
haven't really had much time for reading
things that are sort of perhaps more
tangential but nonetheless important and
there are some works of Science Fiction
that I consider of colossal status and
and one is stanislav lem's Solaris and I
think that t 's exploration of it is is
extraordinarily inexhaustibly deep I
I've seen it many many times I've also
seen the other film called salaris made
in America but it was so disappointing
that I don't refer to it anymore but but
there's that and I've also been reading
something that probably isn't science
fiction exactly um which is um CS
Lewis's uh he he did three a three-part
trilogy and I've only read the third
part which is called That Hideous
Strength um and it is a kind of Science
Fiction but it's also very much a sort
of Mythology and it's very powerful and
very pressing by the way I mean in 1945
or whenever he was writing it he was
foreseeing things that have happened um
recently fantastic that was one of my
introductions to science fiction and yes
I would definitely say that Lewis's
space Trilogy uh is science fiction yes
uh and also of course theological as
well and as always definitely creating
uh definitely creating a myth uh for for
the future which is one of the ways that
I I discuss science fiction I I talk
about science fiction as modern myth
making yes uh so tolken is I mean
generally considered a fantasy writer
but fantasy and science fiction are very
related and he had his ideas of of
mythopia the creation of myths for the
world and I was I was hoping that we
would explore some of this this overlap
with with myth and and science fiction
between us today absolutely yes yes well
as you know
um because you've read my
work Mythos um in in in the ancient
Greek was prior to and more important
than logos from which we derive the word
logic I mean logos didn't mean mean
logic in those days it meant uh things
that were more explicit it meant things
that you could argue for in a court of
law or you know in a debate but MOS was
the only way of ENC capturing the really
serious uh
important emotional
philosophical um thoughts about the
world that are hard to put into um
everyday language but are nonetheless
important for that and we we seem to
live in a time where for a long time uh
especially in Western culture we seem to
may maybe deny methos to say it wasn't
significant to us uh anymore we could be
a culture purely of of logos and I know
we're going to get more into this with
with your ideas but then I I see the the
way that our attempt to do that was was
completely futile because the
mefos is really more powerful than we
are and it just exploding out again and
one major way of that happening was
science fiction and the huge popularity
of of course things like Star Wars and
Star Trek uh but movies like 2001 and of
course the popularity of writers like
like Louis who make this explicitly
theological as well yes yes your
expression it's bigger than we are is
rather um uh important I think there's a
sense in which these things are not made
up but are permitted by us to come to
expression and when one is
writing the
most difficult to express things and and
certainly poetry of which I have a
little
experienced um one feels that something
is ring through you it it's not that it
it doesn't use you and take part of you
into it but it's not just coming out of
you that's the very strong feeling one
has and and so many artists and writers
have reported very much the same
phenomenon yeah AB absolutely that was
that's I think we'll get to that in in
one of my questions uh I don't want to
preempt too much here uh what I'd like
to do for my listeners is discuss uh
your work uh for which you're best known
uh which is articulated in two books uh
the master and his Emissary in 2009 and
the m with things in
2021 uh both very significant books uh I
think I've cropped up a couple of times
in your Live Events as the person who
said that uh the matter with things is
is a three and a half
pencil uh book uh to to get through it
and and deal with all of the questions
uh uh that come up and the complete
works of Shakespeare is only two and a
half
pencils
uh uh but what
would it be fair to say that uh the
master and his Emissary is your thesis
of of the jeel hemispheric model uh and
then the matter of things is the
extended philosophy I think that's a
good way of putting it the only thing I
would add to that is that um I I
explored literature that wasn't
available when I first was writing the M
the master
inistry um and so in the matter with
things I include a great deal more
neuros pychological
evidence I think there are it's about
6,000 okay papers and sources that are
referred to there so nobody can say
there's no evidence that doesn't stop
some people saying that without having
looked at my books but uh I'm trying to
get beyond beyond that so yes it is and
it's it's saying what the philosophical
import of all this is uh I I in a in a
second I'm going to ask you to give your
your your summary I guess which you must
be very used to to doing by now um I
think one of the the the important
points is that this does have these very
deep uh roots in scientific research in
in various areas that you have crossed
into uh so that separates it from the
kind of the pop culture idea of of
hemispheres yes uh which people are
quite famili with and then have also
heard is no longer valid uh so that's
something to to say that this goes
significantly beyond that idea and also
it it has a lot of similarities
to uh a a long history o of thinking
about the world that we might think of
through the Mythos or even through
religions or uh and perhaps even ideas
today like you've talked with people
about John thei about meaning and so on
so it it crosses into all of these areas
but yours seems to be uh the most
scientifically rigorous of them is that
fair do you think I think so yes and
it's not only that I um you know take up
this unpopular issue of hemisphere
difference but I come to quite different
conclusions from the ones that made
their way into popular culture so the
first hurdle I always have get over is
oh all that stuff about hemispheres was
exploded long ago it's pop science and
it's nonsense well it's true that most
of not all but most of what was said
about hemisphere differences was wrong
um but perhaps I could explain what I
think is important about the difference
please do yeah please do yeah um first
of all it it's a very um
evolutionarily verifiable hypo is if you
like the the idea is that the two
hemispheres of the brain evolved
differently not just in human beings but
in pretty much all creatures we've
looked at to solve a particular problem
which is how to pay two kinds of
attention to the world at the same time
one kind of attention is required for
survival in the simplest sense that we
need to get stuff we need to grab food
we need to catch a rabbit we need to
pick up a seed whatever it is and we
need also to be able to manipulate our
environment to pick things up and build
things and and use tools and so on in
the case of human beings so in fact the
far far back as we can go in history 700
million years we know that the neural
networks that form the ancestors of the
human brain were asymmetrical which is
interesting in itself why were they
asymmetrical and I think the reason for
this was that as I say two kinds of
attention need to be paid one is the one
with which we grab things and this is
the one subtended by US in US by the
left hemisphere and it it therefore pays
attention to something that we already
know what it is we know we want it and
we need to get it and so it focuses in a
targeted way a very narrow beam of
attention that brings
Clarity but the difficulty with this is
that it is not seeing everything else
that's going on at the same time and so
in order to survive you also need to be
looking at out for Predators not just
Predators but also for your your your
kin for your your Offspring for your
mate um for your kind and to do this you
need precisely the opposite kind of
attention maximally
open
un un sort
of undedicated yet as to what it may
find and Broad sustained and on the
lookout Vigilant so very different from
this say I know what it is I want to get
it it's a detail the the right
hemisphere is looking up for the whole
of the rest of it so the one thing that
was probably true about what people used
to say was that the left hemisphere had
um a narrow tension and the right
hemisphere brought attention and that's
not disputed by anyone in the world I
mean it's a it's a very well attested
fact but what people were not aware of
so much was that attention creates the
experiential world what we find to be
there depends on the kind of attention
we pay and there are many amusing uh
experiments that have been done uh in
recent years um showing that we're
completely blind to something we don't
expect to see um and so uh what what
follows for me is that these kinds of
attention give rise to two different
kinds of phenomenological worlds what
are they like in the nutshell the left
hemisphere sees things that are already
known for familiar fixed isolated
fragmentary
decontextualized and examples of a Kind
a category not unique but oh it's one of
those and this kind of abstracted
thinking is um a useful tool but it's
not very good for constructing reality
the right hemisphere sees something much
more complex it sees a world in which
nothing is completely uh fully known is
never completely fixed is never
completely isolated but is ultimately in
connection with everything else it's
flowing it's changing it's um often
implicit right hem is much better sorry
this is by right hemis um at picking up
um the stuff that
is hard to detect with the kind of
conscious mind so small changes in
expression in the face uh aspects of
tone of voice irony um metaphor that the
language of poetry the language of myth
it's much better at understanding the
meaning of a story whereas the left
hemisphere sees it as a simply a
sequence of vignettes it doesn't
understand the overall import of what's
going on so those are really quite
different worlds and my thesis is that
the world that we're in now has come to
depend very heavily on this very simple
um
mechanistic um theoretical vision of the
world a distinction I like to make is
between presence and a representation
and a representation means literally
present again after the fact when it's
actually no longer present so the world
is present in all its richness and
complexity and intuitive meaning that
can never be fully grasped to the right
hemisphere which is an expert at
decoding it and the left hemisphere
instead replaces reality with its own
simple map of reality now a map is not
to be despised a map is very useful but
when you mistake a map for the world
you've made a huge error and I believe
that's where we now are I just like to
add that in the ways in which we can
come to a sense of what we can rely on
we need to be using I would say at least
four things these seem to be the primary
paths to reality one is science another
is reason a third is imagination and a
fourth is intuition and we live in an
era in which imagination and intuition
have been sort of tarnished as false but
actually science and reason can lead you
to false conclusions unless they are
sophisticated by imagination and
intuition and indeed when you come to
look at as I have done the stories of
many great findings by mathematicians
and scientists they made these
discoveries not by pursuing the
scientific method as such but by having
a broad attention which saw new shapes
new form forms new as the Germans say
Galan which are holes that cannot be
decomposed into their parts without loss
and in each of these Paws science reason
intuition and Imagination the right
hemisphere pays the bigger part it is
actually more intelligent it sees more
its emotional and social intelligence
you will not be surprised to learn is
greater but its cognitive intelligence
its IQ is higher than that of the left
which is contrary to what a lot of
people think and it's much more able to
feel its way into an understanding of of
what it is um seeing in the world around
it but these values of uh imagination
and intuition uh I guess one way I I
think about it is that they give us like
broad long-term
outcomes uh and the the less left
hemispheric values uh reason and logic
seem to give us like immediate and very
measurable outcomes
uh and they seem I think the reason for
instance among the listeners of my
podcast who are often very
scientifically minded there's quite a
major uh divide they would say well we
get the machines and the
technology uh from this uh what they
might consider the whole process of
Consciousness but what you would call uh
the left hemispheric so is is that why
we currently value the left hemisphere
more because it gives us the machines it
gives us the technology and those seem
to represent all of our progress at the
moment yes I mean that takes
us a little way and I don't know how
much to go into but to concentrate on
something very
clear the left
hemisphere's aim is control and
power that's why it's in service of
manipulating the world and getting stuff
grabbing stuff it controls the right
hand with with which for most of us we
do the
manipulation um and so it's res on that
is to increase power and machines and
Technology are ways of
externalizing this kind of thinking but
what I want to impress on any listener
is that and the full argument is in my
my books but but that the the vision
that the left hemisphere brings is is
woefully deficient it is extraordinarily
lacking in an understanding of
context which changes everything of
implicit meaning of holes that can't be
degraded into Parts it focuses on things
that are supposedly precise and builds
from there as we make a machine but
actually nothing in the world except the
machines we have made has this structure
nothing living things certainly don't
and the inanimate World also does does
not it is not mechanical it is not made
in a Machin likee way so in order to
understand we need to greatly
sophisticate our intelligence and our
insight and this comes from espousing
both hemispheres and I just like to
comment on the word reason I make a
distinction which is hard to make in
English between what I call reason and
what I call rationalization or
rationalizing and in other languages
there are two different words for this
for example in German what I called
reason is called fun and what I'm
calling rationalizing is called fand so
Fant or rationalizing is a procedural
thing which you do explicitly on a paper
if this then that and so on and so
nothing wrong with it but um there is
something that's much greater than that
which is the ability to set all this
into an overall context and that's
something that comes with leading a wise
life and it's the sort of thing that you
would expect from a good judge that that
at the end of his or her career he was
able to see the whole picture and
understand in the round to take into
account many many factors in reaching a
conclusion and if you do that you are
less often caught out by reality if you
purely rationalize you make some very
strange steps and and an amusing thing
for me is that I mean a lot of time um
in my career I I've spent with patients
with skit Fria of course and in
schizophrenia people people talk about
Madness and they say it's the loss of
reason but as has been pointed out by um
various people including minkovski a
very fine polish French um philosopher
and psychiatrist in the first part of
the 20th century but also um by others
like GK Chesterton the madman is someone
who has lost everything but reason can
only rely on reason and it leads to Mad
conclusions so the person who hears a
voice and there's nobody in the room
thinks well that's strange it's not
coming from me so it must what's what is
there that's in this there's a socket
over there in the wall somebody has
wired into that is beaming voices into
my head it's kind of logical but of
course it's utterly
Bonkers so um we need to be careful
intuitions can if unguided by reason
lead to falsity but unguided by
intuition can surely read to lead to
falsity can I uh put uh uh uh lay
something out for you and uh potentially
as a as a mirror of this uh divide do
how do you know Stanley cubric 2001 yes
I do I saw it a very long time ago and I
can't really remember it very
well of course um well it seems that
we've we've been trying to find uh kind
of a story for for how our to how to
visualize our reality and we had uh a a
great methos like the Christian methos
in the western world and then we we came
more and more to science and and to
reason maybe these leaves less
hemispheric values by oh going too far
in that direction and then we've been
trying to find like a new story to put
in its place and uh I think science
fiction represents an attempt at that
story in some ways that we're going to
build space rockets and teleporters and
and starships and this will take us off
uh into into the Galaxy into the
universe but which is this completely
unconscious Place uh just full of of
dead matter and maybe some alien
civilizations as well but then in a
movie like like 2001
uh Stanley cubric if you remember he
shows you all of the the the spaceships
and the satellites around Earth but then
it's not it's not via those that we
actually go out into space uh he
actually has the
astronaut climb inside the the mind of
how the artificial intelligence and and
switch it off and then we go on this
kind of
psychedelic uh journey into into outer
space so I'm sorry to test you of a film
you you only vaguely remember but does
that seem to
express uh uh some of this divide
between the the hemispheres as an idea
just in the way that I've laid it out
for you I think it does but I I I
caution about the Divide because
um I make a distinction
between um division in the sense of
complete separation and Division in the
sense of making a distinction and there
is a distinction between these
hemispheres and one of the myths that I
need to stamp on is that the left
hemisphere is the hemisphere of Science
and the right hemisphere is the
hemisphere of sort of fantasy it's
certainly not it is the hemisphere
that's much better at Imagination but to
go off on a hair which I won't pursue
unless you want me to imagination is is
almost the opposite of fantasy fantasy
takes us away from reality imagination
enables us to enter into reality
but yes I think you're right we I mean
one thing to say right away is that
there is no conflict between
Christianity and science this is
something that has been drummed up by
only since the middle of the 19th
century by people who I suppose looking
at it most charitably they wanted to
make sure that there weren't religious
constraints on what could be could be
claimed and and that of course I would I
would B but religion and the myth of
Christianity is is which is an
incredibly probably the most rich myth
that we've ever created if we created it
um is is something
that uh speaks of exactly what the best
of the left and right hemisphere can can
bring about but what happens whenever
you have a myth and if you have a
religious myth is that the left
hemisphere wants to codify it it wants
to create a lot of rather odd
propositions that you must sign up to
and it wants to structure it in a
logical way and so whole bodies of Dogma
are created by the left hemisphere
imposing this on religion which is not
the Wellspring of religion the
Wellspring of religion is something that
is carefully responded to by patient
attention by listening to things that
you don't expect to hear understanding
the speaking to you of everything around
you and so when again you talk about
dead matter
um and again how long have you gone but
I mean you know I argue in the matter
with things that in fact Consciousness
is not something that sort of emerged
late in the day out of a brain but is in
fact a primary uh element what's called
an ontological primitive in in the
universe there's so so much rich rich
stuff in there in in relation to this
this topic
um there's there's something that that
I've observed and it's quite widely obs
oberved often among writers of Science
Fiction which is that the the kind of
the collective imagination is more and
more literal in its interpretation of
any story that that's given to it
absolutely uh so for for any for for any
half decent writer if you're writing
about uh space rockets and planets and
alien civilizations there's some level
on which you're exploring kind of
scientific ideas but there's also the
symbolic and the metaphoric and the the
Mythic in there as well but it's harder
and harder for people to to
think in that way at the moment
absolutely I mean one of the most
striking things for me is that the left
hemisphere doesn't understand anything
that is not literal so it really doesn't
understand the point of poetry why lie
when you could say it clearly uh it
doesn't understand music it doesn't
understand Irish it doesn't understand
sarcasm it doesn't understand wit or
humor and so what you find is that
people take everything incredibly
literally um and miss the point so um
the vanishment of humor from public
discourse in the recent years has been
one of the most Grievous losses to
humanity that I can imagine because in
humor although we think of it as you
know just an entertaining element it's
actually a very profound element and
it's also
um got its place in spiritual Traditions
above all in Zen which used this tumor
to help us see things that are not
logically um reductively
um explicit so um yeah I mean that this
is happening
everywhere now I might say if I may that
when I first went to America I was
working at John's Hopkins in a
neuroimaging lab and um mhm and I found
that in the first few weeks people kept
looking at me other puzzled when I tell
something and they go really and then
I'd go no not really don't mind don't
worry about it but I hadn't realized how
much of whatever I said was to be read
between the lines uh it was amusing it
was putting a perspective on something
but they took everything deadly
seriously and this may be an aspect of
having a Melting Pot of cultures where
you can't rely on the usual sort of
things to do with the way people say
thing and so you have to deal only with
the explicit but it's now become what we
have to deal with
everywhere sorry carry on please I had a
very similar very similar experience of
doing a a a long writer's Workshop in in
California this was over a decade ago
now and uh I was the only English person
there and I loved everyone on the
workshop but I realized about two weeks
into it and and I said to to one of my
friends that I I think maybe some of the
people in the group are angry with me
and my friend touched me on the knee and
said they don't they don't realize
you're being ironic and I fought back
for everything I'd said and thought oh
no they must think I'm a I'm a terrible
terrible
person but what so I want to dig into a
bit more of what what's driving this
literalism then is I know this isn't
what it is but is is the left hemisphere
becoming bigger and and H and dominating
us biologically or is there some kind of
feedback mechanism in our culture or why
are we becoming more and more yes more
left hemisphere well as you rightly say
it's not that the left hemisphere is
getting bigger um and in fact it's of
interest that the right hemisphere is
slightly bigger and heavier than the
left hemisphere in in
humans
um what is happening I think is that
let let me just refer here to one of my
favorite philosophers a an Whitehead who
said that a civilization
flourishes until it starts to analyze
itself and I think that what happens is
that in the way we have mainly lived for
thousands and thousands of years is in
harmony with nature in harmony with
Society in harmony with the myths the
rituals the beliefs of our culture and
that these had been amp ways of alerting
us to many kinds of truth that was not
just a kind of tit fortat in the court
of law way of debating things but
certain realities could not be
encompassed in that way but they didn't
need to be but what's happened in a
largely
deracinated culture where people have
been torn away from their communities
the dragged into the cities uh more and
more into a world made by machines
reflecting the left hemisphere as kind
of a world all around them when they
look out of the window they see
mechanisms they see hard surfaces on a
rigid grid um and they are no longer in
touch with what I'm you know honored and
grateful to be in touch with here which
is being surrounded by nature and these
things teach you they speak to you and
so I think what's happened is that in
this world in which we rely very much on
discourse you have to choose what it is
you say the first thing is that the
right hemisphere story is much more
complex than that of the left hemisphere
and therefore requires a lot of effort
to articulate as I know because I've
articulated it at very Great Lengths in
uh in those two books and a lot of
people write to me and say I mean
countless people write to me and say
thank goodness you've explained
something that I kind of knew at some
level but I just had no way of working
it out expressing it or or or or
defending it um and so I think what
happens is that you have to make
decisions and the worst thing that can
happen to you nowadays is to be said to
be inconsistent in fact there's a great
deal of wisdom in sometimes being
inconsistent because it's usually more
than one side to a question in fact if
only we realized that there's always
more than one side to a question we
wouldn't have all the ridiculous um
self-righteousness foot stamping
hysterical fit on the internet when
somebody says something that somebody
else doesn't agree with well get real
get educated this is what life is like
and and so there's a kind of idiocy and
ignorance that are spread across mass
culture which encourages black and white
thinking the loss of all the new ores
and in the process all the subtle stuff
is drowned out by sound bites and I
could say something which if taken in
context meant almost exactly the
opposite of what it would seem to be
saying if it was just a sound bite taken
out of its context and so incredible
Injustice is done to many people by
something being taken out of context and
whizzed around the world and then next
thing they find that people are sort of
treating them as a
nonperson so we're we're involved in
this this process of distancing from
nature yes uh and coming more and more
into to uh well I guess they are machine
environments they've been machines they
are somewhat machine like we can go back
to a movie like Metropolis for its langu
the whole city is a a big machine and
that that's that's 100 years ago yes uh
now we've we've Advanced on a a lot from
there so can I can we talk a bit about
myth directly I guess um in firstly
could I ask you kind of what are your
formative Mythic uh influences like
myths maybe that you grew up with or
that are important to you that's a good
one
um well I certainly didn't have a
religious upbringing not at least until
I went
to secondary school um where I was
fortunate to be introduced to something
I thought was beautiful and resonant and
deep
um so what did I find I think my father
was very literalistic um bless him I
mean he was a good man a very good man
but he didn't have much time for poetry
or music or anything like that he liked
facts and uh I'm in favor of facts too A
lot of them um and I've defended my
point of view with them but I think
there's more to life in that
um Robert graves's the white goddess
actually was a book I read in my um
teens and I thought it was really really
important I also read Helen wal's the
wandering Scholars which was about the
flourishing of poetry music and dance in
the late Middle Ages in Europe and what
this meant for the
culture and and then uh I didn't really
follow the path I I to this day I
haven't read The Hobbit and I haven't
read the Lord of the Rings and and it's
not that I don't think you know I don't
respect talking I do um it's just rather
as I say I don't these days have so much
time for for reading um
you know mythological books and I I
remember when I used to go say with my
grandparents I I was encouraged to and
in those days we did as we were told to
go and lie down after lunch um which
gave them chance to have a little nap
and a bit of a rest and in in my bedroom
beside my table there was a book
um the myths of Greece and so I
familiarized myself with Greek myths
early on and they were very um they
touched me deeply along with these
Celtic myths that I had heard from
Robert Graves and so these things were
were very important to me and then later
you know as I said well not later but in
my teens I began to become intrigued in
exploring further the Mythos of
Christianity I mean a word I use without
any implication of this being true or
false um and indeed I think that myths
have a kind of Truth which is greater
than factual truth
um which as I say was a perception of
the ancient Greeks anyway so um these
are the things that have
really intrigued me and I also read I
did read the CS Lewis NAA books um
partly because I'd read I'd read the
last battle when I was at school but
then when I had children of my own I
read them the whole naria seven part
thing and they were
completely wrapped by it and so was I
you know I was thinking [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] this is
good stuff so those are the things that
you know it more or less obviously have
um populated my imagination I was
surprised when you said uh that you you
didn't have these things from until you
until a little bit later no in your life
because now it seems I think many people
are searching for something that they
find in in myth and maybe you've you did
that searching uh as well and I think
one of the problems with our perception
of myth and especially maybe the
Christian Mythos is uh the idea that's
held now that if you went back 300 years
everyone fully believed in in Christ or
in God or in the elements of the Mythos
when in fact I think it's always been a
thing that people have searched for and
that a few people have found rather
than i' I'd go so far the actual held
belief of everyone the the holding of
fixed belief with certainty is not part
of faith and it wouldn't be faith if it
was certain faith is a matter of
Fidelity in fact that's the root of the
word in other words it's something that
you give your loyalty to because you
think it's great and Noble and it will
lead you to places of revelation of
Illumination um and Enlightenment and I
think there's always been this um
tendency to think
that s in up to six impossible things
before breakfast is what religion is
about but it is not at all it's about
enriching the way in which you see the
entirety of the world so that once you
start to see the world with different
eyes it is far
more it has meaning it has Direction and
purpose it has Beauty and Truth in it
and and these are the things that really
seem to me to be the essence of a
fulfilling life not to have those things
is to be set to drift and and I I've you
know this is backed by scientific
research but it's also
intuitively um obvious that the things
that give us a sense of meaning not are
not invented by us but are contacted by
us we're able to perceive them and these
are things we perceive with the help of
nature with the help of an intact
tradition of a society and with and
through religions or or at any rate
through a spiritual
inclination and these things were all
opposed to the machine there's no place
in them for the mechanical they're
simply mechanical the simply mechanical
is far too crude leaves almost
everything that's of important out and
so while it's it's useful
undeniably it's only as good as the uses
to which it's put and often we're not
the wisest assessors of what's going to
happen when we start using it in a
certain way and we're already finding
that we've set in motion things that we
cannot now easily stop it's the story of
the Sorcerers Apprentice you know who
knew how to utter the spell that would
cause the machine to get going but
doesn't know how to stop it and now
there's a lot of people who are warning
us about the way in which this is going
to impinge on humanity and perhaps take
if I may put it this way the humanity
out of
humanity so I think these things are
massively important and to embrace that
Mythos of Christianity is not to force
yourself to believe anything but to
listen to open your heart and mind to
what is expressed for me most powerfully
through the art that it has generated so
through the quite extraordinarily
beautiful music through particularly of
the relena Sal and the extraordinarily
fine paintings and the Very Moving
Poetry and these things make clear to us
things that otherwise we would ignore so
that's my my my my idea in a nutshell
that it's not surprising that we're
highly stressed depressed anxious don't
know what we're doing don't know where
we're going because we've chucked all
the means towards meaning out I just
want to emphasize again you know lots of
people say oh yes um you need these
things like you make them up actually
you're in a padded cell you can't see
anything it's a horrible business and
the soon over the better but let's cheer
ourselves up a long way by pretending
that there's something out there no mate
there is something out there and we're
part of it by the way we're you know
nature is not out there nature is in
here and I am in nature you know and the
Divine realm is not something out there
or up in the sky it's something that's
in here and I'm in it you know and and
Society is not something other than me I
am in society and society's in me these
are the ways to S but I
when when people try to to turn to to
something like the Christian methos
maybe it's fair to say that what they
get first is that left brained literal
interpretation yes of the meos which is
which is in its way dogmatic and they're
meeting that with their own left
hemisphere yes uh interpretation which
is where the arguments come up from so
is
there is there so I don't want to give
this to you like cuz this starts to
become a bit like a guru question I
guess but how how do we then
reconnect with our our right hemisphere
that's a too big a question I think but
uh
um in that maybe just in that Mythic
sense when when someone is asking that
that question well the minor doesn't
literally exists or or we don't have any
historical evidence for a ex X or why
how what is an answer to that do you
think well that not everything that is
very real
is pable down it's
not capable of being fixed the left
hemisphere once things that are
fixed and it can fix them in language
and it can fix them by tracing a course
in history but while that is a very
useful I don't get me wrong I don't
disparage that I use that all the time
my mind is quite rational actually but
but it also realizes using reason that
reason is not everything and Pascal
himself said reason is feeble indeed if
it cannot explain that reason is not
everything and of course in in for
people who like scientific and
mathematical proofs girdle's theorem
actually proves that there are things
that are certainly true with within a
certain framework but cannot be proved
within that framework so
I think one needs to free oneself from
the idea that one builds up a picture of
reality from Little nuggets that were
puts together well I've got a fact there
and a fact there I put them course they
didn't seem to mean anything although
first of all you've taken them out of
context they only mean something in the
context that they're in
um and so we need that business of
bringing
together um but it doesn't start from
the bits it starts from the fact that
things already ready to he and that our
mind wants to break them up so one has
to think in broader pattern over greater
distances in time and in space so we are
connected with others across time and
space we are as connected with uh our
ancestors as we are with our descendants
and we have loyalties to both and duties
to
both and we're also connected to people
all around the world as we more and more
perceive through the damage that has
been done by
industrialization and so
I I think the first thing is to perceive
the world differently often in a
religion people will say and they're
right to be say a Christian is not to
believe the following things and never
doubt them but it is to see with new
eyes to feel with a new
heart there is a a medieval prayer which
I think is very important God be in my
head and and it's very short it's only a
few lines you know God be in my head and
in my understanding God be in my eyes
and in my looking God be in my mouth and
in my speaking God be in my heart and in
my thinking God be at my end and at my
departing and that very neat and short
poem is very much about what I was
talking about internalizing something
that is bigger than
you and so the first thing is to change
the cast of mind and people might say
well how do I do that without working
from step to step but that again is the
left hemisphere and this is actually not
the way things work many things come as
a moment of insight as an aha moment a
rejigging of a shape of a form so that
you see it a new and boringly as a
is helping people to see for themselves
what it is they need to do and that you
know if you make the mistake as when I
was wet behind the ears and and hadn't a
lot of experience in Psychiatry I used
to do which was to tell people what they
needed to do it wasn't that I was wrong
I was right but the thing is it's no
good telling people until they see it
for themselves and once more what they
will see is greater than anything I can
tell them and more appropriate to them
so that's what I say I mean of course I
can become Bal and say there are things
to do like practice mindfulness which I
think is very important um practice
being compassionate and grateful um the
these are simple things and and listen
more to music and and attend to it don't
just you know have it on in the
background and not not pay attention to
it
so and to to read my and re-engage
really with a with a with a mythology
and the best mythologies are religious
mythologist in my view I mean that that
there the accumulation of wisdom of so
many people over so long the idea that
little me can in my lifetime with the
little bit that I know improve on that
is is huous isn't it isn't that just an
extraordinary Act of arrogance so it's
not to say that you know Traditions
aren't changing they're changing all the
time they flow but the only way in which
we can make things go in direction that
we think is better is by engaging with
that tradition it's like a cloud that
you want to go somewhere you don't cut
it off from its stem and roots and stick
it on the wall you train it that and
that's what a tradition is like that's
very cool I I think maybe I can I can
push on that a bit um so I think for for
for for people today there is a great
difficulty engaging with these religious
Traditions which I would say are kind of
the the the great Mythos Mythos perhap
of our of our
civilization yeah myth yeah yeah so I
think we're engaging instead with what
we might call a synthetic Mythos um and
two of two of the great figures in that
happening one is Joseph Campbell yes and
his hero's journey or his monomyth so he
he he I would say it's kind of like a
synthesizer he takes all of this pattern
from great Mythic Traditions especially
the Christian tradition yes and presents
it in a kind of uh uh uh as as a pattern
which is then picked up by storytellers
and famously Star Wars but hundreds of
other movies and these movies seem to be
consistently very powerful for people
they have a real effect yes and then
Campbell's ideas are really coming from
car and his ideas about archetypes and
so on so could could you comment perhaps
a bit on the idea of uh could a
synthetic MOS have value in that way uh
and also about perhaps a relationship
between Y and your own thinking on on
the hemispheres and meaning and myth yes
there is a very strong link between my
thinking and Yung and it really wasn't
from Reading Yung that I generated ated
what I think it worked the other way
that I worked from the Neuroscience to
see what the picture was and it wasn't
always the one that people would
anticipate and yet I found constantly
resonances with yong's work and with
Hillman you know James Helman who was a
a disciple if you like yeah of of Yong
um so yes no I agree with with this what
what I what I found is that miso from
all around the world have similar core
[Music]
perceptions um at the beginning of part
three of the matter with things which is
the section on ontology or metaphysics
whatever you like to call it and I I
quote at some length um a
Miss uh of the onandaga
people uh who are
iray which I think is staggering I mean
when I first said it I could not believe
it it was absolutely what I was seeing
in the hemisphere it's a story of Two
Brothers one of which is more insightful
and better motivated than the other but
they both have divine power and what
needs to happen is that the one that is
more more fallible more and and more
arrogant and more resentful this other
brother is kept if you like under the
egis of the wise brother but they
shouldn't shouldn't get too close
together because otherwise what the
right hemisphere the master the better
Brothers he would be vitiated by what
the left hemisphere
contribut and so that was a staggering
one but you know people don't have to
expose Christianity and I happen to
think it's the richest of all the
mythologist but there's so much in bant
there's so much in DSM I'm a doist and
there's no contradiction between being a
doist and being in my case a very odd
and probably not very good Christian but
but but at least um the these These are
other ways of um these are other ways of
thinking that it's so rich that to
neglect them is to deprive yourself of
all the things that to me seem to give
life its its richness so and I hope
people will ReDiscover and I think
although you say people are very
resistant to this I think they're
resistant to the the bad stuff and and
and particularly when they look at
religions as are fundamentalist and
violent and hateful that has nothing to
do with religion nothing so I mean
that's just a perversion of religion
there a horrible exress from a religion
but they are searching for myth but not
just the sort of myth that somebody made
up yesterday really but one that seems
to
reflect a deep insight into the nature
of the
cosmos and sometimes this can be done in
L mythical terms I mean I hope that what
I
have if you like what I certainly don't
to go on record to saying that I think
the hemisphere differences is a myth
except in the sense that myths can be
profoundly true in a in a in a logical
way as well but but it is if you like a
helpful myth that enables people to see
why certain things go together you know
why for example with an attention to
detail a failure to understand implicit
meaning and the kind of um insane
optimism go together I mean they don't
sound like they should but in fact if
you know about hemisphere differences
you can see exactly why they do and then
you can start seeing it in I just put
those three randomly together because
after all there are so many differences
you can find many intersections but all
I'm really saying is that the old vision
of the right and left was just so wrong
and we need to really pay attention
critically to what the real differences
are if we're to know ourselves and you
know the great injunction of the ancient
Greek world was know thyself it's very
simple two words but so profound I think
my my before encountering your ideas and
they helped me to understand this much
more clearly uh my way into some of this
was through uh attempting to be creative
trying to write yes for me uh uh which
and then uh uh quite young actually I I
I started teaching writing and one of
the groups of people I would work with
with were people who were very
intelligent usually professionals uh now
were now retired professionals so they
they had a very highly trained intellect
and they were trying to crack this nut
of being being creative and I I came up
with my own myth about it uh which I
would use with people which is that the
part of you that that wants to be
creative is like uh a crazy Old
Hippie uh that has huge ideas about
often about myths actually but in order
to express it you have to work with you
have to get the crazy Old Hippie to work
with a kind of uptight middle manager
who who actually has the writing skills
that are needed to to do the writing and
you have to somehow get these two
characters into a room together and get
them working together uh which I think
for me is something like the the left
and right hemispheres in their in their
character but I feel that for a lot of
people this is their way into this is
about this creative challenge like you
try and write but there's this inner
editor who's always there criticizing
everything that you write so you never
you never finish anything well just as
iide that's been a big problem in my
life um they have a very strong n
critic
um but I think the
the only thing I'd have to do here is to
dissociate myself from the idea that the
right hemisphere is a crazy old be and
the right hemisphere is the found of f
of wisdom really um and is also very
Down to Earth by the way um unlike many
hippies um okay it is actually the one
that is more in touch with reality and
and better grounded than the left which
goes off on fantasies but what I yeah
would would add to your picture is that
when people people want to be creative
they wanting to be creative is something
to be slightly wary of because it's one
of those things that can't be wanted in
the left hemisphere way so what do I do
if I follow the following steps and that
is not going to work um any more more
than I want to believe you know really
work and you can try it's true but in a
way you have to open yourself up to
something that you don't yet know what
it is and in order to do that you have
to still the part of your mind that is
striving to achieve this part of your
mind that says I know what it is I know
what I need because every time we say I
know we close down again on the familiar
that we're trying to get away from and
so a lot of time in creation passes in
what appears to be
unfruitful uh openness to things without
any conclusions being drawn but it's
only in that uh wise Silence of not
saying and not doing that things will
begin to reveal themselves to us
um Steiner has has written very well
George Steiner on on this this idea of
the sort of attentive mind that is
hearing something it's not quite clear
yet but it's leaning into it and and
that is a very good model which he sees
actually imaged in the four paintings of
the enunciation by FR Angelico in which
the the Virgin is is sort of listening
to the Angel and the angel is sort of as
if we're attending to the to the Virgin
anyway yeah and just just sitting with
some of that for a moment when you said
about your own uh inner critic yes there
have you do you feel that in the writing
of uh
non-fiction of these two books that you
have you have silenced the critic to
some
extent I have fears when I can um the
critic is usually most vocal when I'm
trying to get
started um which is a sort of couch 22
um and in fact I only was able to write
the master in his Emissary by pretending
to myself and I really did believe that
what I was doing I said look okay
I I wrote all the main Concepts about 70
of them on little linges of paper and I
laid them all out on the floor in the
living room and move them about to see
where they went and see if I could find
a diagram and I really couldn't so I
said to myself write um no more than 25
Pages a a skeleton of where you want to
be going in this
book and I headed it up as you can of
course in word with a with a header that
said draft outline of the master in his
Emissary and it finally reached um about
1,300 pages of of text and U I printed
it off and gave it to a friend of mine
who I call my unofficial editor because
he's so insightful and he had a shop I
gave it to him in a shopping bag and he
looked in and he saw the title and he
said some
outline and indeed it was but that was
the way in which I sort of fooled myself
into writing
it but um another thing is that I I feel
that when I'm writing well stuff comes
that from that place which is not
entirely forced or intended uh stuff
asks me to be
written and
um I I've sometimes thought when I look
at the Master's atmosphere and even more
when I look at the matter with things
which as you know is
a an even greater task in terms of the
amount of scholarship and Science in it
I I I I sort of look at it and think but
how did you write that I mean you were a
lazy person how could you have written
it so I come to the conclusion that you
know the mice wrote it in the night you
like the tailor of gler came down in the
morning not having enough cloth for the
waste coat he had to deliver in the
morning and suddenly found the mice had
made it I feel like that you see the
thing is that very little of what goes
on is conscious we have this idea that
there are two tanks there's a sort of
nice big clear tank of Consciousness and
underneath is a slightly murky muddy
region uh which has a sort
of a perhaps a sort of flip column
through which you can pass from one to
the other but most of what goes on is in
the Consciousness this is absolutely not
true I mean I used to say that 95% of
all our mental activity is unconscious
but um a paper with rather amusing
Precision that I quote in the books says
that
99.44% of mental activity is not
conscious in other words you you don't
have to buy the Precision to get the
point that almost everything we do and
not just the the sort of lesser stuff
goes on unconsciously so we solve
difficult problems in math in our life
we uh project um how to deal with the
future um to make um decisions to like
things to fall in love to not all these
things are going on under the radar and
they're not unintelligent for that
they're using our full intelligence and
you found a very for for a work of very
based on a lot of very rigorous research
you found a very potent myth to to
communicate yes uh in in the master and
the master and his emsy which I think is
why it has
communicated uh because this this seems
to be a very important part of
communicating complex ideas to people I
I think for instance that like Einstein
and relativity is is completely
incomprehensible to most people but the
idea that you go to space and you come
back and it's the future because of
Relativity that is the myth that people
can actually on to uh or the trains in
relation to each other yes and and what
you're describing is is quite a
consistent story of of myth makers that
this comes from from somewhere from
somewhere beyond us from from artists
and creators and scientists as well but
anyone who reaches that that real
insight it seems to
come yes come from Beyond us is so so is
that beyond the right Hemisphere or is
that
simplifying too much I think that could
be simplifying too much
um yeah
the thing is we don't know really the
depth of our knowledge because if we did
we'd be conscious of it but I think that
in our unconscious we are making sense
of talking and understanding intuitively
something about the way our mind and
therefore our brain works and and for me
the best demonstration of this is this
onandaga Legend which is completely
amazing it's so
accurate about how the Trin actually
works and it comes from an era before
there were any brain um Imaging studies
so I I think that's that's the way i'
I'd put it the difficulty with the r is
that
um you know people who are are very if
you like narrow in their thinking think
that well if he's created a thing that a
myth must be wrong he's not a real
scientist which is rather a shame
because you know I've really sweated
blood over
the and I defy anyone to show me exactly
why I've got this wrong nobody ever
has in fact there's a very interesting
phenomenon which is something like this
um scientists say well I love the
neuroscience and and you know no quarrel
with that it's very interesting and
revealing but then you go on and apply
it to life you know and I'm not with you
there and then there are other people
who say well I don't know about the
neuroscience and all but what you see in
the evolution of Western culture is so
right you know just it cries out and so
you got these two people each of them s
of saying yes this bit fine this they
don't want a corpus col to put them
together but that's what I hope I
have provided because they do need to be
seen together and my editor atale for
the mastering cry I sort of said you
know I think there are two books here we
could make two books out of this and she
very wisely said yeah but the TR is that
the scientists would read one and the
humanities people would read the other
and never the train should meet and so
I'm extremely glad that she insisted
they should all be part of one book can
I can I ask you about the the idea of
the machine absolutely again because
this is this is very powerful in in
science fiction we have um from from
Frankenstein so Mary Shell's
Frankenstein written in the gothic
tradition but it's often recognized as
the first science fiction Noel you of
course have a a a scientist at the heart
of it um and but then this idea that you
can put together a body from spare parts
that if if we what if we've given up the
idea of of humans as some kind of divine
entity perhaps with a soul uh what do we
say they are so we start to say that
we're
machines uh and shell reflects on that
and reflects on the the kind of the
horror of that
possibility uh a a very famous science
fiction movie like The Matrix where
we're literally lost in machines that
that control every part of our life and
this is something I talk with about too
about my um podcast
listeners uh because I'd say about 70%
of the science fiction community and I
poll them on this if I ask them would
say yes I am a machine and they might
add to that that I am a
biological uh a biological machine so
this seems to be the the Mythos of our
time this is how we understand ourselves
now uh as a machine and I know that that
you can can see through that or or pass
that for us and I'd like you maybe to
talk to my listeners who think that they
are machines about how how to have a
larger picture of ourselves than that
well in chap chapter 12 of the matter
with things um a chapter called the
science of life um a case of left
hemisphere
capture what I'm arguing there is that
organisms are holes that are not
decomposable into their parts and are
not understood if viewed as machines and
that's not um anything I say without um
serious scientific evidence and there
are a number of um talks I've now done
perhaps half a dozen with um Michael
Levan who is um a distinguished
professor at TFT and and a
microbiologist and geneticist and
evolutionary biologist um about this and
I think that more and more I see people
realizing that the old story that was
told that we were all the sort
of poor da but this idea that somehow
you know we're lumbering robot thoughts
controlled by our genes for their
benefit um that was a myth that was
simply mythical in in the in the
pejorative sense and that we're not
machines um and we completely Miss many
things and can't explain many things if
we think of ourselves as such I think I
give at least eight ways in which we
differ from machines and look over the
evidence in some detail so I recommend
people to read it if they're interested
um but I think there's a big problem
here which is more of a philosophical
nature that we don't understand the
relationship between parts and a whole
and what I think is that parts are an
invention so what that are is
holdes in other words not machine
mechanical constructions but uh non uh
divisible
although um they have distinguishable
Parts but non-divisible holes that can't
be reduced to that part
and uh there was a great mathematician
and philosopher called uh Robert Rosen
who um wrote a book called life itself
and a more approachable book called
essays on life itself in which he argues
that whatever exists is
largely better understood by
assimilating it to the model of an
organism than that of a machine even the
inanimate world and he leads to the
conclusion that actually inan animacy is
something that doesn't really exist but
would be the asymptotically approached
um reality if one pushed the mechanical
idea far enough but it doesn't actually
exist anywhere and that when one starts
realizing what one's dealing with is
organic holes one understands their
their their behavior and and the way in
which we can understand them we
understand them much better
so all that exists is is holes and what
we see as parts are holes at another
level and so there are in a sense a
nesting of holes in the cosmos um and
different holes are appropriate at
different levels of magnification if you
like to talk in those
terms so that's some of what I'd say um
but I could you know quote some
fascinating things that suggests that um
we're not I mean Barbara m who won the
Nobel Prize for her work in microbiology
was able to show that microorganisms
bacteria and single cells were able to
respond in an imaginative way to a
crisis that they were never programmed
to tackle and had never experienced
before but they came up with a solution
nonetheless and that requires a certain
kind of intelligence whatever you like
to say it might not be intelligence like
yours or mine but it's some kind of an
intelligence and there are many other
instan throughout the natural world
plants that make decisions that they
simply can't possibly have been prepared
for uh in in strange situations set up
in the laboratory I probably haven't got
time to explain them here but but they
are gripping and amazing so we we know
that all that lives and probably all the
things that we don't think live um
behave in ways that we haven't
completely fathomed and as you go
further and further into the um Ultra
micros opic world of of particle physics
and so on you realize that once again
the idea of a mechanism doesn't work so
the way I look at it is the idea of a
mechanism is a kind of um shoddy model
that works okay for practical purposes
in the middle of something but it
doesn't work at all when you go small or
go big and it doesn't work at all when
you go in rather than
out so as I sometimes say if I were
Building a garage I don't need to take
take into account the curvature of the
world but that doesn't mean the World is
Flat the world is curved and um it's
sperical and that's really important to
note but for certain purposes one can
ignore reality and the left hemisphere's
model is not real it's a model exactly
that and a machine is simply a model
it's a way in which we have modeled
things in order to be able to manipulate
the world better and for those purposes
they work but um mistake is to think
that because we've made something that
worked we
understand the things of which it is
only a remote um cousin or not even that
because it doesn't belong to the same
family at all could we almost argue then
that there there aren't any machines a
machine is when we impose this this map
onto uh something which is actually a
set of holes and we see it as a machine
because we're going to use it for a
certain purpose there yes all the ways
in which we understand things are models
and we we we improve the model or we or
we don't and I think the the model of
the machine yes it it works very well
every day for making stuff um to help us
manipulate but it it's not truthful it's
just a model not a very good one not a
very sophisticated one but yeah it's
it's fine and the proof of the pudding
is that it has made us powerful alas
without improving our wisdom and I would
say we're probably the least wise people
that have ever inhabited the Earth and
yet we're also the most powerful this is
a dangerous
compensation and we we well we we tell
this story in myth over and over again
that our machines are very powerful but
they're not wives uh and uh they're
they're unable to to
wield meaningful to create meaningful
things in the world they will strip
meaning out of everything but it's seems
very I just want to push on it a little
bit further it seems
very very very sad that so many people
see ourselves certainly up probably up
until my mid 20s I would have agreed
with that assertion that I am a
machine uh and I feel sad about that in
in retrospect for what I may have
thought about myself and I think it was
also accompanied with a lot of other
thoughts you know a certain despair if
the world is just a big big machine
where where is the meaning in any of
this for me well yes and you you
referred to
um images coming from the early 20th
century and and one that you probably
know is the machine stops a short story
by am forer which is amazing he it's
already in 1912 whenever he wrote it
that we were going to be ending up
basically living in a machine depending
on it and not really understanding what
lay outside it it is a
worry but you
know can a machine bleed to quote
Merchant Merchant of Venice can a
machine sorrow can it fall in love can
it change its mind can it truly
imagine um in what ways is a machine
like us all that we do in AI is to
project outwards a
bloodless abstracted way of thinking
turning something that is something we
should be trying to get Beyond not um
enlarge
um and it is the the means
whereby the left hemisphere thinking is
pushed outwards into the world you see
because the left hemisphere loves the
theory it prefers anything that fits
with the theory and doesn't see anything
that doesn't fit with its Theory so once
you've decided that people at machines
for example just to take an example then
you don't see all the evidence of things
that don't fit with that because the
left hemisphere wants consistency with
its model the right hemisphere is what
vs ramach Chandon a very great
neuroscientist call The Devil's Advocate
in other words it says yeah but hang on
it might not be like that that is a
really important um element to have in
one's um Armory
and the right hemisphere's way of
approaching things is okay you say this
in theory let's now test it against
reality now that's great but the
difficulty is that the left hemisphere
has colonized external reality so for
many people when they look outwards into
the world they see a screen they see a
machine they see all around them they
see a bringing into being of this
mechanical utility itarian World which
is the left hemispheres world and in
recent years it has pushed forward in
two very damaging ways one is a colossal
growth like a cancer of
administration so that now all the
institutions that look after us and look
after our future the
universities the schools the hospitals
are topheavy with Departments of
management that try to tell teachers and
doctors and Le what they should say and
what they should do and who they should
hire and this is a very bad State of
Affairs it's an expression outwards of
left hemisphere procedural thinking and
the other is AI and now so much of time
is wasted for all of us I mean by
machines so something that 10 years ago
would have taken a f minute phone call
to somebody in the office who say I see
what's going on don't worry I can sort
that but now I spend literally half a
day on the internet and instead of being
ble to speak to somebody that says you
know we can help you are frequently
asked questions but the frequently asked
questions are never the ones I'm really
asking cuz they they're too generic and
I've got a typical problem here and you
know there are boxes you have to check
in things you have to go through to get
there and I I can't because nothing is
truthful in in in response to them so
this is a huge waste of time I me you
might I don't know if I've got time just
very briefly to refer to an amusing
episode in recent history when I gave a
lecture for University and much to my
amazement was paid for it oh it's
delightful it was rather handsomely paid
for it and in the old days what would
have happened is that the the the
finance department called the university
chess would have sent me a check in the
post and I'd have cashed it but no now
lots of things have to be done through
um a platform online and not only one
but a couple of platforms and you can
only graduate to the second one once
you've done the first and they said
don't worry we've got someone who will
guide you through this three minut three
months into this process not having got
onto the second platform the person
moved on to another job and said don't
worry that somebody else is coming 6
months into this process this other
person and I had not been able to solve
the problem and eventually I thought
what the hell is going on here because
it asked me to tick a box and there were
77 boxes representing what I could have
provided as a service to the university
and I could have provided window
cleaning I could have provided catering
but there wasn't one for giving a
lecture which seems to me a rather
fundamental part of the life of
University so I rang up and amazingly
got a person that won't happen in a few
years time and I said this is hopeless
and they said oh tell me about it it's
the bane of Our Lives it it's it's
ridiculous um it doesn't correspond with
reality it gives us so much extra work
well this is of course what's happening
for all of us and so she said I said
well what do I do cuz I'm completely
stuck I can't move on said just take any
box and we'll pay you so I take window
cleaning and and you know they paid me
which is lovely um and I I Justified it
to myself by saying you know
metaphysically I was cleaning their
Windows
um well they're the same they're the
same thing I guess aren't they the the
the administration the bureaucracy and
thei because the thing the only thing
actually the AI will be able to do is
perpetuate bureaucracy watch is already
underwear
y yeah and what you said in there to to
pluck this out is
that what the left hemisphere fiz is or
models is less and less like reality and
more and more like a
machine uh and what we and what we are
doing is is actually going further and
further from a reality that we can't we
can't touch anymore because we're we're
in the mentality of the machine we built
the machines around us then the machine
is all of this idea about the world that
the left hemisphere prefers to to
reality that's exactly right
um and and what's interesting is that
the U and I've come to see the
importance of this more and more is that
the left hemisphere doesn't really
recognize anything it itself has not
made so the right hemisphere is
interested in what actually exists but
the left hemisphere is interested in
things that conform to the model of
things it has made and so unless it has
already got this idea because remember
it likes the familiar the things that
fit it doesn't like anything that
disturbs that um anything that isn't
made by it becomes Target and I believe
that at the moment we see the war being
waged on nature and on Life by the left
hemisphere world and that things that
don't fit with the Nar
are
being ignored ostracized and dismissed
destroyed and more and more of what we
will get is the quote wisdom of some
chat gbt with steroid on steroid which
basically does a survey of the internet
and comes up with stuff which has
already been put there largely by people
who've been Consulting chat chat GPT and
no doubt its descendants in due course
so what getting is a self-referential
loop that it will be impossible
eventually to break out of because
anything other than that will be called
untrue or or pseudo science or whatever
we desperately need to get back to truth
and in Oxford on the 9th of February I'm
giving a talk um to the university on
truth and what why the university is
becoming less and less relevant because
it is turning away from The Pursuit Of
Truth yeah wow uh I I've had you for
about an hour and 20 minutes of
recording uh I'd love to carry on for a
little bit longer as long as you're
happy to yes I am
yes okay okay yeah okay wonderful let
let me uh go go a bit make us a
speculation here then which I've I've
had in response to your your thinking
quite a few times that
um on the direction of
meth
and so we were talking about truth there
a truth and reality basically so I'll
I'll put it on the table just as a a
statement we we've said that as well you
made the point that myths T tend to
express these
related World Views or ideas there's a
certain consistency across all of our
mytho uh one I think is like the
presence of some kind of
higher a higher being or a higher
Consciousness be it like gods or Angels
or uh uh Davis in in Hindu mythology
another we might point to is uh maybe a
kind of other an other
realness uh which we speculate on a
mythology um so I I I I want to ask
is it possible that the way that the
right hemisphere sees the world is what
it shows us then in the
myths that it tells us is this Mythic
reality that we've pushed so far away
closer to a truth about our
reality I I would certainly say that
um it would be logical for us to suppose
that we
knew everything or could understand
everything I mean if a mouse could think
and speak as we do we would say well you
know there's nothing beyond what I know
but we we know there is and there may be
creatures in future or elsewhere that
know more than we do but that knowledge
exists um whether we know it or not if
you like there is something there beyond
what we can grasp it would be an
extraordinary Act of blind
um arrogance really to suggest no we
know it all we we understand it all so I
and a
deep both
intuitions and elements of experience
that suggest that there is more to this
Cosmos than than we we know the full
story of it's not a very extravagant
claim actually and the right hemisphere
is able to put us in touch with that
better than the left because the left
only understands as I say what it's
grasped as things it could make or has
made so this world is populated by its
own conceptions but the trouble is that
its own conceptions are too narrow and
the way to break out of this is by
engaging the not fanciful right
hemisphere but the
imaginative right hemisphere which is
able to see into things deep into them
in a way that the the left hemisphere
cannot so I do believe that yes
and
I I think the the notion that there is a
cosmos out there and greater than us is
a great relief in a way because you then
can begin to open up and feel that it is
not your job somehow to sort it all out
or to but you but it is your job and
this is a serious duty to respond to it
to at least respond to it and I believe
truth is a relationship truth is an
encounter it's not stuff just out there
and it's not just stuff I made up but
it's what comes about through my
encounter with everything
else but obviously every other person's
encounter with everything else and that
doesn't mean that we just make it up it
means that there is a reality that it
behoves us to be true to in the way that
we use the word true in in a belie you
know I be true to somebody that I'm
loyal
and when you live in that truth and in
that loyalty that whatever it is then
begins to grow and become part of you
and you become part of it so it is a
generative encounter in which both
parties are untouched and so what we
need to get away from is the idea that
there is a truth as it were in a box
somewhere and we take a path towards it
and we open the box we've got it it is
in fact a journey it will always be a
journey because it's one that can never
be fully completed but the fact that it
can never be fully completed completed
is not a problem because the value of it
is
in honorably truthfully loyally
magnanimously generously
kindly following that path bearing in
mind the higher values not just those
that are useful to us but things like
goodness Beauty and truth so I mean this
is the vision that that I have I can't
help people for it means nothing but to
me it means a very great deal and it
also means that in a way your life is
not pointless or purposeless no your
purpose and point is to help grow the
good things that are in the cosmos it's
Beauty not to bring ugliness not to
bring destruction but to bring more
connection more kindness and tolerance
more Beauty uh more goodness into the
world I mean I'm sorry if I S preachy
but hell I mean these are important
messages and you know I don't I'm not
really made up member of any religion
but that shouldn't stop me from seeing
these
things H uh I I I think that methos
precedes religion yes that religion
maybe is is is that kind of for
formalized dogmatic thing but is trying
to show us I agree yeah but but also it
takes it further so it it's very
difficult to engage simply with the
Mythos without all the other things that
religion begins I mean the word means a
binding and it means the coming together
at Minds who can pursue things who can
share things who can feel a relationship
and and this is very important for human
flourishing so and and also very
beautiful as I was saying works of art
and rituals and indeed myths that have
been generated by religion so it's a
two-way flow when religion becomes too
sclerotic then it's a problem I agree
but it also does a sort of two-way dance
with our mythical sense in helping us to
guide that because we might have a myth
of I mean anything really in a way um
and and that could be unfortunate
because I mean most people can can see
the falsity of certain kinds of myths
for example the myth that was
perpetuated throughout most of the 20th
century by the Soviet Union or by Ma
these were mythologies they were
profoundly destructive
horribly cruel um and attacked
everything good and beautiful so these
are not these are not good BS so we need
to have in a way a bit of a touchstone
and that can be an internal Touchstone
but it can also benefit from after all
the condensate of knowledge of people
from Days Gone By who are not stupid cuz
they weren't us or didn't know things we
know there's lots of things they knew
that we have
forgotten
um that I want to push a little bit more
I want to be be the the voice of some of
my podcast listeners for a second uh who
uh who uh they kind of willingly listen
to me talking about myth but they they
don't really think science fiction is
myth and they they think myth is just
made up so so now I've just put the idea
on the table for them that no actually
myth is a bit more like
reality uh than than than our Longos the
Mythos is is at least necessary and so
and I think they would at this point
actually have some
anger about
it uh because because
um because they had this perception of
myth as lie and they don't want a a
lie asserted as as as real uh so I've
just channeled them to to to that length
there so what what more could we say to
them well the first thing used to be is
to be aware when you're finding
something makes you
angry
and I don't mean just in the way that a
psychiatrist would say that's probably
showing you a conflict in mus that
you're not recognizing but I mean that
anger is absolutely the main mode of
operation of the left hemisphere it's
always angry um and it's always right by
the way it always knows what the truth
is uh thinks it does but of course you
know from my work that actually it's
often frankly deluded completely deluded
but it's emphatic that what it thinks it
knows is the only story and thinking you
know the only story is also I would say
a bit of an alarm well hey uh are you
really sure about that um what about
listening to a few other people and
seeing if that perhaps Rings a belt the
other thing I'd say is
that what about
poetry poetry takes us to places that
are not just literal scientific facts
but are you prepared to say that poetry
is
lies if so I can't really help you I'm
just Ed to know because if you think
that you you you're going to miss out on
an enormous amount of of experience um
that is profoundly it speaks to us as
embodying truths truths that are much
harder to express in the language one
might use for
um a dishwasher instruction manual and
and so what are we really saying it was
only with lock in the 18th century that
people started to talk about myths and
perish and so on as as as
lies
and you one has to be very careful about
that because there are things that can
be believed as unshakably true because
we've proved them according to what we
know which we now know are not true so
until Rutherford we thought that the
Universe really obeyed Newtonian
mechanics but there's ample evidence
over the last 100 years that this is
simply not the case and we're now seeing
as I say in biology that there's
evidence that there are whatever you
like to call them form fields or
whatever that guide the development of
an organism that are nowhere to be found
in the genome we believed it was all in
the genome then we sequenced The genome
and we found there wasn't Not only was
there wasn't enough information but
there was hardly any I it was so small
the amount of of information it was many
orders of magnitude too little to
express what it is that organisms can do
so we're now opening our minds again and
thinking well maybe there's something
else going on here when you think about
that you come to different conclusions
and I think it's worth
mentioning that almost all the
physicists of the 20th century the great
ones who one think of was having
developed uh quantum mechanics people
like Neil bour Max plank Heisenberg
scheringer and so on I don't need to go
through the panoply but practically all
of them um had a great deal of time for
religious
myths and in fact there is um uh I qu in
in the book um evidence about the
beliefs of Nobel Prize winners now the
Nobel Prize has been awarded since 1900
so we have evidence over the last 120
years is of the religious beliefs of
people who won Nobel prizes are
scientists less religious than the
people who at the top of their game in
the humanities no in the humanities the
rate of people who at some point in
their life have been disbelievers in the
Divine is about 35% it's still not a
majority but it's pretty large and as
you go down into the Sciences it's
something like um it's something like a
9% for biology about 7% for chemistry
and it's 4.9
4.7% for physicists they are the most
religious people and it's also the
hardest science frankly so I just ask
all these um people who just know
they're right and get very angry when
someone says something they don't agree
with to you know Cal down take a deep
breath consider that you might not know
everything that the things you believe
are right might only temporarily seem to
be right and are just a stepping stone
on reaching greater truth greater wisdom
that's all I can say and you know the
great thing as a psychiatrist is that
you know there are people you can't help
um and so you you stop banging your head
against you know I'm never going to win
this person over so you stop worrying
about it there always going to be people
who don't see what it is you're talking
about fu everybody has to sit with the
truth know and the consequences of that
so good luck you know if you're one of
the angry young men or angry old
man there we
go well I I I
think something we've lost in our
teaching CU because we're not allowed to
offend
students is that you can't you can't
really teach anything without uh uh
pushing people to the point of anger
because it it's part of our development
can I put one one more big question on
the table for you before we we wrap up
which is which is the future so
obviously the future is a big part of
Science Fiction and I think that's
because the future has become very
important to us we don't we don't have
another world to think about so we think
about the future of this world uh and
and you mentioned actually uh uh Stalin
and Mao I think just now so that was one
kind of utopian vision of the of the
future uh maybe a future with no
Injustice assuming we give them the
credit that they actually believed what
they were saying uh so we have that
utopian future but I the the most
powerful future seems to be progress the
future will have progressed primarily
Tech technologically will have uh better
technology but none of these seem to be
particularly compelling ing futures for
us at the moment we think more actually
about Armageddon and and
dystopia uh and the destruction of the
world maybe via VIA climate change so I
wonder if you have thoughts on the
future and maybe a big question about
maybe what might a a more
hemispherically balanced
future uh look like what might a more
right hemisphere future look like
perhaps
well of course the the talking of myths
the myth of progress is is a very
singular idea I mean it was never
exposed before by any other culture but
it's become our since Enlightenment
which was a you know a very valuable but
also hubristic movement that believed
that it knew everything and understood
everything and the future would be um
ever more wonderful uh I read a
wonderful German um haou the other day
which basically translated goes in the
past it was good then everything became
much better if only it were good again
anyway um
I I I I think
um predicting the future is famously a
Mug's Game so I don't know but I think
it's very wise of us to think about the
consequences of our actions and I I take
that the cautionary principle has a
great deal in it
and that there are certain steps you can
take that will be extremely hard to
reverse and we've talked a bit about
that already how a cage that's made out
of self-referring Loops will be very
difficult to break out of so I I do
worry about that and I think it's the
way we're going and it's certainly the
case that the greatest crimes in the
history of humanity in terms of their
scope and uh severity have been
conducted by people who thought they
knew how to make a better world so we
have Lenin and Stalin and Maro and Paul
paron and so on
um people who are a little bit more
humble and want to work with people to
make them to change their understanding
of other people to be more tolerant of
other people not less tolerant of them
um would be important so I think what I
would say is as a more hemisphere balanc
future would be a beautiful place to
live it would be one where yes science
made progress but it wasn't trembled by
as we now know that science is being
trembled by a form of political
correctness and wokeness there are
certain things that are true but are
known to be true but can't be said and
are dismissed at other things that
because they promote the the received
narrative are not good science but
another that's published so and and a
recent piece of research shows that
scientists the majority nearly all in
fact in the words of the piece of
research scientists um consulted in the
US said that they um to some extent
sense self sensed what it was they they
said or thought or investigated so it
would be a world that was more in touch
with truth but also a Kinder one because
you know for all that we're trying to
achieve this wonderfully balanced and
and lovely world I've noticed during my
lifetime a great loss of of joy and
peacefulness you know in the world I
grew up we no more thought of you
know the things that trouble us now as
huge problem maybe we should have done
but in fact um there was more
understanding between the Sexes there
was probably less anxiety between and
fear between the
races um and I know that's a difficult
area to go into because there are all
kinds of points of view and I respect
the is complicated but I think it's also
worth considering that we haven't
necessarily made it all better in fact
what we've done whatever we have done is
produce a world which is racked with
mental illness and in which people feel
a drift and don't know what to say or
what to believe so I think in that world
we would have returned to a sense of
purpose which was anchored around the
great values of goodness Beauty and
truth and a sense of the
Sacred and we would begin to work
together rather than work against one
another not feeding conflict and
adversity and um I'm right you're wrong
and I need power and you you must have
less but instead a sort
of seeing that we can work together this
is so Elementary that it's been part of
all the people who have really helped
Humanity forward in the last you know in
the 20th century of M Mandi and indeed
of of um Martin Luther
King and and and and Nelson Mandela I
mean was that we need we need to work
together to to to cooperate because if
we don't we'll die I mean there's no
question about it and you know
interestingly the story of evolution is
not one of constant opposition and
aggression that comes into it it's a
very important part of the picture but
actually the species that have been most
successful have been those who learned
to
cooperate so cooperation is a big part
of becoming whatever we are and I would
say that if we could adopt a little more
humility
about what we know faced with an insight
into actually how little we understand
if we could rediscovers compassion and
the Art of gently listening to people in
a non patronizing way but being able to
discuss whatever nothing should be off
limits we should be able to talk about
it in a reasonable way and hear one
another out and and a sense of wonder at
the beus nature of the world which is
not just a foregone mechanism these
things would ult ultimately
alter the way in which we experience
life and I think that we need to be
gravitating towards them as fast as we
can recovering civility teaching
children in school how to negotiate how
to argue two sides of a question um how
to um arbitrate between Waring parties
how to do something that is normally
only taught to people too late in life
when their marriage is on the Rocks
which is how to how to talk to another
person and hear what it is they're
saying so you know in couple counseling
there's a thing you do where you you you
say no you say what it is no no you
you'll have your moment in a minute let
let him speak or let her speak and when
that's finished then the other person's
allowed to reply but the first thing
they must do is to say back what it is
they've heard the other person say and
very often that is so revealing because
you find that it was a misconception
that wasn't what they were saying at all
and so there is common ground and
finding that common ground is what we
need
so I don't know the answer to these
things I can give pointers I can give
hope
I can say we only are asked not to solve
massive problems on our own to cooperate
with others towards ends we believe in
and to bring Integrity into our own
lives and and as much as possible avoid
saying things we know to be wrong um
avoid furthering things that will
restrict freedom and and and restrict
the expression of beauty and and roph
distic our idea of what good is which
comes from the heart it's not following
rules it's not taking boxes it's about
something that's in here a
disposition of the
so well much of that sounds like uh
ancient
wisdom uh and I think maybe one of the I
hope well I've observed this already in
telling people about your work and in
talking with people who are already
familiar with it is that this uh
this placing this understanding of the
jewel
hemispheres uh gives us in itself uh a
myth a story to understand this through
so I could say to
people uh uh listen to the
good but that doesn't make sense to
people now but I think to say maybe we
can work from our right hemisphere for a
while with all of the attached meanings
to that is actually is in itself a way
into um all of the things which you're
saying which we we can all agree with
but we don't have a a central symbol to
discuss it through and I hope that your
work is actually giving that to people
are you are you seeing that in are you
seeing some impact of your ideas in the
world when you talk it's hard to judge
because of course to some ENT the people
that I encounter are going to be the
people who are more open to it um but I
certainly do
get a colossal amount of feedback that
is so heartly to me because I never
foresaw that by writing I thought about
an interesting topic that some people
would fix on and say yeah interesting
maybe we should investigate this more I
thought basically would all be forgotten
but that it hasn't been and people see
the meaning that I'm trying to propagate
is extraordinary heartening and I think
young people in particular are more open
to this the the the the people who are a
problem are the established
smug um intellectuals with they know
they're they're practically all white
and they think they know what's best for
people of all Races and people of
different Sexes and so on so they they
think they know and the story is a
played out story and what we're
experiencing is a conflict between an
enforced ideology which these people
insist on and what our heart is telling
us and that's a very uncomfortable place
to be and I think that's what's causing
a lot of the grief the fear the Panic
the anxiety the stress and the Gloom if
we could find a world in which people
spoke recognizable truths to us again um
this this would be wonderful I mean
because one's heart singals when one
hears something that one can respond to
and that one knows in one's heart is
right I you say people don't know where
to go for truth but I think they kind of
do because they can they can see the big
picture with their right Hemisphere and
they can see the way in which this is
being discussed and unpacked and they
can see in it something different from
what it is they're being served up all
the time and and worrying about so I am
in that sense a hopeful pessimist as I
often say I'm hopeful in the sense that
I always have great hope in humanity you
don't know what they'll come up with
they're amazingly resourceful they're
wonderful beings actually one of the
things I'm very opposed to is the
constant um derogation of humanity yes
of course we've made An Almighty [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up
that's absolutely true um and there's
lots of things we've done that that we
would now not do in that way but there
is something amazing about human beings
if we can live in harmony with the rest
of the natural world there's no reason
why we shouldn't in fact that's what we
need to be um encouraging ourselves to
do so yes I am I am I am hopeful very
hopeful of what will come forth it will
come forth from young people because
young people are less
um indoctrinated you know Max plant prly
said science moves forward a funeral at
a time it's not that you convince the
oldies who hold the power that you've
got something to say it's the young
people who say it and there are lots of
research now who write to me where can I
go where I can research your things and
so on well I'm not really sure but
anywhere that's got an open enough mind
you've ought to be able to find people
who will welcome you in their
midst I have I have a feeling much more
is is going to form around your your
work the next few years I certainly hope
so yeah can can can I thank you for
joining me and also thank you for your
work which has had a big influence on me
thanks T over over the last few yes no
thanks for having me along I've
thoroughly enjoyed talking and uh I'm
very glad that my work resonates with
you when it means something to you as I
am to so many people who who please
carry on writing don't feel I've heard
it too many times I can never hear it
enough that people write and tell me
that's very good thank
you
