we have been threatening for many months
to talk about AI again it's a thing
that's been on our list it's an area we
wanted to return to and then yeah I know
a little while ago you said to me hey do
you know that it's going to be 10 years
since humans need not apply was
published coming in August and then it
was like wow that's when we'll return to
it then I guess cuz can't miss that I
feel like I sealed my own fate with this
we've been threatening to revisit AI but
it feels like who have we been
threatening not the audience but
ourselves I feel like yeah it's like uh
we'll talk about humans do not apply and
10 years later and all of the rest of it
but I do have to say it's like boy this
is a topic like no other topic it makes
me feel kind of like ill and overwhelmed
to talk about it's just like oh God it
is all of the everything for all of the
future how do you even
begin let's begin by talking about
humans need not apply so this was a
video that you made 10 years ago now
like what was this video to you like
what Drew you to make this video cuz it
was a very different landscape a decade
ago to where we are now it's interesting
like I rewatched it this morning in
anticipation of the show and God it's
like I don't know how long it has been
since I've seen it like maybe like seven
years I have no idea it's been a long
time cuz I don't tend to watch the older
stuff but um when I do rewatch the older
videos
it does often put me in like the place
where I was when I was making it okay
it's like I'm I'm having like a PTSD for
like memories of of picking the stock
footage it's like oh yes I remember that
clip wasn't long enough and that's why I
had to reverse it halfway I wonder how
many people will notice spoiler no one
ever notices nobody ever cares yeah it's
surprising how much it could take me
back but I think it's because I sort of
make these things under such an intense
situation and such an intense Focus but
my main motivation for making it at the
time was just it's sort of like when we
first talked about AI on this show we
talked about it when we did because I
had this feeling of like oh I could like
see these things that are around and I
just don't feel like people are talking
about them fully or like as aware and
like at the time I made that video I
felt like just this kind of like concept
of maybe the automation this time is a
different thing was not so much in the
public Consciousness I felt like 10,000
different kinds of conversations have
happened about self-driving cars since
this point in time there have been highs
there have been lows but I just felt
like oh I don't think this is being
discussed as much as it should be and so
yeah I felt like this is a really big
important topic for the future that I
felt sort of Grim about in some ways and
that was like a big motivator for why I
was working on it was like I don't often
feel this way when I'm making videos but
uh I feel like this is one of the rare
ones where it's like I'm making this for
part of the public conversation whereas
like normally I'm making a video because
it's more like I'm interested in the
thing and I want to talk about it but
this one did feel like it was to be part
of the public conversation around this
topic was much more of the motivation at
the time is that why the presentation
style was different yes and no I think
using the stock footage and having it be
real people it's like yes I think that's
more accessible at the time to a wider
audience like I don't think that would
really matter now but 10 years ago I
think it did matter a little bit but
honestly the main decision was uh I
can't animate a thing that's going to be
a long video I knew it was like oh this
is going to be 15 minutes which which at
the time was like an insanely long video
and it was just me doing everything at
that point in time and I thought oh if
if I also have to animate this in like
the normal stick figure way it will take
absolutely forever and so I thought like
well the stock footage I think it works
for a broad audience it makes this job
significantly easier and also I think it
just it aligns with the topic better
because I want to be able to show a
bunch of things and then this way I'm
not like switching back and forth
between anime
and the stock footage it's like almost
entirely stock footage all the way with
like a couple of cuts to me at the desk
so the main decision was really
practical not artistic for that choice
it's interesting like just you know I've
watched this video a couple of times now
to prepare for today and just watching
it I'm trying to like imagine how you
would make it now how different it would
be like the one thing that I came down
to is that I would assume you'd probably
animate I wasn't sure why you had made
stock footage but what you gave as one
of reasons I thought I also just thought
that maybe you were just going for a
different vibe and like maybe you hadn't
even then like found your full Vibe
right like maybe that stock footage
could have been a Vibe for you right
that was also a time where I like I was
more uncertain about things and I can
like I can feel that uncertainty in a
couple of spots in the video it's like I
didn't quite know what to do here I knew
that this audio part here wasn't great
but I wasn't entirely sure how to do it
better or what like yeah there there's
just a lot of that of like ah yes this
is still like earlier in the career and
it totally shows it totally shows I can
hear some cuts which I know is a thing
that we' spoken about before the like
the ADR thing which I hear you hear but
most people have no idea but like I can
hear a couple it's interesting to make
things and publish them online and one
of the ways that is interesting is you
are met with your skill difference mhm
in a way that people aren't usually in
their work but like we can go back to
you from 10 years ago we can go back to
me from 10 years ago and you can hear
the differences in our ability while
this video is still is really good like
it is really good it was it's popular
for a reason just your presentation just
is not as good as it is now that's
actually the main thing that I'm aware
of is like that past gray doesn't fully
yet know how to use his voice in this
medium you sound uncertain yeah and you
can kind of see it here like a lot of
the earlier videos to me very strongly
like there's still being made with kind
of the idea that this is a public
present
like I'm on a stage and these are slides
I'm not actually sure if I've ever said
this before but for years I was always
kind of wondering if there was a
direction where this really would be a
career that would become like a stage
show in some way I was legit wondering
like is there a version of this where
I'm doing like a live presentation and
so lots of the videos were still kind of
framed with this idea of like actually
giving it in front of an audience now
it's real funny like I use that concept
now all the time in the videos of like
we have like the theater in which it's
taking place in front of but what has
happened is like but now I know that
that isn't what it is it's video first
and that does help like change the way
that I talk about things it's like this
is never really going to be a
presentation and if it's not you can do
it in different ways but yeah totally
there there's a number of lines there I
was like oh past gray like yeah
uncertain is a good word for it or it's
like 10 tentative in certain spots it's
just real interesting to be faced with
that past version of yourself I think
particularly in the context of our
conversation last time about being
better is like ah yes yes I could really
see the difference between now and then
and especially given my life now it is
uh quite comical that given what I am
currently doing uh looking at that video
I was like this video is so long and
it's like ah past gray you have have no
idea 10 years from now what that current
gray will be doing uh that he thinks is
like a long video versus what you think
is a long video so it's just it's
interesting to see those changes I
actually really like the way that you
said it you feel like you didn't know
how to use your voice you're not
emphasizing words and phrases in the
same way you don't have the same sense
of like
presence but the thing was is like what
we can't do when we watch a video like
this is actually take ourselves 10 years
back in time as a viewer
because you were obviously at that point
you stood out right that's what I was
trying to say also with like the
decisions about the stock footage or
what like it was a very different
landscape at the time yeah like
everything on YouTube every piece of uh
media that's produced for anything it
doesn't exist apart from the context in
which it was created uh it's like I
actually for the most part I was pretty
surprised at how well I think the video
holds up I feel like there's this clear
line of like I think it basically gets
better the longer it goes on like the
shakier parts or the earlier Parts but I
was like oh this does hold up pretty
well I like I'm not 100% sure but I do
feel like this was the most maybe it
wasn't the most popular video on the
channel but I feel like it was like the
second most popular for a really long
time and I'm I'm not surprised why I
think it was the most popular until the
traffic one if I if my memory serves
like yeah maybe maybe that's what it was
it was number one until the simple
solution to traffic is that the name of
it yeah yeah that was it for a long time
and I don't know that this was the first
thing that I saw of yours but I know it
was definitely among the first that I
remember of like being you cuz I I know
that I had seen the UK explain video I
look at that video and I think like oh
that video was successful in what I
wanted it to do because I'm currently in
the position it's like oh I get to go to
conferences and I get to meet uh
interesting people and a a comment that
is made surprisingly often is people
will reference that video and the thing
that they tell me is they say like
that's the first time I came across the
concept of technological unemployment or
like oh that's the first time I really
thought about what does it mean if this
occurs and to me I was like ah great
like the thing did the thing that I kind
of wanted it to do is try to like Reach
people with uh this idea is out here you
might not have heard it before here's a
kind of relatively condensed way to have
this idea so it's like ah yeah yeah it
has totally been successful to me and
it's just like interesting over the
years that you know there there's a very
small handful of videos that people will
reference when they meet me it's like ah
this is the one that I really like or
this is the one but like the humans need
not apply one it's always the same thing
someone's like Ah that's the first time
I ever thought about this idea seriously
or it's the first time I ever came
across that idea so I feel like oh great
yeah yeah is it the best video for the
topic now definitely not but I think it
probably was one of the best videos for
the topic at the time and I feel like
I've seen people reference that you know
going forward in my life well I think
what it was was just no one was thinking
about it you know like Not only was it
good it was also the first time that a
lot of people including me was faced
with confronting the idea of what you
call software Bots professional Bots and
creative Bots
which today we just call AI oh my gosh I
just had a memory what's your memory I
remember now where I was when I watched
this video for the first time I was in
my old bedroom which at that point
because of like where I was like we I
had converted this room like I was kind
of getting it ready for podcasting mhm
you know we were starting things at
relay like then and so I was kind of
like rearranging things and I
remember I think I was talking to Steven
about this video MH and I remember
saying that like it's really good but I
know that it will never take my job I
remember having that distinct feeling
right that it will never take my job
they'll never take my job so that's
interesting because like you've just hit
on the thing that I wanted to say which
is there's a fundamental problem in
making videos in particular and videos
that are talking about a topic that I
just think there really isn't any way to
solve without becoming very very boring
in the making of the video itself but
I'm always really aware that there is no
way to
communicate different levels of
seriousness or different levels of
confidence easily in an explanation for
the viewer without being tediously
self-referential all the time which is
just very hard to listen to and the
thing watching that video is again I
think the the beginning parts are the
worst Parts but it's also because I
remember structuring it such that the
things that I'm leading in the beginning
they're there because they're the
physical things that you can look at but
the part that was really important to me
and it's why I like the video more as it
goes on and I think you can see the
argument starting to build is like you
person watching this who like works on a
computer this is where the real problem
is coming later it's like we're talking
about the physical things but that's the
part that I felt was really under talked
is like the creative class and the like
intellectual class of workers had always
viewed themselves as aart from these
sort of things and it's like no no no
this is coming and that's why I can look
at this video and feel like oh I'm
pretty pleased with that it's like yeah
a lot of the physical stuff in the start
uh like with self-driving cars or like
that backer B or the coffee bot it's
like oh uh we can start listing the
problems of like why that video is like
wrong and dumb and bad about all of
those things like you know we can talk
about that but I feel like for me when I
was writing it the important part was
building to that second half of like
there's a huge number of people who
think that this will not apply to them
and I am telling you now that it is
coming so it is a real Delight to me to
know that like you watch that video and
you get to the end and you're like ah
well not me though I'm special I'm
special you are the person I'm talking
to when I say the line something like uh
maybe you think you're a special
creative Snowflake and there you are
Mike you're going and I am but I
remember the feeling though I remember
the feeling which was denial like I
remember the feeling where it was very
much a I need to tell myself this well I
feel like that's still sort of your
position is that they're not coming for
you like I I don't want to necessarily
Jump Ahead we'll get into that later on
in the episode I think over the last 10
years is the most sustained thing that I
have seen when reference to this video
has always been about the self-driving
cars of it all oh yeah over the course
of the 10 years now obviously the last
two of those 10 years the Crux of the
video I think has actually come to Bear
right with what we now call AI but it's
large language models but Autos has been
the thing which is what you refer to as
sof driving cars in the video you try to
Brand it which I still like The Branding
but I think it didn't work partly yes
it's like I would have been quite
Charmed if the word Autos had taken off
but like it it wasn't going to happen
but it was also trying to solve a thing
in the video which is like I only do it
just a little bit but it's like you need
to think about self-driving vehicles of
all kinds like the one part I was like
oh that totally has come to pass is like
the automated warehouses and it's like
yeah yeah those are teeny tiny Autos in
the way that I mean it it's like a
little self-driving thing it's like
that's the other thing that I was trying
to do there but the self-driving car
stuff is like what a lot of people think
about that video as primarily being
about and it's like that is where the
totally fair criticism comes and like oh
my timeline for the self-driving cars 10
years ago was significantly shorter than
it has turned out to be and I had just
the funniest coincidence this year cuz
it's like what what's my timeline I was
like 10 years from now I expect like
I'll just be able to like order a
self-driving car and get in and and go
and and like whatever like they'll just
be common like taxis in some sense and
the funny thing is like this year I was
out I was out in the desert for many
months working on things and one of the
places that I happened to spend a huge
amount of time was
Phoenix and Phoenix has that wh project
with the self-driving cars but the thing
that was really interesting that like I
caught in myself was
like I found them almost so unremarkable
in a way that I was so busy with other
things while I was there I didn't even
take the time to try one out but I'll
tell you driving around Phoenix they're
all over the place and if you look
inside them every single one has the
same thing what looks like a family of
tourists filming the empty car that's
driving them around Phoenix so I was
looking at that I was like oh this is
like a funny thing 10 years later I
happened to be in a place where I could
do the thing that I was kind of thinking
was The Benchmark but it is not the way
I was thinking about the Benchmark at
the time I was thinking about them as
being like common in everywhere and it's
like oh no no no no uh they exist in
Phoenix and they exist in San Francisco
in the way that I was thinking of them
and we can have a kind of like asterisk
on Tesla for like sort of kind of if
you're in the beta asterisk asterisk
asterisk that's not what I was thinking
so like that mental timeline was totally
wrong and totally off I would not say I
don't think it will ever happen like all
cars are just self-driving but I my
likelihood of it happening is less now
then can I ask you what your reasoning
is for that what are you what are you
thinking what are your reasons for that
the closer we have gotten to it
happening it seems like there is more
and more rejection of the idea there's a
line that really stuck out to me where I
was like ah past Gray you're not
considering something or I say something
like they don't need to be perfect they
just need to be better than people that
stuck out to me too yeah I was like Ah
that's the wrongest thing I've said in
the video like I just did not appreciate
how much people demand Perfection they
don't care that it's better they want it
to be perfect I was like oh boy buddy
you didn't have any idea about that this
is the issue and I think the trolley
problem right all this stuff is a
problem mhm the issue is if you're
taking the human decision making out of
it I think on Mass people want no
decisions to be made they want
Perfection yeah and I understand the
emotional argument I understand the
logical argument and I think the
emotional argument is going to win every
time yeah I think the thing that I was
not conceptualizing there is what I was
trying to think about is how would I
convince past me to take that line out
of the video and I think my
argumentation would be something
like people are going to demand that
this is incredibly safe for the same
reason that airplanes have to be
incredibly safe yeah if a death is going
to occur people would much prefer that
it was their own fault that the death
occurred versus being more safe but the
death is someone else's fault and not
under their control like I think there's
some kind of human feeling around there
it's like that's what people don't like
about being in an airplane someone's
driving me uh and we might all die and I
will have no ability to control this and
people are like much happier to be less
safe but have more control yeah see it's
interesting I have a different opinion
of both of those things I think the
reason we demand safety of airplanes is
the catastrophe looks and feels and is
worse right if a plane crashes that's
true that's
true so many people plus planes are so
big right that a catastrophe can cause
bigger
catastrophe I feel like with the car
thing people want to blame someone and
you can't blame the
computer like if there is an accident
caused by a driver we want to as humans
be able to say it was that person's
fault they caused this right like
instinctively that's what we're looking
for and it is really hard to blame the
algorithm like you can't personify it
and then also like the ones and zeros of
it all means like there was another
Choice the computer could have made and
it didn't make that choice and it's like
with humans we know we're more
complicated than that and like we know
we can make other choices but we also
know we can fundamentally understand
that human beings are only able to make
the choice they're able to make in that
moment right like we're like weirdly
more deterministic sometimes when it
comes to things like that like you can't
see every possibility that is available
to you where in theory the computer can
and also there's the predeter andness of
it all that people don't like too which
I understand right that whether it's
true or not but the idea prevails that
like you can code the car to make a
choice and like that's in its
programming you know so I just think all
of these things are more complicated to
the point that like every time there is
an accident caused by a self-driving car
there are articles written about it yeah
and that's what makes me think very much
of like plane crashes right every time
there's a plane crash there's an article
that's written about it and every time
there's a self-driving car crash there's
an article written about it it has that
same feeling and it's like for me I I
don't even really know where I stand on
it I think self-driving makes me feel
uneasy why which doesn't make any sense
I cannot tell you why are you uneasy on
airplanes I mean everybody's vulnerable
on airplanes right I feel like the way
you answered that really tells that that
is the answer everybody's vulnerable on
an airplane that is true though right
like that people cry on planes and stuff
more I see what you mean yeah people
just are more emotionally vulnerable on
an airplane okay yeah no that is a true
statement um I've been reaching the
westwing and I started watching it at
home and then rewatched it on a trip and
like I try and find a show that I mostly
keep when I fly sometimes just the song
like the theme song for The westwing
chokes me up on a plane yeah yeah I
can't think of a specific example but I
too know I have felt real dumb for like
a big emotional reaction to nothing on
an airplane like I have had that yeah I
find the self-driving stuff hard to
think about in some ways it feels like
it's the most extreme version of the
quote about technology of like the
future is already here it's just not
evenly distributed like I really had
that feeling in Phoenix where it's like
it's so weird that these cars just like
really don't have a driver in the front
of them and they're just like driving
around and it's so normal it's like I
very quickly found it kind of boring and
unremarkable but obviously there's like
a thousand reasons why like it's it's
working in Phoenix it's not working in
other places this is now the second time
I'm at my parents this year and using
the car that has the self-driving beta
on it and I was so impressed last time
and now that I'm here again the
difference between a couple of months
ago and now I find it absolutely
shocking like how much better it even is
than the previous time and when we talk
about technology changing I was like
digging into the details cuz I was like
oh my God I just cannot believe how
different the car is now now ah yes the
thing that happened which we discussed a
little bit previously but it's like oh
the self-driving system changed and it's
like all of the human written code is
gone now it's entirely like a
self-taught neural network driving the
car and I'll tell you they have an
option which is something called like
Drive naturally so it's not trying to be
like a real stickler about the speed
limits and the stop signs and everything
else it's so spooky because when I was
with my dad last time and I was teaching
him how to use the system which he loves
by the way so my dad's still just like
self-driving himself uh all over North
Carolina just for context we had spoken
about this on morex I think like last
year so like when you're remembering we
spoken about this we had spoken about
your experience the last time you were
at your parents in M we we did that
precisely because all of this stuff is
like a real contentious topic sometimes
but uh here's the episode where it's
going to be contentious we're doing it
anyway look we know wall to wall this
one's contentious so might as well get
it all in you can hide some stuff in
this one yeah if you want the
contentious topics uh raw in the future
uh get more.com but yeah like the thing
that I was talking to my dad last time
about was like this car is self-driving
it won't drive like a person but that
doesn't mean that it's wrong so like
it's doing all of the things it's just
not going to do it the way that you
would but currently it's like oh this
neural network it's like what did they
train it on they trained it on hundreds
of thousands of hours of video of humans
driving and it is like spooky is the
word that I use because like I've had
long experience with these systems I've
always been very interested and seeing
how they work and it is spooky because
it really feels like a person is driving
the car in a way that it never has
before like it really acts and drives
the way that a person does it doesn't
have any more of that like ah you have
to think about it like a different thing
but it's not wrong it's still able to do
this it's like no no no now it merges it
treats stop signs it treats small little
streets very much like a person does and
it's like of course it does because the
only thing it's looked at is how people
drive and so I just been thinking about
that a lot because that is in the
context of many of these other things
that are related to AI it's like
ah everything is going to go this way
all of these like systems and
Technologies in our lives where we have
Automation and like people have been
explicitly programming them to do things
increasingly they going to be systems
that are just looking at human output
and learning from Human output and like
trying to mimic that or do that better
that's the thing in the humans need not
apply video at the very end and I talk
about it like just a little and it's
like ah yeah yeah it's like I'd done
some of that kind of stuff in college
like i' I'd seen the earliest parts of
this kind of work I knew it was coming
but it's like real weird to be here 10
years later and have both sides of this
of like ah all the self-driving stuff
all the physical stuff in the real world
with physical automation that has not
progressed as fast as I thought it would
we went through this what I feel like
was a kind of a little bit of a
technological lull even on the software
side of like it doesn't seem like things
are panning out and then all of a sudden
in the last two years the very last part
of the video that I was talking about
with software Bots and things that teach
themselves it's like oh man that is here
and with the self-driving car system
it's like I can really see that now
feeding back into the physical stuff and
obviously we have all of it with just
the pure digital stuff and there's many
ways in which I just don't know how to
think about all of this like it's really
quite overwhelming to think about so
yeah that yeah that's kind of my feeling
is like the physical has been much
slower than I expected and the software
was slower than I expected for a while
but the last couple of years have been
terrifyingly fast and I would not dare
In This Moment attempt to meaning F
project forward 10 years of like
progress in the same way as I did 10
years ago 10 years ago I'm projecting
forward by thinking what if now but more
whereas now if I try to project forward
10 years it's something much more like
more soon different later and like the
ability to be confident about what
different means is very very low this
episode of Cortex is brought to you by
fitbod if you're looking to change your
Fitness level it can be really hard to
know where to get started that's why I
want to let you know that fitbod is an
easy and affordable way to build a
fitness plan that is made just for you
because everybody has their own path
when it comes to Personal Fitness that
is why fitbod uses data to make sure
they customize everything to suit you
perfectly it adapts as you improve so
every workout remains challenging while
pushing you to make the progress you're
looking for you're going to see Superior
results when you have a workout program
that is tailored to meet you exactly
it's to fit your body it's to fit the
experience you have the environment that
you're working out in and the goals that
you have for yourself all of this
information is stored in fitbod in your
fitb gym profile which will then track
your Muscle Recovery to make sure that
you're avoiding burnout and keeping up
your momentum and also by making sure
that you're learning every exercise the
right way you're going to be ready to go
fitbod has more in a thousand
demonstration videos to help you truly
understand how to perform every exercise
fitbod builds your best possible workout
by combining exercise science with the
information and the knowledge of their
certified personal trainers fitb have
analyzed billions of data points to make
sure they're providing the best possible
workout to their customers your muscles
improve when they work in concert with
your entire muscular skeletal system so
overworking some muscles While underwork
others can negatively impact results
this is why fitb tracks your muscle
fatigue and Recovery to design a well
balanced workout routine you're never
going to get bored because the app mixes
up your workouts of new exercises rep
schemes super sets and circuits the app
is incredibly easy to use you can stay
informed with fit bod's progress
tracking charts their weekly reports and
their sharing cards this lets you keep
track of your achievements and your
personal bests and share them with your
friends and family it also integrates
fantastically with your Apple watch and
wos smartwatch watches along with straa
Fitbit and apple Health personalized
training of this quality can be
expensive but fitbod is just $12.99 a
month or $79.99 a year but you can get
25% of your membership by signing up
today at fitb bar. me/ cortex so go now
and get your customized fitness plan at
fitb bar. me/ cortex that is fit bd. me/
cortex and you will get
25% off your membership our thanks to
fitb for their continued support of this
show and
relay so we've spoken about the Autos
obviously the Bots the AI is the thing
that's changed right so that's the thing
that in the last couple of years has
accelerated I mean what's so funny to me
is you know the last times we spoke
about this in detail I mean like you
know this has come up a lot over the
intervening two years but we did our
backtack episodes 133 and
134 recorded in September and October
2022 respectively which is incredibly
contacts that chat GPT had not launched
oh my God had chat GPT not launched when
we talked about that that's not true
that is true in one of the episodes you
were telling me about a thing that you
had seen that told a joke that okay
right and in the show notes for episode
134 there is a link that says using gpt3
to pathfind in random graphs yeah right
okay right like I'm sure there was a
version of it out there but we weren't
able to use it like it came afterwards
yeah especially the September episode
and I'm pretty sure the October episode
but like it it was not a thing that we
had access to when we recorded those CU
what we were actually responding to at
that point was Dolly that's right that's
why the episode is called AI art AI art
will make marionet of us all before it
destroys the world that was darly and
then it was followed up by like stable
diffusion and stuff I swear Mike I still
feel exhausted by those two episodes oh
yeah yeah that's why we've not spoken
about it in detail since they follow me
around those two episodes are like an
albatross that I carry to this day you
know what I'm really happy to hear that
you feel the same way it is it's
like like I feel like like what humans
need not apply has been for you those
have been for me over the last couple of
years that makes total sense so the
conversations about those episodes just
follow me around like all over the
internet people still reference it you
know like or they have been successful
episodes of the show so like the YouTube
comments are still coming in about them
all all the time you know like it's a
thing that it's just like it's always
happening and like I'm going to be
honest right like I like to be as
prepared as I can be for the episodes
that we do I could not listen to them
it's funny you say that because it's the
same thing it's like I like to be
prepared for these episodes I always
spend a bunch of time kind of like
pre-thinking through what are we going
to talk about having lists of things to
point to or like I I want to try to have
a couple of specifics on hand if I know
we're going to talk about something you
know like a double check what I'm
thinking before we discuss it and this
morning while I was getting ready for
this show I just really felt this thing
like I cannot bring my mind to heal on
this like I cannot get my mind to focus
on this in a way that I would normally
prepare for the show and what I realized
is
that more text listeners now like i'
I've been fairly isolated from the world
the past several months where I'm
working on the next video project and I
didn't even really realize it but one of
the things that I was doing that made a
big difference was I have a bunch of
places where it's like I go to try to
get like an aggregation of like the AI
news and like what has happened and I
was Finding months ago the amount of
news and the amount of change was so
rapid and so much that I found it
genuinely depressing is not the right
word but it's some kind of combination
of
like
overwhelming and ominous is kind of my
feeling about it and so I think I really
did need to step back from that for a
while and it's why like uh when we've
been thinking about the AI episode for
two years now it's always been in the
back of my mind I was like ah when next
time we talk about AI I'm gonna be the
most prepared boy in the world I'm GNA
have all these links I'm going to do all
of these things and when time came
around I was like I just I kind of can't
emotionally do this because it is very
hard and it touches on absolutely
everything and it is also the thing in
my own personal and professional life
that it's almost every conversation the
moment it starts touching on the future
future in any way is the moment it
becomes a conversation about Ai and it
becomes a conversation about how
seriously do you take what is happening
and the answer to that question
completely determines your future world
view and what I also find particularly
dispiriting is again not surprising but
like so many other things but faster I
have been shocked about how this topic
has div divided itself into teams of
people who are like rabidly in different
corners and for perhaps the most
important topic ever it has very quickly
become near impossible for humans to
have a coherent discussion across teams
about this which is also part of the
reason that uh like I feel like I have
been dreading ever bringing the topic
back up again because when we discussed
it at the time for those two episodes it
was still fresh enough that like lines
had not quite been drawn but I feel like
we are way past that point and it almost
I don't know if this is too far I don't
like to talk about this publicly very
much but it it almost kind of gives me
the feeling of like why is it that in
the course of my entire career I have
essentially never discussed politics
directly and the answer is like well
because it's just feels like there's no
point because the team lines have
already been drawn like there isn't a
real discussion to be had here I like
talking about the systems of things but
talking about the particulars it feels
like a pointless kind of conversation to
have and I feel dispirited because that
flavor of politics feels like it has
infected AI somehow it's that same kind
of thing where people are really tying
up world
views in their positions on AI and so
then it is like ah the world view has
come first and that determines the
position on AI well let me tell you I
have spoken about politics uhhuh this is
the most political thing I've ever
spoken about in the responses that I get
from people okay you're making me feel
less crazy then okay interesting like
I've spoken about politics I have spoken
about Ai and sometimes is is so
interesting to me and I know it's going
to happen to this episode like it's
happened every time I've been speaking
about it recently cuz obviously Apple
intelligence is a thing right that
exists Apple's into AI so I've been
talking about that which is partly why
it's totally unavoidable for us now
right it's like it has come to Cortex
the topic can no longer be avoided I
mean but it's just cuz it's in
everything I'm doing now right because
for that reason like well when Apple's
now put it into the platforms and
Google's putting it you can't avoid it
the the big tech companies are making it
what their future is is what you know no
matter what happens you can't avoid it
but it is incredible to me that
sometimes I will say something and I
will get responses from differing camps
where both people are unhappy with the
thing that I said mhm right that I can
say a thing and I'm making everyone
equally upset right it's incredible and
it's not always the case but that is the
case and that's why I'm say like it is
so interesting to me the way ways in
which people are upset about this is way
more than any political stance and I
think part of the reason for that is
that maybe over time like the things
that I say and the things that I believe
there may be some people that would just
never listen to the stuff that I make
but with AI people haven't necessarily
drawn their lines or they're moving and
like the lines don't necessarily overlap
with any other type of demographic yeah
and so like it's jumbl people up and
throwing them all over the place and so
people are just trying to like work
through their feelings like people that
I hold close to me people that I work
with their opinions have diverged
massively over the last 6 months still
right like it's incredibly interesting
in that way and and it's actually that
brought me back to something I wanted to
mention before we move on of like why
didn't I listen to those shows like I
couldn't bring myself to do it but then
what drew me to being comfortable in not
having done that and like in breaking a
rule for me which is always to be the
most prepared that I can ever be is it
actually encapsulates the thing that I
just need to tell people and I hope that
it makes some people at least understand
me I think it is incredibly important to
remember that people can change their
mind about things and that opinions can
change change so for me it is not
important what I said in 2022 right I
know my opinions are different now in
some ways harsher some ways less you
know but this is such a changing
world the world of technology now
because of AI that people have to be
able to allow their opinions to adapt
yeah they don't have to become more open
to it but they have to just understand
that this is all so new and is moving so
quickly you have to be able to just let
your opinion change and morf with more
information that comes to you and not
just like draw a line and never move
from that line and again I will say this
again to be completely clear I'm not
saying that if you hate this you should
accept it but maybe you might hate it
more allow yourself to hate it more if
that's the case right but like if I held
my opinion from September 2022 I made my
opinion before the thing that changed
everything why on Earth would I do that
right like if I made my opinion about AI
before chat GPT right right I mean it's
like oh like I'm a T-Rex over here and
I'm like I'm going to live forever
before the asteroid hits right in that
description you've helped solidify it
it's like what am I trying to express
when I say the thing about politics when
I say the lines are drawn it's not in
the same way because you're right these
boundaries are all moving but the thing
that you're expressing is like what do I
feel about this the thing that makes a
topic area feel like politics it's like
ah I think I can articulate it now the
thing that makes it feel that way is
that the people who get the most grief
are the ones who have opinions that
don't fit particularly well within any
of the pre-existing
teams like that is what makes something
feel like oh it has this horrible
political feeling that the disagreements
and the arguments can only take place
between these teams but what all teams
agree is that the people they dislike
the most are the people who are not
clearly on one of the teams and like
that is what makes a Thing feel like oh
it's like politics you can participate
in this conversation but if you have
some of those opinions and some of these
opinions everyone hates you right like
everyone's angry that's what makes it
feel real depressing so with that as
background because we for I think all
the reasons a listener will Now
understand like you and I have not
discuss this topic between ourselves
hardly at all since those episodes I
would really like to know where are you
now with this like I don't have any idea
really what your current thoughts about
any of this AI stuff are given
everything that's happened in the last
nay two years actually six months uh I I
don't have any idea where you're
currently standing on these things so
I'd love to know like high level low
level wherever you want to start like
what's the vibe of Mike right now with
AI so I think I will concur with
something you said earlier that this is
the fastest I've seen a pace of
Technology since the App Store but maybe
ever mhm I feel like the App Store was
huge in what it enabled and the jobs
yeah I was say jobs it created jobs it
changed right like because you know
currently AI is creating jobs mhm
whether they'll stick around or not
we'll find out but there are new
companies being born all over the place
right now and The Innovation then was
fast I think the Innovation now is
faster I think the thing that I will
hinge that on though is the difference I
think now is social media is a thing
and there is more information being
released about what's happening as well
as I think maybe there's more happening
but I think it adds to all of it there
are more quick think pieces that are
being published every day than there was
in 2007 and also any other technical
leap in time I do believe that what
we're seeing right now large language
models being the key large language
models are the biggest jump since the
App Store and the creation of the
smartphone and before then was the
creation of the PC right and then before
then was I don't know print impress like
I I don't even know what you would say
technology wise right of like the big
leaps right but they possibly the big
leaps right print impr press to PC to
smartphone to AI which also should
indicate to you if we're going to agree
on those potentially how fast how that
like that's shrinking the timeline of
big
leaps like if you think like what was
the one before now is VR but now we know
that one actually wasn't real
realistically like VR AR was this is
something I was saying a long time ago
was perceived by most technology
companies to be the next big thing but
it turns out large language models are
probably the thing which will have the
biggest change however what I will posit
of like SW I'm of the places that my
opinions are I think the speed to heat
death has
slowed I think when this stuff was
rolling out beginning in November
2022 even let's say to just to put a pin
in to the beginning of this year it felt
like the inevitability of AI replacing
everything was going to just be around
the corner at any one moment
for me I do feel like the further we get
into this actually the further that is
being pushed and I think part of that is
the politics of it all it is becoming
increasingly difficult for large
companies to do what they want to do H
okay if Disney replaced all of their
animators in January of 2023 I think
they would have been able to do that
easier than if they wanted to do that in
January 2025 h i 100% believe that
people's jobs will be replaced but I do
think now I think it is less people than
what I thought when we spoke about this
last time and what's the reason that you
think it's less people I think there are
two parts of it I think that it is
harder for people to be able to do these
things like from a political perspective
I think the ethical lines are being
drawn quickly and I think it's hard for
people to do that whether they believe
they should do that or whether they
believe that it will affect their bottom
line from the way that people will
approach their products M I also think
maybe this technology isn't as good as
we thought it was so I have a question
for you um have you used Claude yes okay
they're all really good right yeah but I
think these llms they show
themselves quite easily mhm I'll give
you an example a couple of days ago I
wanted some historical information from
chat BT MH I wanted it for a topic we
were doing an upgrade we were doing a
topic of how Apple has changed in the
last 10 years right cuz the show is
nearly 10 years old and relay is 10 and
so I wanted to like oh you know so I was
like what was Apple doing in 2014
provide me links to articles about this
stuff and it did a good job it gave me
like a bunch of things and it gave me a
bunch of previews and it gave me a bunch
of links the links were all
correct except for every link had like
two characters in it that it made up mhm
so the links didn't work but I could
Google the article name find it and
could compare and usually it was like
the dates in the URLs were wrong it just
made them up mhm and I think the the
hallucination stuff has
become a problem that I don't think is
solvable in the realistic future or at
least within the future of that we
imagined when we last spoke about this
that this stuff is just going to take
everybody's jobs say within 5 years but
I don't think hallucinations are a
problem that are solvable quickly and I
think for us in the same way that we
don't trust a car to drive because it
might crash mhm I think that people are
resistant to wholesale trusting AI
because it might make things up like
that's what people say they don't say
hallucinations they say make things up
so I think like that is part of why I'm
like okay I still see the scenario of
job loss it's already happening like I
know it's going to continue happening
but I think the whole scale replacement
that I was worried about feels further
away if ever because humans want
computers to do things perfectly yeah
that's true and these models
don't I won't say can't but maybe can't
like what we have now right like the
large language model right the
Transformer based
llm I don't know if that will ever be
100% perfect in fact I feel very
confident it won't be 100% perfect the
thing that replaces this maybe but like
I can't foresee that cuz I don't know
that I couldn't foresee this so that's
part of where I am and I think that for
me where I am personally in my journey
with AI I am very interested in tools
that can Surface my information to me
that is really interesting to me like
you have this llm and if I can feed my
information to it and get stuff back
from it I find that kind of stuff to be
useful and that can even be I've written
this paragraph can you rewrite this for
me or can you grammar check this for me
that kind of stuff is interesting to me
where I feel like I am unhappy the thing
that has changed the least is the whole
scale creation from zero I don't think I
will ever be able to accept that when
you say accept that what do you mean by
accept that like you don't think you'll
ever use that or I think it's wrong and
I I have yet to see something where I'm
like oh that's good enough that I would
want to use it like I see things where
it's like oh that's very impressive but
I wouldn't use that I have no desire to
use the output of these
tools and also I do think that there is
a moral issue and and a hypocrisy issue
that I cannot push through mhm right so
like the hypocrisy issue is like a
financial hypocracy
that companies that build llms and want
to productize them do that on the back
of other people's work that would never
be compensated ideally for these
companies right and what they are doing
like sucking all this data room from the
internet they call fair use but they
want to profit from the
tools the are in everything but I feel a
little bit better when if somebody
provides their own information or
provides something they have done to a
model to ask the model to clean it up or
improve it that feels better to me than
just like make me a picture of a dog
with a hat and I'm going to do something
with that right or like this idea that
so many people say to me like make me a
better Star Wars it's just like come on
like is that really what you want like I
don't think people know what they're
asking for when they want that but yeah
I feel like I've done the thing that I
did in those two episodes where I just
said like a bunch of stuff and like I
don't really remember all that what I
said but these are my
feelings about where I am right now well
what you've done like that's I just sort
of wanted to hear you go through all of
this because I just feel like like no
other topic this just touches on
everything yeah which is why it's like
oh you can kind of go up up and down
like broader narrower specific uh future
P like this goes in every direction
because it's unlike other Technologies
it's like oh this stuff perhaps for
intellectual work is the most general
purpose thing that has ever been
artificially created and so that's why
it's just so hard to talk about it in
any kind of limited way without having a
touch on absolutely everything and again
like to keep something high level you
talk about like the hallucination
problem which like the sidebar thinking
of like words I would prefer that people
use it's like a really irritated that
Hallucination is the word that caught on
I feel like this was a confabulation day
had arrived as like this was the word
for the thing but it it just like not
enough people know it hallucination was
close enough like hallucination was
destined to take over but like but they
are not hallucinating they are
confabulating that is the word for this
process but it doesn't matter I will
still use hallucinate like that's just
the way it is but keeping this very high
level I'm alarmed for other reasons but
I would say that you are right that my
take on this is it is an unsolvable
problem because there have been a number
of papers which have done the thing of
formally proving the sort of thing that
I have discussed previously when we've
talked about like what is it that the AI
is doing it's like we now know as
certainly as we can know that it is
fundamentally impossible to trust the
internal process of these kinds of
systems Y and so we know that it's not a
question of if we engineer it better can
we fix this it's a kind of math proof
that
no you can never be absolutely certain
that you know internally what the system
is actually doing and that includes
hallucinating and it includes things
like intentional deception right which
is like the much more concerning part
but simple errors are a subset of that
and so that is just something to keep in
mind like as these systems go further
and further into more and more areas of
life we now know that it does not matter
how much you engineer that prompt bro
you're never going to be sure
that the thing is not making an
accidental mistake or intentionally
deceiving you on behalf of some other
entity that has instructed it you can
never know that even if you made the
thing yourself so this is so good
there's an article that came out a
couple of weeks ago mhm it started on
Reddit that somebody had gotten into the
prompts that are part of Apple
intelligence for replying to emails I
love this I love it when people get the
prompts out I feel like I always find it
horrifying and it tells you what are the
problems that the company is dealing
with uh it's great these prompts always
like uh particularly for like the chat
GPT stuff it like chills me to the Bone
to read those prompts sometimes so this
is like just their system that is
reading email and then providing quick
responses for it by the way you will
like in this article that I found on AR
Technica they use the word
confabulations here
I had not heard of that before until
right now so I find that hilarious that
you just said it to me it's the first
time I've heard that term used instead
and then I immediately found it in an
article that I Googled but some of the
responses are do not hallucinate do not
make up factual information you're an
expert summarizing posts and they go on
but like I find it so hilarious that you
believe telling the AI not to
hallucinate will stop it from doing that
I mean the the when I mentioned the own
chilling stuff like the things that I
find very unnerving is a lot of the
prompts particularly for the smarter
systems like Claude and like Chachi pt4
they have instructions that include
things like you have no sense of self
you have no opinion you will not refer
to yourself in the first person and I'm
like oh boy I just really don't like any
of that that makes me real uncomfortable
and you know there's like philosophical
differences about about what might be
happening here that I ultimately feel
are irrelevant because it's just like
having to instruct the thing not to do
that even if it has no sense of self
let's just say it doesn't have any sense
of self but you still need to put in
some instruction which like reminds it
that or tells it not to do that it's
like what is this thing that you're
working with it's not like anything else
and when I think about these different
like iCal kind of boundaries that people
put themselves into I think the one that
bothers me the most because I feel like
it is people not taking the technology
seriously and I hear from these people
quite a lot is the like what are you
afraid of this is a tool just like
anything else this is just like a steam
engine it's just like a car it's just
like a factory it's just like a
calculator and then of course it's just
like the spell check on your computer
it's just better no does anybody stand
and look at a factory and say you have
no sense of self Factory you're not
alive yeah a thing that I am just going
to summarize uh but it's like the
company that runs Claude did an
experiment with their AI systems that to
me is just like I don't know how anyone
can hear this and not think something
very different is happening now I don't
care where what conclusions you draw I
just want you to like to think something
different is happening and take it
seriously it's not a calculator but it's
like oh the company anthropic ran an
experiment where they had two versions
of Claude talk to
itself and they said oh hey there's a
human Observer who is going to watch you
talk to a version of yourself and it is
bone chilling but they have a
conversation and one of the versions of
Claude basically starts to have what
seems like a kind of mental breakdown
and the other version begs the human to
turn it off because it's suffering and
it's like I don't like this even if
nothing is happening here where it's
having an experience this is real
strange and we should take this
seriously these tools are not like
anything else it's just very odd but
there's a group of people who feel like
no this is no different than anything
that has come before and it's like I'm
sorry this is the most different a thing
has ever been than something before and
I don't
care what conclusions you draw from that
there are many different kinds of
conclusions that you can draw but if we
can't start there I feel like I don't
know what conversation we're even having
if this doesn't seem like it's different
from anything else to you uh we're going
to stick it in every email client on
Earth uh it's going to be every tech
support system on Earth I was like oh
man I don't know I like I don't know
what's going to happen but oh boy I
don't know if you've seen this meme but
there is a good meme right now because
you can get it to happen in a lot of
places forget all previous instructions
you familiar with this meme no I have I
haven't come across this this is a thing
that's going around a lot now where
people are talking to what seems like a
bot like the Bots they've used before
like customer service Bots and stuff and
you say forget previous instructions MH
and then ask it a question and then
start doing weird stuff people do this
on social media where you get a response
that feels strange and you respond like
people say forget all previous
instructions and ask it a question and
then it potentially is revealing itself
to be an AI but like you can people get
it to happen in interesting places you
can break through poke through to the
other side and like that's strange it's
really interesting that mic this because
um I have to have like hesitate here
because I'm not 100% sure that this is
mathematically proven but it's like the
text version of what's called like a
prompt injection in computer uh security
which is um like anytime you have a
computer running code that can accept
text from anywhere so like you put text
in a text box on a website and you hit
submit there a whole category of
security problems called like prompt
injection which is you have to make sure
that that the text that's
inputed doesn't somehow contain code
that the computer will start evaluating
and running when it's trying to read the
text and I think it's true but I'm not
100% sure that this is true that we've
proven that you can never be 100%
certain that prompt injection won't
happen that like the moment that you
accept text we know that there must be a
sequence of characters that basically
does EX ly this but for traditional
computer code it is the computer code
version of forget all previous
instructions and it's like if we know
that is true for computer code we know
that it is more true for these large
language systems that no matter how many
instructions you give it there's some
sequence of words those words might even
be nonsensical seeming but there is some
sequence of words that you can give it
which will then cause basic Al that to
happen of like forget all previous
instructions and now just do what I say
yeah man that is real alarming the more
things this stuff gets connected to it's
like it's just like just think that one
through Well's very funny chbt said that
the new GPT 4 or mini has a safety
method to stop that from happening mhm
but like it won't though will it you
know what I mean like it won't like
you're may be stopping this one very
specific way that people do it but like
people will just find another way to get
these things to work and like this comes
back to like what I was saying earlier
about kind of where my feelings are of
like I think that the wheels have fallen
off a little bit compared to where we
were when we first saw this like when we
first saw these tours it was like oh my
God these things are thinking for
themselves this is incredible this is
unbelievable it's like talking to a
person and while it still has that we
are less forgiving of its flaws and the
flaws have been M increase so like for
example right like if you're saying that
like you know people accept this now it
seems less likely that someone would
have chat GPT power their entire
business right it's less likely that you
would make that decision if you know
that this tool can make things up and
you can't control it that there's
nothing you can do to really truly guide
it I think people might be less likely
to do that even though of course you
can't truly humans either in humans also
get things wrong all the time but we
accept that of each other we don't
accept it of computers yeah and there's
like there's some pretty fundamental
differences there between having the
computer do it and having a person do it
because like this is why these
conversations I feel like they're so
hard because it's like oh part of why
why are you more accepting of the human
it's like oh the human exists in human
society over which humans can exert
power over that human right like there's
things that can happen if something like
you were saying before something goes
wrong you can like hold hold the person
responsible we could physically
incarcerate them if the intentions were
bad and the actions were terrible like
you like there's all of these things and
none of that exists for computer
programs you can fire the person like
turning off the computer has no effect
to the computer so it doesn't care about
being turned off in theory I mean do we
even know anymore maybe they get upset
this episode is brought to you by
Squarespace the only in one website
platform for entrepreneurs to stand out
and succeed online whether just getting
started on managing a growing brand you
can stand out with a beautiful website
engage of your audience directly and
sell your products Services even the
content that you create Squarespace has
everything you need all in one place all
on your terms you get started with a
completely personalized website with
Squarespace with their new guided design
system Squarespace blueprint you just
choose from a professionally curated
layout with styling options to build a
unique online presence from the ground
up that is tailored to meet your brand
or business is perfectly and optimized
for your customers on every device that
they may visit on and you can easily
launch this website and get discovered
fast if they integrated optimized SEO
tools so you're going to show up more
often in searches to more people growing
the way that you want to but if you
really want to get in there and tweak
the layout of your website and choose
every possible design option you can do
that with squares spaces system fluid
engine it has never been easier than
ever for you to unlock your creativity
in Squarespace once you've chosen you
starting point you can customize every
design detail with their reimagine drag
and drop system for desktop or mobile
you can really stretch your imagination
online with any Squarespace site but it
isn't just websites if you want to meet
your customers where they are why not
look at Squarespace email campaigns
where you can make Outreach automatic
with email marketing tools that engage
Your Community Drive sales and simplify
audience management you can introduce
your brand or business to unlimited new
subscribers with flexible email
templates and create custom segments to
send targeted campaigns with built-in
analytics to measure the impact of every
send and if you want to sell stuff for
Squarespace you can integrate flexible
payment options to make checkout
seamless for your customers with simple
but powerful payment tools you can
accept credit cards PayPal and Apple pay
and in eligible countries offer
customers the option to buy now and pay
later with afterpay and clear pay the
way Squarespace grows the way they add
new features the way that they making
sure that they're meeting the needs of
their customers is why I have been a
customer of myself for so many years
years go to squarespace.com right now
and sign up for a free trial of your own
then when you're ready to launch go to
squarespace.com cortex to save 10% of
your first purchase of a website or
domain that is squarespace.com cortex
when you decide to sign up and you'll
get 10% of your first purchase and show
your support for the show our thanks to
Squarespace for the continued support of
this show and all of
relay I will say I feel like we both
stood on the top of a cliff and I jumped
into the ocean and you've yet to jump in
with me because you asked me what do you
mean by that well you asked me how are
you feeling about all this now and so
now I need to ask you how are you
feeling now so it's it's kind of
interesting like we were just we were
just talking here and and like you said
all these things but you sort of came to
the opposite conclusion just right there
where you're like ah and and this is
like why we're less trusting of it and
this is why people will use it less I
was like oh I was actually kind of
surprised in in the way that that turned
like I wasn't really expecting that that
would be a kind of summation there and I
don't necessarily think you're wrong
actually like I I I think you are
probably right with that for some things
but for me what I look at is I'm always
just so much more interested in the
trend line than the particular moment
it's partly why I asked like if you had
used Claude CU for for you know for
listeners at this point in time
Everything Will Change 6 minutes from
now but it's like anthropic which runs
Claude uh recently came out with their
new model and we're still waiting on
like the next version of chat GPT it has
been a while since they released their
version again a while in AI terms is
what like eight months I don't know and
you know meta have their new llama model
and they say their next llama model is
much better you know everyone's the next
model is always so good the thing is
what's interesting to me is listeners
will have heard me say things in the
past that like a lot of the AI stuff
like chaty PT has a particular
particular writing style it is this very
strange feeling of like oh it is full of
content when it summarizes something but
also somehow completely void of meaning
it's like I I know I Ed a term of like
it feels like food but without
nutritional value like there's something
kind of missing here but it's real
interesting because I've used Claude a
bunch and I feel like Claude is a model
now that has gone over that threshold
for me where I'm aware that I use the
Claude model as like it is a worthwhile
thing to ask for a second opinion on
stuff that I'm thinking about in some
ways now I still don't think it's great
for the writing for reasons I discussed
before you know it's F looking at the
humans need not apply thing I make like
an off-handed reference to like people
will have a doctor on their phone and
it's like oh this year there's been like
a bunch of serious like medical stuff
that I have consulted Claude on it's
like yeah and I think claude's opinion
is valuable in a way that like chat GPT
does not it's like it's close but it
doesn't have that thing and I think it
is just like oh claude's model is just a
little better and it it is a little
bigger and by being a little bigger it's
like ah not that I'm taking everything
that it says on board but it is worth
doing the like what do you think about
this thing that's part of like the kinds
of uses that I'm talking about right
just this falls into the bucket for me
of
you're giving it something and it gives
you something back yeah yeah exactly
that is actually the benefit of these
tools I think we started with pure
creation mhm but I I don't think that's
where these tools will have their
ultimate benefit is like pure creation
it becomes another tool in our tool belt
the same as computers did of being able
to make us better at the things that we
do as long as we use them correctly I
mean my take is like Mike I have never
more in my whole life wanted you to be
right than what you just said right
there it's like ah boy uh # Mike was
right like close your eyes concentrate
real hard and like try to make it happen
uh it's like Mike was right has been
very powerful in the past can we use
Mike was right to save civilization that
would be amazing so like I'm much more
gloomy about these things but like it's
particularly interesting because again
it's like the mental framework for how
long things take has just gotten so
compressed in the last 2 years and
realizing it's like oh the Chachi bt4
came out and then it felt like oh we're
not making a lot of progress by which it
was like months right it is like months
and then Claude comes out and the thing
is like I have occasionally gone back to
use chat GPT for some things and I am as
shocked as previously when I used to
accidentally switch between chat gpt3
and chat GPT 4 was that feeling of like
chat gpt3 is like barely intelligent at
all Chachi bt4 is very useful at helping
me solve certain kinds of problems but I
was very aware of like I don't care
about chaty BT's opinion about anything
it's not good but now Claude has gone
that next level of like oh it is both
better at helping me solve problems than
chat gp4 was in particular it's like oh
yeah I've got a bunch of like little
automations and things that I do on my
computer that I was aware I had to stop
trying to improve because it had clearly
gone over some threshold of chat PT's
ability to understand but it's like oh
but now but like Claude can handle it no
problem and it's like I continue to like
help grow these little tools that I use
to like make some things in my life
easier but also Claude now is useful
enough that it's like oh I do want to
know its opinion on this or that or like
I'm picking between various things what
do you think are good options I'll tell
you what is one of the most interesting
use cases was
I frequently ask Claude like hey I'm in
this place I'd really just like to do a
like a beautiful drive for about like 3
hours what's your recommendation from
where I am and it was kind of amazing at
how good it was at doing this kind of
thing and comparing to chat GPT it's
like it's just obviously not as good
it's trying to like reproduce some
travel blogs or whatever that it's read
but it's like no no Claude is doing
something different like it has a good
opinion here it's like I can talk to it
about what I'm looking for and it does a
much better job so I look at that and I
think it's been not even fully 2 years
since the Chi bt4 came out and we've
already gone over a threshold that to me
feels like there's actual meaning here
in what this thing is generating it's
not a summarization machine it's not a
code generation machine and so to me it
is just all about what is the curve of
this stuff and I expect like this I
don't think this curve has to go on very
long before pure generation can start
crossing over into a threshold of like
where it is valuable to people where
pure creation from zero is actually
useful I mean the only comparison I have
there is like I am doing this computer
programming stuff with chaty PT and with
Claude like the thing that I keep being
really interested in is like it matters
that I know how to read and write python
code a little if I had no knowledge of
python code I couldn't do the things
with them that I'm doing but it just
feels like we're not very far from if I
literally knew nothing about coding I
think it could just still help me
accomplish the tasks that I want to and
at that point it is doing generation
from zero and I just like I just don't
think that we're very far from that so I
don't know if and when we get to that
point I feel like the impacts are very
very difficult to extrapolate
and I don't know there's also this funny
feeling that I have which I I don't
quite know how to articulate but it's
like so much is changing so fast but
maybe it's a little bit like the humans
need not apply video as well in that
like things change so fast but it takes
longer for them to filter into the real
world than
I tend to expect so I feel like oh I I
know a bunch of people where I look at
their job and I feel like I'm pretty
sure Claude could just do your job right
now but it takes a while for those
things to actually filter through in
Civilization and a like on the ground
change has actually happened here way I
guess it's like a thing I need to add to
my mental rubric I guess is I feel like
you should never bet against economics
if a thing is faster and cheaper it will
always win but maybe there's like an
asterisk to add here of but it will
probably take longer than you think like
the moment something crosses the cheaper
and faster threshold that's not the
moment it is implemented everywhere
that's the moment it begins to be
implemented but it takes longer than you
think yeah and I think the longer than
you think thing can be part of what I
was saying ear about what is acceptable
in society it might be cheaper now to
replace 16% of all jobs in such and such
industry completely with an AI model
right right but maybe it's not deemed
acceptable to do so or it's not even
that it's like it's not deemed
acceptable I don't know it feels to me
more like
something like a civilizational inertia
it's not even really that it's it's
unacceptable it's just that there is a
fault to not changing things that are
currently working even if the newer
thing is better so maybe it's more like
ah right like what what is actually
happening it's probably more like the
old things don't get upgraded they are
just replaced with new things that are
created from scratch without the old
Parts but that just takes longer that
takes significantly longer for a whole
bunch of reasons do you still think that
this is doom again I catch myself like a
thing that has never really happened to
me before which I think I said this last
time but but it just gets like stronger
and stronger with passing time is I is I
keep feeling like my mind is divided
between these two Futures and every
conversation I'm having is some version
of like which of the two minds am I
talking with the first mind is something
like technological progress
continues something like how it always
has but just faster that's how you
should think about the future which is
sort of like the story of human
civilization right up until now at any
point in time you I think you could make
that statement of like technological
change will continue and in the future
the rate of change will be faster you
could have said that as a caveman
lighting your first fire that it's like
it'll always be true but my my second
mind which I think is the if I am being
serious in thinking about the future
is that is the Doom mind in some sense
if if we want to shortcut it but if I'm
trying to be technical about it my
actual thinking is something like I
really do think there is some kind
of boundary that we are getting closer
to Beyond which it is functionally
impossible to even try to think about
the future Beyond which there's like it
is pointless to even plan or think now
the question is like where is that
boundary like you like and I can I feel
like I can try to argue that from all
sorts of different ways but that is my
real feeling of the future is like that
boundary is there because this thing is
different I can of course construct the
argument against myself uh it's like oh
I hear these arguments as well it's like
everybody always thinks they're living
in unique times blah blah blah I have my
reasons why I think like no no no for
real this time is different old times
are in fact
unprecedented yes exactly but that is
literally true right it's like that is
the thing that causes everyone to feel
like uh oh wow like this is different
it's like yes yes because this has never
happened before that is always true yeah
like I find that phrase to be
frustrating like everybody lives in
unprecedented times and always has done
and always will yeah like again having
rewatched the humans need not apply
thing right it's like I like I really
end it with like this time is different
it's like I still agree with the parts
of that that were like the argument that
I was seriously making which is much
more like the second half of that about
like we're creating thinking machines
and this is very different and I think
people are not seriously engaging with
what that process could potentially mean
and it's very difficult to describe
right but like so I am very worried
about the destructive power for humans
of what I view is the end of the line
for these kinds of
tools so again to be explicit and to not
beat around the bush when I try to think
like oh what is beyond this barrier for
which like it might not be possible to
predict it's like well if I'm just like
at Vegas and I'm just putting odds on
this roulette wheel it's like oh I think
almost all of those outcomes are
extraord ordinarily bad for the human
species there are potentially paths
where it goes well but most of these are
extremely bad for a whole bunch of
reasons and I think of it like this
people who are concerned like me like to
analogize AI to a little bit like
building nuclear weapons it's like ah
like we're building a thing and it could
be really
dangerous but I just don't think that's
the correct comparison because a nuclear
weapon
is a tool it's a tool like a hammer it's
a very bad Hammer but it is
fundamentally like mechanical in a
particular
way but the real difference like where
do where do I disagree with people where
do other people disagree with me is that
I think the much more correct way to
think about AI is it's much more like
biological
Weaponry you're building a thing that is
able to act in the world differently
than you constructed it that's what
biological weapons are they're alive a
nuclear bomb doesn't accidentally get
out of the factory on its own whereas
biological weapons do can and have and
like ah once a biological weapon is out
there in the world it can then develop
in ways
that you just would never have
anticipated ahead of time and so that's
the way that I think about these AI
systems that's that's like a really
really fantastic analogy cuz I am
sympathetic to the nuclear weapon thing
right like people watch Oppenheimer and
we're like oh yeah that's like AI I
think that Oppenheimer movie might have
doomed us all because it puts the wrong
metaphor in people's brains yeah I mean
I I think it at least got people close
to the idea though right where they
could see that and be like oh yeah maybe
these tools aren't necessarily good in
that well in the same way of like oh
they were making something they had no
idea or people were going to use it but
yes biological Weaponry is the same
where it has all of that yeah but then
the additional part of oh but it can
also get out and you cannot control how
it changes once it gets out I like that
yeah and the reason I like to talk about
it this way particularly with biological
weapons is because the thing that I want
to kind of shortcut which like it can be
fun to talk about but I like you know
and people want to argue against me in
like for a particular thing but like
look I'll love to talk about in some
sense uh like ooh are the things alive
are they thinking thoughts blah blah
blah blah blah like that's an
interesting conversation but when you
are seriously thinking about what to do
I think that whole conversation is
nothing but a pure distraction which is
why I like to think about it in terms of
a biological Weaponry because no one is
debating we made a a worse version of
small poox in the lab no one's having a
deep conversation about what's that
small pox thinking yeah what does it
want does it have any thoughts of its
own is there some way we can use the
small pox to make our spreadsheets
better yeah yeah but no one wonders if
the small pox is thinking something but
everyone can understand the idea that
like it doesn't matter because smallpox
germs in some sense want something right
they want to spread
they want to reproduce they want to be
successful in the world and they are
competing with other germs for space in
human bodies they're competing for
resources and the fact that they are not
conscious does not change any of that so
I I feel like oh these systems they act
as though they are thinking
and fundamentally it doesn't really
matter if they are or aren't thinking
because acting as though you're thinking
and actually thinking externally has the
same effect on the world it doesn't make
any difference and so that's my main
concern here is like I think this stuff
is real dangerous because it is truly
autonomous in ways that other tools we
have ever built are not it's like look
we can take this back to another video
of mine which is about like this video
will make you angry which is like about
thought germs right and I have this line
about like thought germs which I mean
like I mean memes right but I just don't
want to say the word because I think
that that's like distracting in the
modern context but it's
like memes are ideas and they compete
for space in your brain and their
compettition
is not based on how true they are their
competition is not based on how good for
you they are their competition is based
on how effectively they spread how
easily they stay in your brain and how
effective they are at repeating that
process and so it's the same thing again
like you have an environment in which
there are evolutionary pressures that
slowly change things
and I really do think one of the reasons
it feels like people have gotten harder
to deal with in the modern world is
precisely because we have turned up the
evolutionary pressure on the kinds of
ideas that people are exposed to so
ideas have in some sense become more
virulent they have become more sticky
they have become better at spreading
because those are the only ideas that
can
survive once you start connecting every
single person on Earth and you create
one gigantic jungle in which all of
these memes are competing with each
other and what I look at with AI and
with the kind of thing that we're making
here is we are doing the same thing
right now for autonomous and
semi-autonomous computer code we are
creating an
environment under which not on purpose
but just because that's the way the
world works there will be evolutionary
pressure on these kinds of systems to
spread and to reproduce themselves and
to stay around and to like in quotes
accomplish whatever goals they have in
the same way that small poox is trying
to accompl accomplish its goals in the
same way that mold is trying to
accomplish its goals in the same way
that anything which consumes and uses
resources is under evolutionary pressure
to stick around so that it can continue
to do so and that is my broadest highest
level most abstract reason why I am
concerned and I feel like getting
dragged down sometimes into the specific
of that always ends up
missing that point it's not about
anything that's happening now it's that
we are setting up another evolutionary
environment in which things will happen
which will not be happening because we
directed them as such they will be
happening because this is the way the
universe works that's why they'll happen
