thank you
no no
no
[Music]
no
[Applause]
[Music]
wow no
no no no
no no
[Applause]
no
please
it's got a cat yourself my God no
no
no no
no
I've got no please please
no
James Corden video
oh God here we go okay the case of James
Corden is a social phenomenon lightning
in a bottle I don't think I've known a
celebrity to be so universally hated
anytime he's brought up people always
have something negative to say about the
man but regardless of what people think
about James he somehow seems to be
everywhere just somehow everywhere
everything everywhere all at once
everywhere I go I see his face
right let's see here late night hosting
American TV
British TV
award ceremonies American films
British films
the man was in the Emoji Movie for God's
sake the Emoji Movie the notion of them
being emojis is just a jumping off point
these are just characters
with uh with spirits and souls and
hearts and minds and they
you're really once you get past the
notion of you watching lots of emojis
they're just characters it's safe to say
that James has done a lot throughout his
career maybe too much what I'm trying to
say is James's countless projects and
appearances everywhere has only really
backfired on him it almost feels like
common human understanding that James is
for lack of a better word a dick head
actually no not lack of a better word
that is a good word [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] take this
recent quote from Mel B of the Spice
Girls calling James the biggest [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
in Hollywood I think you always have to
be nice to be work with whether it be
production camera guys sound Latin we'll
work for the same thing so it should
always be nice and he hasn't been very
nice okay okay okay you might be
thinking how did the man who does all
the carpool karaoke videos get labeled
as the biggest [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] in Hollywood
right class get your notebooks and pens
out because this is your first lesson
and let's be honest hopefully last in
the subject of coordinology yes I just
made that up and there will be an exam
at the end and if you fail
you're not going to get into University
oh I know I'm sorry oh it's tough isn't
it
right in calling James the biggest
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] in Hollywood Mel B brings up
the main critique that most people have
against Corton that being that allegedly
allegedly can't stress this enough
allegedly
allegedly he is a horrible person to
work for to the point where he can't
even name the staff that he works with
every day name two of the cameramen in
this room
[Applause]
this is very similar to a lot of the
talk show hosts in the talk show host
Cinematic Universe in particular
Ellen Degen Ellen DeGeneres Ellen
DeGeneres think about it she spends
years as a prominent TV personality
mostly well liked she has her own talk
show she does voice acting she stars in
a sitcom in which she wrote only for it
all to crumble once the truth comes out
about what she's really like behind the
camera and then everybody hates her now
oh my God I solved it talk show hosts
voice acting sitcoms bullies allegedly
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
well on second thought it's a little bit
more complex than that you see when
Ellen was in a peak slay era it seemed a
lot of people had a good opinion of her
until all the stuff came out
I am so sad
I would argue that people had deceiving
hatred towards James way before he went
to America and had his Ellen style
cancellation I don't think James Corden
being hated so much comes down to one
singular moment is the bigger picture
it's not just him chanting at restaurant
it's not just him being mean to his
staff there's something bigger at play
here a lot of the people that don't like
him they don't know why here's an aura a
chakra
pheromones that just exude cringe James
Corden I don't know why I just don't
like this guy oh my God right so I'm
gonna have to go to the very beginning
to figure this all out so class turn
your coordinology textbooks to page one
there is so much more to this
so much more
Barbara 5 James Corden why he's funny
but like he's like cringe
if you had one message to James Corner
what would you say be better yeah James
yeah
[Music]
even when I see him in a commercial just
merely like advertising something uh my
brain starts to melt down and my stomach
churns I just can't really handle James
Corden in any way shape or form
it's always an act welcome to watch Mojo
UK and today we're counting down our
picks for the top 10 times James Corden
was a wanker it's the whole torment that
had gone
[Music]
James Corden has no idea that I exist
but I [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
I cannot stand that man I can't stand
him
from where I was sitting I can see your
belly
part one Cordon conquers Britain
[Music]
so James Quan's big break over here in
the UK came in the form of the BBC free
sitcom show Gabby and Stacey for those
who are unfamiliar with it the show
centered around a young couple one
called gabin and the other one oh we'll
see what it did there
Stacy lives in the seaside Welsh town of
Barry Island and Gavin lives in Essex
the two meet for the first time in
episode one and from there the show
explores the internet so never getting a
long-term relationship gives us some
insight into British life and provides
some grips and gaps along the way
with lots and lots of bros accents my
niece went to Greece
Oh I thought was this lousy t-shirt in
the show Gordon plays the character was
Smithy Asia
Essex Gaza in the narrative Smithy acts
as best friend and wingman together but
mostly Smithy is a reminder of Gavin's
life back in Essex away from his
girlfriend as the plot revolves around
the division between the two families
the character of Smithy provides some
good dramatic moments in the show which
Drive the story but most of the time it
just feels like smiffy is there for
James to live vicariously through him
are you asking me
it is also important to note that Corden
wrote the scripts for the show with
close friend Ruth Jones so you can say
Gordon and Jones who are almost the
Alters to Gavin and Stacy the show was
very successful in the UK immediately
after the end of its second series in
2008 the guardian actually describe the
show as BBC freeze biggest breakout
comedy hit
since little British and no you have
another bacardian cork please after the
success of Gavin and Stacey people fell
in love with the character of Smithy I
honestly couldn't tell you why
I think Smithy is like the worst part of
the show to be honest but anyway since
Cameron Stacy Jones is like the new hot
commodity in the UK for a bit him and
the actor who played Gavin Matthew horn
tried to ride the wave of Cameron and
Stacy with an unfunny appearance on the
Brit Awards and even more unfunny sketch
show which seems to be wiped from the
internet this is literally the highest
quality clip I could find oh and an
extremely unfunny film called get this
lesbian Vampire Killers that really
shows the emotional maturity James had
at the time
more powerful than you will ever
and with that
he locked her [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] head off if your
career had to begin again oh God yeah
yeah what would you do differently the
lesbian Vampire Killers
I would
I would uh I would not be in that film
I'm sure James has a lot of regrets
about this period of his life in fact
after looking more into this it's
interesting to look back on the first
known hatred of James this particular
article is the earliest example I could
find it dates back to March 2009 horn
and Cordon isn't just bad it actually
made me feel a bit depressed wrote One
newspaper critic this really was the
beginning of the end for James which is
funny because he's only really just
started I remember witnessing James
corden's rise to fame here in the UK I
think my earliest memory is probably
Doctor Who 2010
honestly Doctor Who Pete's there is so
good
it's clear that at the time regardless
of the band quality of his output Cordon
really was the new big thing that every
Network wants to slice up I'm sure the
High Reps in the UK industry just
absolutely loved him
yeah okay so we need someone to host the
Brit Awards I know why don't we get that
Gavin and Stacy guy yeah James Corden I
know let's get him to do it five times
it's strange James does all his work and
dominates the British industry but the
more I look into this the more it seems
like James has always been quite rude
like this anecdote from a Reddit AMA
which we'll get into later so League of
Their Own which is like James's panel
Show filming live through multiple
Tantrums over minor things that the
production staff with him being
incredibly rude to them which made the
other regulars seem very awkward like it
was usual between each take the other
celebs who would be chatting amongst
themselves bantering about but James was
glued to his phone and then they gone to
say seeing him like that it made me
realize everything you see on TV is a
complete Persona and really his natural
personality is just a complete
self-entitled
you so much oh that's crazy
it just shows like a celebrity's real
personality can be just awful in person
but as long as they switch it on this is
the camera starts rolling it's all good
like nothing could stop James from
getting more and more successful after
that whether you wanted it or not James
Corden was a huge success he was in
every British award show he had a cameo
in everything for some reason but you
must remember because of his immaturity
at the time the more stuff that he did
it was only more reasons for people to
hate him like he goes on the Brit Awards
and it's like oh why is he dances like
that and in the end when he does all
that stuff it just kind of snowballs
into people saying stuff like that James
Corden no I don't like that James called
enough it is a rat's wax this is what
happens with a lot of celebrities who
just force themselves onto every program
and forced himself onto every billboard
look at me look at me kind of thing I
already mentioned the ridiculous amount
of Brit award ceremonies that he did so
let's move on to the real mask off
moment for two so let's move on to the
real mask off moment for James sorry I
just love this bit so much I could have
done the whole video just on this so
imagine it it's 2010 it's the glamor
Awards and the award is best film
actress and the two presenters are James
Corden and Sir Patrick Stewart and for
some reason Sir Patrick just refuses to
announce the winner of the awards until
James has been taught a lesson in Grace
and decorum I want to speak to James
here
it is it's James isn't it
when the presenters are up here and when
the recipients are receiving their
Awards don't stand at the back of the
stage with your hands in your pockets
looking around as though you wished you
were Anywhere But Here oh you couldn't
be more wrong sir you couldn't be more
wrong or genuinely James is British is
really sticking out here he sounds like
an extra from Oliver Twist he couldn't
be more wrong sir if it looked like that
I'm so sorry but when you come up and
present an award just get on with it
there we go
foreign
Patrick just keeps going for some reason
from where I was sitting I can see your
belly
[Applause]
and uh that was right over there at the
back of the room these people down here
you know
sorry I'm waiting for the punchline go
on
no seriously go on okay no go on
you can see my belly and we can all see
you dying right now let's go for it here
we go
now we see Sir Patrick Stewart
desperately trying to find a punchline
for another joke one more
do you want one more
[Applause]
if you fancy the Jonas Brothers
cover your belly
I love the girl with it
I love that
the winner of the award Zoe Saldana
tries to defuse the whole ballet
situation
um I over for whatever is worth I I like
your belly so
thank you
I like your belly also the whole time
James and Patrick are just in the
background
[Applause]
but
the people that haven't seen my belly is
there anyone who hasn't got a it's just
there
[Music]
very cringe on both sides cringe is a
key word in this cordonology class from
where I was
can see your belly I think for me the
craziest thing is that James is on and
off camera personalities are so
obviously different like on his talk
show he's almost a character
character
character tour character character
character caricature of a James Corden
that he himself has invented he's just
so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] fatal he's just so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
fake
[Music]
that's not to excuse Sir Patrick Stewart
because I don't I don't know what he was
doing I don't know like
indeed kind of questionable like kind of
edging on fat phobia kind of if you
fancy the Jonas Brothers
cover your belly like what is oh my God
right just to recap class we've settled
that James on camera is a lovable
British fellow and off camera is a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and he's made some quite poor
decisions that you think would impact
his career quite a lot more but the
studio system they don't care about that
they just care about money and James
makes them lots and lots of money
because he's funny money we've got to
have money all of the projects that
James did in this period of his life
only really became popular in the UK so
I don't think all the stuff that he's
done so far contributes much to his
eventual reputation in America like when
he goes to America he kind of starts a
new starts a fresh but I think we've
established a pattern of behavior for
James that will just keep popping up
later he's got a bit of a pretty
attitude he has a kind of compulsion to
do every project that comes his way and
regardless of people's disdain for him
he just keeps evolving oh my God help
he's evolving help oh my God help oh my
God he's too evolved oh my God you want
a Tony
after winning a Tony for the play
one man two Governors oh my God that's a
that's a very British name for a play
oh Blobby seen by the queen that's gotta
be good we've gotta go watch that James
somehow finds himself in the Disney
adaptation of Steven Sean House musical
into the woods it's a great musical love
it it's a Bop but James that's what you
said and you know what I what was that
okay James this is probably just me but
it just takes me out of it like it
doesn't feel right like he plays the
character of The Baker and he enumerates
the whole thing
so it's just
I wish I'm in this Village
more than anything Nifty young man more
than life like that aura of cringe that
James brings spreads to this but
performance aside once James dipped his
little English boy toesies in the Disney
pool
everything changed
everything but I'm telling you the same
I tell kings and queens don't ever never
ever mess around with migraines
especially
[Music]
part two Corden spreads overseas oh my
God it gets so much worse honestly
why did I do this video I've been
working on this video since November but
I have no idea when this video comes out
so let's just say it's been a while a
long while this isn't even a real
microphone this is a lav mic taped to a
microphone
anyway after doing research for this
video and everything it's so weird to
see how back then the American Media
were trying to push James Corden onto
everyone
like the Americans had no idea who he
was but they gave him a talk show so
they're kind of like make sure everyone
knows who he is he went on Vogue and
they just said yeah like to boost his
career we'll dress him up all fancy and
and cover them in flower yeah let's
cover them in flower because you know he
played the Baker and into the woods and
I'm just guessing I have no idea whether
they thought of into the woods or they
just like kind of pushed
this like Baker aesthetic is very weird
very weird well I guess the flower did
its magic because the American Media
started to recognize James Corden for
what he was from into the woods and two
Governors and with that James Corden was
announced as the new host of The Late
Late Show after the departure of Craig
Ferguson on the 8th of September 2014
and he's still there today Jesus Christ
his presence as a late night host really
boosted his career boosted it like some
black market steroids suddenly he's not
making like humble little cameos and and
appearances and British TV he truly is
everywhere
oh look James is playing a hand in the
Emoji Movie
oh look James is frosting his hips at me
dressed as a mouse oh look James is a
musical oh look James is in trolls oh
look James is doing cardboard karaoke
with Adele oh I do like a bit Brazil oh
look James is in another musical oh look
James is in Peter Rabbit Ola James is in
the musical again
again
oh look James is playing nothing
compares to you at a Coldplay concert
yeah see that see that there look
oh I hate that
they did the bot did he did the Bob you
know we sort of stick your foot and go
did they do that
I can't really do the movement sitting
down but it's like
[Music]
it's like oh
boom
like imagine being a Coldplay fan you're
living in L.A you finally getting to see
in the concert and then oh James
corden's there why is he there why is he
there like this seems to happen a lot
like James goes out and about in
Hollywood so a lot of the people that
live there they all have stories of like
how rude and kind of cringe James can be
so it's clear that James's reputation of
being a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] didn't take too long to
come true in America and if you want
evidence of this you have to look no
further than the Reddit AMA James did in
2019. long story short I think the
producers of The Late Late Show thought
it would be a good idea to do an AMA ask
me anything on Reddit in 2019 to boost
the ratings of the show I I guess
like that's never going to go well but
like it's never regardless of your James
Corden or not it's just never gonna it's
just never gonna work out and it didn't
work out like
I think this AMA is a perfect
demonstration of how James's career was
going so far in America these comments
honestly they deserve a dramatic reading
hey James why are you class as a
comedian when you're not funny James are
you aware that everyone thinks you're a
hat and countless ass out James Ivan the
faintest idea who you are really but
Reddit assured me you're an [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ever
thought about coming back to UK and if
so what can we do to stop you
why do you treat your fans like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] did
you know that if you acknowledge the
claims that you're not a nice person and
Tackle them head on and talk about it
from your point of view is way better
for your PR than just ignoring them
massive tin person hi James sorry I went
to the party but you've not answered
many yet maybe you're on your phone
anyway is this pop [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] article true
and if we click that link it takes us to
this which also deserves a dramatic
reading a flying [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Tales from the
cockpit
half an hour into New York to London
flight passengers in business class
notice a woman with a crying baby being
bought through the curtains by a flight
attendant they looked in mild horror as
they saw the attendant direct her to an
empty seat next to
James Corden ah expecting a huge
celebrity hissy fit to kick off corden's
cabin mates were impressed to see that
he didn't say a words or make any sort
of complaint he simply put on a pair of
noise canceling headphones pulled an eye
mask over his eyes and turned away from
her to sleep pretty decent of them right
when the plane landed though passengers
were surprised to see called and remain
secret as the woman with the baby
struggled to open the overhead locker
and even more surprise when she turned
to Cordon and said for [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] sake can
you just at least hold the baby while
get the bags down the woman was his wife
it was his baby
I don't care if it's real or not I love
it it just paints such a picture it's
like poetry it just demonstrates what is
really like off camera and as soon as he
gets in that carpool Karaoke car
something switches him like all of a
sudden he just starts rapping with Iggy
Azalea
but like he does it to the point where
he's almost over compensating like it's
so cringe to watch
it does this we [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hand gesture
thing that is [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] horrible
on that I don't even think she [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I don't even think she tries that
hard
okay maybe I'm reading too much into
this carpool karaoke can't be that bad
like they get millions of views he's all
over my YouTube recommendations
[Music]
okay yeah it's bad it's it's really bad
is trash but to be fair to the guests
most of the cringe it comes from James
himself the guests just seem to sit
there whilst his things obnoxiously loud
and I know he doesn't even drive the car
but do you really want to kill Paul
McCartney as soon as he starts singing
and takes his hands off the wheel
no nobody wants that we love Paul
McCartney because as soon as Paul dies
the only Beetle we have left is Ringo
and nobody wants Ringo I sound like a
Beatles fan I'm not a Beatles fan I
don't care about the Beatles Hey Jude
I remember people being actually angry
that you didn't drive the car
was by the Twitter user ass case just
further proof that maybe the James
Corden hate
isn't always warranted but most of the
time it is
just shut up and have fun the
mind-numbing and the fun content aren't
you having fun is this fun content more
fun did you say you want more fun
content do you want more do you want
more you're having fun are you having
fun are you having fun yeah James Corden
yeah okay class I think it's clear now
most of the western world has heard of
James Corden and for a multitude of
reasons whether it be his onset Behavior
his airplane Antics his cringe
overcompensating or his belly they've
decided they just don't like him
part three the world hates you
now what
it seems audiences always crave this
idea of the perfect celebrity and
looking into James's decline into
I guess you could call it
unlikability it's clear that it's
perfect celebrity is one whose division
between on and off camera isn't so
noticeable a celebrity who's Persona is
consistent with what the audience wants
them to be with the talk show audiences
want interesting interviews you know
funny moments a good host that is a host
who's not running around and doing the
most to the point of cringe like James
is doing that's why a lot of the
celebrities that people like tend to get
labeled with the term relatable because
they're just like me but with James he's
nothing like you in fact when you watch
James on stage there's like a sense of
desperation in it in his eyes it's just
so hard to watch this kind of shell of a
person laugh so obnoxiously loud and
tell jokes that you obviously didn't
write realized that no one was
interested and that's fine James who
wrote that one who wrote that one
that's a crackle who wrote that one I
think James has come at a point in his
career but the more he does it's just
more fuel to the cringe fire this is a
symptom of a lot of intimate hatred
because once people have made a
conscious decision that they don't like
you there's nothing that you can do
right I would say my plan for James
please just do less please just do just
do less please he's even gone on record
to say that he says yes to too many
projects so I guess this is James's
fault do you remember Kevin and Stacy
that was good wasn't it that he had a
good thing there James you had a good
thing before the Emoji Movie before the
Reddit AMA before the belly why don't
you just go back to that yeah just go
back to that because look at it this way
James and I'm talking to James directly
now James the less you saturate the
market with your presence and plant
yourself from every possible project
the less ways people are going to find a
reason to hate you because remember when
you went to America and you went off to
start fresh it only took a year for the
Americans to find a reason to despise
you that being said it's only really a
matter of time before James plays like
Edna from Hairspray or just does another
talk show like he just can't help
himself he's a Madman like it's just an
endless cycle James does something
cringe gets traction for it
gradually Fades away
he does something cringe again because
he just can't help himself then he gets
traction for it and then it fades away
but I don't want to make it sound like
James is like a Disney villain he's
literally a talk show host
like he's literally just a man just you
know just floating around and if the bad
behavior that he exhibits is because of
like mental health or the pressures of
being a celebrity that's valid that's
completely valid but wouldn't it be like
a better strategy to just say that
instead of continuing to hump people in
the middle of the street like don't hump
people in the middle of the street James
stop doing it stop it get some help and
trust me James the way things are going
you're going to want to take my advice
because gen Z they're close to bringing
back the guillotine in the town square
and you're one hit Frost away from gen Z
hating you forever first they'll Eat the
Rich and when there's no Rich left
they're coming they're cringe talk show
hurts just kidding is not that serious
stop being cringed James because it's
filling up my YouTube recommendations
all right that's class dismissed you can
head out now throw away your cordonology
textbooks you'll never need them again
okay I'm gonna head out I'll play you
out with a song and James if you're
watching this
bye
bye bye bye James
don't stand at the back of the stage
with your hands in your pockets looking
around as though you wished you were
Anywhere But Here oh you couldn't more
wrong sir you couldn't be more wrong or
genuinely and if it looked like that I'm
so sorry but when you come up and
present an award
you can get on with it there we go
I can see your belly from where I was
sitting I can see your belly
one more do you want one more
[Music]
if you fancy the Jonas Brothers
cover your belly foreign
[Music]
