[Music]
gentlemen thank you for being here once
let's let's i keep doing these podcasts
where i just talk to people so please
introduce yourself and tell people what
you do
uh i am tristan harris and uh came on
the show about a year ago after the
social dilemma came out that's probably
where most people know me um and
used to be a design ethicist at google
studying how do you ethically influence
people's attention and thoughts and
behaviors
and
really enjoyed the conversation last
year the reason that today i'm here with
daniel schmuckenberger who's really
a person i've learned so much from the
last few years and why i thought it'd be
a good through line
is that the issues of social media which
i know we're going to talk about today
are connected to a number of other
issues that are going wrong in society
that are all kind of interconnected and
i've learned a tremendous amount from
daniel and i thought it would help
really clarify some of these these
issues for for everyone well thank you
daniel thanks for coming aboard thanks
for having me here what a daunting task
how to ethically influence people
and what a weird thing that this
industry that didn't exist
20 years ago has such a i mean think
about life on earth and then 20 years
ago all of a sudden this social media
thing sort of
evolves and
now you have to wonder how much of an
effect it has on our just day-to-day
lives
and how to ethically influence people
yeah what is that what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] does
that even mean
well first of all
how do those thoughts even
get you know how does that get worked
out actually i should first say that
there wasn't at google a department that
said how do we ethically influence
people i actually sort of um as was
shown in that in the film the social
dilemma wrote this presentation worried
about how technology was influencing
people's thoughts concerns behaviors et
cetera and i studied persuasive
technology at stanford which is a whole
discipline and field the idea that
technology can influence people and it
was that of my own personal concern that
when that presentation went viral at
google
i uh kind of worked my way into this
position that never existed before which
was
how could we create a framework for what
it means to ethically influence other
people and a lot of that has to do with
asymmetries of power i mean when i was a
kid i was a magician we talked about
this before
magic is about an asymmetric
relationship the magician knows
something about your mind that you don't
know about your own mind that's what
makes the trick work
and actually across some of the issues i
think we're going to talk about today
are ways that there is an asymmetric
relationship between what technology
knows about us and what we don't know
about ourselves when you were studying
at stanford
what year was this this was um 2002 to
2006 i was in undergrad and then 2006 i
got involved
with professor bj fogdan who again
actually studied ways that persuasive
technology could be used for positive
purpose like how do you help people be
healthier how do you help people floss
how do you help people work out more
often things like that it could be used
in a positive way right but i got
concerned because it was all of
this increasing arms race to use
persuasive tools to harvest and capture
people's attention now known as the race
to the bottom of the brain stem to go
down the brain stem into more social
validation more social narcissism
all of that and that's one of the arms
races we see everywhere which is like in
every single thing if one oil company
doesn't drill for that oil well the
other one will if one
attention company doesn't add the
beautification filter the other one will
if one company doesn't do narcissism
social validation hacking and certain
likes and variable rewards the other one
will and it's true across so many of the
other issues that we're facing whether
it's like if i don't build the drone for
everyone then someone else is going to
build the drone for everyone if i don't
so that's how i think did you realize it
back then i mean 2002 2006 you're
talking about a completely different
world in terms of social media before
the iphone actually yeah yeah 2007 right
iphone came out in 2007 we were studying
persuasive technology and i was i've
said in the past uh
partners with the
co-founder of instagram in the
persuasive technology class so we were
actually studying how would you apply
persuasive technology to people before
the iphone even existed
and um you know
for
you know what bothered me is that i
think when people think about how do you
ethically persuade people you just get
into a whole bunch of ethical cop-outs
like well we're just giving people what
they want you know or
if they don't want to this they'll use
something else there's these very simple
ways that the minds of people in
technology the tech industry i think
defend what they're doing and what
concerned me was that the ethical
framework wasn't really there not that i
had one at the time by the way i studied
at google for three years to try to
develop like what does it mean to
ethically influence three billion people
who were jacked into the system this is
before cambridge analytica before the
facebook files and francis haugen
talking about the you know we now have
the receipts for all these things so we
talked about all these things in the
social dilemma but now there's the
evidence with francis haugen's
whistleblowing that um you know
instagram makes uh body image issues
worse for one in three teenage girls i
know i'm going fast but that's
the broad strokes do you know the
conspiracy theory about her
tell me the the conspiracy theory
amongst uh the tin foil hat folk is uh
first of all she was uh she started a uh
twitter account
like right before she went there and was
immediately verified right and then
instantaneously was on all these major
uh media outlets major network
television shows and being interviewed
and p and she was saying something that
a lot of people felt like was a call to
authoritarian intervention into social
media that it was government censorship
uh was the solution and regulation was a
solution to dealing with this problem
and that it seemed like she was a
sanctioned whistleblower like they she
was saying all the things that they
wanted to hear and that's why they put
her in the position to make a big loud
noise what did you think about that when
it came out i'm just curious i always
have to do this you know when something
like that happens like
maybe
maybe because you know the government
would do that like most certainly they
would love to have control over social
media they would love to be able to
censor things like the hunter biden
laptop story they would love to be able
to
you know hide joe biden's medical
records or you know kamal harris's uh
time as a prosecuting attorney like
there's a lot of stuff they would like
to do yeah or district attorney rather
there's a lot of stuff they would like
to do uh with access to information i
mean you're seeing it right now in terms
of one of the things that's been
fascinating about covid
is uh during his pandemic and during
this terrible time of uh you know
paranoia and dealing with this disease
and fear and anxiety
you're seeing
this
narrative from social media networks
that absolutely walk step in step with
the government
where if the government wants certain
information censored it's being censored
across major social media platforms
that has to be coordinated
there's no way it's not and it is no way
they're incentivized to
not have people discuss certain things
because we've said before you know
that's one of the major points of um the
social dilemma is that things that are
controversial whether they're true or
not are the things that are the most
clicked on the most shared the most and
that's where
that's where the money is
so there's got to be some sort of
incentive for them to not do what they
do with every other subject whether it's
immigration or gun control or abortion
or anything
the algorithm is the sense of
immigration or you're saying that as an
this it's an example something goes
viral yeah not the censorship right they
don't censor an immigration no i mean
that the i mean the border crisis is a
great example of that right like the
government would probably like us to not
see all those haitian immigrants
storming across the border but my god
those were shared like crazy totally you
know so why was covet information shared
well because there was a narrative they
could say where this is dangerous
misinformation we can protect people
even though some of it turned out to
actually be accurate right like the lab
leak hypothesis
you know at least at least that it's a
hypothesis it's a hypothesis yeah the
middle east is being considered by
virologists right but the point is
that who the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] are they
to decide what can and can't be
discussed and when they're doing
something step in step with the
government i get concerned so when
someone comes along and this person
who's a whistleblower says something
needs to be done you know we're
endangering young girls lives we're
doing this we're doing that we need some
sort of government for intervention i
mean this is essentially calling for
censorship and calling for government
control of social media which freaks
people out so she's pretty clear that
she's not calling for censorship but
it's the reason i asked you was curious
what how it came across your radar
because i happened to to know and hear a
little bit about this from her we
interviewed her on our podcast
um and
the story that goes viral about her
saying that she's a psyop or that she's
a plant
that's an incendiary inflammatory
controversial story so when that gets
suggested is it going to go is it just
going to fizzle out or is it going to go
viral it's ironic it's going to go viral
exactly and in fact the when you kind of
realize like everything i mean there's
there's some things that are real
consideracy theories and there's some
things that are real psyops and there's
there's that's a real thing but
notice how many things we think of as
psyops conspiracies etc now and it's
because anything that has that
incendiary quality goes goes viral and i
happen to know for example i think one
of the things that claims in there is
that she's funded by this billionaire
piero mittiar but i happen to know from
talking to her that happened at the very
very end of what she was doing and it
was a tiny grant of like 150 000 for us
in the non-profit world that's like a
tiny amount of money basically just to
support her flight costs and i happen to
also sort of hear from her how like uh
how much of the media was constructed
the very last minute like she was
working this one
um newspaper the wall street journal to
do this sort of procedural rollout of of
specific stuff that she thought was
concerning i guess what i'll just say is
like what if she's just a good faith
person who saw that virality was driving
people crazy
and that it was it was harmful to
teenage girls and it's true that the um
the government would see some of that
and say hey we could use that for for
something else we could use that she
could be a tool for us to do something
else but i guess what you know in the
aim of complexity and nuance and not
jumping to conclusions and this sort of
thing
um
my perception from from talking to her
now extensively she's a very good faith
actor who was concerned that this was
going to drive the world apart i should
be really clear that this is not my
position yeah she's this is just the
conspiracy theory
i literally don't have an opinion on her
yeah i do have an opinion on algorithms
and i do have an opinion on what it does
do to young girls self-esteem and
you have teenage daughters yes i i just
think i mean and young girls are a point
of focus for
why their point of focus more than young
boys i'm not entirely sure i guess it
has to do with their emotional makeup
and and uh there's higher risk of
self-harm due to social media and
jonathan hate talked about that in his
book the coddling of the american mind
um it's it's very clear that it's very
damaging and i my kids uh you know my 13
year old does
have like interactions with their
friends and i do see how they bully each
other and talk [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about each other and
it's it's they get so angry and mad at
each other
um it is a factor but it's an it's an
algorithm issue right
it's there's multiple things here so the
first thing is um just to kind of set
the stage a little bit uh
i always use eo wilson the biologist who
who
sort of defined what what the problem
statement for humanity is he said the
fundamental problem of humanity is we
have paleolithic emotions and brains
like easy brains that are hackable for
magicians we have medieval institutions
you know government that's not really
good at seeing the latest tech whether
it was railroads or now social media or
ai or deep fakes or whatever's coming
next and then we have god-like
technology so we have paleolithic
emotions medieval institutions
god-like technology
you combine that fact that's the
fundamental problem statement how do we
wield the power of god's without the
love prudence and wisdom of god there's
actually something that daniel taught me
and um
then you add to that the race to the
bottom of the brain stem for attention
what is their business model just to
review the basics everybody knows this
now but it's it's engagement it's like
how do i get that attention at all costs
yeah so algorithms is one piece of that
meaning um when you're on a news feed
like i don't want to just show you any
news i want to show you the most viral
engaging like longest argumentative
comment threads news right so that's
like pointing a trillion dollar market
cap ai at your brain saying i'm going to
show you the next perfect boogeyman for
your nervous system the thing that's
going to make you upset angry whether
it's masks vaccines francis haugen
whatever the thing is it will just drive
that over and over again and then repeat
that thing and that's one of the the
tools in the arsenal to get attention is
that the algorithms another one is
technology making design decisions like
how do we inflate people's sense of
beautification filters in fact just
recently since we talked last time um i
think it's a mit tech review article
showing that um they're all they're all
competing first of all to like inflate
your sense of beauty so they're doing
the the i think the filters the filters
people know this stuff it's very obvious
but they're competing for who can give
you a nicer filter right and then now
instead of waiting for you to actually
add one tick tock was actually found to
actually do like a two percent like just
bare beautification filter on the no
filter mode because the thing is once
they do that the other guys have to do
it too
so i just want to name that all of this
is taking place in this race to capture
human attention because if i don't do it
the other guy will
and then it's happening with design
decisions like the beautification
filters and like the follow you and if
you follow me i'll follow you back and
the like button and check pulled refresh
the dopamine stuff that's all design
then there's the algorithms which is i'm
pointing at a thing at your brain to
figure out what how can i show you an
infinite feed that just maximally
enrages you and we should talk about
that because that thing drives
polarization which breaks democracy but
that's a that's a we can get into that
oh daniel let's bring you in here so how
did you guys meet and
how did this sort of
dynamic duo come about
yeah i was working on studying kind of
catastrophic risks for at large you've
had people on the show talking about
risks associated with ai and with crispr
and genetic engineering and with climate
change and environmental issues pull up
to the microphone there and there you go
escalation pathways to war and all these
kinds of things and basically how can
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hit the fan right
and i think it's a
pretty common question of like how long
do we have on which of these and are we
doing a good job of tending to them so
that we get to solve the rest of them
and then for me it was there were so
many of them what was in common driving
them are there any kind of like societal
generator functions of all the
catastrophic risks that we can address
with to make a more
resilient civilization writ large
tristan was working on the social media
issues and
when you had eric on he talked about the
twin nuclei problem of atomic energy and
kind of genetic engineering and
basically saying these are extremely
powerful technologies that we don't have
the wisdom to steward that power well
well in addition to that is all things
computation does right there's a few
other major categories and computation
has the ability to as as you mentioned
with facebook get to billions of people
in a very very short period of time
compared to how quickly the railroads
expanded or any other type of tech get
to a billion people a billion users
which they did in like a few years
versus before that it took software
companies like microsoft even longer
than that before that took railroads
even longer than that so the power of
this tech is you can compress the
timeline so you're getting you know a
scale of a billion people's you're
impacting a billion people in deeper
ways much faster which means that if
you're blind to something if you don't
know what you might be doing the
consequences show up faster than you can
actually remediate them when we say
exponential tech we mean a number of
things we mean tech that makes more
powerful versions of itself so i can use
computer chips to model how to make
better computer chips and then those
better computer chips can recursively do
that
we also mean exponential speed of impact
exponential scale of impact
exponentially
more capital returns exponentially uh
smaller numbers of people capable of
achieving a scale of impact and so when
he's mentioning god-like powers and kind
of medieval institutions
the speed at which our tech is having
influences in the world and not just
first order influences the obvious stuff
but the second and third order ones
facebook isn't trying to polarize the
population it's an externality it's a
side effect
of the thing they're trying to do which
is to optimize ad revenue
but the speed at which new technologies
are having effects on the world and the
total amount of consequence is way
faster than regulation can keep up with
and regulation and just by that alone we
should be skeptical of any government's
ability to regulate something that's
moving faster than it faster than it can
appraise of what the hell is even
happening in the first place so not only
that you need someone who really
understands the technology and you're
not going to get that from elected
officials you're going to need someone
who's working on it and has a
comprehensive understanding of how the
stuff works how it's engineered where it
goes
you're i mean i'm skeptical of the
government being able to regulate almost
everything right well and so there's
maybe a few things to say about that so
one is the complexity of all issues like
climate change is really complex like
the where the nuclear pathways of
escalation or the way a satellite or gps
could get knocked out triggers a nuke
somewhere that's also really complex
social media is really complex crispr
you know bio stuff is complex so in
general like one of the ways to
summarize the kind of problem from our
friend zach stein's kind of work is that
the complexity of humanity's problems is
going up like this but the capacity to
meet them is like not really meeting it
and then you add in social media and you
polarize people and divide them into
like they don't even know what's true
because everyone's got their own
personalized version of reality right
and instead of even trying to try to
meet that it goes down and in fact
social media also rewards the most
cynical take on anything so any time a
government institution has ever said
something dumb like when the guy asked
zuckerberg uh how do you make money and
he says
uh senator we sell ads
that thing goes viral and when that goes
viral everybody saw that and they didn't
see that you know the five senators who
i talked to who actually do
really get these things pretty decently
and i'm not going to say like let's just
like regulate it but just to notice
right so the cynical take about every
time an institution makes a mistake that
thing goes viral which means we lose
trust in so many things because no
matter what what the issue is you notice
that you were bringing up the conspiracy
theory of might the government have a
incentive to make a plant like francis
and so it's plausible but plausible
doesn't automatically mean is one of the
challenges is when someone has a
confirmation bias they hear something
that's plausible and they just assume
that it is without doing the due
diligence of saying what i need to know
you do a good job of checking that we
could also say would facebook have an
incentive to say that she's a plant and
try to hire a bunch of pr and they were
and they were helping to spread that
story
i'm not saying they're responsible for
it i understand i actually think that
what happened is organically again the
cynical take goes viral and then if
you're rusher china or your facebook in
this case you can be like that's a
really helpful cynical take from my
perspective in fact one of the things
that facebook does try to do is turn the
social media debate into a censorship or
free speech debate because they know
that divides
the the political class because they
know that the right doesn't want
censorship obviously and so they say the
more they can spin whatever francis is
doing as she's claiming censorship the
more they can divide um
uh
any any possibility for actual action in
fact i'll tell you just a quick story
really quick is during the three-hour
testimony that francis gave if you watch
the full three hours she had both people
on the left and the right and i've been
working on this for eight years i've
never seen someone create a bipartisan
consensus the way that she did she
actually did if you watch the video
and there was a senator there on the
right who typically had been very
skeptical of these issues and the next
day i talked to her she was going to
meet with that senator
and he later said i can't meet with you
why
because the story went viral saying that
she was a democratic operative and he
said my base will hate me if i meet with
you
so the very thing we're talking about
which is the ability to regulate
anything wow is being broken and
shattered because the incendiary
controversial take on everything goes
viral now again i'm not saying that
we're this like easy world we should
therefore regulate it's just like right
but noticing the mind work like part of
what i wanted to do today is like how do
we reverse engineer this like bad trip
we've been on for the last 10 years like
it's like a psychedelic trip where we've
all fractured into this different
reality where the controversial psyop
interpretation of everything the
conspiracy-minded interpretation of
everything again some things are real
some some of those things have
desert there's in that way
but just to understand how deep the mind
work has been the last 10 years
it's so funny you say the right doesn't
want censorship
isn't that a crazy statement like have
we like shifted the polar
you know the polar what do you mean
it used to be the left didn't want
censorship the aclu used to defend nazis
i mean right what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] has happened
like our polls have shifted like north
is south and south is north it's it's
it just shows you that so much of what
ideology is is tribal it's like you you
find a group that agrees to a certain um
certain pattern of behavior and thought
and you subscribe to that now i am a
right-wing conservative i am a left-wing
progressive and then you just follow the
playbook and it makes it so much easier
than having your own individual nuanced
thoughts on complex and difficult issues
like this right but the fact that he
couldn't talk to her because his base
would somehow rather think that she
actually is a democratic operative and
she does work for the government it is
trying some sort of an attempt at
censorship and i'm sure not only is
facebook amplifying that but
all of the different russian troll pages
on facebook are amplifying that which
confuses the water totally well also if
i'm russia or china facebook is like the
best weapon i've ever had against the
united states yes oh my god you've got
an f-35 i don't need f-35 right i've got
facebook i can destroy your entire
coherence as a society and they have and
you won't get anything done and all of
your energy will be spent on waste
infighting and heat we talked about this
recently but there's i'm sure you saw
the story there was 20 top 20 christian
sites on facebook 19 of them were run by
a russian troll farm i'm glad you
actually mentioned that excuse me it was
the eastern european troll farm yeah
macedonia i think totally 104 this is an
important stat actually i'm glad you
brought it up um a hundred and this is
as recent as october 2019
140 million americans per month were
reached by essentially troll farms
actively um there's three categories of
pages in which they're so for christian
pages the top 15 out of 15 christian
pages were all run by troll farms so all
of the christians in the country have
were receiving content and 85
this is this is a secondary point 85
of the christians who saw that stuff in
their feed
they didn't actually accept an
invitation from the the group or the
page to say yes i want to subscribe to
you facebook because they're optimizing
for growth they change the way the
system works so if a page invites you
that's enough for it to start putting
the content in your feed so there's an
example in francis's work
where there was a q anon person
who invited 300 000 people in one day
300 000 people and because facebook's
optimizing for growth and engagement
those people didn't have to say yes i
want to join that group just by being
invited it started testing like we want
we want to optimize regulator puts in
your feed and if you click on it it auto
adds you to the group oh my god out of
the top 15 pages for african americans
two-thirds of those top 15 pages were
run by troll farms of the top 15 pages
for native americans one third of those
pages were run by troll farms so we're
now we're not living in an authentic
reality reality quote-unquote it's
getting more virtual
if you read chinese military doctrine
specifically look at the 36 stratagems
don't ever attack a superior opponent
directly turn the enemy against
themselves based on their existing fault
lines population-centric unconventional
warfare right like that's kind of
ancient doctrine it's just facebook
makes that amazingly easy because it
automatically already puts people into
tribal groups
that whatever the content is in that
group is going to keep getting up
regulated optimizes for inflammation and
tribal identity and those types of
things and so you don't have to
kinetically attack a country to make the
country so turned against itself that
the polarized population supports a
polarized
representative class which means you get
gridlock on everything which means you
can't do effective governance which
means another country that does
autocratic governance just wins
geopolitically yeah it seems absolutely
insane that
they could through one page inviting
people yeah instantaneously start to
distribute all of their information on
the on those people that they invited
so why would facebook allow that like
you would think so if i'm designing
facebook you would probably say wait
wait you just said the government should
regulate social media
it should be illegal as well it should
be illegal yeah well this is i don't
think the government should regulate but
i do think there should be rules in
terms of like
if you're a regular person that say uh
has a specific group of interests
like same you only like um
motor cars you like vehicles you like
hot rods or whatever and that's what
you're interested in you know you use
facebook when you're off duty at work
and you just want to just check some
stuff out and all sudden you get queuing
on [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] because they invited you into
this q anon group and you start getting
all this information you start getting
radicalized
it's it seems like
and again i don't know what we should do
in terms of regulation
i i but i don't think that social media
groups should be able to just distribute
information to people
based on this concept of universal
growth yeah well i mean think about it
if we were just designing or unlimited
growth yeah
exactly i mean if if we were designing
facebook with a feature called groups
and groups had a feature called
invitations and you could invite people
yeah wouldn't you design it so that
people have to accept the invitation for
the group before it shows up in your
feed why would facebook not do it that
way right because what happened is
starting in i think it's like 2018
people stopped posting as much on
facebook so you and i and maybe we used
to post a lot more in 2016 2017 if we
stop posting as much oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] we can't
harvest all that attention from people
we were doing all this labor what do you
mean what caused it to slow down oh just
like people i mean people being more
skeptical maybe of facebook or just
realizing they don't want to share as
much or just usage burning out more
people moving to instagram or people are
getting older as well right older older
user base totally and so so now if i'm
facebook i want to find new sources of
free unpaid content creators where can i
tap that pool of content oh i've got
this thing called facebook groups where
people are posting all the time so i'm
going to start putting that stuff in
people's feeds to just so now i'm
fracking for attention i'm going lower
into
all these other places to backfill this
attention harvesting we are the product
manager and how do you know since there
isn't rigorous identity if a user that
says their user is really who they are
or if they're a troll farm or if pretty
soon they're an aigp three algorithm
and you should explain what yeah please
do gpt3 yes
uh the ability to generate text-based
deep fakes so so people know what a deep
fake is well there's a whole reddit
thread with people arguing with each
other that are all fake do you know
about that no i don't actually yeah let
me send it to jamie it's uh duncan just
sent this to me the other day and i was
like what in the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] i could only look
at it for a couple moments before i
started freaking out
but the idea that uh
you know that's that's it's not far off
like this this ability that
deep fake ai has to recreate is
especially in text yes exactly that's
specifically what gpt3 is it's a text
model that trains on trillions of
parameters and basically the entire
corpus of the internet so you're
basically ingesting everything everyone
has ever said online ever
including stuff in your voice or in my
voice and then you could say gpth3
write me an argument about why social
media is great written by tristan harris
using his words and phrases and it'll do
that it'll actually be able to take my
style of speech and it'll generate text
there you could also say you wanted the
vaccine
the ability to say
make arguments for vaccines or against
vaccines and say only use real data
and then be able to show the financial
vested interest of anyone arguing on the
other side and just have it be able to
create
more data than people can parse in any
reasonable amount of time like an
academic looking paper that's 10 pages
long saying why the vaccine is not safe
with citing real charts real graphs real
statistics and the real vested interests
of people who are say positively
pointing out that the vaccine is safe
who maybe they have some connection to
pfizer or something like that and it'll
generate that full 10-page or 20-page
document and it'll take a team of
statisticians you know a while to decode
that thing and you can flood the
internet and it's ready we already have
through open ai and the gpt-3 algorithm
the ability to pass the turing test in
many areas we need to explain what the
turing test is meaning that if you're
reading the text you can't tell that it
wasn't produced by a human right turing
test is the idea that if you that's how
you find out if someone it's a very good
robot so you've already got an asmr
right so this is this is the um reddit
thread so this is
these are all why the human babies cry
these are all robots this is all bots
arguing with each other this is what
happens when you give birth to a human
baby
oh my bad i thought you were just trying
to answer the question no worries no i'm
trying to answer the question of how
babies cry
yta i don't know what that means
and you are disgusting i can't even
fathom the level of toxicity in this
post these are all bots i am disgusted
that you are making fun of others don't
you know that people in this sub are
supposed to be empathetic with others
feelings question mark i'm sorry but
you're being a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] these are all robots
yeah this is wild because if you've just
read this you didn't know i don't really
care if you disagree with my opinion as
long as you don't call me a pedophile if
you were a real man
you would be with a young girl and take
care of her and you would be a sex
offender like this is wild [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] yep it
one of the things people don't know is
actually was just developed over the
summer they announced that open ai um
just a track since we came and talked
about some of these things last time
in august 2020 openai released a video
of using the same technology of machines
generating stuff
to actually write programming code so
you tell the gbg3 i want a asteroid
video game and it's like
and it writes all the code and then it
puts a little graphic of a starship
thing in the middle and then there's
rocks that are flying when you say i
want the rocks to move faster and then
the rocks move faster through the
asteroids only requiring natural
language no programming so you're just
saying you're typing a natural text i
want an asteroid video game that when i
move left it moves left i want this i
want the asteroids to move faster
actually make the the the starship
bigger and then it just changes and it
does it all
for you now this is perfect because this
is saying
you're just typing in text that's right
but also voice detects so you could just
say it you combine these things together
make me a pong game yeah
exactly and lex uh code me the unreal
engine
i mean that's that one's gonna be hard
yeah right but the point is that's where
we're headed right so and part of this
is again we have the power of god this
is actually it right here it is this is
the one
make the person 100 pixels and it's
doing it all itself yep
wow and it writes the code in the right
hand side so this is uh this video that
jamie pulled up on youtube is open ai
codex live demo and you can see this all
happening while this person types in the
data and they're actually explaining it
now how this is going to work
once you see it later yeah move set its
position to 500 pixels down and 400
pixels
yeah from the left and then it just does
that
oh my god look how quick it codes it
wow now make it controllable with the
left and right keys the right arrows
right boom and then now you can move it
so it does it progressively right it's
adding the code in yeah
wow
yeah
and this is going to be accessible to
more and more people too go ahead
this is an example of a kind of deep
point to think about for the state of
the world as a whole is
one of the things that exponential tech
means is exponentially more i'll tell
you this but get this thing right up in
your face
exponentially more powerful tech that's
also exponentially cheaper which also
means more distributed
and so
pretty soon this level of tech will not
only be getting better but available to
everybody so what happens when you have
an internet where not only do you have
an ai that is curating the facebook feed
for the most sticky stuff which usually
means the most toxic stuff that and
that's an ai that is curating human-made
content but now you have ai's that are
creating content that also get to
maximize for stickiness and then you
have the relationship between the
curation and the creation ais like how
does anyone ever know what is true about
anything again
so ai can create fake stories
and the the fake stories can be boosted
up by these troll farms
which themselves could be run by fake
you know accounts and fake logic
and wait it goes one step further is so
that's just distributed ai
right but we also have
drones making
continuously better drones with
continuously better ability to swarm and
weaponize them it also becomes easily
accessible we also have
crispr making biotech capability
something that you don't have to be a
state actor to have small actors can
have so there's this question of how do
we make it through having decentralized
exponential tech which means
decentralized catastrophic capability
god-like powers decentralized
decentralized god-like powers
biology as well as in terms of
technology that's right so it was social
media
just like gloss over the crispr thing
for people who don't understand what
crispr is crispr is a gene editing tool
i think it's on the second iteration now
or is it on the third
something like that they're they're
getting better and better at it the the
idea is eventually is going to get to
the point where it's like a home
computer like where you are going to be
able to edit genes yeah so
how i mean
how do you stop that or what do you do
about that and who has who who if you
wanted to have any kind of regulation
about something like that
what is the regulation is the regulation
that you have to have some specific
level of clearance before you have
access to it and but if that's the case
then you put it in control of the
government and then also
bad actors and other
governments are going to just distribute
it wildly and how do you control that
someone
would
uh have to have some kind of access to
get it if one of the it's is something
that you just need internet access for
like open ai or the ability for cyber
weapons right cyber weapons hitting
infrastructure targets it's like now the
only way to regulate that is universal
surveillance on everyone's use of their
home computer
and we don't want that future so so in
general like yeah um because this might
sound like just uh disaster porn which i
want to be really clear that i mean i
think there is a way through this yeah
our goal in coming on was to be able to
talk about the the framing the problems
so we know what we're trying to solve
we're not trying to say hey we've just
got this let's see
let's frame it really clearly yeah okay
you've got your coding problem and you
have this biology problem with with
crispr
how do you how does
a civilization navigate this without
killing itself well
daniel's gonna be able to speak to a lot
more of this i just wanted to connect it
first to social media so people see that
the through line so i actually think
that social media is its other kind of
it doesn't seem as dangerous right it
just feels like this this thing where
people are sharing cat videos and their
opinions and their right political ideas
and sharing links but it's actually just
like this and in the same way that that
dangerous capacity we're now seeing what
that dangerous god-like power was doing
of steering three billion people's
thoughts personalized to them the thing
that would most outrage you know
boogeyman their their lizard brain and
their nervous system
that's a god-like power when you have a
god-like power there's sort of two
choices that there's two attractors with
that power one is think of it like a
bowling alley you've got one gutter on
the left and one gutter on the right on
the left you've got a dystopia a
centralized control saying like here's
how we're gonna control that god-like
power that's like china controlling its
internet that's like mark zuckerberg
having a total monopoly on what people
can and can't say like those are both
dystopias that's centralized power the
other uh gutter in the bowling alley
is like take your hand off the steering
wheel and let this thing go for everyone
like anyone can make anything go viral
let's add the devious licks which is by
the way a tick tock challenge for
anybody to basically trash their high
school bathroom and it teaches you how
to do it and these videos go viral and
it's just like everyone's trashing what
is a devious like i probably shouldn't
have gone there it's so quickly
it's a um
high school teacher told me that there's
there's all these horrible things that
are going viral at the point virality is
a god-like power and devious licks is a
challenge that basically uh you you um
you're challenging your fellow high
school aged uh friends around the world
to um trash their high school bathroom
so you like flush a big mac with like
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and all this horrible stuff down
the toilet at the same time they put
like p this is awful they put like pee
in the soap dispenser they do all this
awful stuff
and it just you're just spreading a
disaster meme you're just teaching
people how to create a decentralized
catastrophe instead of a drone
just for tick tock likes well they do it
because it's getting attention and
engagement there's another one that's a
self-harm challenge for teenage girls
they're saying basically um uh you know
this is teaching who can who can do a
cutting it's like a cutting challenge i
think is what it's called so the point
is that these these decentralized comes
from are these things
from troll farms i don't know but they
could be
some of them probably are right yeah
there's a concept called stochastic
terrorism there's a good article on edge
which basically is the idea let's say
there was a foreign state actor that
wanted to
mess things up in the us population
trying to control a specific person to
do a specific thing is hard but trying
to get an already kind of
disenfranchised group more radicalized
it makes it more likely that some of
them do some harmful stuff is easy think
about you know you last texted me joe on
january 6th i think we had a quick text
exchange because like i think that's an
example of
i don't i mean and i'm not going to
claim that everyone is just that's an
example i think i would say of i can
basically go into a group of the
boogaloo boys or you know stop the steel
groups or something like that and i can
just see stuff that's like hey let's get
our guns out let's do this and i just
just just hinting at that idea i'm not
telling one person to go do something
i'm not controlling anyone i'm just
hinting and there's a wide enough group
there that people can take action so
that's one of the
other decentralized power tools but i
just wanted to close the thought of on
the on the bowling alley we've got um
the bowling alley one gutter is like
let's lock it down with surveillance
let's lock it down with mark zuckerberg
controls everything let's lock it down
with the government tells us what we can
and can't do on computers and the other
gutter which is the decentralized power
for everyone which without people having
the wisdom to wield that godlike power
or like not at least not evidence that's
in in people's own usage of it right now
also we've incentivized people to do
destructive things also
right so in certain places there is an
incentive to for those things to happen
it's not just by accident it's like by
design and incentivized but what you
just said is super important
it's
a population that is getting
continuously more radicalized on all
sides that simultaneously has
continuously
more powerful tools available to them
in a world that's increasingly fragile
and so if you have an increasingly
fragile world meaning more
interconnected global supply chains that
have where a collapse somewhere leads to
collapse everywhere more sensitive
infrastructure you know things like that
if you have an increasingly fragile
world you have more and more radicalized
people and you have those radicalized
people having access to more and more
powerful tech that's just fragility
across lots of different dynamics and
this is why the social media thing is so
central is it's a major part of the
radicalization process it's both a major
part of the radicalization process and
is itself an example of the centralized
control censorship which we don't want
and the decentralized viral memes for
everyone which radicalize and enrage
people and polarize democracies into not
working the thing is in those two
gutters the gutters are getting bigger
every day
like on each side you've got more
potential for centralized control you've
got china basically doing full control
over the internet you know doing a bunch
of stuff to to top down control and the
other side you have more and more
decentralized power in more hands and
that gutter is growing so the the
question is how do you basically we have
to bowl a strike down the center of that
alley but it's getting thinner and
thinner every day and the goal is how do
we actually sort of um it's almost like
a test right we are we are given these
godlike powers but we have to have the
wisdom love and prudence of gods to
match that set of capacities you were
just mentioning what china is doing to
kind of uh regulate its internet that's
because you're worth speaking about yeah
have you been following this yeah that's
what terrifies me is that we have to
become like china in order to deal with
what they're doing
um i i i just i feel like
one step moving in that general
direction is a social credit score
system and i'm terrified of that and i
think that that is where vaccine
passports lead to i really do and i i
think
this idea that they're slowly working
their way into our everyday lives and in
this sort of inexorable way
where you have to have some sort of
paperwork or some sort of a cue code or
something on your phone or qr code
that scares the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out of me because
that that's you're never going to get
that back right once the government has
that kind of power and control
they're going to be able to exercise it
whenever they want with all sorts of
reasons to to institute it i'm worried
about that too but i will say also just
to also notice that um everywhere
there's a way in which a small move in a
direction can be
shown to lead to another big boogeyman
and that boogeyman makes us angry social
media is upregulating the meaning of
everything to be its worst possible
conclusion so like a small move by the
government to do x might be seen as this
is the first step in this total thing
i'm not saying that they're not going to
go do that i'm worried about that too
but to also just notice the way that
social media amplifies that the degree
to which we all get kind of effective
and triggered by that the thing i think
is worth mentioning is what china is
doing regarding
its internet
because it's
seeing real problems and we might not
like their solution we might want to
implement a solution that has more civil
liberties than we should let's explain
what they're doing yeah so i'll do it
quickly so um
it's almost it's quite literally as if
xi jinping saw the social dilemma
because they've in the last two months
rolled out a bunch of sweeping reforms
that include things like
if you're under the age of 14 and you
use doin which is their version of tick
tock when you swipe the videos instead
of getting like the influencer dancing
videos and soft pornography you get
science experiments you can do at home
museum exhibits and patriotism videos
wow so you're scrolling and you're
getting stuff that's educating because
they want their kids to grow up and want
to be astronauts and scientists yeah
they don't want them to grow up and be
influencers uh and i'm not when i say
this by the way i'm not just to be clear
i'm not praising that model just
noticing all the things that they're
doing well i'll praise it
another
influence people that's a great way to
do it they also limit it to um three
hours sorry 40 minutes a day on tick
tock for gaming um let me actually do
the tick tock example so they do 40
minutes a day for tick tock they also
when you scroll a few times they
actually do a mandatory five-second
delay saying hey do you want to get up
and do something else
like because when people sit there
infinitely scroll even tim cook recently
said mindless scrolling which is
actually invented by my co-founder of
the center for humane technology
azeraskan he invented he was in the
social dilemmas the one who invented
that infinite scroll thing
um chyna said hey we don't want people
mindlessly scrolling so after you scroll
a few videos it does a mandatory five
second like interlude they also have
opening hours and closing hours so from
10 p.m until six in the morning if
you're under 14
it's like it's closed meaning um one of
the problems of social media for
teenagers is if i'm not on at one in the
morning but all my friends are on and
they're still commenting on my stuff i
feel the social pressure i'm going to be
ostracized if i don't participate and if
your notifications are on your phone
keeps buzzing totally and even if
they're not on it's like oh but i want
to see if they said something about my
thing and so um it's a it's a we call a
multi-polar trap if i don't participate
but the other guys are i'm going to lose
out and facebook and these companies
they know that by the way even netflix
said their biggest competitor is sleep
so
one of the because they're all competing
for attention
so when you do this mandatory thing
where you say we're going to close from
10 pm to 6 in the morning suddenly
everyone if you're in the same time zone
it's another important side effect uh
can't use it at the same time so these
are some examples for their military by
the way when you if you're a member of
the chinese
pla army um you you get a lockdown
smartphone it's like a light phone it's
like hyper locked down you can't do
anything by contrast we know that russia
and china go into our um
veterans groups on facebook and they
actually try to sow disinformation try
to radicalize veterans hey afghanistan
happened aren't you really pissed let me
show you 10 videos right and this is
like dosing people with more mental
health problems
so in a bunch of different ways
specifically if you want to drive civil
war in a meaningful way in the u.s
take the people who have real tactical
capability and radicalize them
and so target those groups in particular
and that's like that's
it makes sense why their military wants
to lock down the ability for external
influence of course right yeah and so
while we're you know spending all this
money building physical borders building
walls or you know spending 50 billion
dollars a year on the passport controls
and department of homeland security and
the physical you know russia trying to
try to fly a plane into the united
states we've got patriot missiles to
shoot it down but when they try to fly
an information
like precision guided information bomb
we instead of responding with patriot
missiles we respond with here's a white
glove facebook algorithm that says which
zip code or facebook group would you
like to target
right so it changes the asymmetries
typically what made us power what made
the us powerful was the geographic uh
you know we had these huge oceans on
both sides it gives us a unique you know
place in the world when you move to the
digital world it erases that geographic
asymmetry of power so this is a imminent
national security threat this is not
just like hey social media is adding
some subtle pollution in the form of
mental health or hey it's adding a
little bit of polarization but we can
still get things done it's an imminent
national security threat to our
continuity of our model of governance
which we want to keep spoken to people
in power have you spoken to congress
people
about this yes but i'm hoping many more
of them watch this because i think
people need to see the full scope and i
really do want to make sure we're not
sounding like just full disaster porn
because we want to don't worry about
that go full disaster porn well it's
just better that than not
it's not meant to scare people just to
get an appraisal of what is the
situation it's going to scare the
reality is going to scale
it should scare people because we we're
so far behind the eight ball there's a
really important point tristan was just
at that we actually need to double click
on which is
that democracies are more affected by
what's happening with social media than
authoritarian of course nations are and
for a number of reasons but do you wanna
well and we sort of hinted at it earlier
but when social media's business model
is showing each tribe their boogeyman
their extreme reality it forces a more
polarized political base which means to
get elected you have to say something
that's going to appeal to a base that's
more divided and in the facebook files
that francis haugen put out
they showed that when facebook changed
the way its ranking system worked uh in
2018 to something called meaningful
social interactions i won't go in the
details they talked to political parties
in europe so here we are 2018 they do an
interview with political parties in
poland and hungary in taiwan and india
and these political parties say facebook
we know you changed your ranking system
and facebook like smugly responds yeah
everyone has a conspiracy theory about
how we change our ranking system because
those stories go viral and they're like
no no we know that you changed how your
ranking system works because we used to
be able to publish here's a white paper
on our agriculture policy to deal with
like soil degradation and now when we
publish the white paper we get crickets
we don't get any response and we test it
and the only thing that we get traffic
and attention on is when we say negative
things about the other political parties
so and they say we know that's bad we
don't want to do that we don't want to
like run our campaign it's about saying
negative things about the other party
but when you change the algorithm that's
the only thing we can do to get
attention it shows how central the
algorithm is to everything else if i'm
tucker carlson or rachel maddow or
anybody who's a political personality
are they really saying things just for
their tv audience are they also
appealing to the algorithm because most
more and more of their attention is
going to happen downstream in these
little clips that get filtered around so
they they also need to appeal to how the
algorithm is rewarding saying negative
things about the other party so what
that does is it means you elect a more
political like representative class
that's based on disagreeing with the
other side and being divided about the
other side which means that it throws a
gear into the rent the wrench into the
gears of democracy and means that
democracy stops delivering results in a
time where we have more crisis we have
more supply chain stuff and inflation
and all these other things to respond to
and instead of responding effectively
it's just division all the way down but
it's been division from the jump even
long before there was social media so
all social media is doing it's putting
gasoline on yeah it's they're taking
advantage of a trend that already
existed it's not like but my opponent is
reasonable right but i feel like i'm
just a better choice and you could
disagree because he's a great guy but
this is how i feel no one's doing that
totally totally again but notice though
in this 2018 example how specific the
change was those political parties that
before 2018 they could get elected in
those countries because they hadn't gone
that as partisan maybe as we were yet
yes they could have gotten elected in
getting attention by saying here's a
white paper about our agriculture policy
but after 2018 the algorithm has the
master say everyone has to appeal the
algorithm if i'm a small business i have
to appeal to the algorithm if i'm a
newspaper do i just like write the
articles i want to write or the
investigative stories the fourth estate
that we need for democracy to work no i
have to write the click bait title
that's going to get attention so i have
to exaggerate and say joe joe rogan just
takes horse dewarmer because that's
going to get more attention than saying
he took ivermectin so particularly in
this world where no one's buying paper
anymore correct everyone's buying
everything clicking online so you really
and very few people are even subscribing
so you have to give them these articles
and then have these ads in the articles
and those publishers and that's also
driven by the business models of these
these central tech companies so there's
a facebook twitter and google there's
two feedback loops that he just
mentioned
politically if you have facebook and
other platforms like this polarizing the
population then the population supports
a more polarized representative class
but the representatives to be elected
are doing political ads and so the
political ads then further polarize the
population
and so now you have this feedback loop
and then the same is also true with with
media the media has to meaning
newspapers television still has to do
well on the facebook algorithm because
more and more there's a monopoly of
attention happening there and it's
someone seeing a clip there that has
them decide to subscribe to that paper
or keep subscribing to it or whatever it
is
so you end up having the algorithm
radicalizing what people want to pay
attention to where then the
sources of broadcast have to appeal to
that which then in turn further
radicalizes the population so these are
runaway feedback loops
and
what's the solution
um well actually you you asked me this
last time and i dodged the question and
part of it is because um
it's it's connected to a set of broader
issues that that i think is actually
really deep in daniel's line which is
actually the reason i wanted us to do
this together this time
there's obviously many steps to this
right so once you've kind of let this
cancer sort of spread
if you take out the the thing that was
causing the cancer we've now already
pre-polarized everyone's beliefs like
when you say what's the solution to all
this like ever all of our minds are
running malware like we're all running
bad code we're all running confirmation
bias except no one thinks that they are
right everything's the other ones are
but not not me but the point is that all
of us like it doesn't matter like
people on all sides of the political
isles and all tribes we've all been
shown our version of the boogeyman our
version of the inflated thing that got
our attention and then made us focus on
that and then make us double down and go
into those habits of those topics being
the most important
and so we have to realize that i almost
think we need a shared moment for that i
wish the social dilemma was a little bit
more of a it was a shared moment but i
think there's almost like a truth and
reconciliation
like uh
moment that we need to unwind the you
know our minds from the cult factory
because it's a cult factory that found
each of the little tribes and then just
sucked them into together and made them
in a self-reinforcing
let's say we take any
issue that some people care about and
think is central whether we take social
justice or climate change or u.s china
relations
if
half of the population thinks that
whatever half of half the population has
a solution they want to implement carbon
taxes or whatever other half of the
population is polarized to think that
that is uh bad and terrible and going to
mess everything up
so that other half are still political
actors and they're going to
escalate how they counter that
how do you get enough cooperation to get
anything done especially where there are
real issues and not just have all the
energy become waste heat in in autocracy
let's take china as an example where you
don't have to where you don't have so
much internal dissent
you don't have that issue so you can
actually do long-term planning
so one of the things that we see is
we have decreasing ability to make
shared sense of the world and in any
kind of democratic society if you can't
make shared sense of the world you can't
act effectively on issues but the tech
the types of tech that are decreasing
our ability to make shared sense of the
world are also
increasing the speed at which tech is
changing the world and the total
consequentiality of it and that's one
way to start to think about like this
bowling alley example is we're having
faster and faster more and more profound
consequential effects and less and less
ability to make sense of it or do
anything about it so underneath the ai
issue the crispr issue the u.s china
issue the how do we regulate markets
issue the how do we fix the financial
crisis issue
can we make sense of anything
collectively adequately
to be able to make choices effectively
in the
in the environment we're in and that's
underlying it
tristan was laying out that you got
these two gutters right you've got
decentralized catastrophe weapons for
everyone if we don't try to
regulate the tech in some ways and that
world breaks or to say if we don't want
decentralized catastrophe weapons for
everyone maybe we do something like the
china model but where you have
ubiquitous surveillance
and that's a dystopia of some kind and
so either you centralize the power and
you get dystopias or it's decentralized
you get catastrophes and right now the
future looks like one of those two
attractor states most likely
catastrophes are dystopias we want a
third attractor
how do you have a world that has
exponential tech that doesn't go
catastrophic or the control mechanisms
to keep it from going catastrophic
aren't dystopic and by the way we're not
here saying like go buy our thing or
we've got a new platform this is not
about this is just about describing what
is that that center of that bowling
alley that's not the gutters that we can
skate down the closest manifesting
example of this so far
um although when you do one more
construction i think which is um but it
is taiwan because taiwan actually i
think i talked about it last time we
were here
is a um
they've got this digital minister audrey
tang who has been um
saying how do you take a democracy and
then use technology to make a stronger
democracy so you can look right now the
landscape he's okay we can notice that
china and countries like china
autocratic countries are employing the
full suite of tech to make a stronger
authoritarian autocratic society they're
adding surveillance they're doing you
know cameras everywhere they're doing
sesame credit scores they're
using tick tock to educate their people
instead of turn them into influencers
they're using the full suite of tech to
create their kind of autocracy that they
want to see
by contrast
open societies democracies western
democracies are not consciously saying
hey how do we take all of this tech and
make a stronger
democracy right how do we have tech plus
democracy equal stronger democracy one
of the other reasons i wanted to talk to
you
is so far i think the tech reform
conversation is like how do we make
social media like 20 less toxic and then
call it a day or like take a mallet and
break it up and then call it a day
that's not enough when you understand
the full situation assessment that we're
kind of laying out here of the skating
down the middle of bowling alley the the
thing that we need that competes with
that thing because we can't just also
allow that thing is going to outperform
so the the
china autocratic bottle is going to
out-compete
a you know democracy plus social media
that like is 20 less toxic isn't going
to out-compete that thing well
ultimately in the long run it's going to
but it's fascinating is they're willing
to forgo any sort of profits that they
would have from these children from 10
p.m to 6 a.m right in order to make a
more potent society of more influential
not influencer but influential more
educated more positive people that are
going to contribute to society
this is something that i think you can
only do
if you have this inexorable connection
between the government and business and
that's something that they have with
corporations and with the ccp over there
right they have this ability
because they're they're completely
connected like what the government did
the senator tell us about china's oh
yeah this is a great point we were
talking with a sitting senator who was
saying they're at some national security
conference
um talking to a foreign minister of a
major eu country and said who do you
think
the ccp the chinese communist party
considers to be the greatest rival to
its power
you would say
united states right right so it's not
the united states they consider their
own technology companies to be the
greatest threat to their power oh so
that's why when someone like jack ma
steps out of the line they lock him up
in the brig for a few months and shut
his mouth notice that you know
cryptocurrency oh that's a threat to our
financial system oh a bitcoin
specifically um oh tick-tock that's a
threat to the mental health of our kids
oh facebook we don't want that in our
country that would open up our military
to foreign hacking so they see correctly
that technology is the new source of
power of basically what guides societies
it is the pen that is writing human
history and it doesn't have if you let
just for-profit motives again
coupled with like how do i get as much
attention out of people as possible in
the race to the bottom of the brainstem
to suck it out of people that thing
doesn't work with society that breaks it
so they see that appropriately and then
say let's do something about now the
cynical view is obviously they're a
communist country that's just you know
just doing their thing that's a cynical
perspective but a post-cynical
perspective is they're also
appropriately recognizing that there's a
certain threat that comes with allowing
unregulated technology
so
one way to think about this tristan was
just saying that they recognize the
power of new technologies and the need
to be able to employ them if they want
to be effective
we can see how much the world responded
how much the u.s responded to the
possibility of a nuclear bomb with the
manhattan project just even the
possibility that the germans would get
it and how that would change everything
asymmetrically and so we make basically
an indefinite black budget find all the
smartest scientists in the world because
that much asymmetry of tech will
determine who runs the world
it's important to also say there are
some people who will have just like a
knee-jerk reaction that says oh you guys
are just being catastrophic yeah you
guys are just trying to scare us
disaster porn there have always been
these risks we always come through them
really until world war ii and the bomb
there was no way for us to actually mess
up the habitability of the world writ
large we could mess up little local
things and in fact that happened most
previous civilizations did go like
did go extinct for different reasons but
world war ii was the first time we had
truly globally catastrophic tech and we
had to build an entire world system
mutually assured destruction the bretton
woods world the igo world to basically
not use that tech
well now that was basically the first
catastrophe weapon and then we had only
two superpowers that had it so you could
do mutual destruction and it's really
hard to
to enrich uranium and make nukes it's
not hard to do these types of tech right
that's the whole point and we have now
dozens of catastrophe weapons
many dozens of actors including
non-state actors who have them
and so we're like oh we're in a truly
new phase this isn't the same as it's
always been we're in a novel time of
risk
and the exponential technologies with
kind of computation at the center ai and
these other ones we're talking about are
so much more powerful than all forms of
legacy power that only the groups that
are developing and deploying exponential
tech will influence the future
that's like the big story
and then we would say well which groups
are developing and deploying exponential
tech well china is autocratic nations
are
facebook is google is like major
corporations that are also top-down
non-democratic systems are and they're
becoming
like facebook has three billion people
the us has 300 million people right
we're talking about something that has a
global scale of influence but is really
a top-down system a corporation though
so you either have corporations that are
wielding the power of all this
technology for mass behavior
modification surveillance of everyone
perfect sort of understanding of their
psychological traits and then moving
them that scale but in the corp in the
tech big tech corporation model they're
doing it for a for-profit motive whereas
in the ccp model they're doing it for
their ideological goals but neither of
them are democratic neither of them have
some kind of participatory governance
jurisprudence of foreign by the people
and
the open societies are not innovating
and how do we develop and deploy
exponential tech in an open society way
and that's fundamentally what we're
saying has to be like the central
imperative of the world right now
is
you're not going to be able to compete
with groups that are developing and
deploying exponential tech if you are
not also
but how do we do that in a way that
preserves the civil liberties that we
care about actually advances them
and can advance participatory governance
and collective intelligence and that's
not a simple way is you don't right the
simple ways you'll slide things down
become an autocratic yeah so you either
beat china by becoming china or you
figure out a third way well that's like
to see there be a third way i'd like to
see a third way too but i don't see it
so that's what's terrifying to me so
like a little more about taiwan is
actually worthwhile we're moving in the
direction of china more than we're
moving in the direction of some new
utopia currently yes yes right so what
about taiwan well so you can't even
mention that
see what happened with john cena no what
happened you didn't say that yeah
john cena was uh there was
an opening weekend for
fast and furious nine i believe and john
cena
accidentally or inadvertently
said that taiwan is going to be the
first country that sees the movie
well china doesn't recognize taiwan as a
country and if you want to do business
with china you can't say that
that was on full display when and it
made people very skeptical of the world
health organization when one of their
spokespeople was having a conversation
with a journalist and
uh when she brought up taiwan's response
and other countries have done it like
this but taiwan's response and he
disconnected his did see that did you
see that yeah and then came back on and
glossed over very quickly said china's
doing a wonderful job let's move on and
she was like but taiwan and he's like
china is amazing and china this and
china that well john cena by saying that
taiwan was the first country that was
going to see fast and furious pissed off
china and then
john cena made a video where he spoke
mandarin
and in it is like this weird video you
should watch it because you haven't seen
it let's show it to him show it to him
because it's he's apologizing to china
in the weirdest way
saying i really really respect china and
i'm so sorry and i made a mistake i was
very very tired so this is the perfect
example of a kind of dystopia we don't
want to go to a future where people are
all accommodating or can't feel or think
their actual thoughts because they have
to appeal to some source of power
exactly and the source of power is
financial because 160 million dollars
was the opening weekend for fast and
force 9 and 134 million of it came from
china
senator had many many interviews
nine information
gave me lots of interview information
uh
i made a mistake
i have to say right now it's so so so so
so so important
i love and respect china and chinese
people
i'm so so sorry for my mistake
i'm sorry i'm sorry i'm very sorry
you have to understand i
i love and respect china and chinese
people
i'm sorry
that's it he doesn't even say what he's
sorry about right because this is wild
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] when you see this guy who is
you know one of our big major action
movie stars right
just on his knees apologizing to china
right who hadn't said anything bad about
china
not at all right all he did was say
taiwan as a country which you can't say
and if someone talks about something
that's not the mainstream narrative and
the tech companies currently can't
believe you never saw that i i think i
i'd seen it in like a john oliver video
or something briefly so i would add
taste of it but yeah i mean that's a
good example that's that's where you get
your news
i don't know but i was working out
sometime
um i so
this is a good example of we don't want
to live in dystopias where
our thought and our ideas and our free
expression and our ability to figure out
what's true in an open-ended way because
we don't know what's true right
um we need to protect that but we also
remember the last time i ended our
conversation talking about orwellian
dystopias and huxley and dystopias yeah
that quote about amusing ourselves to
death or welfare feared a world where we
would ban books and censor information
huxley feared a world where we'd be
drowned in irrelevance and distraction
right so that's kind of another version
of the two gutters like yeah right now
we're kind of getting a little bit of
both right we're getting a little bit of
hey we don't like the way that the
companies are doing this sort of
censorship or platforming de-platforming
of people we also don't want the
unregulated like virality machines where
the craziest stuff and the most
controversial stuff that confirms our
biases goes viral because both those
things break break society right so
let's get back to that again what's the
solution well let me just make one
narrow solution for that one because
it's funny because francis in her own
testimony says facebook wants you to
believe in false choices between free
speech and censorship there is a
solution that facebook themselves knows
about for this particular problem
which is actually just to remove the
reshare button the the basically the
retweet button the reshare button
um what they found in their own research
facebook send something like
multi like a billion dollars or
something multi billion dollars on
integrity modern content moderation all
that stuff and they said in their own
research it would be more effective to
um than the billions of dollars they
spent on on content moderation to just
the remove the reshare button
after you after people click it twice in
other words this you can hit reshare on
a thing and it goes to all your friends
and then all those friends they still
see a reshare button and they can click
reshare and then it goes to all their
friends right after that there's no
reshare button if you just remove the
instant frictionless like make my
nervous system twitch and then boom i'm
re-sharing it to everybody if you just
remove that one thing you keep freedom
of speech but you kill
an irresponsible reach just like instant
reach for everyone but you also killed
the ability to retweet something or re
share something that's interesting you
could you could still copy and paste a
thing and share it you can still do that
yeah yeah okay but i think that we have
to ask there's a story about steve jobs
that i've referenced several times
someone um you'd appreciate this because
it's about podcasts someone showed him
um the latest version of the podcast app
and someone wanted to make on the iphone
this is on the iphone early days
and they're like what if we made it so
in the podcast app we had a reshare
button and you could see a feed of all
the stuff that your friends were
looking at yeah i mean it sounds like
kind of it's just like social media and
it'd be really engaging and people would
get sucked into podcasts
but steve job's response was no
if something is truly that important and
truly that meaningful someone will copy
and paste it as a link and be like you
gotta check out this interview with joe
rogan which i hope people do with this
episode because it's crossing a
threshold of significance of what is
truly worth our undivided attention
which is also the name of our podcast we
call it that as opposed to just
publicizing something spending a bunch
of money or doing a bunch of or creating
influencer culture or just rewarding
again the controversy and the conspiracy
theory and the thing and again i always
i shouldn't use that phrase because it
sounds like you're always one-sided on
it but just the most kind of aggressive
take on anything the most cynical take
on everything being rewarded we don't
have to have it's nowhere is it written
that like a virality-based information
ecosystem where you have the
people are familiar now with the
metaphor of like a lab that's doing gain
of function research and the idea that
something get leaked out a lab just like
that as a metaphor well today we have
the tiktok institute of virology we have
the zuckerberg institute of virology and
they're testing what makes the memes go
as viral as possible right they're like
hey if we make it have this photo if we
present it this way and if we had these
reshare buttons except their goal is to
create these mimetic pandemics their
goal is to have every idea
that's especially the ones that most
excite your nervous system and your
lizard brain go as viral as possible and
then what you can even say that the
zuckerberg institute of virology
released this this mimetic virus and it
shut down the global democracy world
because now we don't have shared sense
making on anything
but we do
if if everyone's intelligent and
objective and they just
you know they don't use the reshare
button for nonsense the problem is that
people are
you know we were impulsive and we
and we also don't spend a lot of time
researching a lot of things that we read
you know if someone says
right i mean and they they know that and
they pray on that right they prey on hey
you're you're right you should you
should totally reshare that thing well
it's also
you know things are
if true spectacular and it takes
oftentimes hours to find out something
is true or not true right you know and
we can't we don't even know right right
it's very difficult to even trust talk
about how social media kills science you
want to do that construction
well scientific bias right we talked
about that
if someone has a kind of an emotional
bias towards what they already generally
think is true even if they're following
the scientific method well what
experiment they decide to do what they
go looking for will be influenced
because there's a lot of things to look
at right am i trying to do science on
natural supplements versus on drugs
versus on vaccines versus like uh i'll
have an intuition that is the basis of a
hypothesis or a conjecture that then
i'll do the scientific method on
intuition can be biased um
so a point that tristan was saying
earlier that i think is really important
is that this model of facebook and it is
not and it's not just facebook it's tick
tock it's all all of uh the things that
do this kind of attention harvesting
which ends up it doesn't intend
to polarize it's it's a byproduct right
it's a second order effect and an
intended consequence but in the way that
like the unintended consequence of
cigarettes was it had an externality
which was lung cancer and oil companies
had oil spills and so then government
had to regulate it
the these companies are fundamentally
different because their
their externality is a polarized
population which in a democracy
decreases the capacity of government
directly
so the big oil companies and big pharma
companies and whatever can do lobbying
and campaign budget support whatever
they can to affect government but their
their mode of operation is not directly
decreasing the effectiveness of
government the mode of facebook's
operation directly polarizes the
population which polarizes the
representative class which creates more
gridlock which decreases the capacity of
government both relative to other
nations that don't have that issue and
relative to their own internal tech
issues right in their own internal
demands i can't even regulate facebook
in the example i gave at the beginning
of the senator who was going to meet
with francis but then he couldn't
because these stories that polarized
them went viral
she should have shamed that senator
that's what she should have done
and that would have gone viral then he
would have backed down because then his
constituents would have been mad at him
and go hey man
um what's interesting is that instagram
doesn't have a share feature yeah i just
realized that which the share feature
isn't actually the key tick tock is not
really emphasizing shares but facebook
is facebook is but the key is morality
right so
share is one way to get virality tick
talk is just looking at engagement and
up regulating the things that get most
engagement this is actually a key point
because let's say that we tried to make
a piece of legislation based on thinking
it was about shares then facebook would
just move to the tick tock algorithm
just by what you look at the most that
thing gets reshared to other people and
it's based on unconscious signals as
opposed to explicit click signals so
there's a deeper point here which is not
is there a piece of regulation that we
can put in even if we trust the
government to do that it's let's even
say we had a very trustworthy government
it's can the government regulate at the
speed
that tech can outmaneuver it well and
here's the other question if you didn't
have any algorithms whatsoever
wouldn't you be
now open to be manipulated by troll
farms just simply by volume you know if
they have a hundred thousand accounts at
each individual location they have a
hundred thousand locations and they're
just pumping out different instagram
pages and tick tock pay and we don't
really even know how many they actually
have because they discover them like
facebook shuts down two billion fake
accounts per quarter i'm sure they get
all of them [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
and this is before ai
yeah for the gpt you're you're obviously
being sarcastic by saying they get all
of them they don't no exactly yeah um
just to let people know
totally paying attention that's insane
two billion per quarter fake accounts
yep and did they
do is there a centralized area where
these are coming from is it all russian
troll farms are they some of them
political ones that are used against
opponents like well one of the problems
is that we don't know because actually
that's not true facebook has been um i
really want to celebrate all the
positive moves they make by the way this
is not just so i'm clear and more clear
like this is about finding what's an
earnest solution to these problems right
all the time they make great decisions
that are moving the positive direction
we need to celebrate that they do these
um quarterly reports i think called like
a
information quality reports or they
publish every quarter how many accounts
they take down but it's just like a pdf
like they're just putting out a post as
opposed to allowing external researchers
know for example in each country what
are the top 10 stories that go viral how
do they find out that someone's a troll
post
i don't know i mean there's classifiers
that they build there's activity you can
tell like usually have you ever had this
happen use facebook and you click around
a bunch and then it says like you look
like you're clicking around too much
have you ever gotten one of those
messages
um there's occasionally like a person
can trigger a thing that makes it
they're like are you real and it they're
trying to figure out if you look around
a lot you're not real there's because
these bots a lot of what they're doing
is they're going around harvesting
information so they want to click around
various profiles and they like download
the information and there's like ways
more than a person could be able to do
just by clicking yeah it's a hard
problem right because essentially
because the tech is getting better at
simulating the behavior of a human and
then simulating there are people who are
proposing that social media
and the internet as a whole needs
rigorous identity layer
i would say that's a requisite
need for where we're going i was
thinking that about twitter a long time
ago that if and we don't kind of we kind
of have that with facebook but it's not
rigorous obviously right but twitter you
know you can have
jackmeof69 and that's your twitter
handle and with some weird gmail account
and then just post nonsense
you know and so there's no ability to
for justice in that system there's also
no ability accountability there's also
no ability for the user reading somebody
else's thing to know who they are right
for the veterans group or the whichever
group to know is this a russian troll
farm that is pretending to be a
christian or whatever right
and especially is this even a human or
is this an ai in the very near future so
the ability to be able to know this is a
human and this is actually the human
that they say they are is not an
adequate solution but it's an example of
a solution now this of course then
creates other issues one of the things
we've liked about the internet is
anonymity because if there's rigorous
identity who has access to that
information and am i now centralizing
data right so how do you
become a whistleblower
right which is huge or how do you how
does something like arab spring happen
right
there's a whole decentralized community
there's a great movement called radical
exchange by glenn weil and they're
trying to create part of this third
attractor that's like what's the center
of the bowling alley that's a digital
version of democracy
what are decentralized ways of proof of
personhood there's a project called
identa there's a bunch of things people
can look up by radical exchanges work
it's part of a whole movement of which
taiwan is included uh which is that i
don't know if we really got to the
taiwan example but we didn't think okay
we showed uh john cena instead oh that's
right that's right um what people need
to get it because it's an example of
what is working it's a solution it's a
it's a direction of how we can go which
is they've you know you can only fit so
many people into a town hall to
deliberate right um so there's sort of a
limit to our idea of democracies kind of
guided by ideas from 200 years ago
they've created a system called polis
which is a way of gathering opinions
about various ideas and then sort of
seeking who wants more funding for
various things less funding for various
things and whenever there's an unlikely
agreement so they sample a bunch of
people say you sit over here you sit
over here they get these clusters like
these people kind of like this these
people kind of like these other things
whenever there's an unlikely agreement
between those clusters in other words
consensus rough consensus
that's what they sort of boost to the
top of that system so everyone's seeing
areas of common ground common ground
common ground as opposed to fault line
of society fault line of society be more
angry join the common thread etc
and then you're invited into a civic
design process where you actually say
hey i don't like the tax system and
they're like great we're going to invite
30 of the people who were part of that
rough consensus we're like let's improve
the tax system let's talk about how
we're going to do it they do a
combination of in-person stuff this is a
little bit before covid and zoom calls
and then do like these mechanisms to
kind of get an idea of where do people
agree and then how would we make it
better they've done this with air
pollution they have a huge air pollution
problem because of the lithography that
they do with chips and things like this
they do it with um
with budgeting they also have a
transparent budget for the entire taiwan
government so people can see like
imagine if the the u.s federal budget
you don't know if you want to do this
but lived on a blockchain where you had
transparency into all the you know what
was getting funding and that would that
would create more trust in government
because you could see essentially who's
getting the big contracts and for how
much and that was more accessible and
there was a civic participatory process
where more people could could contribute
and participate in identifying areas of
inefficiency you could even imagine a
place where citizens could get rewarded
by saying hey this is inefficient we
could do it better this way and if you
identify places where it could get more
efficient that gov you could make you
could get money or resources by making
the whole system work better for
everyone if you ran a current audit of
the us government through blockchain
you'd have a goddamn revolt
they would go holy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] this whole thing
is corrupt this is
infested
down to the roots
and that would be a real problem and i
think the nancy pelosi's of the world
would really have a hard time with that
i heard
some clip that you did where you were
talking about your uh pot thoughts of
people being in big buildings and the
pipes everywhere
um and just like how weird
some aspects of civilization are so
think about how weird democracy is like
has an idea the idea that you can have
some huge number of people who don't
know each other who all believe
different stuff and want different stuff
figure out how to actually agree and
work together
as opposed to just tribalize against
each other and do their own thing like
it's actually a wild idea to think that
that would be possible at any scale
maybe a tiny scale where that's when it
started it was a tiny scale right and
we've always had a scale issue right in
1776 you could all go into the town hall
and fit and so i i wasn't just hearing a
proposition that a special interest
group had created and i get a vote yes
or no which will inherently polarize the
population right very few propositions
get 99 of the vote they get 51 percent
of the vote because they benefit
something and they harm some other
things and the people who care about
what gets harmed are fighting against it
that polarizes the population against
each other social media they're designed
to do that just like crazy just like
facebook saying hey this is a
conversation about censorship or free
speech and boom you just split the
population in half as opposed to hey we
all agree we could do a little bit less
virality we could stop the teenager use
these in these ways and would be better
for everyone the proposition creation
isn't designed to polarize the
population it just does because as soon
as you get beyond the scale of we can
all actually inform what a good
proposition would be by being in the
town
conversation yeah just to find a problem
i mean not everybody knows a proposition
something you would vote on what's a
good way to go forward before we make a
choice on what a good way to go forward
is we have to do some sense making of
what is even going on here like what are
the values what's going on here that was
so the point was a conversation that
happened at a smaller scale
also if you had a representative the
level of tech at the time was something
that a very well-educated person could
understand most of right they could
understand a lot of the tech landscape
obviously we're in a situation now where
the scale issue of democracy has been
completely broken so almost nobody we're
supposed to have a government of formed
by the people but nobody really
understands the energy grid issues or
first strike nuclear policy or monetary
policy or anything like that
and everyone's voice can't be heard
right
now what taiwan was working on is is the
tech
that is particularly in the west
breaking democracy could that same tech
be employed differently to actually make
21st century democracy more real so the
same ai that can mess up the information
landscape for everyone could we use that
type of ai that understands language to
be able to see what does everyone think
and feel and actually be able to parse
that into something we can understand so
there's an online environment that says
here's the distribution of people's
values here's the various values people
care about here's the emotions they have
here are the kind of facts about it
and then is there a place where we can
actually craft propositions together
so there's a way to make it to be able
to utilize these same tools
to
make democracy more realized to make
collective intelligence more realized
but right now as we were saying
autocracies
are working on employing these tools
corporations are working on it both of
which are top down democracies really
aren't there
outside of taiwan and estonia and a few
small examples what would be the
incentive like who would be incentivized
to use that other than the people and
it's pretty clear that the people don't
have control over facebook don't have
control over twitter certainly don't
have real control over the government
you know you have control over elected
officials who it's almost universally
agreed will lie to you to get into
office and then not do what they said
they were going to do which is the
standard operational procedure so what's
the incentive and how would how would
these get implemented so again at a
small scale 1776 your representative
couldn't lie all that much because
everybody they lived in the same town
right and you could all go see what was
going on right
and so can we recreate things like as
you were mentioning people would freak
out if they could actually see how
government spending worked can we create
transparency at scale can we in a way
that could create accountability at
scale
we could could we have places where
there's direct democracy and people can
actually engage in
the formation of what a good proposition
is not just voting yes or no on a
proposition or yes or no on uh can we
can i stop you there how would you say
we could how would you do that how would
you have that transparency and who would
be incentivized to allow this
transparency if the transparency has not
existed up until now why would they ever
allow some sort of blockchain type
like deep understanding of where
everything's going i don't think they
are incentivized which is actually why
this show is interesting
because if the if we're really talking
about a government of foreign by the
people where the consent of the governed
is where the power of government comes
from like ultimately if
and the founding fathers said a lot of
things about that the government will
decay at a certain point particularly
when people stop taking the
responsibility to actively engage right
and so
if if tech can produce if tech has
incentives to produce things that are
catastrophically problematic for the
world
and we need to regulate that somehow and
the issues are too complex for
individuals to understand so you need
institutions but how do you make sure
the institutions are trustworthy
you have to we have to create new 21st
century institutions but they have to
arise
for and by the people which means
there's a cultural enlightenment that
has to happen right people actually
taking responsibility to say we want
we
we want institutions we can trust and we
want to engage in processes of
recreating those and how do you get
people to be enthusiastic about some
sort of a radical change like that other
than some sort of catastrophic event
like a 911. well this is why we're
talking about all the impending
catastrophic events is to say we don't
want to wait till after they have to do
it before something happens it would be
but it seems like that's the only way
people really change the way they think
about things is something some almost
like cultural near-death experience has
to take place well it's like the problem
of humanity is paleolithic emotions
medieval institutions and god-like tech
one of the paleolithic emotions is it
can't be real until oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it actually
happened right and so like but the test
is we are the one species who has the
capacity to know this about ourselves to
know our paleolithic emotions are
limited in that way and say we're going
to take the action the leap of faith
that we know we need to do
like we're the only species they can do
that if a lion was in this situation or
a gazelle they can't like understand
their own mind and realize they have the
one marshmallow mind or the you know
short-term bias or recency bias they're
trapped inside of their meat suit this
is a beautiful idea idealistic notion
however in real world application most
people are just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] lazy and they're
not going to look into this and they're
not they're not going to follow through
and this is why most people that really
study
tech mediated catastrophic risk are not
very optimistic and
they think things like we have to chip
human brains to be able to interface
with the inevitable ais or we have to
have an ai overlord that runs everything
because we're too irrational and nasty
and the question is
like if
there have always there's always been a
distribution of how rational people are
and how kind of benevolent they are
and
we have never with that distribution
been very good stewards of our power
right we've always used our power for
war and for environmental destruction
and for kind of class subjugation but
with the amount of power we have now
those issues become truly globally
catastrophic and this is the thing is
like
and this is what almost every ancient
prophecy kind of speaks to
as you get as as you get so much power
that you can't keep being bad stewards
of it either the experiment
self-terminates or you are forced to
step up into being adequate stewards of
it so the question is what would the
wisdom to steward the power of
exponential tech
what would the minimum required level be
and that's like the experiment right now
that's the
that's the opportunity for us the
opportunity but you're talking about a
radical shift in human nature
well it's a possibility in human
conditioning
why don't you give some examples okay
so
we can look at some cultures that have
certain traits quite different than
other cultures as a result of the
conditioning of those cultures more than
as a result of the genetics we can see
that if you look at jane's
what are the genus the jains are a
religion that is highly emphasizing
non-violence even more than the
buddhists they want where are they asia
they won't kill plants they only eat
fruits and things that come from plants
so you can see a whole population that
won't hurt bugs
based on conditioning across the whole
scope of human nature the genetics in it
you go to a larger culture like the
buddhists and you can see that for the
most part you've got like 10 million
plus people over 3 000 years in lots of
different environments that mostly don't
hurt anybody including bugs
as a result of the way they condition
people you can decide conditioning
culture you can see that jews have a
have had historically a level of
education that is higher than the
embedding society that most everyone
around them has as a result of investing
in that
and so we're like can cultures
value certain things and invest in
developing those in people
it doesn't mean that everyone is
suddenly has the wisdom of gods to match
the power of god but can we create a
gradient that's like this is where there
used to be this concept
building what's that i'm sorry i'm
hearing what you're saying yeah but i
don't see it
yeah i'm hearing what you're saying
idealistically yes
but i don't see
the motivation for the shift
i i feel like this is you're it's a big
ask it's a bit right and a big ask has
to come with some sort of a master plan
to get people to ship their shift their
perspective
well if you take a look at the like
attractor of catastrophes and the
attractor of dystopias
those are the likely ones right but we
don't see it
like people don't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] until it's
happening which is why one of those two
will probably happen yeah well and with
social media they do see it i think
there's there's a unique moment and the
reason i thought this would be an
interesting conversation with the three
of us is that social media has become
the case like we can now all see it we
can now i mean it took
unfortunately for some people seeing the
receipts which is what france has
provided to things that we all predicted
back you know eight years ago
but now people understand that that is a
consequence of unregulated exponential
technologies that are steering people at
scale making things go viral at scale
and
dangerous at scale so that's a case we
can now see that thing can we leverage
the understanding of that to realize
what bigger thing needs to happen that
doesn't mean yeah before we get to the
incentive just imagine as a thought
experiment for a minute that facebook
changed what it was optimizing for
because facebook is this three billion
person
ai optimized behavior
machine right like that's a huge it's
not like normal companies right and it's
important to understand that and it's
optimizing for engagement which usually
ends up looking like outrage desire
addiction all those types of things but
let's say
that we
could we assess for are people being
exposed to different ideas and the ones
they're used to are they actually up
taking those ideas are people expressing
ideas that have more nuance and
complexity
and you were actually up regulating for
those things
there's a lot of actually quite
constructive content on the internet and
imagine that you could actually
personalize development and education
this is why you started to say
winterstone was saying what china is
doing where the kids are seeing museum
and science experiments and patriotism
you're like yeah that that actually kind
of makes sense
and it makes sense but it only makes
sense when you have an autocratic
government that has complete control of
the corporations and their motivations
like if the corporation's motivations
were specifically designed to
rake in the most amount of profit like
facebook says you'd never be able to
trick them into doing that there's no
way they'd be like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you
we're not going to do it that that
infringes upon our rights as a business
to maximize our profits we have a
obligation to our stakeholders our
shareholders they would never do it and
we can see how the government took major
corporations that had such an
uh an effect on society and made them
public utilities or regulated them in
the past yes now could we have a
situation where because of conversations
like this there was enough bipartisan
public demand that rather than being
totally polarized as a representative
class the representative class had to
unify to say actually these platforms
are so powerful that they can't be
harming our citizens and harming our
democracy we actually have to put some
regulation not on who gets to speak but
what gets radically upregulated right
but the problem is the way they would do
it is the same way they do like the
build back better bill where it's 40 000
pages and no one can read the whole
thing and inside of it there's a bunch
of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about how they can spy on your
bank account and and you know and it
locked you down if you spend more than
six hundred dollars then you have to go
to a committee to decide whether or not
you get your money back and make
everybody scared and paranoid i mean
this is the kind of behavior that our
government engages in on a regular basis
this is not just a big ask for us to get
people to be motivated to make this
radical change but it's a big ass to the
government is like hey you [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] have to
start being honest now and that's not
gonna happen
yeah it's a tricky it's a tricky
proposition because the question is it
changes the way the government has been
treating human beings through every
single day of our lifetime so do you
trust facebook to hold this power do you
trust the government to hold it no do
you trust individuals to be resilient
against all of this power pointed at
them that is so radically asymmetric
more that
more that more i trust people to wake up
to the fact that you do have control
over your news feed you don't have to
look at it you do have control over what
you share and retweet you should be more
objective about the information that you
consume you should try to find fact
checkers that are independent and are
unbiased and are not motivated by
financial
means like there's there's fact checkers
that are clearly connected to parties
you know we know this
so i could similarly argue you're trying
to um ask too much of human nature so
it's way easier than that ask that of
the government and ask that of
corporations well at least human beings
don't they they have a personal
understanding of the consequences of
what they're doing and they don't have
this diffusion of responsibility that
both government and corporations have
the thing about the diffusion of
responsibility is one person in a
corporation doesn't feel evil when the
corporation dumps pollutants into some
south american river
but that is happening and it is a part
of it but when an individual takes
responsibility for their own actions and
if we
can somehow or another
coach or explain or educate individuals
about their consumption and what what
kind of impact their consumption has
on their psychology on their future
on the way they view and interface with
the world
that could change the reason why these
algorithms are effective
is because they play to a part of human
nature that we don't necessarily have
control over what we like to argue over
what we like to engage with you know i
brought this up with your on your
podcast before but i'll bring it up
again i have a good friend
ari shafir and he ran an experiment on
youtube where he only looked up puppy
videos and that's all he recommended to
him the problem with the algorithm
except for what you were talking about
before with the q anon thing that's
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the problem with the algorithm on
youtube is it accentuates the things
that people are actually interested in
but when facebook those [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] when they
do something like that where someone
just invites people into a group and you
can mass invite i'm assuming through
some sort of a program right they're not
doing it individually one by one so if
some q anon group mass invites a million
people and then it's all of a sudden
distributing disinformation to that
million people then you got a problem
with the company there's a problem with
the way that company distributes
information because you're not allowing
people to make the decisions that they
could make to clean up their algorithm
to clean up what they get influenced by
to clean up what their news feed looks
like that's a problem that's a problem
because you're it's not as simple as
you're you're giving people choices this
is what they choose no you're allowing
someone to radicalize like intentionally
radicalize people with either willing or
un unbeknownst to them disinformation
yeah and we don't want the
nestle coca-cola vending machine in the
preschools because
do the kids actually have the ability to
win the two marshmallow experiments in
the presence of that much advertising
the other thing getting it advertising
do they understand marketing there's a
we want to spot asymmetries of power and
the challenge here is the asymmetry is
i've got a a trillion dollar market cap
company that has observed three billion
people's behaviors and click patterns so
i know more about people before they
even know about themselves yuval harari
gives this example his partner he said
he's gay you his partner itzik makes two
clicks on tiktok and he knows exactly
what he wants
right it when you have that degree of
asymmetry and it's designed with that
much power on one side of the table
i mean what a system is inhumane if that
symmetry of power is so asymmetric right
so if i if it's influencing me more than
i understand my own brain like a
magician that's that's not gonna we're
not gonna be able to get out of that
because if it's playing to my
confirmation bias and i don't know that
i have confirmation bias i'm just run by
confirmation bias that's a form in which
i'm essentially a foot soldier in
someone else's culture war
if it's playing to my social validation
i don't know that it's plain to my
social value i don't even know i have a
thing called social validation that
that's an exploitable part of me that's
an asymmetric interaction so i mean
you're right by the way as a as a part
of an ecosystem of solutions
we do need a cultural i mean daniel
calls it a cultural enlightenment but
you can just simply say we need a mass
education about how technology
influences us that matches everyone uses
social media deserves to know how it
works and in the carnegie endowment they
did sort of met analysis for the problem
of misinformation
if you look at like 100 organizations
surveying how do we deal with this
problem like i think like 98 of them
said like the number two result was at
least do digital literacy education for
everyone right everyone should
understand more about how this stuff
works so to your point about we should
be educating everyone to be better
stewards of their own attention their
own information consumption but when you
have bad actors that are manipulating
this stuff at scales and at levels that
people don't understand and we're about
to have gpt3
and printing you know basically full
research papers that justify everything
you've ever believed
um
like that that's not that's not going to
be an adequate solution so we have to
change something at the systemic level
the question's just how do we get that
to happen
yeah you know solutions right
well if we're willing to
i mean
you know what i'm saying like
we we have these ideas of what needs to
happen but this is like
what we need to do is get everybody to
stop eating processed food and exercise
regularly and only drink water
well you can get like 10 people to do
that
you can get like highly motivated people
to do that you can get
really intelligent
cons you know really conscientious
people that are
considering the impact their choices
have on their future but that's not
normal human nature and also you're
dealing with the fact that most people
are very unhappy with what they do for a
living they're very unhappy with their
lives their personal lives
their
there's like a good percentage of people
that are not happy with most aspects of
their existence well they seek
distractions they seek distractions that
might be the only comfort that they have
is
arguing about global warming with people
online or or you know arguing about
second amendment rights like
we gotta take into consideration the
motivation
for people to engage in these acts in
the first place and a lot of it is just
they're very very unhappy with their
existence so that's why they get trapped
doing this when you talk to someone who
is like hey i realize that i got to get
off of social media i don't do anything
anymore i wake up in the morning i have
fresh squeezed vegetable juice and then
i go on a nice long hike and those are
rare [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] humans they do exist but
the idea that we're gonna change the
course of the vast majority of our
civilization and have most people behave
in that manner is very unrealistic so
this is why now add
increasing technological automation and
the radical technological unemployment
to that
meaning automating more of our jobs
etc right is that good or bad does that
make people less happy or more happy
well for the most part it makes a
radically unemployable underclass a huge
radically unemployable underclass where
at least in feudalism you still needed
the people to do labor now you don't
need the people to do labor
so then this is why there are a number
of people in the upper wealth class who
believe in universal basic income
because it's at least the cheapest way
to deal with those people now you add
the metaverse to that and and this is
the entry into the matrix world right
right now this is this is where we we
have to get to because that's what i'm
really worried about what i'm really
worried about is the solution will be to
disengage with the actual material world
and the solution would be to find
yourself almost completely immersed and
do whatever you can to just feed
yourself and pay for the metaverse or
whatever it is whether it's
zuckerberg's version of it which by the
way i saw a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] commercial which is
so strange there's a bunch of
like incredibly diverse multi-racial
kids and they're sitting around bobbing
their heads to a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] a lot or a
tiger that's talking to them and dancing
have you seen that
please find that
because it's like what are you selling
the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] are you selling like it doesn't
even show what you're selling it's like
this weird uh change from facebook to
meta right and so it's showing this ad
it's very attractive it's interesting
you see all these people they look cool
and they're all bobbing their head and
then like the tigers talking to them
telling them anything is possible you're
like oh cool anything's possible but
you're watching like what are you saying
like i don't even know what you're
saying like what is this like watch this
because it's it's so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] weird
it's not moving of course not too many
people are connected to the metaverse
it's failing
so the same thing but different messages
thought when the audio started that was
good
but see the same thing it's like
cultivated
multi-racial
multi-ethnic groups
this is the dimension of imagination
[Music]
so the two cans are dancing pelicans are
dancing
the tiger let's go to buffalo
[Music]
look everybody's bobbing their head no
one's going what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is going on
[Music]
they're all bobbing their heads right
but what is this this is going to be fun
no it's not we're [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
this is not going to be fun this is a
trap yep this is a trap they're going to
lure you into this and you're not going
to give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about your regular life
anymore because it's going to be so much
more exciting and next thing you know
they're going to say listen it'd be much
more
involving if you put a gasket in the
back your head and they could just
connect you straight to a pipe and next
and then you're in the matrix so a few
things to say um
the competition for attention in the
attention economy was always about the
metaphors we've been living in the
metaverse for a long time because it's
about how do you capture and own and
control people's personal reality that's
what instagram facebook tiktok youtube
the whole thing that's what these things
are
one of the things that this makes me
think about that's subtle actually and
from i know you've had jonathan height
on the show talking about teenage mental
health problems
when you look at when self-harm and
depression starts ticking up in the
graph for the kids uh 13 to 17 year olds
it's there's a subtle point in a
specific year period where that ticks up
and you know what happened what that
year was it's like 2009 to 2011. what
changed in that period the iphone the
iphone and then social media we had
social media before that right but what
changed is when it went on mobile right
now what changes when it's on mobile
because it goes from
you have it all the time you have it all
the time it becomes your new 24 7
metaverse
i would say that it's the when you
virtualize people's experience so fully
and that virtual world doesn't care
about protecting and nurturing the real
world when you virtualize people's
relationships in a way that they don't
protect they don't care about nurturing
your offline relationships when they
virtualize your online relationships in
the same way that you know we have a
technosphere that doesn't care about
nurturing the regenerative capacity of
the biosphere we have a virtual reality
that's not trying to protect and and
nurture the the real reality that's
underneath that and it depends on that
real reality so if the economy depends
on the earth working in this fundamental
way and it's not trying to protect to
make sure those fundamental capacities
keep going through deforestation and so
on that's very similar to a virtual
reality that's not protecting the social
fabric that it depends on it depends on
that thing for it being higher if you
want to
say anything to that
yeah so
why did facebook by instagram and by
whatsapp and the various things they did
is because a monopoly of attention is
the play
and a monopoly of attention is a really
big deal to be able to get but as soon
as new devices come out you're going to
get attention in different ways so ar
and vr as new platforms obviously you've
got to lead the way in having the
monopoly of attention there and
increasingly hyper normal stimuli
and the cell phone
took us up to something like 50 screen
time from say 25 screen time on the
laptop the ar can take us up to like
approaching 100 screen time or you know
engagement time right and then
persistent tracking of reality across
all those domains so we can see why this
is super problematic and and pernicious
that was just speaking to how the
metaverse is a natural extension of what
they've already been doing
right where's the middle lane
we've got
you know we've got the gutters on each
side what's the middle lane
there is
oh i remember what what tristan was just
saying about
if the daniel get on that microphone if
i have virtual relationships
online but they're actually debasing the
integrity of my
in-person relationship so when we're
talking we're actually looking at our
phones
uh we would say from the center for
humane technology kind of perspective
what is humane tech one of the
definitions would have to be
and he was mentioning earlier that tech
plus democracy makes a better democracy
similarly if you want to think about
what does humane tech mean
tech plus any of the foundations of what
it means to live in meaningful human
life and a sustainable civilization tech
has to make those things better so tech
plus families has to actually increase
the integrity of families otherwise it's
fundamentally not humane it's misaligned
with what is foundational to being human
tech plus democracy has to make better
democracy tech plus individual human
mental well-being
right but it's not right right tech plus
democracy is debasing it fundamentally
yeah currently but there are ways of
actually um
first of all aligning and choosing your
business models to be in alignment with
that thing so i mean not to give apple
too much praise but when it um says hey
you know we're gonna you know they just
added the johnson johnson guy to their
board and they're choosing to go into
health because they could just say hey
we're gonna build our own maximize you
know engagement machine metaverse thing
i'm sure they're working on one but the
choosing business models their business
model isn't maximizing attention that's
why we use facetime it doesn't have like
here's comments here's notifications
here's the hearts and likes and thumbs
up floating across the screen is using
facetime because it's you're the
customer not the product well apple's a
fantastic example of what is possible
when a company does have
the most superior product
in the market right like it's it's kind
of widely acknowledged that when it
comes to the phones when it comes to the
operating system that exists in the
phones and when it comes to the
operating system that exists on the
computers and then the fact that apple
controls all of the hardware so the the
problem that windows has is
you got lenovo and dell and there's all
these different companies that are
making razer they're all making the
different hardware and then you have the
operating system that engages with that
hardware but there's all these different
drivers because you got different video
cards you have different there's so many
different things that it's it's very
difficult for them to make this one
perfect experience whereas apple's like
you know what we're going to do is we're
going to control all the hardware so
they make the best laptop they can
possibly make they make the best phone
they could possibly make and they've
done such a good job with it they have
this massive
loyal fan base
and then through that they decided you
know what
we're going to give you the option to
not have advertisers track you and apps
track you everywhere that is a wonderful
solution and when tim cook announced
that he said we cannot let a social
dilemma become a social catastrophe
they're going after the social
media business model of surveillance
advertising and that's one of the steps
and that's a good example maybe they can
do something with the social media like
maybe apple can use this the same idea
that they have and these same ethics yes
and create a social media app and we can
all jump jump on it something with no
algorithms something that doesn't
accentuate certain
like i mean a stronger a stronger mode
is if i mean they're never going to do
this but imagine that they said hey we
now know how to diagnose what the
problem is it's these sort of engagement
based business models that have infinite
virality that treat us as the product
and not the customer we know it's toxic
for democracy
you know we could just take it off the
shelf we could say those things don't
exist in our shelf here's a crazy thing
it's a good time to do that now they
could do that now here's the thing if
they did that the
um people would be cynical they would
say wait hold on apple's doing that only
so they can basically keep a bigger
monopoly on their app store notice
there's this whole lawsuit right now
with epic games and facebook is trying
to dial up that because they don't want
apple to be this big top-down
take control with their social media
apps are free apps yeah if they decided
to say listen we think there's a real
problem with these apps so we're not
going to make them available they could
simply do that they can simply do that
and say we're going to have something
that's available that we don't have any
kind of control over what your feed is
right
and they um you know we were just
talking about this last night you know
in this
one of the things we talk about is that
there's there's always a cynical take
when someone takes an action and there's
there's an optimistic good faith take
the cynical take on francis is a
whistleblower who's a secret operative
the cynical take on the government
wanting to regulate social media is it's
just because they want to take control
or if the media is ever criticizing
social media just because the media is
upset that they don't have a monopoly on
truth anymore there's a partial truth in
each of these things if if apple takes a
strong move against these social media
companies
and they do the privacy thing that you
just mentioned they're now protecting
people's privacy
they prevent cross-app tracking there's
an article that they make an extra
billion per year
out of that change they make a billion
per year so the cynical person says oh
they're just doing that so they can get
more money for that how do they make an
extra billion because somehow the extra
advertising goes through their network
or something like that because you're
not using cross-app tracking through the
other companies somehow people start
spending more money on their system so
now there's a cynical take there but
here's the here's the move if they
wanted to prove that they're actually a
good faith actor this is your idea last
night they could take the billion
dollars or even just a
large chunk of it that's not legal fees
and say we're going to spend that
billion dollars on solving the rest of
the social dilemma we're going to fund
non-profits that are doing digital
literacy education we're going to we're
going to put 500 million dollars into
nonprofits and that are doing digital
literacy education
we're gonna and another sort of humane
tech we're also gonna put another 500
million dollars into r d to do more
features that help address the social
dilemma and actually move our whole
product ecosystem further in the
direction of protecting society and not
manipulating society that might be the
only solution if a company that's as
massive as apple that has so much
capital i mean they are literally one of
the most wealthy corporations that's
ever existed but we would need a if not
the right yeah they're they're i think
they're
up there with saudi aramco they may be
the most you know they keep going up and
down but they would need a public will
and support base of people and that's
why your audience is really interesting
also because like this is gonna take as
daniel said this is a we the people type
moment like we have to actually
ask what is what is the best way out of
this thing there isn't an easy answer
right it's not like hey we're going to
just tell you that's just do x and it's
just all over we fix it all like we have
to navigate through this thing so we
have to find levers that are at least a
little bit more attractive than other
levers this is one of them taiwan is
another one it's an example that works
we could you know biden could invite
audrey tang to come to the united states
and actually say we're going to build a
civic tech ecosystem the decentralized
web community that's building these
ethereum based like new web 3 things
could actually say we're going to take
this central design imperative we're
going to do digital democracy that helps
us do the bowling alley and get that
that thin tightrope that we've got to
walk
these are the kinds of things that that
could happen but we would need there to
be a public zeitgeist that this this has
to happen and i know it sounds dystopian
if we don't do that it's not an easy
problem it's not an easy problem but one
thing we can show is if people are
happier and more successful if they
follow this path than the path of want
and destruction because we we know that
about alcoholics and gambling addicts
right if you have an uncle that is an
alcoholic and you see him you're like
wow i don't want to be like that guy you
learn if you see someone just ruin their
life with gambling you go wow that's
scary i know a lot of people that are
ruining their lives of social media i
know people that it's it's radically
exacerbated their mental health problems
and um i personally
have had a
great increase in my peace of mind by
never engaging with people online i know
you told me that don't look at the
youtube channel i don't know
i don't look at any comments and i
really don't and it's so much healthier
for you oh my god i'm so much happier
right it's incredible told that to
friends and occasionally they dip their
toes back in the water and then they go
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] why did i do that and you know
they'll they'll do an episode or maybe
they don't like something that they said
and then they go read and i'm like my
god man get out of there and i i don't
engage on twitter i don't engage in the
comments of instagram or i don't even
look at facebook
and because of that
what i take in is my choice like i look
at things that i'm interested in and
most of my uh social media it's not
really social media consumption but most
of it is youtube and most of it is like
educational stuff or complete
distractions
and what was the thanksgiving study i
was going to say i was just thinking the
same thing um there's a thanksgiving
study that after 2016 the more per
they looked at zip codes that had the
most like media advertising political
advertising
and the more of that media you had the
shorter the thanksgiving dinners you
were they did this mass study looking at
like tracking people's locations and how
long they were in their thanksgiving
dinner location and basically the places
that were most bombarded with like
polarizing media thanksgiving dinner was
was shorter so they argued and people
yeah and people i think stood further
apart or something like that it actually
had the geo location on their phones too
right the people who had right versus
left views interacted less at dinner
exactly that was what it was people with
right versus left fuse interacted less
at dinner and we're about to head into
thanksgiving and i actually would say
that facebook and twitter their business
model has been ruining thanksgiving
dinner because their business model is
personalizing confirmation bias for
everyone so that when you show up so in
the same way that that's an epitome of
the problem that's your personal version
of the social dilemma like we could also
say like what would be the first step
for each person listening to this that
we can do during thanksgiving dinner
that's like putting our phones at the
door and actually trying to have a
conversation about the mind warp that's
taking place yeah it's hard because when
people get together and they haven't
seen each other for a while they want to
argue about things that they feel the
other person's wrong about right because
they they've got so much of their time
invested
in these echo chambers but you just
mentioned something that was so
interesting which was if people started
to understand that the echo chamber was
affecting them
and affecting the integrity of their
family so rather than try to
uh save everybody on the other side from
trump or biden or whatever it was that
they thought they did this other thing
which is they actually tried to save
people from excessive social media
exposure yeah i want to save people from
excessive exposure to everything that's
harming harmful and damaging but it's
very difficult and i think it's got to
be
an across-the-board decision that you
make and it's got to be with your own
health it's got to be with relationships
it's got to be with honesty it's got
there's got to be a lot of things that
you do that you change if we can
influence people in any way that's
positive it's to understand where the
pitfalls are where where's the traps
there's a lot of them out there now when
we think about the social media issue to
a degree we can take the solution that
you propose and just say maybe the
individual can just remove themselves
from it we would argue that this is
actually
impossible population-wide currently
because there are companies that just
can't succeed if they don't market on
there compared to their company i'm not
saying remove yourself from it that's
not what i said what i said is don't
engage in anything personal like you can
read people's thoughts on things you can
go and watch a youtube video you can
stare at people's butts on instagram but
if you get involved in engagement that's
when things get [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up the problem is
that is the only form of self-expression
that a lot of people have when you deal
with um
if you're talking about something that
people think is a critical issue how do
you express yourself how do you get your
point of view if you think your point of
view is significant how do you get it
across well you have to engage that's a
problem one thing i wanted to share we
interviewed dan valone from an
organization called morin common on our
podcast and he does this work on what he
calls the perception gap
what they found in their work is the
more time someone spends on social media
the more likely they are to to actually
misperceive what the other tribes
believe so so like first of all there's
we get hit by a double whammy because
you're talking about participation on
social media
and you could sit there looking at stuff
but not participating well it turns out
the people who participate the most the
extreme voices participate more often
than the moderate voices that's what
they find in their work and when they
participate they share more extreme
views so their stuff goes more viral so
we're looking at this weird fun house
mirror when we think like oh we're
getting a sample that everybody believes
we're not getting a sampler release
we're getting a sample of what the most
extreme people believe so if you
actually ask in their research like how
many people how many democrats believe
that
what would you ask for democrats what do
you estimate that republicans what
percentage of republicans believe racism
is still a problem in the u.s i think
they estimate like 40 or something like
that and the answer is closer to like 65
or 70 percent so we are misperceiving
because we're seeing through the
stereotypes and the straw men and the
bad faith examples of everyone so part
of this mind warp is we have to actually
again understand that we're seeing a
very specific view and even if very few
if we have a lot you know as a result of
this podcast
if like 50 of people on facebook stopped
participating per what you just said
earlier the problem is that the small
remaining group the most extreme voices
there they would be identified by the
algorithm and they would just maximally
upregulate them
so we just have to realize what game
we're in what unfair fight we're in so
that we can unplug ourselves from the
matrix you called me morpheus last time
i think i was here well there's a
there's also a problem with tribal
identity and it's uh it's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] silly
that we only have two groups in this
country and because the fact that we
really have broken it down to two
political groups
we we are so polarized we don't have
this broad spectrum of choices that we
can you know well i i like a little bit
of this i like a little bit of that and
and to be in the center is to be a fence
sitter and to to to inspire the ire of
both there's many more people who are in
the center the most people that's the
thing that's why this show works exactly
but most people don't think that because
when they look on social media they just
see people at the extremes and they're
like am i going crazy is the world going
crazy and the answer is like you're not
wrong your mammalian instincts that
things are upside down that's not wrong
but it's not because of some master
global conspiracies because social media
is just showing us the craziest of the
craziest voices on earth realize how
much you look like terence mckenna
look at that for real it's kind of
creepy we both got the white and weird
thing going on
yeah
for real
it's a real problem you're like terence
if he's a little more buff
sorry go ahead so let's say that we
could have a bunch of people get off
social media yes that's one of the
exponential tech risks that we've talked
about but
that doesn't actually do much about the
fragility of decentralized drones it
doesn't do much about the fragility of
decentralized cyber weapons right oh
you're a bummer man
you had a little bit of a solution
debbie downer over here well no the
reason i'm bringing it up is because an
individualistic only answer doesn't work
when other individuals and other small
groups have the capacity to small and
large groups to affect everything so
significantly right but it does
significantly impact the health of the
overall population if we're more healthy
mentally and physically we can make
better choices the next step is not just
that we make better individual choices
but that those who can work to make new
better systems yeah and so when you
think about the founders of this country
they didn't just remove themselves from
believing in whatever the dominant
british empire thought at the time was
they removed themselves from that and
then said we actually need to build a
more perfect union and they invested
themselves radically to do so and it
wasn't a huge percentage of the
population but that was working to build
something that could apply to a much
larger percentage of the population so
we need some sort of a radical solution
in terms of the way we
interface with each other the way we do
business the way we govern the way we do
everything yes and so let's say you have
people who start pulling themselves off
social media and saying i actually want
to engage with other people where i
really seek to understand their ideas
before i just jump and criticize i want
to make sure i get their values and what
it's like to be them and so they they
first they remove themselves from the
toxicity second they work to actually
start making sense of the world better
and being in better relationship with
each other next they say i want to make
a platform that facilitates this for
other people
and then i want to come on joe's podcast
and talk about the platform and get a
lot of people on there so we start to
actually get the beginning of a new
attractor a new possibility don't you
put that out there don't you do it
because then
also a lot of people that think they
have the solution what this sounds like
is kind of a radical
you know reboot of the u.s but there's
the january 6 version of that which we
we don't want right there is a different
version i wanted us to tell you in the
taiwan example the way that that
happened is actually it was a bunch of
activists stormed the parliament except
they didn't try to break the glass and
the windows and break through everything
they sat outside the parliament they
created they brought in all these
ethernet cables and they set up a wi-fi
network and they had a bunch of hackers
build this alternative um civic
engagement platform where people could
debate ideas right they're using
technology so it's they did storm the
parliament but they didn't storm it to
to take it to to hurt people right they
did it to create the better form of
government but to debate ideas where you
have things like where unlikely
consensus is found that's what gets
upregulated so they were designing that
the better angels of our nature are
appealed to rather than the lower angels
of our nature and it's possible to do
that that's a real working example i
want you to really check that out it's a
real thing we're not just you know
pointing it at a at a random idea do
people do say it's obviously a much
smaller country it's not as homogeneous
as people think they think taiwan they
think everyone's the same there's 20 i
think indigenous cultures or languages
there so they actually have quite a lot
of plurality they need democracy has
plurality deliberation and compromise
you have to have those three things work
are you aware of the agent provocateur
aspect of january 6th
say more
um
i don't exactly know what the reality is
but the
what people are insinuating is that
there was federal agents that were
involved in instigating the violence
instigating the entering into the
capitol and then there's this one guy in
specific that they've got him isolated
on video they've
shown him over and over again he's faced
no legal consequences
they know this guy's name they know
exactly who he is all these other guys
are in jail all those other guys who got
into the capital i mean so many of them
are facing like these massive federal
charges and four years plus in jail
this one guy is like we have to go in
there we have to take back we have to
get inside there and people start
calling him a fed in in one one of these
videos and i think he like takes off and
runs away but
this is what it seems like it seems like
and this is something that
governments have done forever right you
take a peaceful protest what's the best
way to break up a peaceful protest you
bring in agent provocateurs to turn it
into a non-peaceful a violent protest
smash windows light things on fire then
you can send in the troops and you can
clean up the mess and then you don't
have any protest anymore this was the
world trade organization in what was it
in seattle in 99 or whatever it was
that's what they did it's been
documented that is what happened i mean
like literal government agents went in
wearing
antifa outfits and starts this is pre
antifa right smashing windows lighting
things on fire and they were all
eventually released conveniently well
this guy do you know about this jamie
you know see if you can find it
because it's a curious case of this one
particular individual who's like
yelling in these various groups that we
have to get in there and it like he did
it pre january 6 they did it during the
january 6th thing and this guy's face no
legal charges whatsoever and people like
well what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is going on here
because when you see some kind of
organized debacle like that and then you
see
people ins
insisting that we have to take this
further we have to go inside and then if
you find out that those people are
actually federal agents that are doing
that you're like well what is happening
here and how is that possible and how is
this legal
that's a problem
yeah
i haven't seen this one i remember the
umbrella man who was uh breaking windows
at the george floyd riots i think they
found out that that guy was a cop
and that
i think that was like a rogue human but
no i'm not sure if that's true but so
this is where it's interesting with in
this case i don't know the case at all
but is it that
somebody in government actually
initiated him doing it as an agent
provocateur to shut down the protest or
was he someone who happened to be in
government who was himself radicalized
to acting on his own because of
radicalization did the thing or is he an
agent provocateur but he's doing so
independently just because he's a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] psycho you know some firemen
start fires right but notice that
whichever view you have you probably had
a motivated interest to see it that way
right yeah i didn't have any view on it
right that's the thing i'm looking at it
like this like what is it what is this
video yeah i'm watching this guy like
this one big beefy looking federal agent
guy telling them they got to go inside
and i think he was wearing a maga hat
and uh you know it's like a guy in his
50s then and he's like i'll tell you
what we got to do we got to get inside
there we got to go inside the capitol
and these people like inside like isn't
that illegal like what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] this
guy's taking it to the next level but
he's doing it like multiple times
that's the the pro there's there is a
real problem with intelligence agencies
doing that kind of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] totally because
they do do it and i think they do it
thinking that this is like these group
of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] psychos like we got to stop
this from
escalating so here's the way we get them
to do something really stupid then we
can put fences up and create a green
zone and then we lock this down
meet ray epps
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] dad clicks meet ray epps the fed
protected provocateur who appears to
have led the very first
um 1-6 attack january 6 attack on the us
capital so let's watch some of this
because it's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] crazy it's really
weird
this guy
is doing this like over and over and
over again
there's a video of it but this is an
article about oh so this is an article
that's in revolver
we'll find the video because the video
is [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] strange
ray epps
video here it is like this well that's
20 minutes long well just watch it we'll
see some of it
oh these are guys that are watching it
what about that one
that's uh
it goes to a website these are all
twitter
arrest rave epps says so people are some
people are hip to it but most people
like including you guys have no idea
that this is a person right you've never
heard of this before i don't know why
it's not playing a video
oh these [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] with their clicks
oh my god
please log in log in i want you to log
in we need to track you
god
one of the
one of the things that was so
cool about the c-span was the idea of
being able to actually see what was
happening inside of proceedings yes and
we know that the idea of a modern
liberal democracy is that we want to
leave markets to do most of the
innovation and provisioning of resources
because they do a good job but we still
want rule of law because there are
places where markets will have a
financial incentive for things that
really harm everybody like complete
destruction of environments or organ
trades or whatever it is
and so rule of law is intended to be a
way that if you have a government that
is of forum by the people
that and it's given a monopoly of
violence that it can check the predatory
aspects of markets where the basis of
the law
because of voting is the collective
values of the people but the state only
has integrity and can check the markets
if the people check the state
and this is where
again at a much smaller scale it was
easier to have transparency and being
able to see what was happening the
larger scale messed that up and also
having so many things that were issues
of national security where it just can't
be talked about then it becomes very
hard to say well how do we have enough
transparency that the people even if
they wanted to could engage in being
able to see what was going on so that we
could have trustworthy institutions what
terrifies me is the solution of this is
an autocratic government that controls
all aspects of society so none of this
ever happens
that scares the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out of me because
that seems to be where there's that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
let's play this
tomorrow
but do it from the beginning
tomorrow
we need to go into the capitol
into the capitol tomorrow neither what i
don't even like to say it because i'll
be arrested well let's not say we need
we need to go i'll say it all right we
need to go in shut the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up boomer to
the
we are capitol to the capitol
where our problems are it's that
direction
please spread the word
all right no dave but one more thing
yeah if we go up there
no when we go in are we going to get
arrested
you don't need to get shot
[Applause]
[Music]
okay i think we see enough there's a lot
of instances it goes on for quite a
while there's a lot of videos of this
guy which is really fascinating because
i think these methods that they've used
forever are
kind of subverted by social media
because you have a hundred thousand
different cameras pointed at this guy
from all these when someone starts
screaming loudly people start filming it
and then you get a conglomeration they
are a collection of these rather and you
can go oh what is happening here like
like i don't think they've realized that
people would be so cynical that they
would go over all these various videos
and find this one guy who's not being
prosecuted or arrested he's not being
prosecuted or arrested
ding
congratulations
no he's not look at that guy yeah i mean
if you had a guess if you had like 50
bucks
what are you gonna put your your chips
on red or black
i might put my chips on
uh the result of stochastic terrorism
like if i was china i would have wanted
to infiltrate the facebook group that
guys like him were in and just feel and
just radicalize as much as possible so
that some of them were motivated to do
it earnestly and so it was like some
patsy but i don't even know who it is
for sure there's some of that going on
there right there's a lot of stuff going
on with january 6th right and it's it's
a lot of sad humans who don't have a lot
of going a lot going on in their life
did you see the um
what is the the into the storm that was
the hbo documentary on q and on did you
see it no fascinating it's really good
and uh it's a multi-part documentary
series about q and on and the people
that are involved and
one thing you get out of it is that
these people found meaning in this
nonsense they found meaning and they
they really thought they were part of
something bigger than them and it gave
them hope and happiness and
what i got out of that is well these are
this is exactly what we're talking about
earlier the people that are getting
sucked into this totally distraction
life is that most people don't feel like
they live a meaningful existence so when
something like this comes up and you get
radicalized whether it's by china or
russia or that guy and he's saying you
know that guy's just basically
incendiary right he's just throwing
gasoline on the fire but
you're saying
is
is there something out there that you
can connect to that's bigger than you
and they're saying yes there is you can
be a part of this group you can be a
patriot are you a patriot do you want to
storm the capital and then you got the
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] president who's saying you know
we have to make a big movement we had to
do a big thing they stole this election
like holy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you know we have to go
there and just show a force and then
they pull them off of twitter and like
oh my god it's a the conspiracy is even
bigger than i thought twitter's involved
and it becomes something that is all
encompassing it it involves every aspect
of their life they wake up in the middle
of the night to check twitter they take
a leak and they check it and make sure
that you know
we move to the right have has q released
a new drop and these [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] people get
completely locked into it
and at the end of this this documentary
on hbo which is really excellent i can't
recommend it enough you see a lot of
them are like realizing like this is all
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and they're like what have i
done with my life there's a reddit
channel called cubanon casualties which
is like people especially who have
struggled with family members who
have fallen down different rabbit holes
and i guess that's that's one of them
and as people come out of it just what
happens i have a friend who just reached
out about that about his own wife he
asked me like what can he do yeah well i
mean i think what you're pointing to our
friend jamie wheel uh who's here in
austin we had him on our podcast to talk
about this when we think about social
media a lot of times people think about
it as an information problem
misinformation disinformation is
actually about meaning and identity
which is what you're pointing to people
are getting meaning and purpose from a
thing and it's therefore it's not a
matter of like well let's just like tell
people the true thing or the fact check
thing
there's a sense of
meaning purpose narrative what i'm
participating in that's that's bigger
than myself that people are seeking and
part of that which is exacerbated by
social media because it's mass
alienation and loneliness and those are
exactly the kinds of people that can be
you know pulled in various directions
which includes also some of the
decentralized
ways that they can they can use those
tools to cause havoc something i was
thinking is
in the founding of this country it was
understood that both high quality
education and a fourth estate right of
kind of free and open press were
considered prerequisite institutions for
democracy to work you had the how they
would afford the state is
journalism right some kind of
and but at that time so both both
education and newspaper were the result
of a printing press where you didn't
just have a nobility class who had
access to books when books were really
hard to get but we could print a
newspaper so everybody could know what
was going on we could print textbooks so
everyone could get educated
if you could have a at least that was
the idea right if we have a population
where everyone can
make sense of the world like they've
learned how to make sense of the world
they've got history and civics and
science and like that and they know
what's going on currently then they can
all go to the town hall and participate
in government so it was acknowledge that
without something like a fourth estate a
shared
way to make sense of the world together
democracy doesn't work facebook in
particular is not just a destruction of
the fourth estate it's like an
anti-fourth estate rather than share
something where everybody gets the same
information to then be able to go debate
right now two different people will have
facebook feeds that have almost nothing
in common and polarized right and are
identifying your fellow countrymen as
your most significant enemy and that
everything they think is wrong in a
conspiracy and a lie or something like
that right but how do you
how do you rectify that and still have
independent media
right so one of the things doesn't say
that's interesting is that as we started
to
scale more one of the things in
newspaper and then with tv
and broadcast became able to do
was scale propaganda gave the same
message to everybody and there was this
whole big debate in world war one and
then going into world war ii that
democracy requires propaganda because
people are too dumb to make sense of the
world adequately so we have to
propagandize them so they aren't
fighting the war effort while we're in
war
and
one of the things that is interesting
and just from a potential and you'll say
you have how do we get there because how
do you incentivize the zuckerbergs or
whatever and that's the the enactment is
a real tricky thing
but
you could use the tools of social media
which is the ability to personalize a
huge amount of content to the individual
to actually
not to make real democracy possible
where you don't need to give everyone
propaganda because they're dumb you can
actually help people understand the
issue progressively better in a
personalized way how are they already
leaning expose them to the other ideas
see that they're understanding it
and you can imagine that like real
democracy could actually be possible at
scale if you could personalize the kinds
of education and civic virtue that would
be necessary for people to engage in a
democracy let me add on to that because
this example you just showed me right
this guy i had never seen that video
imagine a thanksgiving dinner happening
a few weeks from now where one set of
people have been all exposed to this guy
and this is like the central way that
they see january 6 is through the lens
of that guy
if you're in one of the other filter
bubbles all you see is just the violent
crazy whatever the right
you you're not even operating on a
shared reality so when you talk about
january 6 normally if we have a shared
printing press or we have a shared
fourth estate we've at least been
exposed to some of the same things yeah
but when you show up at thanksgiving
dinner table when we argue about january
6th and you haven't seen something you
haven't seen right but you you assume
our brains are not built our part of our
paleolithic emotions is that we were
built to assume with my my brain
construct reality from my eyeballs so
like i have to assume i was built
evolutionarily to assume that your brain
is constructing reality from some of the
shared stuff that i'm seeing with my
eyeballs so all my biases are to assume
other people are talking about the same
reality and there's a little bit of a
magic trick optical illusion because we
both saw a quote unquote january 6 but
we were exposed to completely different
media sets so now when we get in a
conversation it completely breaks down
not because we're actually even talking
about the same thing but because we
don't even get to that level layer of
detail and one of the things in a humane
technology world the current i think i
mentioned to you in the more uncommon
research they found that the more you
use social media the more likely it is
that you um that you are not able to
predict what someone else's views are in
a topic you think all republicans are
racist or something like that if you're
on the democrat side or if you're on the
republican side you believe that all
democrats are lgbtq and only six percent
of democrats are lgbtq
so we are far off in terms of our
estimations of other people's beliefs
and in the current world the more you
use social media the worse your
estimations are in a humane future
the more you use social media the better
our our shared understanding and my
understanding of your understanding
would be and and so you can imagine
there's some sense maker out there who's
showing both sides of these different
filter bubbles and helping us bridge
build so we're actually even able to
have a shared conversation those are the
kinds of people that daniel was just
talking about would get kind of
upregulated to be at the center of our
shared undivided attention let's say i
wanted to say how do i increase trust in
our institutions that are processing
things too complex for an individual to
figure out on their own like the reality
of climate change or covid
well
let's say that c-span like i had debates
happen inside those institutions
where people who had real expertise but
had conflicting views
had a long form facilitated debate but
not the type of debate that is just
oriented towards rhetoric and gotchas to
try to win but that is earnestly trying
to seek better understanding and there's
a facilitated process and the people
agreed to it one of the things they
agreed to is what would i need to change
my mind about this if the answer is
nothing then you don't even engage in
the debate if we can't even say what
would change our mind we're not really
responsible participants of a democracy
and each of the debaters has to read
each other's content first and agree to
a facilitation process that's long form
and we start with what do we all agree
on
say we're looking at climate change what
do we all agree on
that means now both around the values
that are relevant and the facts of the
matter that where we go to what we
disagree on we know what our shared
basis to derive a solution looks like
then we try to formalize our
disagreement i believe x i believe not x
and we say what would it take to solve
this do we need to do a new piece of
science do we disagree because of an
intuitive hunch or a different value we
could do as much defines a private brain
or you know that there's these common
cynical narratives also that get in the
way right because we're all just like oh
well it's just this one thing or you
know bench viewers oh the media doesn't
like social media because it's losing
its monopoly on truth partial truths but
not complete go on but we could have
people who had
different views but were earnest and
wanted to know what was true more than
hold their own view be able to engage in
a process that could
bring us to what is shared knowledge
where are their disagreements what is
the basis of the disagreement what would
it take to solve that
and actually have that be what is
informing the institutions and all of
that be transparently oversighted
that would be a huge step in the right
direction there are groups like braver
angel search for common ground in fact
so my organization we actually are
standing up this thing called the social
cohesion and technology council i think
i got the name right
taking these groups like braver angels
search for common ground that this is
what they do they actually run these
civic processes with people who come
from very different perspectives and it
takes like multiple hours they bring
them together for facilitated
conversations but what we're doing with
this council we're putting together is
actually matching them with technology
designers so they can actually take the
lessons like how do you do conflict
mediation how do you get shared reality
from like very different identity held
different realities and then also apply
that to how you design technology
because you can imagine a world where
facebook's like oh do you want to see
more bridge building between january 6
do you want to see more bridge building
stuff on climate change and you could
imagine sorting for that thing right
they could design it very differently
right but you would have to change
people's intuitions and change human
nature because human nature is
conflict
does most people seek conflict this is a
fundamental question about how we view
human nature it is true that the worser
vices and worser devils or whatever you
call them worse angels of human nature
are are there within us right but if
that's what we assume is true that that
is the full story of who we are when we
look in the mirror then this story is
over and we should just go do something
no no no no i don't drink margaritas no
no no i just think
for most people live these sort of
unrealized lives it's a you have a giant
percentage of the population that is
disenfranchised and totally they're
angry yeah and they look for things that
make them angry yes
so well i think we have to address it at
the root level before we address it even
at a social media well you had johan
haryan saying the opposite of addiction
is not sobriety it's connection yeah
like people need meaning purpose
connection and you can imagine a world
where social media is like hey here's
some drum circles or dance events or
obviously post covet or whatever but
just
social media could be steering us we're
making life choices every day right now
when you look at a screen it's just like
it's basically allocating decisions of
where time blocks are going to land on
your calendar right most of those time
blocks are like spend another five
seconds doing this with your phone right
but imagine social media becomes a gps
router for life choices where it's
actually directing you to the kinds of
things that create more meaning now of
course the the deeper thing is work
inequality meaning not existing in the
lot of the work that people do
agreed but relationships yeah absolutely
right i mean who's the angriest people
in cells right when people get really
angry you accuse them of being in cells
but we can imagine a world that
facilitates ways for people to you know
go to dance events together where they
meet other people in a more like
facilitated environment as opposed to
you're going to sit there at home and
like let's just get you swiping and
tinder's profiting from the attention
casino so you match and then you never
message someone right like they profit
from just like that machine working that
way right and then we also have the
emergence of the metaverse where people
are just going to be more incentivized
to go into that because it's going to be
very exciting which is why a humane
future is the online world has to care
about actually like regenerating the
connective tissues of the offline world
if it doesn't do that it's not going to
work apple could be in a position to do
that you take it back to similar to
people exercising and not eating too
much sugar because those are the too
much sugar is a hypernormal stimuli
right remove the sugar fat and salt from
evolutionary food which are the parts
that create the dopamine hit and just
make fast food out of it
um and in the same way of like what is
fast food to real food is just the hyper
normal stimuli that's what porn is to
real intimacy that's what dating apps
are to actually meeting people it's what
social media is to real human
relationships is kind of just the hyper
normal stimuli right
we know that gdp is not a good metric of
the health of a society because gdp goes
up when war goes up it goes up when
addiction goes up
the question of what is a good measure
of the health of a society one metric
that i like
it no one's applying the metric just as
a thought experiment is the inverse of
the addiction in the society as a whole
is a good measure of the health
a healthy society produces less
addiction meaning more sovereign
individuals because addiction creates a
spike in pleasure and then an erosion of
their baseline of pleasure
and baseline of health fulfillment in
general
one of the reasons we're so susceptible
to hypernormal stimuli is what you're
saying is because we live in
environments that are hyponormal like
not enough of the type of stimuli that
we really need which is mostly human
connection creativity and meaning right
and so at the basis of it is like how do
we actually increase those is the only
way that we become unsusceptible
to the supply side marketing that
appeals to yes
and it's interesting to think about if
apple were to take the you know small
percentage of people who opt into
tracking their usage statistics and they
could actually measure for a given
country hey this is the percentage of
people that are addicted based on usage
patterns again it's privacy respecting
and everything and reporting that back
to society so there's a better feedback
loop between how healthy the society was
and its use of technology and then
actually have ways of saying how do we
make i mean again apple's in this really
unique position where their business
model is not addicting people polarizing
people you know they could actually make
their their whole system about how do we
have deeper choices in the real world
well there is a movement in society
currently to try to get people to
recognize through uh
radically induced introspective thought
brought on by psychedelics what the
problems of
our society and not necessarily the
problems of these choices but the
problems and you're talking about like
indulging primarily in these choices
whether it's porn or fast food or
gambling or alcohol or whatever these
problems are that people have
is that
there are certain psychedelic compounds
that allow you to see yourself in an
incredibly ruthlessly introspective way
that'll allow you to make radical
changes and those are all illegal right
now and there's a lot of great work
being done right now with maps
where rick doblin's organization has
worked to try to
introduce these compounds to help
specifically help soldiers deal with
ptsd it's a big one
and i think through that and through
their advocacy and the understanding
that this stuff is very effective
whether it's through mdma or whether
it's through psilocybin through some of
the research they're doing with that
that
there's a way to get um a view outside
of the pattern this this like deeply cut
groove that you're stuck in the default
mode yes and i think
if we're dealing with anything that is
a possible
potential real solution
for radically re-engaging thought for
changing the way we interface with each
other and with with society in general i
think that's it
and i think that the fact that that is
illegal currently is one of the big
it's one of the big problems one of the
big barriers between us changing the way
uh our our culture operates and what we
find to be important
yeah i mean you remember so many of the
like founding writings of the country
said we need freedom of religion but we
actually need a religious people and
what they were saying is like we don't
care if it's confucianism or whatever
but you need people that have some
transcendent values and morals that bind
them to more than just their own
self-interest
and they give them something like
love thy neighbor and give the benefit
of the doubt and things like that so it
was acknowledged that this democracy
only worked with a comprehensively
educated people where they meant both a
kind of moral education and development
of people as well as being able to
understand the issues right both they
need to understand science and economics
and like that they also need to
understand
the importance of compromise over
culture wars of seeking to understand
each other's perspectives so the
psychedelic renaissance kind of religion
has
has decreased in its overall influence
on society a lot
and the psychedelic renaissance is the
beginning of like a new way that people
are starting to access transcendent
experiences and then reflection i would
say that by itself
um
i have seen narcissists and sociopaths
get more severely that way using
psychedelics because it just creates
reinforcement yeah and gurus so it has
to be like psychedelics in a community
of practice
where there is
uh checks and balances on each other
ethics yeah exactly and i i think also
it can
move us away from this concept to use uh
terence mckenna's words dominator
culture you know and that you can have
advancement without having a dominator
culture and you can have advancement
where you seek to engage in the greater
good of the whole
and you know and the choices can be made
that way and i think in many ways it's
one of the things that apple does when
when apple is talking about this
this world where they're creating
less impact of advertisement by not
having you track amongst all apps and
and allowing you to choose whether or
not apps track you
that's a bold move
in this world where everybody is trying
to accentuate the influence that apps
have and the the amount of engagement
they have and that these uh
to be able to use advertiser
money and to to be able to generate more
of it through that
is so attractive to people i mean that's
what look android is just a big
data scooping machine right i mean
they're they're tracking everything and
anything and it's one of the things they
said about tick tock when they first
when software engineers first looked at
it they're like jesus crisis is like
tracking everything and it's you know
one of the most invasive of the
applications why tick tock is not
considered a major immediate national
security threat i still don't understand
i mean if russia in the night in the
cold war was running the media
programming for the united states for
all of its youth like that's insane
there's actually a specific strategy
china uses called the
ccp uses called the borrowing mouth to
speak so you can imagine when anyone
says that any western voice in the u.s
speaks positively of the ccp you just
add a little inflation they just get a
little bit more boost than someone
because you're more trusting of someone
who's a western voice than of a you know
someone who's from you know say ccp or
china and so there's that's one of the
invisible ways you can steer a culture
but going on back to the the apple point
it we all sound like we're promoting
apple in this podcast and i just wanted
to well we're kind of promoting good
faith companies yeah we're moving in the
right direction yeah and you had john
mackie on whole foods we went to whole
foods last night and talked about how
that that's creating an environment for
health and trying to at least couple
better yeah perfect just coupling better
towards we can make money by helping
things be healthier right apple could
say we're going to couple our business
model put on the johnson and junk
whatever you think johnson and johnson
you can say we're going to orient our
business towards long-term health of
people we're going to do apple fitness
we're going to do things like that we're
going to change the app stores to you
know
put down in the shelf space all the
toxic social media stuff if not take it
off completely and put back on like what
are the things that help people connect
with each other yeah and kind of each
other in person i mean part of that is
it's actually kind of hard to host
there's certain people in a community
who are kind of the event hosters
they're the people that bring people
together and right now i mean they're
good at it but imagine that was just
like a hundred times easier i'm not
trying to sell anything i don't have any
product or anything like here and
thinking about this but there are people
who who are work on how do we make it
easier to bring people together in the
physical world and if we made that a lot
easier than it is today so that was
happening more often so that when you
thought about what you wanted to do
instead of i could open up this app or
that app i felt in my own community in
my physical community more opportunities
a more populated menu of life choices
where i can you know do dancing connect
with people drums whatever the things
sewing clubs book clubs just the things
that bring people together
and you can even have you know all the
public spaces libraries and town halls
and squares and things like that have
better instrumentation so that that was
easier to book for communities right
again this is part of a
longer term trend and transition of how
you get out of this but i do think that
we have to make the choices that are
fulfilling as easy to make as the
choices that are not fulfilling but have
the hyper normal stimuli instant hit i
was thinking about something joe and
you're asking like what are the
solutions and jumping quickly to why
some proposed solutions don't work which
is true it's like you think about what
are the nutrients the body needs
you can die just from a vitamin c
deficiency even if you have all the b
vitamins vitamin d etc and so it's like
the body doesn't need a nutrient it
needs minimum levels of lots of
nutrients the same is like how do you
get buff which muscle do you work well
you have to work all the muscles and you
have to work them in lots of different
ways
how do you make a functional
civilization do you do that through
culture
do you do it through kind of collective
efforts or individual efforts do you do
it through technology do you do it
through changing markets or states we'd
propose that there's some stuff in all
those areas that has to happen
simultaneously that drives virtuous
cycles
and otherwise it's kind of like
answering the question of like which
nutrient do you need or which muscle do
you need to work out like the problems
are complex they have many different
causes and all of the kind of single
solutions might do something but end up
failing and so we have to also and this
is again something that's very hard to
do when attention spans are getting
shorter and shorter is how do we
actually look at a whole ecosystem of
solutions that collectively can start to
address it even though any of them
individually can't
yeah
so we're going to hit the brakes and go
backwards or go in a completely
different direction than the culture
seems to be going in so we
you know what i mean we have to not just
stop our forward or not it's not even
forward momentum the general direction
that we're going in well i think with
things like the social dilemma which was
seen by 150 million people
and and francis's stuff coming out and
people having a negative reaction to the
metaverse i don't know that many people
who saw it was like yeah that's totally
do that obviously they have asymmetric
marketing power they're gonna put
billions of dollars into funding this
thing they're hiring ten thousand let's
talk about that what are they doing
because that commercial where the little
the tiger's talking to the buffalo and
then all the kids are dancing i don't
know what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] happening
i mean i don't know what's happening in
that example but the it's it's a race to
control the whole experience i mean the
reason that facebook is doing the
metaverse zuckerberg doesn't like the
fact that apple has controlled his
destiny by controlling the operating
system inside of which facebook has to
sit and then all the various ways that
whether they make advertising like they
did recently the privacy tracking stuff
it makes him not have control over his
destiny and so if you own the whole
platform bottom to top it's a classic
vertical integration if i own the entire
stack i can control the entire thing and
then i own my own destiny that's what
this is really about and it's going to
become a land grab between these
companies for who can sort of own the
next metaverse platform it's a
fascinating
sorry to interrupt but it's a
fascinating observation too or a
fascinating thing to observe when you're
watching someone who has ungodly amounts
of wealth
clearly ambitiously pursuing more
in in a very
transparent way what's interesting to
psychoanalyze him a bit is that he has
55 percent of the ownership and voting
structure shares of facebook he's a very
unique position there's never been i
don't think a company as
massively powerful as his in the sort of
close to trillion dollar market cap
range where it's all basically
controlled by his psychology i mean i
talk to facebook insiders you know
occasionally and they'll tell me that it
at the end of the day with a lot of
these decisions it really does come down
to mark in a way a young guy yeah how
old is he he is he's actually the same
age so he must be 37.
so he and and then i think what he cares
the most about is being seen as an
innovator like if i had to name it it's
not like you said it's not the money i
think people always say oh it's just
he's greedy
he just wants the money it's no i think
it's he wants to be seen as an innovator
and if the world said the way you can be
an innovator is not by
uh building more stuff that that
basically hollows out the physical world
so we can make this unsustainable
virtual world that collapses society you
can be an innovator by actually fixing
and helping to support the planet that
we're on the actual world that we're
living in the social fabric that needs
to be strengthened
but obviously he's been trapped by a set
of incentives i mean one of the most
interesting things is if he came out and
said
post all these facebook files and said
like i'm actually trapped by the
shareholder model and of the corporate
form like i i am trapped by the fact
that i have a fiduciary obligation to
shareholders but he doesn't say that so
in a way he has a fiduciary duty to lie
to himself
about that the gap between what his
incentives are and what the world needs
for basically sustaining also imagine if
you've created something that says
whether or not he created is a different
debate but
you're the controller of something
that's so massively influential on a
global scale and maybe he thinks that at
least he's not evil
like he may be trying to make money and
he might maybe trying to come off as an
innovator but it's not an evil person i
don't get an evil sense off of mark
zuckerberg i get a it's kind of robotic
he's he's odd he's odd in the way he
communicates but maybe that's like a
social awkwardness in dealing with his
own public image being broadcast to the
world and comes off clunky you know
people come off clunky when they're
concerned with how people view them
right
maybe that's it but imagine just giving
that up
i'm gonna back out now like you know
jeff bezos is leaving
amazon and he's going to like hand it
over to another ceo
what imagine him handing over facebook
to some other person and watching them
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it up or watching them
take this insanely powerful thing and
actually make it more evil or make it
more destructive but more profitable
that's that's a
total possibility right i mean if they
just went full capitalist and some
really ruthless ceo got a hold of
facebook
and they said listen our
bottom line is like we're trying to
increase the amount of money that our
shareholders get off of this and what
we're going to do is we're going to make
these choices and these choices might
not be that popular with analysts and
with people that are you know sort of
trying to
examine culture and the impact that
social media has on it but for us it's
going to be a windfall
we were speaking with a friend who is in
a senior position at google working on
ai and
has come to the conclusion that a lot of
people in senior positions in ai have
come to that
something like artificial general
intelligence is inevitable and
inevitable near term
and near-term like how many years it
depends upon who you're talking to but
this was forms that are inevitable in
the like five-year time period jesus
well how come that's debatable because
some really intelligent people think
it's off by like 50 years
partly it has to do with how you define
artificial general intelligence are you
defining it as something that is truly
sentient and self-aware or simply that
can beat us at all games
oh okay and this at all games is already
here isn't it
well pretty much and so then let's say
you start applying that to beating us at
the games of how to remove
how to concentrate all the capital
right because
ultimately uh market is a game
and most of the market is high frequency
trading run by ai now already if you do
the super one then you concentrate all
capital into one thing yeah it's
actually worth noting
if it's a chess game and you could if
you can out compete if you can see more
moves ahead in the chess board against
the other ais you win the other ais and
then you just move faster i know but i
mean that's what's terrifying is that it
moves completely into the realm of ai
and it's outside of human comprehension
it's not we we're not even in the game
anymore
so specifically his thinking was
it's inevitable that that will happen
it will be dystopic there's no way for
it to not be dystopic we at least think
that google dystopia is less bad than
the china dystopia oh my god so we're in
a full-blown race right to get there
and there are many people actually who
understand and other people are like
well
actually the only answer is to jack jack
our brains in so that the
uh meat suit is somewhat useful to the
agi so now we're in a race to do that
when people understand the catastrophic
risks and they don't see any good
possibility out
then oftentimes they will actually
accelerate some version of a catastrophe
as the only reasonable solution and this
is why
it's so important to actually define the
design criteria right and have people
committed to find solutions even though
they're really hard and it's why i think
something like this is interesting is
truly a belief that a lot more people
focused on
what we need to be trying to solve is
actually useful we think there's a lot
of super smart people at a lot of
universities and in institutions and
in their garage who care care about
these things who could be working on
solutions
the entire blockchain ethereum community
and these are some of these very smart
people very very smart they're not
necessarily working so let's start with
the right design criteria right the
design criteria of
if you're
adding tech that affects society it has
to actually be increasing the quality of
democracy it has to be increasing the
integrity of markets has to be
increasing the quality of families and
mental health you look at what are the
foundational things if it's not doing
that it failed the design criteria
similarly the idea that we have these
dystopias and these catastrophes we need
and the dystopia the catastrophes come
from not being able to create order in
the presence of the successive tech the
dystopias come from top down order
that so what that means is rather than
have imposed order or no order we need
emergent order which is what democracies
and markets are supposed to do but they
haven't
they have to be up regulated a new more
perfect union that's up regulated to the
level of tech we have because the tech
has advanced so far we need new versions
of it so how do we bring about emergent
order of for by the people that can
direct the tech to not be catastrophic
but isn't just topic i just want a lot
more people thinking about that i want a
lot more smart people at mit and
stanford and the state department and
wherever and in ethereum working on
those issues proposing things finding
out what's wrong with them so that the
collective intelligence of the world is
centrally focused on
how do we make it through the meta
crisis how do we how do we make it
through the fact that we are emerging
into the power of gods without the
ability to steward that well what would
it take to steward it well
what will it take
well a lot of people working on what it
will take and coming up with partial
answers is
part of the answer right that's what
we're kind of we started the manhattan
project we didn't know all the ways that
it was going to come together right so
there there is a leap of faith we have
to be comfortable with the uncertainty
it's one of the developmental qualities
that's needed it's like we don't know
how to make it through this like got it
step into that reality take a breath
into that
yeah
and we have to figure out how we're
gonna do this we have to refresh um the
way people felt after they saw the
social dilemma yeah because the problem
is they waited about two weeks and then
they got right back to their normal
consumption maybe not even two weeks 100
and i think that we have a very short
memory when it comes to things that
are impactful and
really sort of
jog your
view of reality you know it's so easy to
slide right back into it
and i think
there has to be an effort
where we remind people we remind each
other we remind ourselves whether it's a
hashtag whether it's a
some some sort of an ethic a movement an
understanding like we're moving in the
wrong direction and we need to like
establish that as a as a
a a real clear parameter like we've got
a problem here yeah and i think people
do get that a lot of responsible they do
the social dilemma people got it a lot
of the transit the facebook file stuff
people's negative reaction to the
metaverse yes you know yes there's a lot
of power on the other side of the table
right we've got trillions of dollars of
market power the question is are we the
people the culture going to be able to
identify what we don't want and then
steer ourselves in the direction of what
we do but are we operating in an echo
chamber where we're talking to a lot of
people that are aware of it so when you
say people are aware of it like what
percentage are we talking about is it
even 20. most people who watch the
social dilemma walked away with
something like tech is a problem it's
kind of generally scary and it seems to
be bad for teenagers and i use families
they didn't get is fundamentally
incompatible with democracy because it
polarizes the population polarizes the
representative class creates gridlock
and makes it less effective relative to
other forms of government this is also
like here we are we're at the like the
three hour mark here so we've been
having this conversation and even though
we're doing our best to try to
pin down solutions and it's like
this is a very ethereal thing it's a
very uh it's just like
it almost seems um
ungraspable you know it just seems like
you you can
nail down all these
problem issues but then when it comes to
real world application like what the
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] do you do
well this show
is going to air
by
bouncing off of satellites that are in
outer space to be able to go to people's
phones and computers
using the most unbelievably like
advanced technology like that's pretty
ethereal it's actually very hard for
people to grasp the whole scope of the
technological complexity when you have
that much technological complexity and
that much technological power we also
have to be able to work on complex
social systems that can make us able to
wield it and
we just haven't had the incentive and
motive to do that but hopefully
recognizing where it goes if we don't is
incentive for enough people to start
working on innovation but this
technology this fascinating and super
complex technology is disconnected from
human nature from these thousands and
thousands of years of human reward
systems that are baked into our dna
that's part of the problems that all
these well only because we have a whole
system trillion dollar market cap system
dependent on hacking and mining from
those human vulnerabilities because
they've already done that if we subtract
that thing yeah and we've instead
reflect back in the mirror not the worst
angels of our nature but the better
angels of our nature we see examples of
people doing the hard thing over the
easy thing we see examples of people
hosting events for each other and being
better to each other rather than being
nasty to each other we're just not
reflecting the right things back in the
mirror we do we do reward when people do
those things right occasionally but the
social algorithms don't reward them by
and large right they take a couple
examples where the positive thing
happens but mostly we see the most
engaging outrages controversial thing
and so that we have to reflect back
something else in the mirror i think
it's like if you remember the 1984 i had
to bring it back to apple and if you
remember the ad for the macintosh the
famous thing where there was a woman
like running down the uh
the like there's the booming big brother
on the screen and the woman's running
down and she takes this hammer and she's
wearing a macintosh t-shirt she takes
this hammer and she throws the hammer at
the screen and it blows up and it says
on january 24th
1984 apple will introduce macintosh and
you will see why 1984
won't be like 1984. was it 1984 that
apple came up with that computer yeah it
was actually and the reference was we
have to defeat orwell we have to defeat
that fiction that can't come true and we
i mean it was a specifically against ibm
oh you have it it's worth seeing for
people that so check it out this is
pre-internet this is
it on earth
[Music]
we shall
prevail
[Music]
on january 24th apple computer will
introduce macintosh
and you'll see why 1984 won't be
like 1984. wow it was powerful that is
powerful
you know we ended our last conversation
with
school yeah i was i was actually born
that year which is crazy that's nuts um
and you know you can imagine that was
there during the super bowl by the way
so that was seen by like it was actually
the it was rated the most successful
television advertisement in tv history
steve jobs had a direct role in it and
um
you can imagine
like we have to not let the orwell
huxley two gutters thing happen we have
to throw a hammer down the middle down
the middle
and and create a future where technology
is actually humane and cares about
protecting the things that matter to us
one thing that gives me hope is that
these kind of conversations are very
popular right you know like uh the
social dilemma was very popular that's
when we did got like 99 million views
yeah this one will probably be similar
it's like
people are interested in this
conversation because they know it's real
issue at least the kind of people that
are tuned into this podcast
and i i think
it's gonna be like
little baby steps
into the the correct direction and you
know what i said about psychedelics is
it's it's one of those
seemingly frivolous
discussions
people that don't have any psychedelic
experiences they don't realize the
dramatic transformative
impact that those things can have on
cultures but
we don't have much time no one has much
time not a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] human that's ever
lived has a 100 years ain't [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and in
during this time of this lifespan that
we've experienced we've seen so much
change and so much almost unstoppable
momentum in the general direction and it
doesn't seem good
but recognizing it discussing it and
having documentaries like the social
dilemma having folks like you guys come
on and just discuss like what is really
going on and we didn't even really get
into a lot of the real technological
dilemmas that we have you know when we
basically glossed over the idea of
drones and the idea of
crispr and
many of these other problems that are
this just watching that with text to
code thing going oh my god the barrier
of entry has been eliminated but it's
just
can you type now you know and you can
code it's wild
but hopefully through conversations like
this and you putting attention on it i
mean you are part of the sense-making
world you are helping people make sense
of the world and when you put your
attention on it i mean i'm grateful for
you creating this opportunity to talk
about these things because
you know they're heavy conversations and
they're hard to to look at it well and
it's it's actually important that you
have these long form podcasts right that
are two plus hours as opposed to it
five second clips or tweets
is
uh when we talk about tech has to
enhance the fundamentally important
things so we saw how tech kind of uh
specifically social media tech with the
polarization algorithms messed up the
fourth estate also messing up education
it doesn't matter what you learn if you
can't remember anything and you have no
control of your attention
and so one of the things is the tech has
to actually be increasing people's
attention
right their attention span their control
over their own attention and their
memory if we were to be able to measure
those things and say let's up regulate
that if you want a democracy to work the
tech should upregulate people's
perspective seeking how much are they
actually seeking other people's
perspective and if i have a short
attention span i can't hold multiple
perspectives simultaneously because you
just can't fit that into the same
perspective and i'm right and that's the
only thing i'm going to think
and so imagine that like instead of the
short click bait thing because otherwise
i'll bounce if i actually read the
longer thing and if my post had more
nuance that actually got up regulated so
it created an incentive to take in other
perspectives to try to parse them and
synthesize them
that would be really different we've got
to incentivize kindness too yes you know
this uh
willingness to engage in nonsensical
arguments it's just so common twitter is
the best example that it's like it's a
mental institution where people just
throwing [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] at each other it's
it's so wild to watch when you you don't
see examples like this in real life it's
like accentuating the worst examples of
the way people can communicate but doing
so in this weird public square itself is
a virtual reality if you think about
just what it does it's it's ranked by
what's most engaging so it's like every
dramatic event that happened with anyone
anywhere like little drive-by like oh
you just you just you just like cut me
off on the freeway and i'm upset for a
second anywhere that happens anywhere
it just collects it all into this one
efficient feed and then people are
responding as if it's all like happening
at the same time it's already this weird
chronologically distorted reality
because it's pulling from all these
different moments yes and making it seem
as if it's all one moment so all right
people need to just see i mean it's just
twitter is just bad and it affects
people's minds it's where they think
that this is the world that they live in
where is this concentrated form of it
it's like
um
you know i my friend peter t was on the
other day and he was talking about how
bad juice is for you like people think
the juice is good for like orange juice
he's like sugar it is such a sugar rush
to your liver that your your liver is
like what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] is all this like
you're drinking like
11 oranges worth of juice and it's just
going straight to your liver and your
liver has a really hard time processing
this is almost like that
the social media version of that
like your brain gets all these
impactful moments without
all the like regular life space in
between them if you live a normal
existence instead it concentrates it
from billions of people all around the
world and shoves it right through your
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] brain and we're not designed for
that i had a period where i
intentionally went and curated my
facebook algorithm where i followed all
of the groups that
uh look at police violence cop block and
those ones
and so my feed just became filled with
um cops killing black eyes and killing
uh you know
escalating violence in ways that didn't
look useful now of course those videos
also didn't show
what happened beforehand to possibly
justify it or not so like they were
selected for a reason
but even where they were egregiously
wrong they might be a very small
statistical percentage of all police
interactions but if even though i knew i
was curating my feet for this purpose it
emotionally affected me intensively just
watching that many in a row but by the
time i've watched 12 it feels like this
is everything that's happening right
right that's the whole world and then i
i got rid of those and i curated ones
that were like um pro police thin blue
line kind of ones and you saw people
aggressing against cops and you saw what
they have to deal with and i was like
man these guys are heroes
and again it only took like 12 videos
and even though i was knowingly doing it
to myself
it was that emotionally compelling
because we are used to evolutionarily
seeing a world that is representative of
the world but when there's so much data
that .01 of it is
uh more information than i can possibly
take in and it can be totally
statistically unrepresentative but it
still affects what i feel the world is
you can see how
earnest people can get completely
polarized that's such a good point it is
earnest people and the fact that you are
consciously curating and still having
this effect on you but you at least can
objectively express it to other people
yeah and you know hopefully
that gets into some people's brains and
they they see how dangerous this stuff
is and this is also why these troll
farms exist
because they they can really influence
the way our culture moves and behaves
and the way it thinks about itself
gentlemen thank you very much for being
here this was uh
terrifying
and uh daunting i i mean i i feel good
but i also don't
you know it's hard i get it yeah i feel
like we should
another time come back and talk about
more concrete pathways yeah let's do it
let's do it let's give it a couple of
months and hope things don't
turn to nuclear war i'll tell you why it
feels inspiring to me and thank you for
having us here is
there's a lot of people who are focused
on
systemic injustice or climate change or
uh economics or ai issues but how do all
these issues fit together and how do we
actually deal with the fact that we've
created so much technological power and
we've had such a huge impact on our
environment through the whole industrial
use of technology that the world's
increasingly fragile
these aren't just separate issues they
are related there is a kind of global
meta crisis and there is a need for real
innovative solutions in how we think
about it and i think because of this
more people just at least be thinking
about that and then be talking about it
and that means more of the collective
intelligence of the world hopefully
being able to start to work on solutions
and i am hopeful about that i'm hopeful
about that too let's end in a positive
note
gentlemen thank you very much i really
really appreciate you thank you thank
you bye everybody
[Music]
you
