okay so this my great pleasure okay can
can you hear me is it fine okay so this
is my great pleasure to introduce Jo d
hamkins uh who will talk to us about
continuous models of arithmetic and I
just want to add that Joy will miss you
and think about coming back at some
point
welcome all right well thank you very
much for that introduction and I miss
New York so it's been a while and so I
certainly will be back at some point to
New York um okay so I'm hoping everyone
can see my screen um and uh okay good so
right why don't I just dive right into
it um uh so this is Joint work with Ali
anat and myself and BOS v v vual I'm
sorry if one of the polls could
pronounce Bosh's name
peaceful okay thank you very much it's a
difficult name for me um so our papers
available on the archive and uh right it
starts
with um with a question that Ali anot
asked uh about 10 years ago uh namely
can we form a model of arithmetic on the
rational numbers by
defining the new operations of course
not the rational plus and times but some
other plus and times
using continuous functions in such a way
that we make it into a model of piano
arithmetic so can we
Define a model of piano
arithmetic continuously on the rational
numbers that's the
question and uh I find this question
quite intriguing and was very curious
about it um and the amazing answer is
yes you can do it and and furthermore
every oh I gave away the punchline here
so the standard model has such a
presentation okay using continuous
functions it's hard to imagine maybe at
first but in fact every countable model
is continuously presentable so the main
theorem is that every countable model of
PA has such a continuous presentation on
the rational numbers meaning using the
the standard topology on the rational
numbers okay so I want to prove that
Joel so so can I just ask a question
perhaps this is
something one should ask later so these
are the rationals and countable models
how about the
reals yeah yeah it's going to you you
okay yeah we're going to that's exactly
the kind of question that we want to ask
in fact it might be on the next slide so
a topological model of arithmetic is one
which is equipped with a topology for
which the the operations of plus and
times are continuous with respect to
that
topology and then the question is which
topological spaces support topological
models for example the reals or canos
space the long line susin line be space
and so on which spaces can you have a
topological model of arithmetic that's
the main question that we're going to
address so I'm going to give you many
affirmative answers so on the rationals
the main theorem says yes but also on
the Ada Alpha on hostor Ada Alpha spaces
these are the dense linear orders of
size ol of alpha um provided they're
saturated um and then many uncountable
subspaces of the plane uh you can do it
and there's many other positive answers
and there's negative answers so to
answer Roman's question for the reals
it's negative there is no way to do it
with the reals or in R to the N you
can't do it long line canoun space all
of these are negative answers to the
question there are no there's no way to
give a model of P continuously with
those spaces and be space is open we
don't know the answer for be
space okay so let's just jump right in
um so in light of the answer so the the
main answer was saying every countable
model is realized continuously on the
rationals and so one could ask well is
that phenomenon that's sort of non all
phenomenon General so if a topological
space supports a continuous model of PA
then does it support all models of that
cardinality um for example in the
rationals the answer for the specific
space of the rationals is yes uh and
then one could also ask whether the
topology can ever distinguish the theory
so is there are there arithmetic
consequences of the top of the topology
where maybe you can get some of the
spaces but not all in a way that enables
you to say well you can't ever have a
model of this the but you can with that
theory um and uh and so for example if a
space supports a continuous model of PA
then is it going to give you models of
all of the completions of PA you know
continuously so I'm going to answer all
these questions by the
end sorry Joel can I just ask a yes dumb
basic question go ahead so when you say
I mean if you're talking about the
continuity of plus and times for these
models you mean they're continuous with
respect to the product topology on
whatever is the that you started with
exactly yeah because they're binary
functions so we ask are there continuous
functions in that and is it is it
conceivable that they could be you could
have not a continuous presentation but
sort of you know if you fix any natural
any element and you look at the sort of
the yeah we have for example could the
successor function be continuous you
know what I mean yeah generally the
negative answers are all it can't even
be in one coordinate Okay cool so we we
yeah we're definitely thinking about
that kind of
issue okay if anyone has a question
please feel free to to go ahead and ask
that's completely fun I'm I'm totally
willing okay let's prove the theorem so
this is the main theorem every countable
model PA has a continuous presentation
on the rational
numbers uh and the first step is to
create the standard model which is maybe
surprising because it's hard to imagine
how you could possibly Define plus and
times on the rational so as to make an
isomorphic copy of the standard model of
arithmetic and furthermore do so with
continuous functions um but in fact I'm
going to uh uh show you how to do that
um okay so it begins with the sort of
school child's observation that if
you're doing addition and multiplication
then you can start even when you don't
know the whole
number that you're adding so for example
maybe you some number and you know the
last some digits of it and another
number and you know it ends like this
then you can start to add them even
though you don't know the whole number
you can get some of the final digits of
the answer even if you know only some of
the final digits of the inut and
similarly with
multiplication you know so that's a kind
of obvious observation that I think
we're all familiar with you can start to
do the addition even when you don't know
the whole number but just the final
digits and similarly multiplication and
if you think about what that really
means it means that arithmetic is
continuous with respect to the final
digits topology you know so that's
that's exactly sort of more
sophisticated way of saying the same
thing if you want to know the final
digits of the answer it suffices to know
certain final digits of the inputs and
similarly with multiplication in fact
it's sort of even better than continuous
it's it's lipshits because the number of
digits that you need to know is the same
if you want to know so if you want to
know 10 digits of the final
answer uh then if you know 10 digits of
each of them I mean from the right then
you can do it and similarly with
multiplication so okay so so we can put
a topology on the natural numbers the
final digits
topology namely the the basic open sets
are usab best where s is a binary string
a finite binary string and these are
just the numbers that end with those
digits
okay so for example U Zer is all the
even numbers because those in binary the
even numbers are the ones whose last
digit whose rightmost digit is zero and
U1 has all the odd numbers because those
are the numbers that uh whose last digit
is a one in binary and similarly this
okay one one Z is six in binary but we
have two extra zeros so we're going to
go Mod 32 so these are the numbers that
are six Mod 32 you know and that those
are all open sets in the f fin digits
topology and there's a couple of
observations so okay so the main point
is that the addition and multiplication
are continuous with respect to this
topology um uh as we observed because of
the school child's
observation uh we can ensure that the
answer is in one of these open sets by
ensuring that the inputs are are picking
suitable open sets for the
inputs okay so what are some topologies
this is a house store of topology
because if you have two different
natural numbers then they disagree on
some digit and so there's some s and t
open sets that are going to distinguish
those numbers so it's house
door uh also it has no isolated points
because every use Subs is
infinite um and the basic op sets are
clopen because the complement of use ofs
are just the numbers that disagree with
us so there's Finly many ways to do that
and so the complement of us ofs is just
the Union of the finitely many U
subt where T has the same length as s
all the other ones so those are clo and
uh um it's it's metric and it's really
generated by the two adic valuation
namely the distance between two numbers
is just one over two to the K where the
where the K is the first bit of
difference between the
numbers so this is uh so it's symmetric
topology um and it follows by a result
of cinsky that every countable metric
space without isolated points is
homeomorphic to the rational so this
typology that I described is in fact
homeomorphic to the rational numbers and
so so I didn't I didn't prove the
theorem
by defining plus n * on Q I did it by
defining a topology on the natural
numbers but then arguing that topology
is homeomorphic to Q so now I can just
translate the ordinary addition over to
to q and whatever whatever the
homeomorphism is is giving me will be
continuous functions on the
rationals okay so that basically proves
the theorem so we have a the natural
numbers the standard model as a
continuous presentation on the rationals
because that topology the final digits
topology is homeomorphic with the
rationals so let me give a different
proof
now a more more specific proof what I
want to do is Define a certain linear
order on the natural
numbers it's called the final digits
order I guess do someone have a question
or oh I I I do briefly just that
supinsky theorem I mean you st you're
stating it um you know for metric of
course I mean you could prove
metrizability
under the assumptions given anyway so
I'm wondering yes
you're totally right about harder is it
harder to prove this result without
saying the word metric or is it just no
because in fact the real proof of the
theorem is the argument I'm about to
give next ah okay yeah so this was sort
of the first proof but then we realized
what's really going on no but I mean I
mean sir pinsky's theorem itself for
getting your proof but just just to
prove s pinsky's theorem um you know I
mean we don't need any of this in fact
the the the argument I'm going to give
makes it even more obvious because in
fact it's an order topology for an
endless dense linear order and obviously
that's homeomorphic with
Q so we don't actually need Ser pinsky's
theorem at
all okay so this final digits
order uh is the following order we take
the binary
tree okay so and zero means go left and
one means go right but this binary tree
it's a little a little bit backwards
from how maybe you usually draw it
because I'm ordering the sequences from
the right instead of from the left so so
one zero is extending zero whereas
normally I think you when you when you
normally when you draw the binary tree
you go from the left but I want to go
from the right to make it match up with
the final digits order okay so um so I'm
adding new digits but I'm adding them on
the left as I go up the tree you know
and some of these sequences correspond
to numbers like 1 1 Z that's six and 11
1 Z that's 14 in binary right and some
of them don't correspond to numbers
because they have a leading zero so when
you have a leading zero then then you
you don't you don't correspond to it but
now I want to put the natural numbers in
order depending on how they show up in
this tree in this final digits
tree and it's so I'm using the lexical
order on binary representations but
going from the right instead of from the
left you know that's the final digits
order and it's it's an endless dense
linear order it's easy to see of course
the tree is branching but there's always
you can always put a leading one on so
every uh every neighborhood is going to
uh have a natural number in it so it's
going to be a dense linear order and the
the the the final digits topology are
just determined from the cones in this
tree so for example U sub 1 one is just
the natural numbers that are in this
interval here I mean this Union of
intervals and so they're going to be
open so the order topology on the final
digits order is the same as the um final
digits
topology so this is this makes it now
completely obvious that it's
homeomorphic to Q because I've got
accountable dense linear order and I'm
looking at the order topology but the
order is isomorphic to the rational
order by can theorem and so the the
order topology is homeomorphic to Q so
the final digits topology is
homeomorphic toq so this is what I meant
we don't need serinsky anymore any of
that it's just the final digits
order it's the order to appology on the
final digits
order okay are there any questions about
this final digits order I
don't is it clear enough okay so like Z1
is greater than one zero in just a 01 01
is yeah everything over here is greater
than everything over here so you know
this is the empty sequence so it's
sometimes when people say well what's
zero in binary and uh and sometimes
people say well it's just zero but no
that's not right because that would have
a leading zero so zero and binary is the
empty sequence right uh which is in the
middle here this the the sequence just
with zero only is not representing a
number in binary because it has a
leading
zero namely the zero that's right there
so this is not a number okay this is
representing two and so on so um okay so
one way to think about it is that uh I
actually have I actually have one quick
question the the ones that don't
represent numbers are you kind of just
forgetting about them yes exactly good
yeah
yeah so uh they don't correspond to
natural numbers they correspond to sort
of I mean this connection with pic
numbers here two addic
numbers we that'll come up
later okay let's see so where are we now
so now uh the theorem was that every
accountable model of PA has a continuous
presentation on Q so far I've only
convinced you I think that the standard
model but I want now to prove that every
countable model and this is how it goes
take any countable model of PA and
consider the final digits order as it is
defined inside m M can Define that order
because it can talk about binary
representations and so on and from the
right lexical order it can Define the
order and uh and M sees its own
arithmetic as continuous with respect to
that order that's just the school
child's observation that addition is
continuous with respect to final
digits so M knows that it's plus and
times are continuous with respect to the
order topology of that order but what is
that order well it's accountable endless
dense linear order and so it's
homeomorphic to Q so therefore I've got
a copy of M on Q with continuous
operations uh so so that's the that's
the proof basically it's just realizing
that the the final digits order is
definable in PA and it gives you
accountable endless Jo Jo so I guess
again that's perhaps will be address
later but how much of PA do you need for
this argument oh very little and in the
paper I'm not going to get into so much
because I'm not so good with weak
arithmetic but my co-authors are pretty
good with weak
arithmetic so in the paper we were
careful to State exactly what you need
and I delta0 plus exp is enough to
handle the binary
sequences and so I think it's on the
next slide actually yeah wait can I you
elaborate I'm a little bit lost at where
you're using the theability in this
argument oh uh I need
to I think right here yeah M M M can
Define in order so therefore it makes
sense to think about the order
topology that word it's just okay it's
really just it's a manner of speaking I
mean okay fine I mean you're using that
fact and that fact is most conveniently
expressed in terms of the order right
exactly okay so that's really why this
way of thinking is maybe better than the
other way going through cinsky and so on
because I'm not going to be able to
maybe appeal to cinsky inside the PA
model I would find that confusing to do
that but once you get that next slide
right you're not accountable endless pel
in your order that's not that's a
statement you're just proving that
you're in the real world right you're
not or are you trying or are you proving
that internally in some weak system this
is just where I lost TR M knows that its
order is is De den and endless and and M
is countable so externally we can see
look that's yeah that's externally okay
that's what I thought externally it's a
it's a copy of Q because it's
accountable endless denl your order so
that's why it's homeomorphic to Q
externally internally M sees its
arithmetic as continuous with respect to
the final digits order okay and M thinks
that that order is isomorphic to its cu
maybe non-standard Q you know wait wait
but do you need that fact that M thinks
it's internally isomorphic to its Q is
that is that is that an essential part
of this argument or is that side comment
no it's not I didn't use it all I used
was that the order was Den linear order
but that's another property you could
consider I suppose yeah and we do so
it'll come up okay sorry okay so this is
the week Theory one more question sure
this proof doesn't it just show that if
you have any model of PA you can find a
continuous presentation on its version
of the rationals so if
it's you're two slides ahead of me yeah
it's gonna come sorry okay
okay okay so this is the we another
question sure go ahead this theem you
have on the screen do you know this one
okay yeah do you know whether it's sharp
do you know that if you like weaken this
theory that you get counter no well the
thing is if you don't you need X to have
binary representations as far as I of
course and so I I have no idea how to
prove the theorem or refute it if you're
weaker than this I just don't know okay
and your co-authors didn't either then
um uh I'm not I don't want to speak for
them because they know quite a
l so yeah I was hoping to stay away from
I guess it's the mopa seminar but you
know PA it's in your so just give me
pa okay I'm sorry I don't know the
answer to that uh Cameron so okay so
here's a variant order which is very
natural in which actually we had maybe
were considering at first but it doesn't
work so this is the this is a natural
order where you don't ignore the leading
zeros you imagine that every natural
number is represented in binary by an
infinite string with only find many ones
and so you add on all the leading zeros
and then you just use the lexical order
from the right so zero is represented by
the the any number of zeros you know or
the infinite zero string if you like um
and it's a different order because
before zero was in the middle okay but
also addition is not continuous with
respect to this order because for
example 1 plus one is two I think we can
agree
three uh but if you look at two the
number two in this
topology it has an open interval
consisting entirely of even numbers
because all the odd numbers are up here
and the even numbers are here so there's
an interval there's a neighborhood of
two that contains only even numbers but
one is the smallest odd number in this
order and every neighborhood of one
therefore will have some even numbers
and some OD numbers and so it can't be
the pre-image of the interval around two
because you must be able to get some odd
numbers by adding so therefore addition
is not continuous with respect to this
topology so therefore this is the wrong
order is how I think about what's going
on the other order is the right order
okay it caused some confusion because we
were looking at this order first and
then I realized wait a minute we need we
really need the other order
okay so in uncountable models we get
this theorem which is the one that Corey
was mentioning namely every model of
arithmetic has a continuous presentation
on on its rational numbers which will be
in uncountable order topology
now okay and we can ask well oh okay but
this is the proof that we observed
already the model always has a
continuous presentation with respect to
its final digits order and the point is
that its final digits order
it thinks its final digits order is
accountable Den linear order and
therefore order isomorphic to its
rationals and it and that reasoning is
correct even when m is
uncountable um but the point is that
what what it thinks it's rational s
isn't accountable Order anymore but some
non-standard version of the of the
rational
okay house dorf introduced these Ada
orders so Ada is the the order type of
the Ral
but we can have uncountable versions of
this so if you have a saturated nless
dense linear order of cardinality Alf
Alpha then that's called Ada Alpha and
that exists provided you have this
cardinality requirement which is
necessary for
saturation um and so the cor is that the
order Ada Alpha if it exists has a
topological model of arithmetic and the
proof is just look if Ada Alpha exists
then there are saturated models of size
all of alpha for for any theory of of
suitable size language um and so if we
just take a saturated model of PA of
that size then its rationals will also
be saturated and therefore we'll have uh
order type A to Alpha and therefore the
previous theorem will imply that we can
do it on Ada
Alpha this is sort of a generalization
of the previous argument about Q it's
really about a to Alpha for any Alpha
provided that it
exists okay so which
spaces what is the cue of a model of
PA what which topological spaces arise
that way they're always at least a
little homogeneous because in the
rationals we have
translation as a continuous operation so
any point in fact any any finite border
isomorphism extends to an automorphism
so that's a a limited amount of of
homogeneity in the topological space in
the order and therefore in the
topological
space
um it's never complete as an order
because the model itself even knows that
because it can think it can point at the
square root of two which it thinks is a
cut that's not filled so the model can
define a cut that's not filled and
therefore the order is
complete
uh
okay so in particular it uh I guess that
shows that it will never be compact as a
topological
space um okay so the same idea works
with the integers if you have the
integers of a model of PA then you can
make a continuous presentation on the
rationals and now you use the signed
final digits order so here uh we have a
we we put a digit for the sign negative
numbers over here positive numbers and
then we start uh giving the digits but
from the right so the small digits are
more important the rightmost digits are
the important
digits for determining the order okay so
here's all the even numbers positive
even numbers positive odd numbers these
are negative even numbers negative odd
numbers and so on
um okay so I guess right here because
it's negative this zero is going up and
the one the one is sort of more negative
here this zero is going down because
it's positive okay so this is a natural
order on the integers but the same proof
then
Works uh because this is a countable
dense linear order um so homeomorphic to
q and the integer arithmetic is
continuous with respect to this signed
final digits
order okay let's see um so let's now
consider negative
answers so and we're going to prove this
in a way that was discussed
namely well fulfilling something like
the Tenon Bome we we're going to show
that in fact it's often the case that
neither addition nor multiplication can
be
continuous uh and often we only need
sections unary sections of these
functions we can show none of them are
continuous okay so caner space is not
possible you can't do you can't have a a
continuous presentation of a model of PA
on canra
Space uh and more generally no compact
Hoster of space has a continuous model
of
arithmetic so let's prove
that so no compact h space so this is
the proof suppose you had a compact h
space with A continuous addition so it's
a model of PA and it has a continuous
plus so then look at the final segment
in the in the PA order in the arithmetic
order a final
segment uh so this is the image of the
whole space under the adding K map which
is a unary function so it's the image of
a compact set under a continuous
function and therefore it's
Compact and therefore it's
closed and so we've produced a lot of
closed sets here but they're nested
because it has K goes up the those sets
get smaller and there's empty
intersection so we've made an infinite
nested intersection of Clos sets with
empty intersection and that violates
compactness so therefore it's a
contradiction okay so you can't do it
with a compact hster of space and
addition can't even be continuous not
even in one
coordinate can I ask a bit of a maybe a
stupid question sure go ahead where do
you use house DWF in this argument oh
right here to know that the continuous
image uh yeah it's in this step I think
you need both of them for that for that
reasoning to work the image of a compax
set is compact but therefore closed
that's using House St I
think okay so that was for addition now
let's handle
multiplication but we can do basically
the same
thing now let's look at the the
multiples of K factorial so we compute K
factorial inside the model the model's
version of K factorial because K might
be non-standard right but it's a PA
model so it knows about factorials so we
can make K factorial inside the model
and we look at all the multiples of that
constant and that's the continuous image
of a compact House of space uh by this
map assuming that multiplication is
continuous even just in one
slice and uh therefore this set is
closed but again they have intersection
empty
because uh there can't be any number
that's in all of these that's a multiple
of K for every K that's impossible and
therefore the intersection is empty and
that's contradiction okay so uh compact
is impossible let's do the reals now the
reals are impossible so this answers
Roman's question in the
beginning uh you can't even have a model
sorry can I ask just it went by it
looked like you were
using this translation by K
multiplication by K factorial um why I
mean why is there even that slight
difference or is it just a matter I mean
oh if you just do multiplication by K
then it's not linearly
nested so that's the only reason to use
K
factorial right yeah okay fine exactly
okay good EXC thank you
plested yeah yeah Joel so since we're
talking about those so what happens if
you cut the model you know take a model
with a top so there would be a largest K
so then the argument wouldn't quite
apply you mean if you have a very weak
Theory or what no you just look at the
arithmetic of an initial segment with a
top so then you can consider I mean you
don't have K factorial or right right so
there's much that you don't have but
also you have the the highest number
there the both arguments somehow need
right I have no idea in that well you
have to adjust the function sort of
there when they're undefined perhaps the
value is zero or something right right
yeah if there's a largest
element yeah I'm not sure I have no idea
I don't think we even treat that case in
the paper that's a much weaker Theory
than what we're looking at I
think okay but I guess some of our
theories are just considering say
successor arith IC which is a weak
Theory but it's never it never is going
to have a top I mean in success Artic
you can always add one more right so
okay let's look at the
reals in the reals you can't have a
continuous model arithmetic you can't
even have one where the successor
function is
continuous suppose that you had one and
really we just need successor arithmetic
which is a tiny part of P
minus um so consider the adding one
function if that's
continuous then the the range of that
map should be connected because it's a
continuous image of a connected set but
it's missing only one point because
you've just thrown out zero only so but
the reals have the property that if you
throw out one point it's not
connected so that's a
contradiction so right so if you look at
all all the the image of the successor
map the image of the whole space under
the successor map should be connected
because the image of a connected space
is connected the image of a connected
space under a continuous function is
connected but in the reals if you omit a
point it's not connected anymore it
always is
disconnected okay so that handles the
reals it doesn't handle the plane though
because in the plane you can omit a
point it is still
connected but it does work with the long
line uh okay sometimes in the long line
you have a least element so you'd have
to emit two if you have a long line and
you emit any two elements then it's
disconnected so you just add two instead
of adding one but it's the same
idea okay so if you if you become
disconnected after deleting any finite
many k points then that argument is
going to show you can't have a
continuous model but I I I missed that
is that because it's the long line
rather than by direct or yeah I mean
normally I think when people say the
line they mean the one directional yeah
the positive long okay yeah but the
previous argument works with the
bidirectional long line um or it works
with the one directional long line but
you just have to add two instead of
adding
one
yeah okay uh
right so here's a different
argument so if you have these two
properties if you have an uncountable
connected space but it has no descending
Omega one sequence of connected
subspaces uh and there's no partition of
the space into uncountably many disjoint
connected uncountable subspaces and the
reals have
that then you can't have a topological
model of
arithmetic you can probably guess which
of those two arguments was the first
one I mean this is our first argument of
course and then the other one of adding
one and omitting a point it makes it so
obvious okay so let me just briefly give
this argument um so case
one uh if the model has an increasing
Omega 1 sequence of numbers then we can
look at these sets which are a nested
Omega one sequence of
connected
subspaces and that violates the first
condition in case two otherwise there
must be some number D with Omega one
many
predecessors you know and in that case
we can look at modular arithmetic at the
residues and depending on the residue
we're going to get a partition into
uncountably many connected sub
uncountable subspaces and that violates
the second
condition okay let's just
proceed every topological model of
arithmetic has a continuous pairing
function and by that I mean a continuous
injection not necessarily bje but
injection and the reason is just can's
pairing function of course canos pairing
function in arithmetic is a
bje but it has this 1/2 in it and
dividing by two might not be continuous
in fact we can prove that sometimes it's
not continuous so you can't divide by
two but if you just get rid of that
factor of a half and and and then add 2
m instead of M so this is twice the
caner pairing function so it's an
injective pairing function not bjective
it's the range will be the even
numbers um uh and this is a a polinomial
so it's continuous if if if the model
was continuously
presented okay so from that you can use
to rule out the r to the
NS in any find mention you can't have a
continuous model arithmetic on R to the
n and the reason is that if you look at
the continuous pairing function then
this is giving you a continuous
injection from R to the 2 N to R to the
N but there can't be any such thing uh
if you look at topological Dimension
Theory you can't you can't ever have a
continuous injection from a higher
Dimension to a lower
one but the pairing function would be
like that so there for you can't have a
continuous model arithmetic on
R okay so be space so does be space uh
support a topological model of
arithmetic uh or what about this space
or any uncountable polish space uh and
we don't know the answers to this these
are all
open but you can see them as motivated
by this sort of classic result for any
consistent countable first order Theory
you can always represent it in be space
using F Sigma or G Delta relations so
continuity is a kind of stronger version
of that and this is where where the
question originally came from and the
reason why Ali originally asked the
question um was because of this kind of
thing so can we improve this classic
result to continuous from merely F
Sigma and uh of course if you have a
continuous function then the graph is
closed so it's F Sigma um graph of the
the fun the graph of the function will
be F Sigma but continuity is stronger
than okay so let's talk about the
difficulty of Capal likee models so if a
model of arithmetic is continuously
presented on an uncountable polar space
then you can't have an increasing or
decreasing Omega 1 sequence in
particular you can't do it with a Kappa
likee
model and the reason is that if addition
is continuous then the order will be
analytic Sigma 1
one but there's deep theorems that show
no analytic order can have increasing or
decreasing chains of length
Omega I'm sorry did I miss the
definition of Kappa like Kappa like
means that it's a model of size Kappa
but all the initial segments have size
less than ah right
okay so in particular every every Omega
one like model will have an increasing
Omega one sequence in it
right okay but you can have uncountable
models that don't have that property
there sort of uh all the points have
sort of all the cut of co- finality
Omega
basically okay uh so just to summarize
so every model of arithmetic admits a
continuous presentation with respect to
these topologies of course we always get
the discreete indiscrete topology is
because every function is continuous
with respect to those ones and we get
the rational line as computed in
m and also you can handle the initial
segment topology so that's the topology
it's not house stor but the topology
whose open sets of the initial segments
of m m is ordered right it's a model of
arithmetic so it has an order and we
take the initial segments of M as open
sets Okay so that's a sort of cinsky
like topology you know the
um and this is the final segment
topology and uh for three and four the
key to to show that say you're
continuous with respect to the initial
segment it means
that if a plus B is in a certain initial
segment then it suffices to take A and B
in certain initial segments and then
you're going to guarantee that the sum
is in that initial segment the same kind
of argument about the final segment so
it has to do with a sort of monotone
nature it's definitely doesn't work if
in the integers for example where when
you multiply by negative you're
switching the order and so it's not it's
not monotone in that way but in models
of PA it's monotone and so you get you
get these sort of extra kinds of
topologies now if if
you about the previous slide sure this
four do you use anything beyond PA
except this like ordered semi- rang
stuff
uh I don't know exactly what we use but
I don't think it's very much at all yeah
I think that's right yeah it should be
very weak thank
you I think in the paper we were careful
to State exactly what you need but for
this talk I I was just assuming PA
everywhere but I think you're totally
right about
that okay if m is a topological mod
arithmetic then m is upward homogeneous
meaning that if a is less than b in in
in the arithmetic
then you can continuously map A to B
okay of course you just you just add the
difference right and that's that's
adding a constant so it's continuous
okay so that's a level of
homogeneity um but it follows that if
you have an isolated point then all the
smaller numbers are also
isolated okay so if you have if the
topology ever has an isolated point then
everything less has to also be isolated
because of
that so
now suppose m is the topological model
of arithmetic and you fix an element B
and now let's change the topology we're
not going to change the arithmetic but
we're going to change the topology to
make every number up to B isolated so we
have it we have M we fix some B and just
make declare all these points to
be open as Singleton sets so they're all
now isolated so you generate a new
topology and that's M Star
and you can show that it's still
continuous addition and multiplication
are still continuous as long as you did
it on an initial
segment um and the point is just that
the pre-image of a small value is also
small so if you ever were affected by
these isolated points then the way that
you're affected are also isolated and so
everything's
fine and then it it follows that
um every model of arithmetic has a
continuous presentation where dividing
by two is not
continuous because I could take say the
indiscrete
topology and then make points isolated
you know fin at many points make them
isolated but now if I was in the in the
in the indiscrete chunk of points above
then dividing by two if it brought me
below that cut off then it would violate
the continuity of dividing by two it
shows that dividing by two is not
continuous and also so subtracting one
is not continuous for the same reason
because if I'm going from in the
indiscret chunk to the isolated point
then I can't do that continuously so you
can't predecessor might not be
continuous
um okay I mean it's a weird topology but
it's good to know that you can't divide
and you can't subtract necessarily
unless you have some other reason why
that should be continuous
okay so is there a topological model
arithmetic having no continuous bje okay
we were kind of
irritated that Canter's pairing function
has to divide by two which is not
continuous necessarily but we can't
prove that there's no continuous bje in
these
models um so in the model I described I
think there is
one uh but uh maybe there's some other
model
in which uh there's no continuous
projection we don't know the answer to
this
question okay now in countable spaces
let's see so what are the countable
topological spaces that we can realize
well we we can realize the rationals
every every countable nonstandard model
is continuous with respect of the
rationals but also we can make the
rationals with Finly many isolated
points because I can I can just make
points isolated at using that process I
could also make infinitely many isolated
points if it's a non-standard model I
can make say all the standard numbers
isolated in the other
ones just using the the regular order
the the final digits order on for
example also the countable discrete
metric space of course if I make every
Point
iolated okay so the main theorem gives q
and the the topology blending ideas give
these other uh spaces but one thing to
notice is that the standard model cannot
use three We cannot put the standard
model on space three because of this
fact if a point is isolated everything
less than it is isolated so if there are
infinitely many isolated points then all
the numbers have to be isolated for the
standard model and so therefore this
answers the question if you if a space
realizes a a model of PA does it realize
all of them and the answer is no because
here's a space that has all the
non-standard models but it doesn't have
the standard model continuously
presented so that's a negative answer to
that question I asked
initially um okay if I have a
topological model arithmetic then so is
mstar where this is a new topology
generated from the old by taking all
initial segments so so now I don't just
add isolated points up to something I
just take I add the initial segment
topology all the way up so I take the
old open sets and then I throw in a
bunch of new open sets namely the
initial segments and I generate a
topology that way and it's going to be
still continuous with respect to that
topology also I could add the final the
final segments if I wanted to instead
and it's going to be continuous for the
respect of that topology
also okay so the final digits topology
already makes all the final segments
open okay so here's a
a topology that's going to realize all
the non capik
models so namely so I'm going to give
you a space of size Kappa that
continuously supports exactly the
nonappa like models of
arithmetic so let X be the indiscrete
space so that's the one where the only
open sets are empty and everything you
know and plus Kappa many isolated points
so I've got a big chunk plus Kappa any
isolated
points now I can't I can't ever realize
a kepik model because I have Kappa many
isolated points so they would have to be
unbounded in the model but therefore all
the points would have to be isolated
because anything less than an isolated
Point has to be isolated so no capik
model is realizable here but any non-cap
like model is realized because it's
continuous with respect to the industry
topology and then I can just pick a
point with capam many predecessors
because it's not like and make all those
points isolated and now I've got this
topology so this is a space that
realizes some of the models of size Capa
but not all of
them and now I've got another space that
realizes all the other ones namely the
ones that all the capik models okay and
the the the space is just like this take
any capik model M and then use the
initial segment topology on M so that's
a topological space now and you can
argue that uh every model that's
continuous with respect to that topology
will have to be Capal like I don't want
to give the argument because it's a
little finicky but you use the main fact
that you're using is that the open sets
are linearly ordered by
inclusion and uh and you can use that to
argue that any other um any other model
in which the operations are continuous
will have to be capitalized
so we have now two spaces of size Kappa
so that this space has continuous
presentations for all the non-ap like
models and the other space has
continuous presentations for all the
kaik models so it's sort of partition of
the models of size Kappa depending on
this topological
presentation so of course if you do that
when Kappa is Omega then you're really
identifying a a a topological Space X so
that the only the standard model is
realized on X has a continuous
presentation on X namely it's just the
initial segment topology on the standard
model then by the argument I just
described another model is going to be
continuously presented if and only if
it's Omega like but the only Omega like
model of PA is the standard
model but in particular this answers the
question of detecting the theory because
I now I've got a topological space so
that only the standard mod model is
continuously presented on it and so in
particular I can't realize any Theory
except for the theory of true arithmetic
I mean I've not only detected the theory
I've detected the model itself and
there's only one the standard
model okay so if I have a model well we
don't know it's those previous arguments
seem to be suggesting that if a model of
arithmetic is continuously presented
with respect to the initial segment
topology of another then maybe they
would have to have the same order the
order might be isomorphic but we the
proof doesn't quite give that to us but
it it suggest it's very suggestive that
maybe that's true and that would be a
kind of explanation of it of course I
think models arithmetic can have the
same order without being isomorphic as
models of
arithmetic I mean that just follows
because you can't Define plus and times
from the order but uh
right maybe you can get it for capik
models I'm not quite
sure okay
[Music]
so right oh I see what am I saying here
right oh yeah all the accountable
non-standard models have the same order
type of course if they're non-standard
and the and the standard one has the
only other order type okay let's see so
um right so let's go I guess I'm almost
done
so every model of arithmetic of size at
most Continuum can be continuously
presented using a Subspace of the plane
and this is a consequence of the fact
that in fact every such model is a sub
is a submodel of the complex numbers
every model of arithmetic of size at
most Continuum is a submodel of the is a
sub ring I'm sorry is a sub model of the
complex number
field and that's due to Joseph um oh my
God maybe one of the I don't know how to
pronounce his name milch milch thank you
very much Roman okay so uh so what you
do is you start with M and you take its
integers of course m is a sub model of
its integers and then that's a sub ring
of its rational field and then you can
take the algebraic closure of that field
that gives you an algebraically close
field of characteristic zero um and uh
then if it wasn't big enough oh I see
you should start with a Continuum so
first you should make it size Continuum
and then do all that now you've got an
algebraically closed field of size
Continuum and there's only one of
isomorphism because that's a categorical
Theory I mean it's uncountably
categorical so this field is isomorphic
to the complex numbers and therefore m
is the submodel of
it and furthermore because it's a
submodel and in the complex numbers plus
and times are continuous that gives us a
topolog local presentation of the
original model
M uh okay
so uh so that's it so thank you very
much I'm happy to have any kind of
questions should I start my share so we
can see each other or well wait because
there may be some questions about some
previous slides so now so now our
Strange procedure is that we clap
somehow so let's clap
than no no we clapping and it's open now
for
questions well I you can think about one
I have one
that it um so it seems like an obstacle
for continuity would be the the standard
initial segment in a nonstandard model
if you look at the rest of the model the
operations have some flavor of
continuity so have you thought of of
situations where we can represent the
the the chunk the non-standard you know
we just chop off the standard cut and
look at the rest and see if this has a
representation on some topological Space
by neglecting the standard part oh I see
would it make any guess in a sense the
topology blending arguments sort of have
that flavor because you're sort of you
can make the standard numbers all
isolated for which is a way of excising
that oh I see you can just yeah right
right I see but it's going the other
direction from what you're requesting
because right right starting with a
topological model and then saying well
we can also chop off the standard part
and make them all isolated but but I was
thinking in terms of the negative
results of things that you cannot do in
certain kind of spaces but maybe if you
forget about the standard CH chunk maybe
you could right yeah I don't know I I we
haven't really thought about that that's
a very interesting proposal so I want to
think more about that I just don't know
the answer to that yeah so you want to
prove that maybe sort of like almost
Contin meaning that as long as you're
operating only on non-standard numbers
then it's continuous but you don't so
the Restriction to the non-centered part
would be continuous is what you're
asking for yeah okay that's interesting
I don't I don't
know oh can anyone hear me yes yes oh
yeah this is Ken I can't see me but you
can hear me uh yeah uh a question about
the Ada Alpha orderings the house do
orderings yes yeah now as I remember it
going way back there used to be there
were theorems that say that for real
close fields if the ordering is an ADA
Alpha ordering then the fields any two
fields that have the same Ada Alpha
ordering are
isomorphic can you say anything like
that with these when you use an a to
Alpha ordering does that give you some
some version of
isomorphism um or whatever uh
homeomorphism when you map your
structures onto versions of the
irrationals that look like an ADA to Alp
of ordering well I don't think you're
going to make a conclusion like that
because the theorem here is is
basically uh um all the saturated models
are going to be realized but they won't
all be isomorphic they could have
different theories and so on and um and
so I don't think going to be able to
prove uh well maybe you could prove that
their orders are isomorphic or something
but I mean because we're getting every
single saturated model of size Al of
alpha on that space a to Alpha that's
what the corer is giving us right
right but but those models won't even be
elementarily equivalent to each other so
they can't be
isomorphic and uh but maybe yeah I'm not
sure what I don't know is okay although
the space is the topological space is in
order
topology I'm I'm not sure how deeply
connected that is with the order of the
model certainly it's not connected
directly with the with the arithmetic
order of the model it is conceivably
connected with the order of the final
digits order of the model or the which
is which is the same as the rational
order of the
model so maybe one could hope to prove
that that those borders have to be um
isomorphic I mean I guess they would be
if they're saturated so I guess maybe a
conceivable line of attack on that would
be to show if I have a model of PA and
it's continuously presented on a to
Alpha then its rationals must be
saturated and I don't know if that's
true or not um it seems plausible uh
then the orders of the models would all
be the same they would all be the same
as Ada Alpha in that Cas I mean that the
rational orders of the model
thank
you so I have a question about to what
extent this is about plus and times in
particular so you're divided by two
counter example shows that just having
plus some time continuous won't give you
all Delta zero functions
continuous do you know if something like
that is possible you could have a top
logical presentation where all like
Delta zero functions are
continuous oh oh uh oh I see you want
not just plus and times to be continuous
but all the
Deltas exponentiation or something yeah
oh I see yeah that's a really good
question uh I don't know the answer to
that question mean is exponentiation any
easier than the
general right well it might be harder is
not built zero is I okay right yes all
right so yes so but you could ask about
okay so you could ask about that also is
exponentiation continuous in my standard
model or any or just have you discussed
that question about uh trying to get
continuity there also well it seems like
it is under this like uh like final
digits order because if you want you
know the final digits of a number do you
know the final digits of two to the N uh
I guess you do because two to the N are
still Zer
right so so exponentiation I guess if
you just mean two to the end this is
continuous with respect to the final
digits order the final digits are
also no no no wait uh is that what we
want yeah I think that doesn't that show
it U right but of course one wants to
consider you know a to the b or
something right and or three to the n
and so on even though you're looking at
the final digits order in the binary
representation going on where it's like
binary then primary then quinary
I'm sorry I can't quite hear you Cameron
you're breaking up can you say it
again I but isn't it possible to
represent numbers so that the radex
varies As you move to the left I thought
there was some weird way of doing
that
maybe yeah uh I mean sure that that
wouldn't be the final digits order but
that would be a kind of generalization I
guess and uh yeah maybe that makes sense
um I'm not sure I don't know it's a
great question and I just don't know the
answer uh yeah maybe it's uh I think
it's maybe a good project so so I guess
what you want to know is sort of when
can you make all of the sort of Simply
definable
functions continuous I guess factorial
is easy
right fact if you take factorial then
it's not biased towards any particular
base so does that make it easier or
harder here is it continuous with
respect to the final digits order oh see
if you know you know the last let's see
I mean you
know well with respect to see you know
that every factorial is even and it's
also divisible by three the final digits
of of the factorial are all zero right
once you get big enough because it's a
multiple of two to the K I mean once
you're bigger than 2 to the k then the
final digits are going to of the
factorial are also going to be have k z
Zer there so that makes it continuous
doesn't it
uh because you can you can you can say
what the final digits of the answer are
if you know the final digits of the
input
sufficiently maybe let's see
maybe I have to think more about it yeah
don't quote me on any of
that yeah I don't know uh but also
factorial and exponentiation aren't um
well uh yeah let's see so yeah I guess
what's the right class of functions I
mean you said Delta zero definable but
maybe one wants
like or something
or all the Primitive recursive functions
continuous isn't that obvious
[Music]
somehow if you have a a curing machine
with a tape you only need
to certain fin list segment to
Output no because the turning machine
might want to see the whole input before
it starts doing anything interesting
right okay that's true
this
finite yeah right exactly that but
that's what we're talking about right so
yeah maybe making all computable
functions continuous that would be a
kind of super super continuous
presentation I don't know if it's
possible I mean no it's quite
interesting
though yeah how far can you push it
what's what's the class yeah this is
great I love those questions yeah I have
no idea though yeah really great
questions but you have a computable
viction between the rationals in the
model and the model itself so I mean
could you sort of use that to build a
continuous function that is purposely
not continuous somehow I
mean well what to are you thinking about
the final digits topology or yeah I'm
thinking about the final digits topology
you have access to that sort of in the
computable world and you can kind of
play with it in some sense you can make
a step function there right that's what
I'm kind of thinking and it's going to
be definable it's going to be lowlevel
definable is that yeah I think that's
basically going to refute it right there
yeah it's even for Delta zero right
there's going to be a Delta zero
definable step function on the the
rationals of the model and that is order
isomorphic with the final digits order
and therefore the model is going to be
able to define a discontinuous function
on the final digits order you know
that's I think that's great Corey yeah
that basically answers that question I
think yeah great yeah but but maybe you
know going back to expanation all that
it's like can you make it so that all of
the functions in a fifth grade textbook
are continuous or something like that
yeah right I think there's probably a
quite Rich collection of functions that
you can posit that you can get the
positive result for and the question is
how far can you push
that uh which natural class of functions
can you make continuous say with respect
to the final digits order which I view
as a natural topology to be looking at
for this kind of question although one
can you know change the topology to
something else if you want um yeah so
one would want I guess exponentiation in
effect and so all those kind of
functions can I ask about the connection
between the topology of picking out
theories uh because I thought that that
was pretty interesting um uh so right
now it seems like you can you can
essentially pick out the standard model
and all others right all other countable
models um which which which gets almost
at that question but it but but it's
really more just about the St standard
versus non-standard yeah um so is there
any thought about what uh like is there
a topological space which uh supports
one and only one like all completions of
a particular all countable completions
of of a model PA and only those or
something like yeah that's a great
question and we tried to do that but it
seems to be really hard and so sort of
this you're totally right about
objecting to that answer because it's
not really satisfactory it's not about
the theory it's really just about the
standard model so we can topologically
we can make a distinction between
standard and non-standard and we can
also make a distinction between Capal
like and non-ap likee and those two
distinctions are sufficient to answer
those questions that I asked but uh it's
really not satisfactory as you said
because one would want maybe a more
robust way of answering the question
about the theory would be that you know
you
can like if you have Kier then like a
certain to hard to believe right how
could that
possibly so so maybe about that question
if you if you are in a non-standard
model it has lots and lots of initial
segments that are models of all kind of
completions of PA so once you have a
continuous representation for this model
it comes together with representations
for all those others and so that would
be make it very difficult to sort of
isolate those that wouldn't really go in
this category I see you mean some
theories imply that there are cuts
right exactly exactly you know all those
embedding theorems that you can actually
you know in a nonstandard model embed
continue initial segments that are
models for continue many different
completions so this one I see that's
really quite interesting yeah maybe
that's an Avenue to answer some of these
questions you know I don't I don't know
the answer to the question we only have
those two distinctions and I find it not
really very satisfactory and so this
really uh please give it a shot you know
try to yeah right so so there are the
sorry sorry go ahead go ahead I was GNA
say this is um that might have answered
my my other question I was going to also
ask about like maybe you could is it
possible to do the same thing just for
for another theory right um do do the
same thing in the sense of it's a
topological space that supports exactly
one model um that's not standard um but
like exactly one mod for for
and then maybe it picks out a different
so the answer is no it's clearly no
yeah yeah I would find it hard to
believe but are you saying you have a
proof Roman or well by that argument
because once you have a topological
representation for a model then it so
you just cut it to representations of
those initial segments I think yeah but
that's a different space right so if
you're going to the Subspace maybe
you're getting that other space oh oh I
see I see a different space that's um
that's a Subspace right right would it
be I well the question is no babbe there
all kind of things to consider if you
take submodels of a given model or Cuts
how does it you know what kind of space
are you getting on the other side is it
isomorphic that the one you started with
or is it is it something properly
different right yeah I think it's really
a rich colelection of questions there I
think that's true that's true
okay so are there
[Music]
any
questions uh if not well then then let's
thank Jo again it was great talk much to
think about and U I just want to uh say
that uh we do not have any talks uh
planned after this one so unless uh we
get some volunteers or unless I hear
from some people that have been invited
but havn't responded yet uh we'll take a
break and uh watch for the announcements
for future uh seminars little later
