you're listening to the great
simplification I'm Nate Hain on this
show we describe how energy the economy
the environment and human behavior all
fit together and what it might mean for
our future by sharing insights from
Global thinkers we hope to inform and
Inspire More Humans to play emergent
roles in the coming great
simplification I'd like to welcome
climate scientist Leon Simons to the
program Leon most recently was a
co-author of James Hansen at all's paper
global warming in the pipeline Leon is
also a board member of the Dutch chapter
of Club of Rome most specifically what
we're going to talk about today is
Leon's contribution to this paper which
is um breaking out the in missions and
the aerosol contribution from Human uh
activities a aerosols and Emissions have
been going up in tandem but the aerosols
are masking the expected warming from uh
the thermal uh impact of a higher energy
imbalance uh Leon looked at how Global
ships now have new regulations to reduce
the sulfur uh particulate emissions and
when that happened in the globing ship
Global shipping routes measured by
satellites the ocean temperatures went
up they were absorbing more heat because
there was less uh aerosol masking so
this is a difficult conversation because
the implications are that we're about to
have more warming in the pipeline than
expected uh and also because Leon is a
is a scientist and um had scientific
answers uh which were quite dense um and
yet it's a very important hypothesis to
put out there on how human particulate
aerosols have been masking uh the
warming so far please welcome Leon
[Music]
Simons Leon
Simons how are you today I'm good how
are you doing I'm good I am nervous for
this conversation
nothing you say will change what's
happening in the world the physical
climate world but what you say may act
as a bunker Buster to my prior
assumptions of my own analysis of the
future and I'm nervous because I expect
I know the things that you're going to
say because I've watched and read some
of your materials so let me preface this
conversation by saying this you are a
climate scientist but you're also a
human that cares about our future and
you're also a human that's living during
this time so you like many of us wear
three different Hats part of our problem
is that a lot of people merge the
science and the response on various
things and it ends up being muddled I'm
going to break this interview into three
pieces and the first piece I want you to
where your scientist at and then you can
speculate in the second piece about the
future and responses and then finally
I'll ask you some personal questions so
we have a lot to unpack can you start
out with your broad expertise your
particular specialty in in climate
research and maybe a couple minute
umbrella of your your main thesis yeah
so my expertise originates from first
traveling the world and trying to
understand our impact on the world which
I did After High School when I was 19
years old I Tred a will because I I knew
things were changing rapidly and I
wanted to understand them and then I
started studying I wanted to change the
world for the better by studying
tropical forestry but what I've seen in
developing countries where that about
three billion people still use biomass
for cooking and I saw that this can
cause rapid deforestation and change the
place where people live and destroy the
environment so then I decided to drop
out of school and to start my social
business focusing on developing Clean
Energy Technologies especially around
cooking for Ethiopia and then but in the
meantime I've always kept up to date
with the science I got involved with a
think tank called the club of Rome in
the Netherlands and then through that I
kept always working on the doing
research both on the science but also
visiting climate conferences and trying
to understand this changes that are
happening and while doing that I learned
that the most biggest uncertainty in
climate science is the effect of small
dust particles both natural like sea
salt or desert dust but also
anthropogenic so human caused dust these
are called aerosols and they change how
much sunlight is reflected by the planet
by directly reflecting sunlight but they
also interact with water vapor in the
atmosphere this water vapor condenses to
these Aerosoles and then clouds form and
without these particles there wouldn't
be any clouds so I learned that this is
a crucial aspect within climate science
and also the biggest uncertainty because
it's so uncertain how clouds respond to
these particles but then you see that in
the communication and in the about
science it's very rarely this aspect is
being discussed and yeah I think we'll
get to that but I think that's I started
looking into that and then I found that
in 2019 I learned that in 2020 there
will be this very big policy change over
the oceans of reducing sulfur in the
fuels and that that would change how
much sulfur is being emitted and sulfur
is a very important aspect of sulfate
particles which are the strongest
cooling agent of our climate and I got
into touch with James Hansen and I
explained to him what was happening
first he was skeptical about it then I
explain the the science and and the
policy and how this is implemented and
then he asked me to do the research with
him on that and that's how this I got
more involved into the science uh and I
started spending more time on it so so
and that led to you being a co-author of
the recent paper Hansen at all global
warming in the pipeline which I've read
and is terrifying to say the least could
you give just an overview of the main
thrust of that paper and then we're
going to unpack the aerosol component
yeah sure it's a very big paper and it
and it brings together many different
fields within the science and the
co-authors uh represent different fields
which which come together so there for
example Norman L is a scientist from
NASA he he has the series team which
provide the satellite data which we use
in the paper and but the paper also
looks at the Paleo climate for example
so all these different parts of the
climate system the different uh Sciences
to understand all these different parts
come together and that they they they
strengthen the findings from one part of
the paper to the other so what we
learned for example from pale data that
it was much with a less strong climate
forcing the effect on climate was
stronger than was previously thought
that's what we learned from the climate
data from millions of years ago but then
also if you look at thousands of years
ago for example after the last glacial
maximum so the The Ice Age so to say how
fast the planet warmed and how long it
stayed warm and what caused that of
course we can learn from air bubble
captured in IE sheets and to see what
the greenhouse gas concentrations are
and then if we look at how the climate
changed over time some models don't
understand what's happening for example
the models look at the greenhouse gas
con they take into account greenhouse
gas concentration of the past say 6,000
years and the climate should be warming
instead there has been a slight cooling
if you look at the climate proxies so
some other scientists analyze the
climate of the past 6000 years from
three rings Etc and then they noticed a
slight cooling especially over the
northern hemisphere what we looked at is
for example the aerosols so these these
particles I talked about might have been
cooling the planet while these
greenhouse gas have been causing warming
for of the planet and then these two
effects these two forcings they interact
and then there's a net has been a net St
more or less stable or a bit cooling
climate while these greenhouse gases
kept increasing and there increase in
greenhouse gases from rudon at all that
research shows that it might be or could
likely be because humans spread across
the planet and started deforesting the
world and they started producing rice
which creates methane and this
deforestation of course results in CO2
entering the atmosphere and these
effects of course increase the
greenhouse gas concentration especially
if you compare it to other interg
glacial so other warm periods after a
glacial and after an ice stage so we
would expect it now if you look at just
this the greenhouse gas constraints you
should expected to the planet to warm up
until the pre-industrial times but now
we see that the planet so the proxy show
that the planet has been cooling down
instead and then of course the
Industrial Revolution happened and then
there was a big increase in greenhouse
gas emissions but also an increase in in
aerosols and so the implications of the
Hansen paper and the conclusions and
implications yeah what we show with the
the paper led by James Hansen is that
the rate of warming is already
increasing so the planet is now warming
faster than it was in the recent decades
we show that through the satellite data
mainly that the rate of planetary heat
uptake is rapidly increasing and that is
mainly caused by this the planet
absorbing more sunlight and does not
because the sun is starting to shine
brighter but that's because there's less
light being reflected and that's because
there's less clouds there's less
aerosols and there's less ice and snow
reflecting the sunlight and the cloud
effect includes the effect of these
aerosols but there's of course
uncertainty by how much and that's what
this data helps us this is the greatest
uncertainty in climate science this data
helps us and the re the so the the data
from what we call a inadvertent aerosol
experiment of rapidly reducing the
sulfur emissions this helps us to reduce
the uncertainties within the climate
science and then while we're reducing
these uncertainties it shows together
with all the other data I I already
talked about it it shows that the
warming from greenhouse gases is
stronger very likely is stronger than we
thought before because aerosols cooled
more and the glacial periods were cooler
than we thought that means that the the
change from greenhouse gas constraints
is also stronger the forcing effect is
stronger so the greenhouse gas will warm
more if the aerosols cooled more and
then that means that we can expect maybe
a few degrees it's like what you call a
gunkan experiment so more a thought
experiment what would happen if the
greenhouse gas would stabilize at
current rate of course that's not what's
happening at the moment the greenhouse
gas are rapidly increasing and the
aerosols are rapidly decreasing but
we look at what would happen if
hypothetically the the greenhouse gas
concentration would
stabilize but and with and without
aerosols and then we could have four to
five degrees warming by the end of the
century and then further in the future
that's of course Very hypothetical
because greenhouse gas concentrations
will not stay at the at at this very
rate indefinitely but then we could see
8 to 10 degrees celsus of warming but
that means that if all the ice sheets
around the planet would melt and and one
thing to take into account there is that
also the sun is shining brighter and
brighter over millions of years so after
about 50 60 million years the sun is
shining about one and a half wats more
brighter over time so the greenhouse gas
concentration of 50 million years ago is
only part of the story compared to today
yeah I didn't think about that so the
petm mass extinction due to volcanic
activity
that took thousands and thousands of
years that happened when the sun was
less bright so if we have the same CO2
in the atmosphere from our volkswagons
and Volvos instead of volcanoes that's
going to be meeting a brighter Sun as
well so a higher sensitivity could be
presumed yeah you have to take that into
account indeed so this is horrible news
because there's two phenomenon and we've
been focused on one let me unpack what
you just said and and throw it back with
some questions
so humans burn stuff and the resulting
CO2 and and methane act as a thermal
blanket on the planet absorbing more
infrared heat and ultimately heating the
Earth because there's a higher energy
imbalance and we've recognized that and
we're we're focused on that and we're
worried about that some people who don't
believe in climate change point out
things like the little ice age or why
isn't the climate warming because you
have all this CO2 there's not the
correlation that you thought and there's
stories like that out there but what
you're saying is there were two
phenomenon and two things that humans
were doing in addition to the Sun and
other natural things that were
offsetting forcings the CO2 but then the
aerosols that were created long long ago
you mentioned up to 6,000 years ago from
burning of forests or riding horses and
kicking up dust and anything that humans
do and that that particulate matter
heightened the reflectivity of
clouds and reflected more of the
incoming sunlight in back into space so
that we didn't warm the planet as much
as the CO2 science would have predicted
is that correct yeah what you started
off saying is that this is not taken
into account the AR but it is you know
so for for recent climate the changes
since the Industrial Revolution since
let's say
1750 there is the the ipcc for example
especially the part of the ipcc report
so it's a very big report for the most
recent one for example it's split up in
three parts and then the a synthesis
report but the first part aerosols are
an important part of that because
otherwise without these aerosols you
cannot understand the changes that are
happening as you already as you just
described but of course the scientists
who are trying to they do take this into
account and I can show that effect with
one of my slides for example the sure
it's uh there's this slides showing the
main drives of global warming and that's
from the ipcc uh assessment six
assessment report from a summary of
policy makers and I've taken out the two
main drivers and if you see it on the
left it says a toal total human
influence that's up to about 2019 and it
shows about 1.1 degrees Celsius of
warming globally since the Industrial
Revolution so since since 1750 I think
this is or 1850 and then there's one bar
which shows that there's about one
degree warming from Ro mix green gases
and then one might think okay why does
it why didn't it one 1.5° CI yet and
that's the main cause of that is the
emissions of sulfur sulfur deoxide which
cooled the planet by about half a degree
that's and with a very large uncertainty
so that's for this ipcc estimate saying
that there's a half degree cooling from
sulfur but with an uncertainty range of
about 0.2 to 0.9 degrees and that solve
for cooling to date so that doesn't take
into account the present energy
imbalance so if all these concentration
of greenhouse gas and sulfur emissions
and all the other particles would stay
the same they would still be warming
because there's still an imbalance
there's an energy imbalance so there's
still more energy coming in than going
out so until there's a balance then
there will be no more additional warming
still there's more heat radiation going
out and sunlight being absorbed there's
no balance so the ipcc does include
aerosols in their math but you think
that the cooling effect the dampening
effect of what we would have seen as
warming is larger than the ipcc core
models so before we started this
research we didn't think anything really
we just saw thought okay this
uncertainty which ipcc shows in their
graphs and in their text this
uncertainty is so large it's a lar
especially with the interaction of
particles these aerosol particles and
clouds it's a largest uncertainty within
climate science so it's important to
reduce this uncertainty to understand
how our climate will change and this
natural experiment which I'll talk about
of rapidly decreasing the sulfur
emissions over the oceans by
80% that provides climate science with a
experiment a natural like we call
inadvertent experiment to reduce this
uncertainty and to understand what the
real warming effect of greenhouse gases
is and how fast do you see a response if
you stopped aerosols how fast is the
cooling masking disappear and we see
warming yeah so the effect we we see a
direct effect so you would expect for
example these particles these particles
stay in the atmosphere for for days to
weeks so when they R they rain out
because it's it's solid and liquid
particles compared to greenhouse gases
the name says it it's which are gases
which stay in the atmosphere until they
react with other gases but then the
aerosols they rain out as I mentioned
they they cause cloud formation and they
interact with clouds and they rain to
the ground and then they are out of the
atmosphere and their effect is gone but
then how long does it take for to so we
expect it this to cause a forcing change
so this cooling effect of these
particles to reduce right away but then
it takes time of course for the system
to respond so if you take these
particles out of the atmosphere the sun
will shine instead of it will that it
will reflected it will be absorbed by
the oceans and then but of course it
takes a long time for the oceans to heat
up because it's a very large mass of of
water with a high thermal capacity so it
takes a lot of heat toat heat up and
once it heats up of it it also
influences the climate as well with
because if it's warmer there's also a
change in clouds because there's less
Cloud condensation and clouds evaporate
faster so all these feedbacks These are
feedbacks which also take time to come
into effect there's more evaporation so
there's more water vapor in the
atmosphere which also causes warming but
also if plant heats up there's more
thermal radiation so that reduces the
warming so all these different aspects
should be taken into account and now we
are learning after now we have about
three almost four years of data of what
happens when you reduce the aerosol
emission or the the sufur emissions over
the oceans by about 80% and that's the
data has been coming in of course we've
only had mainly had three years of La
ninja another aspect is a negative
Pacific decadal oscillation which our
cothon noral L wrote a paper about where
he says okay if this specific de G
oscillation will be negative we expect
the Earth's energy imbalance to decrease
but it has been increasing instead so
that's also a worrying sign that the
effect might be even stronger so you
could I want you to unpack what happened
with the sulfur uh emissions but let me
just ask a question on what you just
stated this kind of is a testable
hypothesis because if we don't have the
sulfur emissions from Shipping the way
we used to so that we have less
particulate m
and the dampening forcing is is less and
we shift into a El
Nino we can predict right with high
confidence that we're about to have
another spike in temperatures like in
the next six months as we move into El
Nino yeah so that's what we also show in
our paper and in other communication
that we expect this ELO because it we
now have entered an ELO and we are now
starting what we've seen this year is in
part an ELO but more even just the end
of linia so L alino it's a cycle in the
in the Pacific Ocean where the the
equatorial Pacific sorry um serf sea
surface temperatures increase and they
result in during Alo it increase and it
results in net Global higher
temperatures and during a linia the sea
surface temperatures in Equatorial
Pacific are lower and that translates
generally to lower Global surface a
temperatures so we have had three years
of lania and and three years of lower
emissions too I mean not not carbon
emissions sulfur sulfur lower sulfur
emissions indeed but also higher
greenhouse gas concentration increase
especially with methane nitrous oxide so
there's there's of course many things
happening that's the problem with all
this isn't it it's this giant
10-dimensional jigsaw puzzle that people
people focus on one piece of it then
that's just climate and then there's
economy and geopolitics and money and
energy and I mean the the whole thing is
our species can't figure it out so you
also have these environmental
regulations which and health regulations
which I'm now talking about with the
from the shipping but we do know where
these ships are going so if you look at
again at this this graph I was showing
on slide three I think slide three yeah
so where you see the main drives of
global warming on the left and as you
see on the right you see the sulfur
deoxide from The anthropogenic sulfur
deoxide emissions and there you see that
these emissions over the oceans over the
Northern Hemisphere especially over the
North Atlantic and North Pacific Oceans
are very high so that's the yellow the
the yellows and orange swats over the
ocean yes between the the land mes of
Europe and and and North America and
what are what are the red that's
Overland like the dark red is over land
which is mainly C fire power plants
mainly C fire power
plants large sare sources and then the
kind of yellow straight lines that go
into the southern hemisphere those are
the shipping routes presumably yeah so
the the ship routes especially around
Africa you can see that there's there's
shipping routes going around Africa and
of course through the Su canal through
the Mediterranean there's there's High
ship traffic as well and and so how how
did you use this data to test your
hypothesis so let me show a different uh
this from the next slide we have this in
our paper and it's from yll who is also
a co-author of our paper this shows
total sulfat so sulfur deoxide forms
sulfates in the atmosphere the left map
shows sulfate in the
atmosphere H bar Petrol in uh volume and
then that and then you see that of
course there's a lot of sulfur again
over the Northern Hemisphere because
that's where seven of the eight billion
people live but there's also natural
sources but then on the right map shows
the sulfate from Shipping as a
percentage of the total exactly yeah
thank you so there's a indeed the P the
sulfate of shipping as a percentage of
total natural human androgenic s
sulfates so in the North Pacific it's
like 80 or 90% yeah over the North
Pacific and over the the North Atlantic
70 to 80 or 90% even at places and
that's because there's very little algae
so natural source of sulfur in the
atmosphere is from algae but algae need
nutrients so without these nutrients
there's little algae so but over the the
vast oceans there's not so much
nutrients and then so if there's no
nutrients there's no natural source of
of sulfur and then the effect of this
sulfur from ships is much stronger
because it doesn't have to compensate
with other sources of sulfur of of
aerosols also other like natural
aerosols God I mean I mean this could be
a 5H hour conversation I know your
family's coming so it it can't be but
I'm going to ask a couple of naive
questions earlier in the conversation
you said that if they if there wasn't
aerosols like sulfur there would be no
clouds yeah but we had clouds millions
of years ago so is that from the
sulfates and aerosols from algae and
phytoplankton and other natural sources
yeah so natural sources of aerosols also
create cloud of course so there's sea
Sal there's LG producing sulfur through
dthy sulfide and then other like there's
whole chemistry there which we that's
what the science is still uh learning
about how it works are there more clouds
today can you speculate or do we know
than there was 10,000 years ago because
of all the particulates that humans have
kicked up and burnt up yeah 10,000 years
ago it's of course you also have takeen
into account different temperatures and
but of course we don't know for sure
what but we do know that if you increase
the amount of particles you increase how
much condensation nucle are so there's
there's more particles for the water
vapor to condense and also especially
there's some things to consider as well
that some particles they are better for
ice Cloud for Ice Crystal formation so
there's more ice crystals forming around
sulfate particles than around sea salt
particles which you can understand
because especially in the Netherlands if
there's if put on the road we put sea
salt we put salt to keep the road from
freezing so that's an example of sea
salt reduces freezing but then the
sulfate doesn't do that and that that
for causes more crystals in clouds and
cause whiter clouds and you can see so
if you know clouds you know that white
clouds often are ice clouds and dark
clouds or more water clouds also these
rain out faster if you see Dark Cloud
you know okay often you know there's
rain coming right so these are all
things to consider to so aerosols
overall cause clouds to be bigger
brighter and longer lasting overall and
that's there again there's a lot of
uncertainty there which this this
inadvertent experiment will help to
reduce right the inadvertent experiment
of stopping or or regulating how much
sulfur emissions in our Global ships
from our Global ships yeah I'm going to
get to that in a second but let me ask
you one more naive question there's lots
of people from different stripes and
backgrounds watching this show you just
mentioned on these graphs that the
aerosols are parts per trillion one two
five the the real bright highly
concentrated are 10 parts per trillion
is that correct yeah I'm a scientist and
it's even hard for me to
conceptualize that the difference
between two parts and five parts
per
trillion can actually significantly
change the both the clouds and the
dampening effect and the albo yeah and
it's a similar thing that three four or
five parts per
10,000 on climate it can change the
thermal imbalance on Earth can you talk
to me like I'm in a sixth grader if you
see clouds that's about same order of
magnitude in particles there's very
little water condensated water inside a
cloud it's also in the in the part
petroleum uh volume level oh that's
helpful so when I see a cloud it's not
like 50% of the mass of the sky visually
it is but the the actual condensation
and particulate is in the parts per
trillion the rest is just air molecules
yeah yeah so there's or water vapor of
course so there's gas gas water VAP is
also a gas so there's that also explod
because you can see a cloud of course
but CO2 is in the part per million right
so that you can see clouds when the
concentration of water inside a certain
volume within a cloud is much less than
the concentration of greenhouse gases in
the air but you can see a cloud you
cannot see gases you cannot see
greenhouse gas but if you would be able
to see greenhouse gases if you could see
in the wavelength greenhouse gas absorb
infrared radiation it would be black the
the sky would be black because it has
much more particles green out gas in the
atmosphere than there's water inside the
cloud so let's get to this inadvertent
experiment so what happened a massive
reduction in Sulfur in global Shipping
can you uh explain Slide Five yeah
there's these emissions called sulfur
emissions which are harmful for health
and for for the environment for example
I'm from a nice town called Seton BOS in
the in the south of nland which is
beautiful cathedral and these statues on
the cathedral they they were dissolving
because of acid rain and that was mainly
because of the sulfur emissions from our
coal plants so in the 1980s there was
sulfur regulation decrease uh to reduce
the emissions from from coal plants but
over the oceans this regulation took a
long time to come into effect around
North America and around around Europe
especially the North Sea these
regulations uh have come into fact in in
the past decades and have become Tighter
and Tighter and especially in 2015 the
maximum amount of sulfur in fuels was
reduced of these areas was reduced from
1% to 0.1% so reducing the amount of
with
90% but globally there was still a lot
of sulfur being emitted but then in 2020
on January 1st 20120 the regulation
which called IMO 2020 came into effect
regulating how much sulfur is allowed to
be used over Open Seas by ships and this
decrease from Maximum of
3.5% to
0.5% as the graph showed there's a big
decrease all of a sudden a sudden
decrease in how much sulfur the ships
are allowed to carry unless they use
what we call scrubbers which wash this
sulfer from the exhaust caes so that
started in
2020 over these regions yeah so here you
can see the next slide shows since 1900
to today how much sulfur deoxide in
thousands of tons uh shipping
internationally globally was emitting
every year and that nose dived again in
2020 because of these regulations how
much of that uh international shipping
sulfur is is that of all of the sulfur
from humans a good percentage so from
the total amount of sulfur emitted
globally the shipping is about 10% or
was about at uh before 2020 it was about
at 10% and that might seem like not as
so much but as I showed you effect is
much stronger if it's emitted directly
over the oceans because there's no other
sources these ships are there all by
themselves there's there's very little
LG there's no coal plants there the they
are the only source there so if you want
to understand this effect you have to
take that into account so while the
sulfur dioxide emissions from Shipping
have been plummeting the sulfur dioxide
from coal plants in China and everywhere
around the world are continuing over
China has also been decreasing its
sulfur emissions very rapidly in the
past uh two decades especially since the
Olympics also through the installation
of these desulfuration system so all
these new go plants they have the system
which uses chalk to wash the sulfur from
the exhaust from the coal plants and
then the the product is gypsum and the
gypsum is sold on the market and then
through that it's also relatively a cost
effective way to reduce these emissions
but what I was getting at is if we had a
steep drop in Sulfur from Shipping that
still is only the rest of the world is
still producing a lot of warming masking
sulfates yeah so this is the real fan
bargain we have to presume that
Civilization
continues and as soon as it stops as
soon as the musical chairs Game Stops
and sulfates stop we have an immediate
spike in temperatures coming our way
yeah but that's already what we're
starting to see now even with just this
little stop we're seeing that yeah but
it's not a little stop I think that's
really important to understand because I
think there's been a lot of confusion
around that very understandably of
course because it's not easy it's not
easy to understand it's 10% and you
think okay it's only 10% but it's 10%
over the oceans and the oceans are 70%
of the Earth surface is Oceans but 90%
of the global heat uptake is is by the
oceans so the oceans 90% of the the heat
from global warming so global is mainly
ocean warming and then the oceans if you
reduce the forcing so the the if you
reduce the aerosols over the oceans with
80% the effect is expected to be much
stronger than if you would do the same
Overland because the oceans are dark
they have a dark surface because there's
no other aerosols to compete with and
and because there's more clouds over the
O so that these regions are much more um
and because because they take up much of
the Heat and if the sun is shining on
the oceans it's it's not just heating
the first centimeter or the first layer
of the of the surface like when the sun
is shining on the land land absorbs the
the surface the first centimeter of the
land absorbs the heat from the sun and
it radiates back as heat to space but if
the sun is shining on the water the
water the the radiation of the sun it
enters the water into a depth of about
40 m some of the radiation even deeper
so that's also important to understand
that this all contributes to the effect
of changes of aerosol s oans to be much
stronger than if you would do a globally
average reduction of this
effect so how about the next slide which
I see as slide number seven so what we
did to try and understand what's really
happening because there's just models
now before this inadvertent experiment
experiment there were just models to try
and understand what's happening but
without data the models have of course
Limited value and that was clear by the
big uncertainty between models so some
say that wouldn't be much of an effect
some say that would be a very strong
effect about equal to 10 years of
greenhouse gas emissions but we don't
know we didn't know and we still don't
fully know what the real real real world
effect will be and is and for that we
need to we we now have the experiment in
the real world where we Chang this we're
still taking shape of course and what we
did was we looked at these Northern
North Pacific Ocean and the North
Atlantic Ocean to see how much
additional sunlight is being obsorb
because there's less sunlight being
reflected by these particles by less
clouds reflecting sunlight back to space
so that means there's more sunlight
being absorbed and we compare this to
the region of the Southern Hemisphere
with the same latitudes where there's no
shipping or much less shipping so
there's also less of a forcing change
and then we see if you see the the the
the purple and the red line of course
there's variability there's this effect
on the Pacific DEC oscillation which I
mentioned which around 2016 increased
how much sunlight was being absorbed
because the oceans were warmer and there
was less cloud formation but now p is
negative so that we would expect the red
line to go much lower but it has been
increasing very rapidly and it's likely
that this is because of this change in
aerosols in in sulfate aerosols and the
same over North Atlantic after 2020 we
see a big spike a big increase in how
much sunlight is being absorbed and then
over the southern hemisphere we don't
see this happening so the difference on
this chart between the red line and the
black line the red line representing the
North Pacific and the black line the
southern oceans is around three watts
per meter squared three watts per meter
squared is like RCP 8 0.5 is8 and a half
watts per meter squared I mean that it's
a big deal three watts per meter squared
yeah so the total greenhouse gas forcing
so how much heat more or less the all
the greenhouse gas humans have put in
the into the atmosphere since
1970 uh so there CO2 but there's also
methane and nitrous oxide and but also
steric water vapor and ozone so all
these the combined effect is about four
watts per square meter okay and but it
is indeed and if you have then now a
three watts per square meter increase
over the North Atlantic and North
Pacific Oceans which are areas of 40 to
50 million square kilometers both that's
really a enormous increase in how much
heat is these oceans are absorbing and I
I can show you that of course we expect
that to increase the the ocean
temperatures and in the end I can I can
show you what we're starting to see now
with that regards okay so this graph
with the uh the showing the ocean absorb
solar radiation did you make that graph
was that your data and Discovery yeah so
this is what we presented in the the
global warming in the pipeline paper so
when you when you found this were you
like holy when you found this was
this like The Smoking Gun of fitting
together a lot of explanations that had
previously been lacking yes so again we
didn't know what would happen we didn't
know if we would see what we would be
seeing we just that so the hypothesis
was that from the from the climate
research models looking at this in the
past was that there would be the
decrease in how much sunlight is
reflected and increase in absorb solar
radiation but the very high uncertainty
and how big this effect is and now we
see indeed this Spike happening we are
now starting to see it and this is the
48 month running mean if you look at it
from the past years it's even higher so
you see that's you you see that by the
at the end of the graph it starts
increasing more even it's still spiking
so that's really indeed it's yeah you
say holy I think that's quite a
appropriate way to put it because
there's really a lot of this implies
that the cooling effect of this aerosols
was much stronger and that the warming
effect of greenhouse gases is also much
stronger than previously thought or Mo
or the best estimate let's say the best
estimates of the IP
or of a lot of climate research
underestimates this effect and of course
it's it's in the range because I showed
it's it's until now it seems to be more
or less in the range but what what
worries me because I'm I'm still not
certain that this is the end of it right
I'm not certain that this is this is how
bad it really is because the oceans are
still quite cold relatively to other
years because of we had three years of
liia and this negative PD I mentioned so
now we are starting to see what happens
with an El noino and that's what we see
is worrying because it's it's it's
that's what I mentioned this this spike
is still going up and but we still don't
know what will happen when the when the
Pacific decad oscillation this other
large cycle which takes longer to
variate we don't know what will happen
then and it might the the hypothesis
from NASA and Noah together is that it
will increase even further so that's
really worrying well I mean it's beyond
worrying yeah my scientific assessment
is that it's worrying
okay uh could you walk through the next
two graphs please uh Earth's energy IM
balance so here we're looking at the
yellow is the absorbed solar radiation
and the red is the outgoing longwave
radiation over the last 20 years or so
can you explain what this means yes so
this is the global average incoming
sorry the absorbed sunlight so there's a
about 340 watts of sunlight coming in
and about 29 or 30 to 29% of that
sunlight is being reflected back to
space and then about 240 watts per
square meter was absorbed by the planet
23 years ago okay but as the graph shows
this has increased by two watts per
square meter so the Earth is absorbing
two watts per square meter more heat
than it was 23 years ago and then that
has been uh balanced a bit only a little
bit by increase in outgoing long wave
radiation and you might think okay why
is there more Heat going out while the
greenhouse gas concentration is
increasing that's because the
temperature has been increasing without
the increase in greenhouse gas emissions
there will be about four watts per
square meter more Heat going out at the
current temperatures than we see on this
graph so it will be off the chart and it
there will be more heat being radiated
to space then there being absorbed from
the Sun but now we see so there's more
heat being absorbed than there being
radiated to space and that's you see the
the yellow part is growing bigger that
means that there's more heat is absorbed
faster so this the rate of heat uptake
is increasing and that's what the next
graph shows the rate of the which we
call the Earth's energy imbalance so the
rate of accumulation of heat is
increasing very rapidly so it was
beginning of the the century this
Millennium it was about 0.6 watts per
square meter and now it's over 1.8 watts
per square meter over the past uh let's
say two three years it's it's wor 1.5
Watts so that's re really rapidly
increasing and especially in recent
years it's been going up and up and up
so I have a um profound question to ask
here at one point in this graph the
global net heat flux the energy
imbalance was zero in around 2010 why
was that yeah then we can go back and
see that the red part was touching
almost touching the yellow part that
means that there was not much more heat
being absorbed than uh being radiated to
space is that because of the the global
recession no yeah it's it's just I think
that's mainly natural variability so
yeah and if I would take for example a
48 month mean he wouldn't see that so
it's really of course this is this is
really 12 months and there just
variability in the system so it's an
interesting question to ask and that
would yeah you could assess that right
you could do an analysis and see okay
why where was it how hot and why is that
maybe it was more hot over land which
increases the outgoing thermal radiation
but uh it was still colder over the
oceans which causes more clouds to be
over the ocean so something like that
like I would assume is my expert
judgment but that that's not really what
to look at of course it's it's more the
long-term Trend to look at and then
that's really going up right no I
understand okay so what we've learned so
far is that the Earth's energy imbalance
is increasing the climate temperature
response is not as high high as it would
be without aerosols and a big component
of those was just reduced in uh global
Shipping regulations yes without the
decrease of greenhous gas emissions
right so talk to me as if I'm a sixth
grader right now what are the big
picture implications of this and the
Hansen at all paper yeah so so what you
would think would happen if the planet
is warming or so I think there's three
things to take into account so what we
call a forcing is is greenhouse gases
are
forcing so it's the climate is pushed in
a direction where it's warming aerosols
are negative forcing and push the
climate into a direction of cooling so
we've been of course pushing the climate
into a warming State while also pushing
in the other direction so that's the
forcing agents but then what happens in
as a result of this net effect is an
imbalance so there's an and the climate
response and is warming and when it
heats up and a certain moment we expect
the new equilibrium so more as much heat
going out as going coming in as you s
show as you mentioned like okay around
2010 so if there's always around zero
there's an imbalance going around zero
then there's no more warming but now we
are faster pushing it so we stopped some
of the cooling effect so we rapid L we
we call this a termination shock of
rapidly reducing part of cooling which
causes a rapid warming effect and we
expect this to translate to of course
higher surface surface air temperatures
as well and more ice melt and more and
faster sea level rise and and so because
there's more heat in the system but we
haven't seen that yet in the past years
and that's why some are skeptical about
if this effect is real but now we're
starting with this
this additional heat is starting to
surface so if this data from NASA is
correct which it really seems it is then
that should contribute to a rapid
increase in the rate of surface warming
as well so there are two opposing camps
uh at different extremes one is all
those people especially in the United
States who think that climate change is
some great reset hoax that is not based
in science and the Earth is always
warmed and they don't believe this per
se and the other is the climate
scientists themselves who have perhaps
underestimated the role of aerosol as a
cooling forcing and and underestimated
so they you can underestimate the
cooling effect and we're starting to
learn whether this has been
underestimated and it seems it is
generally so the best estimate has most
likely more and more likely been under
estimating the warming effect of
decreasing these green these
aerosols but what's also being
underestimated is that the rate at which
these aerosols can be reduced because it
was always thought James Hansen wrote in
1990 about the effect of reducing fossil
fuel use and then there would be first
there would be warming because this
would coincide with decrease in aerosols
but now we continue the use of fossil
fuels we continue the increase in CO2
and methane going into the atmosphere
and the concentration increase but we
are rapidly reducing the amount of
sulfate aerosols and that combined that
that's of course we couldn't you every
expert who who understands this should
expect the rate of warming to increase
and that will also uh what now we're
starting to see that happening and if
that go goes on for the next years I
think that will also help some Skeptics
maybe not or some will double down on
that that that's what I was just goingon
to say is that in a horrible way this
may be a science communication Global
alert if you're
right we are going to see a spike in
temperatures next year with the change
in the PDO and a shift to El Nino on top
of lower sulfur emissions yeah and if we
don't you have something wrong in this
story I hope I'm wrong but so maybe I
can show you uh just a second this graph
I think the next graph shows a lot I
don't know if you can see it okay yeah
there's a lot of information on this but
I think it's quite clear if you if you
know what it shows so the top shows
Global emissions of sulfur deoxide over
since 1950 so we can see it have been
increasing from 1950 to 1980 the global
sulfur deoxide emissions have been inre
increasing and then it the more or less
stabilized and there was a dip and then
increased again up to 2010 and then
there was it it started to decrease and
in 2020 it started that was a big dip
the second part of the figure shows
Global ship emissions of sulfur deoxide
which show a more less steady increase
up to 2010 and then the sulfur
regulations came into effect step by
step and really coming into effect in
2020 when it nose dived and then yeah
you see that there's almost no more
sulfur being the oceans yes very sharp
drop and then I show three different sea
surface temperature monthly graphs and
uh warming stripes for the northern
hemosphere met latitude it's not only
warming Stripes also cooling Stripes
because you see they the temperature has
been decreasing since 1950 with the
increase of sulfur Co coinciding with
the increase in global but ocean sulfur
deoxide emissions yeah that's what we
would expect if there so if there's a
lot over the Northern Hemisphere M
latitudes where most of the 8 billion
people today living today live that's
where most of the cooling was from these
particles was happening and that's once
these emissions started to decrease the
warming effect of greenhouse gases was
stronger than the cooling effect of
aerosols and we see a rabid increase but
now in the recent years you see it it
has been increas ining more and more and
faster than the other region I show in
this the this the second lowest region
which is the mirror region of the north
sort of the Southern Hemisphere mid
latitude where we see only a gradual
increase in temperature over the oceans
without much of an effect of these
sulfates and then the bottom we show the
Global Effect and there you also see
that there's there wasn't much warming
in the beginning up to 1980 and then
there was a gradual the warming started
to increase and then in recent years it
started increase faster but then now in
the past now as Al coinciding with the
start of the El noo we see a big spike
again and we can expect with this
continuing decrease because there's also
other place where the suface decrease we
can expect warming to increase further
and that could also have other effects
for example the aerosols could have been
keeping the amok stronger than it would
have been without these aerosols so the
Atlantic meridon or overturning
circulation could also be impacted
indirectly by these changes in sulfate
so we really have to prepare ourselves
for a lot of very big changes to come to
our climate and weather systems we
already started seeing this in 2023 with
a lot of crazy weather uh storms that
formed within 12 hours from a storm to
five hurricane 5 hitting Acapulco in
Mexico stuff like
this the high sea surface temperatures
impacting coral reefs all these things
happening so you're you're right it
could help to open some eyes maybe some
eyes will shut even more because it's
very inconvenient to to believe this
that we are responsible for this I agree
and who should have seen this coming and
who haven't seen this coming are already
starting to bury their head deep inside
the the sandor or inside their models
and pretending this very well it affects
their their built identity and all the
decisions they've made in the world so I
want to get back to the paper but first
let me ask you this so yes if we do get
another half degree of warming and uh
even temporarily because then it'll go
back down after the El ninia starts
again in you know at some point it might
but it won't go all the way back down
probably it'll just Retreat higher highs
and higher lows sort of thing yeah maybe
but of course we don't know with with
this forcing the temperature might not
even go below
1.4 ever again global average increase
in surface at 10 temperature might it
might stay very high well ever is a long
time yeah ever okay sure but I mean for
in yeah it's good point in the next few
thousand years um yeah I like to focus
personally I I I like focusing on on
this Century because it's more it's what
we understand most and it's also what we
can impact I actually don't like
focusing on this Century I I because I
think the climate won't stop warming in
the year 2100 and I think one of the
implications of of Hansen paper where
you were a co-author is the earth system
sensitivity to a doubling in CO2 is now
based on your research much higher than
is conventionally accepted um that if we
double
CO2 there's a a transient uh equilibrium
and an earth system uh effect after all
the feedbacks are are measured and if we
only care about the transient one
because that's when we and our children
are alive we're neglecting what happens
to all the other species and ecosystems
and and the human species thousands of
years from now so yeah I agree on that
but I think also if people I think most
people don't care about that that much
and then if you want to if you want to
take that into account if you want to
the long-term effect to be less strong
or less bad it's also important to for
people to understand that the near-term
effect is is likely much worse than most
think right because most don't know
about these aerosol effects it's like in
the cop in at in in Dubai very few
people were talking about it and the
word
aerosols don't are not in the agreement
right so people are blind very blind to
the this effect so because they don't
know what if that this could impact the
overturning circulation they don't know
that this could cause really rapid
warming where where they live themselves
in the very near future and if they
would know if people would know they
might I don't know but they might to get
their together faster emphasis on
might uh let me ask I have so many
questions Leon I know your family's
coming home soon but there's a thousand
questions so first of all yes we might
say that a half degree additional
warming Celsius in the next six months
due to the combined effect of the PDO
switch and and the sulfur would be an
alarming don't look up asteroid hitting
a sign that would wake people up but on
the other side is it possible either in
the near term or in coming decades that
the positive feedbacks from nature from
uh low-lying uh methane producing areas
and some of the the feedbacks that are
triggered from warming start to make
human
emissions not the dominant story
in other words could we trade off some
alarm and political uh Awakening to this
with pushing into a higher percentage of
biological feedbacks dominating the
process yeah so there what worries me
personally is the Atlantic Ocean where
most of the heat flow from the southern
hemisphere to the Northern Hemisphere
happens through the ocean and through
the atmosphere over the Atlantic no and
then so that's transported Heat from
south to North and then if we because we
decreased the
sulfates the ocean is absorbing more
heat than it would was without and then
there's less need of heat transporting
from the south to the north and we al
already see in hypothesis I have that
that this might contribute to the
melting of Antarctic CI so faster
because there's more heat staying in the
South and which contributes to uh
melting of Antarctic CIS but also
keeping it from freezing because and
then and then if the AOK slows down of
course that could influence global
weather system could could impact the
monsoons it could impact the weather we
have in Europe it could impact the
weather all around the world so that's
really something to take into account
and and some part of the system might be
less affected by it than others but and
of course we have the Canadian Forest
another paper I was a co-author of this
year by Ripple at all showed that
present also the different things
happening to the climate system this
year and one enormous spike in Forest
burning over Canada was part of this and
it's really really off the chart
combined with the sea surface
temperatures and the surface
temperatures and the Antarctic SE eyes
and I think it's already very worrying
without even without what we might
expect happening in the in the years to
come and yeah how people will respond to
that do you feel some Vindication that
you've been devoting a lot of your
life's energy to researching this and
and now it turns out that what you've
been writing about and talking about for
the last 20 years is is happening or is
it kind of bittersweet because Humanity
just didn't do anything yeah so it's
very in a way of course it's for
everyone it's personal right if my
country is uh 30% of my country is
already below sea level and right that's
increasing so I might lose my country
because of this so yeah I was right but
I lost my country yeah exactly so I
rather be wrong I think that's that's
important so but the whatever people say
I think the data
shows that it's likely worse than most
people think and I I cannot argue with
the data I can try but the data is there
so what would the um very senior
respected ipcc scientist say about the
slides that you've shared with me today
and and your your paper and your
explanation and your prediction that
we're going to have a another spike in
temperature likely in coming first half
of 2024 I think it depends whether they
are listening and whether they are
reading the paper before they respond I
think that's important I think the First
Response might be this can be right
because I think the the First Response
of James Hansen when I talked to him
about this was also this can be right I
respect him for that he's a puzzle
solver and he's skeptical and he's like
a pitbull he wants to understand it
exactly and here's the thing I don't
know him well but I would never discount
what he said because he did this almost
40 years ago was talking about this and
what a burden that guy must carry trying
to explain all this to the public and to
policy people for 40 years and alltime
Emissions alltime new coal capacity
building in 2023 yeah sorry to interrupt
keep going no you're right and I think
that's also maybe a reason why why
Hansen is uh Sometimes using stronger
language than he has in the past he he
said that your research is a big
deal is what he said on some recent
podcasts exactly yeah so I think that's
the research but I mean the findings
it's just not just our research right
it's even before we present this
research our coauthor normal L from NASA
wrote a paper in 2021 showing that until
2019 there was an increase in the rate
in the Earth's energy mless the rate in
which the Earth is warming doubling in
the rate of warming and it didn't get
much attention but this data is worrying
it's not just what we how we present it
it's the data itself that is worrying so
yeah and I I wish people would look at
this data and come to with different
conclusions and and explain us why we
are wrong using the data but I've
haven't seen that yet so that's what I
think what's important to see what if
you say okay what what would be the
response of of ipcc authors which some
are even part of our paper but what
would be the response of some IPC
authors I think please look at this data
and tell us we are wrong I think that's
that's what we all want to hear thank
you so I have so many more questions for
you let's let's move into the second
part like you've been full scientist
talking about the data and your research
so far now I still want you to kind of
have your scientists hat on but also
speculate I'm going to ask you some
questions so so given what you know now
and of course this isn't can't be proven
this is just your opinion as a very
well-informed person under the default
scenario where do you think the ultimate
what I'm referring to with my colleagues
Hollow anthropos thermal maximum will be
where we headed temperature-wise as the
centuries unfold if we do nothing and
the default and I'm not talking about
RCP 8.5 biophysically implausible coal
and oil and gas availability but even a
near-term next decade or so Peak can
decline in emissions what are we looking
at uh so you want me to guess uh yes and
and then attach a confidence interval to
your guess yes so I think it's very very
uncertain what will happen I think
because well you've already told me that
we're headed to one and a half and James
uh Hanson has said that in the next two
decades we'll hit two degrees and that
will be kind of the Baseline so we've
got that even though what we show in our
paper we assume that the AOK will not
stop okay there will not be a sh
shutdown of that well it's already
stopped 20 to 25% so it slowed
significantly yeah exactly so but it has
stopped before right so in after last I
ha but it has stopped many times so we
know that's possible almost stopped we
know it can slow down significantly and
that within within years the weather in
Europe can change right so place where
people are producing food it can change
and I don't know what what will happen
like I don't know we might increase coal
use again because we need to eat we need
to heat our homes and that's a response
right it's not something I I think
should happen or I want to happen but
what what Humanity might R to in the
with the situation that or or we would
chop down forest which would mean a
smaller sink for carbon yeah if you look
what happened in Canada which I'm
already mentioned that we couldn't maybe
you cannot even cut it down fast enough
before it starts burning right so that's
also something to consider so there's
indeed what you mention there's a lot of
known unknowns and then like personally
of course surface air temperature are
interesting but for me in living in the
Netherlands I think sea level rise is
much more important and Global surface
at average surface at temperatures are
Mo what are not what people really care
about right is not what they feel
strongly about it's it's a storm
Category 6 hurricane or stuff like which
we never knew what could happen or these
the floods hit in Germany a few years
ago which are still rebuilding and all
these these things we cannot really
prepare for like what happens if if our
solar panels are blowing from the roofs
and and the windmills are are being
destroyed in the in the North Sea when
we are getting some super storms which
we could we we or at least the engineers
didn't expect weren't warned about right
so all these things contribute to
changes that could happen and I think
that's what really I think will happen I
expect it more or less to happen this
Century already and I think that's
really something which we should take
into account so
your recent paper with Jame James Hansen
clearly states that temporary solar
radiation management SRM will probably
be needed in the future in other words
we're going to have to purposely inject
atmospheric aerosols to limit warming in
the future how do you see this happening
this is speculation of course this isn't
your your core thing using what
techniques under what scale uh what time
frame and under whose governance and
control do you think this is coming let
me first start with saying this it's not
something Jim or we want right we don't
want to happen I think that but I think
that's important to note or or we think
is an alternative to reducing greenhouse
gas emissions it's what we see already
we see now happening is that we are not
decreasing greenhouse gas image people
are not decreasing greenhouse gas image
at the rate needed and because they are
not doing that because of what we see
happening in Dubai just some some weak
te and no real action happening relative
to the problem at hand we
realize that people and the governments
and companies will likely revert to
sunlight reflection methods SRM or
whatever you call it and that's what we
expect and then we better prepare for
that we better learn from what's
Happening to not do it without the
knowledge to not have AG
trying to cool stuff down and causing a
lot of terrible things to happen
elsewhere or even where they are trying
to do it so I think that's really
important and then how it will happen I
think that's that's very uncertain but I
think that's also really depends on
where the effects are taking place so if
certain countries are for example I
think India India I think likely will be
one of the countries which will consider
it uh maybe before others because it has
a billion people over a billion I think
1.4 billion people now living in a in a
country that's generally quite hot
already and it's still being cooled by a
lot of coal plants uh putting a lot of
sulfur in the atmosphere isn't this also
wouldn't have to be Global could India
do SRM solar radiation management alter
the temperature yeah so they already
reflecting a lot of sunlight with their
sulfur emissions at the the
moment they they are already putting a
lot of sulfur in the atmosphere and not
just sulfur but also a lot of brown
carbon and black carbon and that has
health effects so they are probably they
they already have policy like China did
and has and like what's happening over
the oceans they had policy to reduce the
amount of air pollutants including
sulfur here's a here's a dumb question
Leon if India does some policy to change
this sulfates or their emissions it's
globally mixed won't it won't it be a
little bit more impactful in India but
basically be diluted around the world it
depends what how they do it right if
they if they put it into the
stratosphere there's much more Global
effects than if they would do it over
the surface over the oceans like what
the ships have been already doing as a
byproduct right but the ships and the
but the coal and the coal plants and and
and all the cooking fires the which kill
four million people a year uh all the
biomass cooking fires also cause all
these particles in the atmosphere and
absorption of sunlight in the in the in
the atmosphere but the decrease and how
much heat is reaching the surface and
this all has to be taken into account to
to understand how India has has even
cooled or at least not warmed a lot in
the past decades as it developed
industrially when all these emissions
increased let's assume that there is a
technology to use solar radiation
management and it's effective uh and
that society around the world is seeing
how bad the climate forcing from
emissions are and its warming and the
energy IM balance is so high that we
have to do something but isn't that like
some Modern equivalent of the stone
heads on Easter Island because as soon
as we stop it then the heat comes back
back with a vengeance so wouldn't it
have to be done in perpetuity yeah we
are already stopping it so that's what's
happening now we have been cooling not
intentionally but we have been cooling
the climate we have been limiting the
warming especially where we live and now
we sto doing that and then we're
learning what will happen now and then
of course there the doing it
intentionally I think that's a very big
discussion we and I think that should be
held on on a lot of level
well well well well here's the thing
Leon if you are really this podcast this
conversation is uh December 13th this
will come out in
January we're going to know by March
April June July of 2024 whether you're
really right about this and I imagine
that next year next summer you and Jim
Hansen and and others are going to be
bombarded with what the hell do we do
sort of questions
or you're wrong and this doesn't happen
but I find your your logic quite
compelling on this yeah the data is
wrong I think that's because we're just
presenting the data right and then then
it would be the correlation is wrong
there's no correl yeah the causation
there's a correlation for sure that's
what the data shows but then there's no
causation and it was just all a stupid
coincidence and everything will be fine
I hope so but then you're right so I
think that's if this in the coming
months will take shape more and more and
if more and more people will be affected
by this like of course we already see
that that there's stronger voices of
intentionally cooling the climate and so
on that note I know you're not an expert
on this per se but can you speculate are
there other ways that Humanity could use
technology to create global cooling like
regenerative agriculture that sucks in
carbon into the soil and artificial
whale poop and and other things is there
anything out there that you think might
play a decent role I I'm all for will
poop and increasing the biosphere I'm a
big fan of of James Lovelock and his his
theory about Earth being a living system
and because of course we know there's
life on planet Earth and we know that
plants grow and then the plant and and
the life interacts with with it its
environment and then environment impacts
life but life impacts the environment as
well and in a way we are the conscious
of this planet we can have a positive
effect on the planet and I think I do
believe in that and I think it it's a
very it's not easy it requires uh
stewardship it's an enormous
responsibility and we can do a lot of
things wrong which we are doing at the
moment but in the end I think I do
believe that humans can have a net
positive effect on the planet and that's
maybe that's very hard for many people
to think about even to see humans as a
positive force for the good overall but
I think that is possible and we have a
lot to learn on how to get there and
yeah I think that an important part in
getting there is is increasing the
biosphere and to to increase the
potential of life itself to to create a
better climate well the the other
additional piece is we have to increase
the number of people that actually
understand what's going on and how how
dire the situation is not only for our
our economies but for the oceans and the
biosphere we've been treating the oceans
like a garbage dump out of sight out of
mind and it's invisible CO2 that's just
being absorbed by um these giant bodies
of water so we're not going to have time
for the 50 other scientific questions I
have for you I want to keep my promise
to you on time but I would like to ask
you now just wear your hat as a human
and by the way I don't think you can
really do that you're always going to be
a scientist I can just tell by the way
you you think but but that's okay I
really value your contribution and your
heart on this I'm sure a lot of people
watching this specifically tuned in to
hear you because they know of your work
with James Hansen and they're very
worried about climate change and
probably many other issues as well do
you have any personal advice to the
listeners of this program at this time
of environmental disruption and Global
anxiety
um what some people might call The Meta
crisis but you could maybe even say
specifically climate and what's coming
any advice yeah it's a good question I
think it's important to do what you're
good at and to not despair to not take
everything too to personally to not
internalize everything you you see and
read and maybe what I talked about to
take it to heart but not to not let it
uh affect you personally too much but
also try to work on on Solutions with
the best of your capacity I think that's
really important to to see okay where
can I be a force of good in the world
and uh because I think that's for
everyone uh different so everyone would
answer that question differently but I
think that's everyone can add value to
this world and I think you I think it's
important to to see also look at the
scale look at the scale the
problem of course I believe in small
steps but if everyone does a little only
little happens I think that's true so
take into account the scale of of the
Planet of the of of the problem at hand
and try to add value there and you have
children right young children yeah seven
and five years old seven and five what
advice do you give for teenagers and
people in their 20s who are learning
about all this and having to make
decisions about their career and their
Lifestyles and and choices would you
change your advice for young people or
add to it yeah I think for young people
I think it's important to again try to
to do it from your own perspective so do
what you're good at because if you like
not not Everyone likes to do science or
do do data analysis or be an
entrepreneur or whatever I did what I'm
good at and what I what I like to do and
I I think that's really important if you
want to do this for the long run because
we need people to really be committed
and because the the challenges ahead of
us are are very complex Rel and require
commitment I think that's important and
it helps if you do what you like to do
or if you do what you're good at that
will help you to build a career is
important but it's much easier to build
a career around something what you what
you are good at and what you like to do
and which also fulfills you in a way
well you and I are both doing that I'm
educating the broader public on a system
science with an environmental ethic and
you are solving deep complex uh
biogeochemical Earth system puzzles with
your research what do you care most
about in the world Leon that's a big
question I care about the planet itself
about life and about my uh personally of
course my family and and friends but I
also know that if we want to conserve a
future worth living we have to be very
conscious about the reality of this and
it's some times it's confronting but I
think it's important to understand the
reality and take that into account to
build solutions for the future and
really look at the large scale of things
and I I like to look at it from the
really like a macro large scale
perspective because that's that's where
things are changing and where we have to
change them for the good I agree if you
could I don't think you've probably
watched any of my podcasts we had
conversations offline but this is a
question I ask all my guests if you had
access to a magic wand and you could
change one thing and there was no person
recourse to your decision no status loss
or anything like that what is one thing
you would do to improve human and
planetary Futures I would try or I if I
could change how humans interact with
reality that would be great so of course
humans are not re rational beings they
think they are but generally they are
not so otherwise we wouldn't have had
this conversation right because
rationally we know what our effects are
and we know how it impacts and we know
that we should do things differently but
we are not we know the the potential is
enormous but we are not living up to
that overall I I think I would like that
to change so that we can use the the
tools which physics for example give us
for example I don't like there's some
subjects which even if you mention it
you'll be put into a certain corner
right so including this subject this
subject is a very good example of that
indeed so aerosols like if you even talk
about aerosols even when you talk about
it from a climate perspective and you
say this is the largest uncertainty in
climate science and we need to
understand this better this provides us
an opportunity to reduce the large un
certainty climate science people say ah
you must be Pro GE engineering and you
want more fossil fuels like totally
ridiculous of course but that's what
happens and that many subjects like that
like for example nuclear energy yeah if
you even mention the word some people
might already just because I didn't say
anything about it people might think
okay you're like this or you're like
that nuclear energy renewable energy
climate change they're all polarized all
of them exactly yeah exactly so I would
like if if I could ever want and could
change that just uh for things to be
less polarized and more based on on the
physical reality of this world here here
so we covered a lot here you are a
scientist and know a huge amount about
this topic I would love to have you back
at some point in the future if you would
come uh and we did a round two what is
one specific topic and it could be as
narrow as you like that you think is
relevant to human Futures that you would
want to take a deep dive and unpack and
tell a story about that one thing
anything come to mind yeah what I would
like to assess further I think that's
how how in the past thousands of years
humans have interacted with the planet
and how they change the planet in many
different ways and how that could take
shape in the future I think that's to me
is very interesting and I think that's
so how can we be net force of good I for
example one can think of his own carbon
footprint and I've often people say okay
I have to fly there I have to fly and
they complain about the Caron footprint
but I then say okay what is your net
footprint if you make sure that some
technology can decrease carbon emissions
by a billion tons for example you could
fly anywhere in the world but
hypothetically right so I think there's
there's many ways we humans as
individuals could be a force of good in
the world but over all humans can be as
well and I think that's an interesting
question to dive into further thank you
do you have any closing comments for the
people watching and listening who kind
of understand or maybe some people this
is the first they've heard that aerosols
have been masking the warming in the
pipeline do you have any closing words
yeah so if you are skeptical I think
many people watching this might be try
to look at the data yourself I think
it's the data is quite accessible and uh
I almost when I share my figures on on X
for example I always add the reference
and whether you have 10 followers or a
million followers if you respond I
always try to respond back and uh if you
have questions I can share that my
expertise in how to access the data and
how to try and understand it because
it's really I would love that more
people looked at this and try to
understand what's happening and then
with the knowledge they gain do what
they can to within their expertise to to
further the the cause of Humanity on
this planet Bank thank you so much lean
you're welcome
kakan if you enjoyed or learned from
this episode of the great simplification
please follow us on your favorite
podcast platform and visit the greats
simplification tocom for more
information on future releases this show
is hosted by Nate Hain edited by no
troublemakers media and curated by
Leslie batls and Lizzy
serani
