[Music]
[Applause]
I'm not talking about respiratory chains
as Nick suggested because that would
mean that uh I'm I'm putting forward the
things that differenti us Nick and me uh
I will um more take advantage of what he
already said uh about the energy aspect
and uh since you're prepared now rub
that in and uh do what Nick in a way
cowardly avoided that is to to make
clear uh to which point this is
different from the traditional um
approach to the origin of
life okay so fortunately Nick um made
very easy for me um because he already
had a couple of slides that I would have
shown you too so I can speak more slowly
maybe um I'm a biologist since 25 years
uh as Nick
said is himself but I'm trained as a
physicist so there is maybe a different
approach that comes over here and uh I
was thinking since this is a completely
mixed audience I would try to to just
have fun and uh bring in both my
physical aspect and my biology biology
aspect uh which is not always easy so I
mean for the biologist the the the word
dissipative structure anyway is a Reason
To Leave the Room which is probably not
true for the physicist so let's see the
physicist can go to sleep for the moment
and uh I will tell you when to wake up
again okay so uh this dichotomy that I
wanted to say this this uh leaving the
the traditional um way to think of the
origin of life is connected to uh what
people in the the last couple of uh
decades was the were thinking of the way
they were addressing the origin of life
was they looked at what life was how was
life uh constructed made up and of
course the it was the organic molecules
that came
up now the organic molecules uh then you
have all these approaches to find ways
to abiotically synthesize
these bi these organic molecules now uh
I'm
doing microbiology of microbial pheny
and Physiology and it's mainly the phys
physiology is the point of view which is
important there if you really look at
microbiology and you look what life does
you get two different messages there is
a an enormous amount of bacteria out
there that don't need the Organics they
just make them from scratch they just
need CO2 as Nick just said for the
methanogens so just give them CO2 and of
course uh ammonia all the other elements
but they don't need organic molecules
they don't need lipids they don't need
sugars all that stuff they do
them but they clearly all the time need
a Redux dis disequilibrium this is what
Nick always already mentioned and that's
just a a cartoon again of what Nick
showed you with the mitochondrial
respiratory chain and I would disagree
with Nick that
uh we do not strip electrons of the
donor because that would mean that there
is some work to get in to get the
electrons out no this is a reductant
which is more reducing and that's
downhill that's a thermodynamic uh uh
process that wants to occur so there's
energy in there and the whole thing
works like a battery now of course uh
that was true for us this is true for
the rest of the microbes and there is
certainly many other mechanic mechanisms
there is donors and acceptors all over
the place there's different types of
respiratory chains and there I'm talking
about respiratory chains but that would
be the only time uh and uh it's not
eating and and uh breathing is not the
same thing uh in these cases because
some of the donors are gases and some of
the acceptors may be uh solids so uh but
what is always the same is you have an
donor and reductant and you have an
oxidant Okay so uh to summarize that up
when you look at microbiology what you
see is uh
bacteria procariotas need Redux energy
they don't need the organic
molecules okay so from the point of view
of physics of course the energy point is
is is clear there I mean there's nothing
happening without the energy and this is
a even the biologists will remember the
second law of Thermodynamics so I second
law of Thermodynamics clearly states
that in a closed system everything tends
to uh increasing Delta Delta s the
entropy now life if you have if you put
a bacterium into a a vessel and you have
it grow what is going to happen is that
it it creates it generates uh order from
disorder it just takes all the the
elements and puts them together to a new
cell so that is clearly uh somehow at
odds with the second LW of
thermodynamics
and uh of course it isn't because it's
not it's not a closed system it's an
open system so you have the Delta H that
helps you out there is enthropy flowing
into the system and that allows the
Second Law to be
true now uh this was already pointed out
some 60 years ago by shinger when he
said that life necessarily feeds on
negative entropy so that means on
entropy fluxes into the system okay the
second law of Thermodynamics so so in
principle tells you that uh life is
possible if there is Delta H flowing
into the system but it doesn't give you
a mechanism now that was 120 years ago
and the physicists many of you in the
audience do these kinds of things uh
they know that
complexity uh in this universe uh the
arising complexity is not restricted to
biology you have that in many many
different occasions and uh so this is
just a just atmospheric phen
so you can see that there is something
structuring organizing without any
biology going on and that's uh there's
60 years of uh
nonlinear uh thermodynamics uh that was
developed and uh culminating with the
Nobel Prize to uh
progin uh and in in the the Nobel Prize
um attribution that was the the word
dissipative structures and here it is so
that's the dreaded word this is is the
dissipative structures now that's a
couple of dissipative structures that
physicists know being ourselves known to
you maybe if you prepare coffee in the
morning uh that's that one is closer to
what we are dealing with we can you can
say that's all atmospheric stuff and
fluid things this is a chemical
reaction uh this chemical reaction if
you can look at it it it's generates
order both in space and in time just
from a disequilibrium situation so
that's that's something that uh if you
if I show that to a biologist you would
tell me there is a life going on in
there now the nonlinear thermodynamic
people uh worked out how to to under
which conditions you can develop
complexity in a in a physical system and
that is first of all uh the energy must
be far from from equilibrium so this one
won't work here if you're here far from
the the equilibrium State then you you
can get to to structure formation to
dissipative
structures uh you need nonlinear
equations and you also uh feed feedbacks
Loop help as well now that is uh quite
often tedious to work out this is the
the chemical reaction for uh the belus
of satinsky reaction and in there you
can Define certain Elements which
actually serve as what is called
dissipative engine so engines just think
of the steam engine that transforms uh
thermal energy into uh movement into
work so these these engines uh transform
the the energy flux into
order now uh the task for the the
physicist is quite often to find to
Define these uh dissipative engines that
specifically on on a very small scale do
the
work okay so um oh I go the wrong way
around okay so now let's return to
biology this is a cell and if you ask me
you have only two choices either you say
life violates the second order of
thermodynamics and uh then you have to
come up with a different uh
interpretation different rationalization
of that I'm fine with that but for me I
think the more uh reasonable way or the
way I would look at it is that life in
fact is a dissipative
structure
so for the bi
this is a this is a something that is
just there uh a cell in if I look at it
like that what life really is is all the
electrons flowing through the cell it's
it's in permanent disequilibrium and if
you're microbiologist you will know that
once you don't put any nutrients into
your Your Vessel then the cells won't
grow so now we have two different um
tasks the first one is to find an
environmental setting for the origin of
life where you have strong Redux
gradients because the Redux gradients it
was we see in exellent life so the first
choice is to be to say that life also
originated from Redux gradient that
that's the um I will go through that
quite quickly because we have so Nick
was talking about the hydrothermal W and
the hydrothermal W are very uh um
interesting because they really look
like a cell and Nick was talking about
that so I can go over that uh there's
maybe other locals where you can have a
similar uh strong disequilibria I'm fine
with that for the moment the hydr hydral
wind seem to be the most appealing to me
now uh the next step is that just as for
the the chemical systems or for the
atmospheric system we have to work out
the the dissipative engines which
transform energy into uh order so I will
from looking at bioenergetics and what
we've seen and other people have seen in
in exent life I would try to propose
propose present a couple of them to you
and ask a couple of questions which
might be relevant to astrobiology so
what what is so great about Redux energy
why doesn't life just originate from
thermog gradients from radioactivity
whatever so we have to discuss that and
uh I think there's a lot of discussion
that can go on afterwards but I will
propose a couple of ideas to you the
first one is certainly that Redux energy
is scale independent whereas if you have
temperature and you reduce the scales
then the the red the energy gradient
will become smaller and smaller and
smaller this is not the case for Redux
energy you can have the the donor right
next to the acceptor as a molecule so
you can have the same amount of energy
uh at nanoc Scales next to each other
the other uh thing thing is that for
life to emerge you need that these
gradients are stable or at least meta
stable uh and many Redux couples are
metast stable so they they they can stay
next to each other for hours or days
there is a couple of reasons for that
high activation barriers but one of them
which I wanted to talk about is
cooperative multi electron Redux
chemistry and this is becomes important
afterwards and for astrobiology maybe
that's the reason why we'll go into that
a little bit more in detail so I give
you the case of a two electron Redux
compound which goes through two
different Redux state from the oxidized
to the semi- reduced to fully reduced
State and if you're in an aprotic
solvent then what you would expect is
that the first Redux transition is more
easy is easier than the second one
because if you put the electron on the
second electron doesn't want to go on as
easily now this changes completely when
so that's first o the first reduction
comes before and if you go the other way
around the first oxidation is at the
lower midbond
potential now if you put this into an
organic solvent then you have
protonations going on and according to
as according to PK values that are
involved in all these species you can
have a very funny phenomenon this is
that uh because the the the mass action
energy of the the proton uh will change
around the Redux potential and you can
get to to the conditions where actually
your second oxidation comes uh at a
lower potential than a first
oxidation now what does that that's an
old stuff for the electrochemist I mean
this this is the electrochemists can go
to sleep now that is and that is one of
the reasons I mean Nadia was mentioning
this morning that in in aquous Solutions
uh chemistry is is uh very different and
more more difficult that's one of the
reasons why the electrochemist is avoid
uh aquous Solutions and they prefer to
work in uh in aprotic solvents because
everything is is much faster and much
easier to understand so Redux
cooperativity requires protons now Redux
cooperativity gives you uh just just to
show you that rapidly um imagine you
have a second a two electron Redux
compound and you're in an aoic solvent
so as we said the first oxidation has a
low potential than second one so if you
have an acceptor there then this one
goes downhill exonic fine you get to the
semi- reduced State now uh you get a
second uh substance is coming in this is
uphill and actually it won't go it will
only go to equilibrium it will go a
little bit but not not a lot so you get
equilibration for that if you're in an
atic if you're in a protic solvent in in
water then as we said the first
oxidation is at higher potential than
the lower one so so this is our first
oxidation going on and this first
oxidation won't go so you never get to
the second
state and your equilibration is very
slow actually me you could say you
there's no equilibration but if you have
the two present at the right time in the
right place two of the same acceptors
then of course it will work but that
makes that this is a very unlikely event
and it will take much more time to
happen so this is why these uh these
reactions actually a meta stable and in
the lab you can have a a two electron
donor standing next to an acceptor for
hours or days which is eternity for a
chemical
reaction okay so that's one of the
things is metastability so we don't have
to ask what is so special about Redux
chist Redux energy but we the thing is
Redux chemistry in H2O that is the
interesting thing so the special thing
is as I said it's the metastability the
other thing is Redux bations that the
Nick already mentioned and Redux byic is
that so go back to what I showed you
already uh this is what what I showed
you so you need two uh acceptors at the
same time in the same place so that this
works and you can do a funny thing you
can actually have two different one
electron acceptors if you have two of
them like that then of course the the
the reaction goes but you you have a
different uh very different situation
going on in terms of energy because from
this energy level you now reduce one
which is exonic and one which is endon
so you uh you take you you you increase
the uh you decrease the entropy of this
this system here because you put it to a
higher energy level okay so this Redux
specification for example is one of the
dissipative engines that you could
imagine that uh were used by life and
actually is used by life because as Nick
said Nick mentioned this in the in the
methanogens but we have it you have you
work with Redux bation mitochondria work
with that and there's many many knew
Redux bation that's hype now if you in
biology and in bioenergetics uh Redux
bations are in and to the point where I
would say even there is Redux bations
published which aren't
um in extent life Redux bations are
mainly done by quum of flavins
um you can we we shown recently and
other people have done the same thing
that also mum can do these kinds of
chemical of electrochemical reactions
and tungsten probably also can do it has
not been checked so far now uh this
brings me to the next point which is
that uh if we look at how life works
then we see that uh Metals play an
enormous role and the mpto enzymes
actually are one of the the life I would
I would claim that they are life's most
most versent versatile
biocatalysts and uh but the mipa enzymes
are only a part of it I mean most the
the vast majority of uh catalysis is
done by Metals so we should in
astrobiology we should not forget about
the metals and actually um Flores was
mentioning this uh this morning as well
and we come back to that so what we have
to do is now is and we are not yet there
we have to work out how the metal work
as dissipative engines we have an idea
for mum but for most of the others we
don't have so far at least a clear idea
now uh I will I can basically skip that
because that's the the the proton
gradient Nick was talking about that the
large part in exent life of the Redux
energy is actually converted into a pH
gradient which serves to uh synthesiz
ATP and what you do is you move away the
the
the equilibrium the chemical equilibrium
of ATP to by more than a factor of 10 to
a 10 uh so this is again uh a way to
convert one uh disequilibrium which is
electrochemical in that case into a
chemical disequilibrium so that's
another engine and uh I would argue that
it was not ATP was pyrro phosphate but
that's only a detail these things have
to be worked out how might have worked
at the origin of life and that's one of
the the proposals that we have put
forward uh in the past but um that's
that's not one of the The crucial things
that I want to talk about I mean there's
other things so this is the only the
only point where I will uh disagree with
Nick I would say not not even disagree I
would say there is other uh Nick puts
posits the methan TR the acet COA
pathway um as the the most ancient one
um we have put forward a different um
scenario which actually is uh very close
to the AO pathway but which uses an
additional electron donor which is
methane uh so the difference are are I
would say minor uh in principle we agree
on most of the things but one of the
things we I'm interested in this is that
in this pathway there's a couple of
Redux loops and these Redux Loops may be
interesting to uh to explore a little
bit more detail whether they can work as
dissipative engine if we just simulate
them if we can get the structure
formation coming out of uh these things
okay so uh
to my point in here is that uh we might
not necessarily have to look for all the
complicated organic molecules because if
you come from the physicist point of
view and you look at life as a
dissipative structure then life life
does all the stuff itself what you have
to look for is where is the energy
coming from the energy is Redux energy
for the life for the case of Life on
this planet and I would argue that it's
the most appropriate one for the reasons
that we've been discussing it and then
we have to to uh find all the crucial uh
dissipative engines from looking at
excellent life and give all these
informations to people who uh try toh do
reactor experiment and recreate life uh
from scratch or the the first stages of
of life from scratch okay so uh to
finish this up and uh to have plenty of
uh scope for discussions afterwards that
was the thing I was just
mentioning then there the the next thing
I was already talking about is the water
so I would hold that Redux energy only
is a good source of energy for life if
you are in water because in an aprotic
soul
everything will go within millisecond or
sub millisec micros if you have a minute
it's marus Theory electron transfer so
if you have these things in atomic
distances then with sub micros you have
equilibration going on that is uh one of
the reasons that uh I I wanted to to
make you think about all these I mean I
hear a lot about about that the Titan is
great because it's full of
Organics so if you there is no redo no
interesting Redux chemistry happening in
uh in liquid methane because everything
as I said everything goes to equilibrium
we we need something which is out of
equilibrium and which stays out of
equilibrium and now there's one point
some of you in the community have
understood that we need or have have
taken the message that we might need the
Redux disequilibrium and they put
forward oxygen as as a very very good um
oxidant in uh extra um terrestrial
environment like on Mars because there
is Oxygen on Mars now I would there's
one problem and we know that biologists
know that oxygen is an extremely good
Redux collapser oxygen gives you a lot
of Redux energy I have to finish okay so
I'm finished actually but it is a
mediator so it will do away with all dis
equilibria in a very very rapid way this
is why you get cancer this is why you
age and all these kinds of things okay
and we shouldn't uh forget about the
metals and so the metals should be taken
into account I would say for knowing
which kind of uh Galactic regions are
pro possibly uh lookout for Life coming
up so that's uh thanks to uh especially
to Mike Russ and El BR branscom who
worked out most of the theoretical parts
of these things that's my group in Mars
and we had many many very stimulating
discussions with Nick lanen and Bill
Martin even if we don't agree on
everything but we agree on most of the
things I would say thank
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
you
[Music]
