[Music]
I'm not perfect but I'm the LI inition
breaking down walls with every Vision
I'm but that's my ammunition I Rise
Again the competition I've been through
the storm I've danced in the rain fought
with the demons embraced all the pain
they try to box me in but I break the
frame no script for my life I rewrite
the game I'm Rough Around the Edges
scarred but alive I miss it on fire I
always survive I'm a rebel with the
cause heart full of crit if you look me
in the eyes you see I don't quit I'm not
perfect but I'm a
liion breaking down walls with every
Vision I'm flood but that's my
ammunition I Rise Against no competition
I walk to my own beat I never conform
flipping the script I create the stor
you can try to decode me I'm a mystery
flaws on my power I make history I'm not
here for Perfection I'm here for the
ride turning the chaos into my pride
made from the struggle born from the
fight I shine in the dark I thrive in
the night I'm real I'm Raw I own my
mistakes every crack in my armor every
heart that aches I Stand Tall even when
I fall Limitless Spirit hear my call I'm
not perfect but I'm a living inition
breaking down walls with every Vision
I'm f but that's my ammunition I rise
again no competition I'm a limited
edition One of a Kind imp perfectly
crafted with a free mind no need for
Perfection no need for praise in my own
way I'll set the world a blaze
[Music]
