so there's this guy called the tech lead
that makes YouTube videos and he made
one a while back that went semi viral
and it actually spun off into a bit of a
meme that became popular in anti Linux
circles and that is the tech leads
belief that Linux is only free if you
don't value your time so the implication
here is that with Linux an OS that is
free as in having no monetary cost you
don't have to go to the store and pay
for it it instead requires you to pay
for it with your time now I'm a Linux
enthusiast so obviously I have a bit of
a bias here that goes in the opposite
direction of the tech leads and I'm
fully aware of my bias and because I
have it I tried to go outside of my bias
and see if there is some way that I can
understand my opponents position and why
they have it because otherwise the
discussion just devolves into tribal
guerillas throwing poo at each other
however there's only two ways that I've
been able to come up with to come to the
tech leads conclusion and that is by
either creating a very specific and rare
use case for an end user where they have
to use a different OS which I feel is
bordering on strawman territory or
pretending to be ignorant about several
fundamental concepts which are what is
Linux what do end users do on a computer
and how a person's time is valued so
right out of the gate I'm aware that
there are certain applications which
only run on Windows or the Mac OS which
some users need to use and that creates
a strict dependence on those proprietary
operating systems this might be
something like needing to use Adobe
Premiere or Adobe Photoshop to do a task
that an alternative like blender or
is just not capable of doing but the
people who are in these positions are
very rare and if we took a close
sir look at the type of work that those
people are doing basically they're
graphic designers and it's possible that
they could still spend most of their
time in Linux using an open-source
application to do their job and they
only really need Adobe to do those very
specific effects but like I said these
people are not your typical user like I
said in my tech ecosystem video most end
users are a racecar Johnny they don't
really know or care how the computer or
OS works it simply an ends to a means
and that means is not as complicated as
doing graphical design because the
beautiful thing about the racecar
Johnnie's of the world is that the
majority of them just want to use a web
browser for most of the normies out
there using computers their entire
operating system is nothing more than a
boot loader for Google Chrome in fact
during my two years at Geek Squad in my
years doing professional and volunteer
IT work I found that normies really only
use the web browser on their PC they
certainly use it ten times more than any
other application and web browsers are
the same on all os's
in fact I bet that you could install
Linux on a normies PC rice it to look
like Windows 10 or Windows 7 whichever
you know windows that they're coming
from and they wouldn't even realize what
you did until a couple weeks later when
they notice that hey I have been forced
to do an update in awhile let me go
click on the Start menu and oh I'm using
Linux what is Linux you know most people
they it's it's the same right there's no
difference to their computing habits
whether they're on Linux or whether
they're on Windows
so it's not like you have to waste time
with learning how to use Linux if you're
a race car Johnny you can just install
Google Chrome on Linux the same way as
Windows and use it to read the New York
Times or look at porn or whatever it is
that normies do on their PC now that
we've burned the strawman let's tackle
the lack of understanding
I completely agree that Linux can be a
very time-consuming endeavor but this
sinkhole of time only really occurs with
advanced distros like arch or Gen 2
where you are essentially building your
own Linux distro from scratch or in the
case of Gen 2 compiling everything from
scratch but not all distros are like
this there are distros like Linux Mint
which are already set up very user
friendly and similar to Windows and I
would actually say that you waste more
time with Windows just during the
installation process since Microsoft
tries to make you create a Microsoft
account during the installation process
so you have to put in an email or if you
don't want Microsoft to spam you you
have to go create a different email and
then you have to enter a confirmation
code and it's a whole thing but with
Linux Mint you don't have to do that you
just install it and then you're done you
see Linux it's completely different than
Windows and the Mac OS because of the
distro concept Linux is only as
difficult and time-consuming as the
distro that you pick and it's not fair
to compare elite distro like arch to a
fisher-price toy like Windows which is
what I think people are doing when they
tried to compare Linux to Windows or
Linux to the Mac OS they're really
comparing arch but arch is not Linux
it's just a distro of Linux this is on
the same level of ignorance as saying
that driving is a waste of time compared
to walking because in order to drive you
first have to build your entire car from
scratch and make sure it works and make
sure that it's compatible with the right
type of gasoline and all that stuff
obviously most people driving cars did
not build their own from scratch they
went and they bought something already
built that's tried and true what
why I recommend Linux Mint to Linux
noobs because it's like the Honda Civic
of the OS world it just works and it
never breaks down and I guess I already
covered what the end users are doing
they're all in the browser which is the
same on all os's whether you're using
Gmail or Office online Facebook whatever
browser-based normy activity that you're
doing it's all going to be the same
regardless of your OS and actually Linux
is much more secure against malware that
is delivered through the browser which
is a reason why Linux can actually save
you a lot more time than using Windows
since you're less likely to be hacked on
it you're less likely to have your data
shut down or locked up which is
obviously going to waste a lot more time
if you're on Windows and finally the
value of time which is a very easy
concept to understand and I honestly
think that the tech lead is just
pretending to not get this but time is
not appraised in the same way that an
ounce of gold or a 100 dollar bill is
the value of someone's time is decided
by themselves maybe it's worth your time
to go watch a Marvel superhero movie at
the theater those movies are well they
make a lot of money so most people agree
that it's a good way to spend their time
but I'm not really a fan of that movie
genre so it's a waste of time to me and
it would be a waste of my money just
like I'm sure that those normies think
it's a waste of time to compile gen 2 or
to patch DWM but these are things that I
like doing I like to learn it for myself
and then I like to show you guys I
really enjoy the accomplishment of
installing gen 2 of having a minimalist
OS of having things set up just the way
that I like so I consider it to be a
good way to spend my time maybe you're
just not autistic enough to understand
it I mean it's just like when I was a
kid playing with Bionicles the other
kids on the playground thought that
Bionicles were just robots to smash into
one another but when I would tell them
about the lore in the comic books
explaining their origin they would just
glaze over and go back to smashing the
robots together so maybe the tech lead
he's just not able to understand our
hobbies but that's okay
I mean I'm just gonna stay over here
optimizing Gentoo and I guess he can
stay over there playing with candy crush
on Windows
