hello everybody and welcome back to the
active inference insights podcast
brought to you by the active inference
Institute I'm your host Daris parvy
Wayne and today I have the pleasure of
chatting to ma Al barassin ma is a
cognitive Computing PhD candidate at the
University of kbec in Montreal as well
as the Director of product Innovations
and research at verses a company which
leads the way in applying the active
inference framework to AI with expertise
in computational Neuroscience sexology
Consciousness and much more M's work is
Broad Innovative and deeply exciting
which makes me rather um excited for
this conversation ma welcome to the show
thank you so much for joining us it's a
as I said it's an absolute
pleasure well thanks for having me so um
yeah as I sort of mentioned in the
introduction it your work covers a very
broad range of topics um and areas of
research but as you know this podcast is
exploring the themes of active inference
and the free energy principle so I want
to mainly focus on that even though we
can see about how these different themes
tie in um with that
overarching um
framework if one goes on your Google
Scholar and sees your work on active
inference um again they'll see it's
diverse where I want to start is the
paper that you wrote on epistemic
communities um I guess the first
question our audience might have um just
as a reminder for those listening this
podcast is very much meant as a gentle
introduction to active inference um as
gentle as an introduction to active
inference can be um so just for our
audience my first question is very
simple and it's just what is an
epistemic
community so it has many
definitions uh it's it's a Loosely used
term in variety of fields but the way
we've used it is
essentially a community of people that
share very specific types of beliefs
that lead them to sample reality in the
same way so if you think about like um
your Norms they usually are tied to a
specific way of thinking like for
instance the fact of going to work the
fact of going to work 9 to5 is tied to
an ideology that values a certain type
of productivity consumerism Etc and a
certain type of relationships where we
are together in the morning together in
the evening and um we are with different
people during the day etc etc etc so
your life becomes shaped by these ideas
that give rise to
Norms cool and um let's sort of tie in
the active inference framework then to
this idea that we have a community which
is tied together through um sampling
similar Norm similar sensory
observations um perhaps you could start
just by giving us a brief uh or yeah
relatively
accessible um notion of what active
inference is I mean KL did a very good
job last week at explicating this maybe
just as a reminder to people um and then
how that framework um and the truths
that the free energy principle discloses
can be applied to the formation of an
epistemic
community yeah so active inference um as
a principle is rather simple it's really
just the idea that we try to minimize
how much we are likely to dissolve we
don't want to die so in order to do so
we're going to try to map the world and
understand what might be coming such
that we can avoid moments where we might
be dissolving or moments that are
dangerous for us more surprising we try
to uh create evidence of ourself we try
to predict ourself existing in the
future um and to do this we um make a
prediction act in the world try to
change something see if it changes the
way we thought it was going to change
and then update our model of the world
so you got this uh sensory active Loop
where uh the agent is embedded in the
world rather than just outside of it
mapping it so it's a pretty crucial idea
that the agent necessarily has a
perspective which is defined by
how they are
separate and yet embedded in the world
they have a boundary we generally refer
to that as a mark blanket this boundary
is both defining and defined by the
outside world and the agent themselves
um so if you understand that the agent
necessarily has to to map the world in
order to predict what's likely to happen
but that the agent is only capable of
dealing with their perspective and how
much they can compute from their
perspective you understand the agent is
fundamentally limited it has to um to
maximize how much information it has
about the world to communicate with
potentially other agents which will also
be gathering information about the world
not just from each other but from their
own experience within the world now now
what we posited when we were doing our
research is that it would be more costly
to just flat out change your entire
model of the world if you are
wrong then try to seek out agents who
might validate your view of the world
and therefore also share the same
model this is where we bring in the
notion of Niche
construction when agents exist in the
world as I said they evidence their own
existence to do so they shape the world
so anytime I walk on the grass I make a
little dent and I create a little path
and so if other agents like me same
agents with the same model are going to
take the same path eventually that path
is going to be pretty obvious it's going
to pull other agents to that path so I
and other agents like me are shaping the
environment to resemble Le us so we
therefore thought that confirmation bias
here was a way for agents to avoid
having to constantly change their model
and were more likely to be with people
like them create a world that resembles
them and eventually create something
that resembles an echo chamber um at
least on the belief on the belief path
what we also posit is the outcome of
that is you're not just sharing beliefs
you're creating the world around you
such that eventually some communities
will in fact create some degree of the
beliefs they are sharing in the world
around them which is no longer at all
the same world as some other community
which may be sharing together another
model and they it becomes practically
incommunicable not only are they not
sharing the same model they're not
sharing the same world they're not
sampling it the same way and so
communicating here is essentially
impossible amazing that's that's super
interesting um and I think definitely
maps on to people's experiences in um if
they've ever found themselves down the
rabbit hole of an echo chamber whether
that's on Twitter or Instagram or
wherever I guess a question that comes
to my mind here is that um maybe a um
heuristic idea would be that truth
exists as some kind of Prior within um a
generative model that an agent like us
has like it's important that we tie
ourselves in some way to um veracity
because if not then we're going to be
constantly surprised every time
something false happens or or that false
true distinction it's a bit blurry but
but you see where I'm going so a lot of
EO yeah yeah so a lot I'm going with
this is that a lot of echo Chambers are
reinforcing their model of the world but
it might not necess it doesn't
necessarily need to subscribe to any
notion of external truth to what degree
does that ever butt up against the a
kind of inherent prior which is that
eventually the falsity of your claims is
going to come home um or can or can the
echo chamber the entrenchment just keep
going keep digging as far down as as
possible yeah so this is a super
interesting idea and we first have to
Define what we mean by truth
and what level of
Truth what do we mean by truth do we
mean something that I can
observe do we mean something that is
verifiable by other
agents uh and then what level of Truth
do we mean
um the truth of the
event the social truth of the meaning of
the
event um the the fact that to some
extent no matter what happens this
element will be considered
true do you see what I mean like there's
so many ways in which this can break
down and what this leads us to is so
this is a theory this is something I'm
trying to develop obviously it's not
uh verified yet so it's still something
to to take with a few grain of salt but
it's it's a theory that I think U
naturally follows from what we've done
depending on the level of truth you're
talking about and your definition of
Truth the fact that something say
happened or not can be
irrelevant what matters about truth is
whether it's actionable to some extent
so let's take an example if I decide I
can fly but I never act on
it it has no impact on my life my
sensory active
Loop isn't going to change my model is
not going to change so I can carry this
belief without ever having any
consequence at that level I'm not going
to die but now I can tell other people
that I Can Fly And if none of us act on
it but we all squarely believe we can
fly and it serves a social purpose of
identifying each other we know who we
are and then we congregate to each other
we create a reality together we create
purposes what happens then where does
the buck fall where where does that
belief become a belief that potentially
harms us I think that's the true
question so think of things that are
more contentious like does God
exist technically there is no way to
prove it literally part of the
definition is that beleving belief in
God has to be faith-based or at least
you know for Christian judeo-christian
beliefs it has to be faith-based which
means by
definition you shouldn't need evidence
you should believe without evidence you
should take a leap of
faith okay then we by by virtue of that
we can't verify it we can't change it
your beliefs is kind your belief is kind
of
impervious so then what are the outcomes
comes of that belief how does it allow a
community to survive how does it allow
people to survive and there's a really
interesting phenomenon that happens
there some
people will start manufacturing evidence
of God they will start think okay well
yes it's true I don't need evidence but
I can read certain kinds of things as
evidence and they will select the kinds
of things that count as evidence I.E
things
that they can't ascribe a clear cause to
so for instance they won't ask God to
feed their dog because if they did and
the dog doesn't get fed the dog dies and
now they're like well God didn't do it
there's a Clear Proof here it didn't
happen but something more nebulous like
in the future I will get a job I mean
you know like it's highly likely you're
GNA but can you really describe the
cause of that like you might have sent
some resumés but there's no guarantee
anyone will pick up your resume like
it's it's practically luck at this point
so if it's luck it's God because luck is
not something we can ascribe a clear
cause to um so so then you get these
communities that are functional because
that belief never really comes into play
in their actions and so you can have
weird types of layered beliefs um for
certain people like you could have a
flat earther be your manager it probably
won't change much it's not compatible
with your beliefs but in terms of the
the layer that you share the functional
layer that you share it doesn't come
into play but if I Believe I Can Fly And
therefore you can fly and I tell you
well go go do it now fly jump off the
building now we're going to have a
problem and therefore that kind of
belief is less lik to be carried because
functionally it's likely to disappear
self in terms of self-organization it
just is likely to
disappear right yeah that's interesting
I guess it's it's absolutely right to
unpick these different layers and the
fact that I guess one way of looking at
it is that truth can have this kind of
instrumentalist or pragmatic aspect to
it but also this
um something that you know philosophers
of language would think about a little
bit more in terms of conditional
statements and whether something's
actually true in the world I wonder
whether therefore if we look at the
Active inference framework and we try to
apply Act of inference to this a
question that comes up in my head is
does for an agent to consider their
belief to genuinely be true because I
think what we can say here is if I had
the belief that I could
fly perhaps I occupy that truth at an
instrumentalist level because I'm
surrounded by other people who believe
that they can fly and it actually gives
me a sense of purpose and and and and so
I almost delude myself into thinking
that but really if push came to shove
and someone had me at the top of a cliff
Edge I probably wouldn't do it because I
don't think there's actually a state of
the world out there which says Darius
can
fly does the all of that to say does ACT
does the active inference framework
require for an agent to believe that
there is genuinely solid epistemic
grounds to believe that something is
ontologically the case so that I can
actually fly that if I took
off that I would need to be able to
sample or have sampled evidence for that
or is there a mechanism that might be um
peripheral to that which could give me
the um trust in a sufficient trust in my
model that I maybe I would jump off the
cliff so I think we have to look at how
um life is realized and how you plan
yourself in the future right
so let's assume you really think you can
fly and your life just doesn't lend
itself to it like this how you do you
take the car you you know you hang
around you you have coffee you work
whatever it's just it just never comes
into play you could hold that belief
with high certainty
because it never gets tested and there's
never a risk now if you were to start
having a real risk like that it it
actually like that's that state is not
highly unlikely it's like it's over
here and you now have to start testing
your own predictions of yourself into
the world and you're going to start
seeing spikes of free energy like
there's like you've never seen anyone
fly you sure you can but you've never
seen anyone fly and the risk associated
with not flying is really really really
high
um I think that's when you start seeing
the armor break like I think the
difference becomes between someone who
is lost touch with actual reality like
they genuinely believe they can fly and
it becomes an actual thing they need to
do now they probably will do it but they
will also probably die which means that
um these kinds of beliefs which we
generally consider to be psychotic right
like it's it's
that's the definition it's a loss of
touch with reality no matter what that
means and so when we start couching
these ideas in this way we start
depathologizing a little bit or like
well it's not they're not they're not
sick per se they're nothing
intrinsically wrong with them but their
beliefs are no longer aligned with the
ecosystem within which we exist if they
were on say the moon for a minute maybe
you know they could fly like it wouldn't
be an un impossible belief it's just not
a belief here that that works um so I
think that's why most of the people who
hold beliefs that are not uh related to
what we would consider something that
happened like it's not verifiable it's
not uh it's not something that we can
assure ensure happened or can
happen generally these beliefs don't
relate to things that are
possibly um harmful to them like for
instance believing in Trump believe in
what what Trump says it's easy to debunk
what he says like a lot of people have
done it in fact it's actually it takes
more time to debunk everything he says
than just to listen to
him but it has no impact on your life if
you do believe him like pragmatically
won't hurt you so it's it's it's um it's
a very useful tool to lie about things
that are completely unverifiable to you
therefore why not believe them yeah I
think um I think what you spoke about in
terms of deep apologizing is very
interesting when um I was speaking to
Carl for those who are listening they
might recall we we sort of spoke about
the fact that the complete CL class faum
states that actually any Behavior can be
cast as um Bas optimal under some prior
beliefs so I think that's a nice it's it
leads itself it lends itself to a Humane
approach to Psychopathology or
confirmation bias less um you know more
mundane instances of circular reasoning
or or convincing yourself that something
is true when it's clearly not um going
back to your paper I thought an
interesting thing was so so for those
who don't know ma um and Maxwell and
others sort of created a a computational
model um in addition to the to the
theorizing right so there is the theory
and then you would put it in silico and
you um you in
dowed your silico agents with an a
priori hypothesis that or or preference
that they would be more likely to sample
um agents who are similar to them which
is in in a sense the kind of uh prior
preference which underwrites um
confirmation
bias my question here
is in that are you stipulating that we
too have those prior preferences because
on one hand yes I mean that manifests in
the behavior and it makes sense in terms
of confirming your own model at the same
time humans can also be incredibly
flexible creatures who do change their
model on the basis of um evidence so
firstly is the claim there that that is
an actual um feature of human cognition
and our generative model and two um if
so would you couch that in terms of um
natural selection and evolutionary
pressures or is that is it even more uh
fundamental to
self-organization to um sample
information from those who are more
similar to
you right so so confirmation bias was a
parameter it was something we tested
within with or on a Continuum and we saw
what the effects of it were relative to
the formation of echo chamber or to the
change in beliefs um and then we saw
that it had a magnifying effect but it
wasn't as simple as just you turn it off
and it's gone and you turn it on and
it's it's there right there was still
the possibility to form communities
without uh the notion of confirmation
bias it just wasn't a strong and it also
depended on the network Dynamics uh
different networks Pro propagate
information differently so um we we also
had the notion of uh Habit formation so
if you have uh the need to uh to have
habits basically you're going to slowly
start sampling the the same thing over
and over and over again so um there
there were a lot of parameters that we
that we used and we found that uh um
confirmation bias
basically
uh biased the an the agent's likelihood
model to acquire more evidence about
their environment if the information
confirms their pre-existing beliefs it's
it was that simple basically uh so
basically it it just made it so that
they would still sample people people
around them but they were more likely to
resample somebody that said something
that agreed with their model which is
extremely compatible with Act of
inference right you're trying to
self-evidence so you're going to try to
sample things that seem to you know
agree with your model um so confirmation
bias was just a formalization of that
specific parameter
um what we see
is it's actually adaptive for you to be
with people like you
when you are with people like you not
only are you likely to understand people
better and therefore share information
more efficiently um you're also likely
to be in an environment that is
beneficial for you not just because you
craft the environment around you but
because if you find yourself with people
like you you're probably finding
yourself in an environment that benefits
those people so you know it's it's just
adaptive now it's a adaptive to an
extent if you're only with people with
exactly your your same model then you're
also very likely to to um have the same
issues and to be um vulnerable to the
same kind of volatility it's like the
it's like monoculture if you have one
type of banana if there's one disease
banana they're all going to get it and
you no longer have bananas it's it's the
same idea you want want to continuously
grow and change and and and gather more
error and increase your Fitness
landscape such that you never get to a
point where there's an error that none
of you saw coming and it just wipes
everything out like a Black Swan event
um so there's like a a nice middle
ground it is it's like a super
stimulus if you find yourself in an echo
chamber it feels really really good for
time but there's a part of your model
the part that wants exploration that
eventually understands that you're
stagnating and something needs to change
something needs to happen so it's not
because we try to confirm or model that
we also just want the ma the model to be
stationary we want to minimize free
energy and we want to know that we are
minimizing free energy right it's
layered in
metacognitive so in that sense you want
to see yourself going down so if you're
in a plateau you're no longer going down
right
um so that's why I think to some extent
even when you have a group that seems to
agree that seems to have the same idea
it'll eventually start disagreeing
inside like there will be people that'll
push that will keep polarizing such that
now there's um a little bit of a
difference like you're you're still some
people like well no okay that's that's
too far I I I don't think all of the
World is Flat maybe you know a little
bit but not all of it or I don't think
the entire universe is just the planet
that's silly do you see what I mean like
it's the same belief it's the same kind
of
um moving away from the trajectory that
the others are going but you can't
always constantly absolutely agree or
you cease uh to learn information so
you'll start again sampling a little bit
outside it's just that if you're stuck
in an necro
chamber and the echo chamber has you
know drifted drifted drifted drifted
drifted so far away from anybody you
could ever talk to such that there is no
reconciliation Point here you're you're
just going to have like a straight up no
there's nothing to hold on to for you to
be like well maybe my model is a little
similar but not quite the same so I
could you know adapt a little bit you're
there's this this this Ridge is too far
it's too it's too far gone so it is
adaptive for you to be with people like
you but if it's too like you then you're
stagnating and eventually you're likely
to potentially
disappear amazing yeah loads of things
uh come to mind from that answer um as
you said again um for those listening as
you said just important to point out as
you said to reduce free energy over time
so-called expected free energy in the
actual mathematical formula there is
this balance of epistemic and pragmatic
actions so we can't we we do have to
explore the world and we do have to
sample in conditions of uncertainty so
if people are curious this this sort of
evades the so-called dark room problem
which was a kind of an initial
contention to the free energy principle
which people can read about and it's
over 10 years old now these arguments um
I guess listening to this um something
that comes to my mind
is and well something that comes to my
mind and maybe those listening is why
does one end up in these states anyway
so maybe I'm listening to this and I
might I'm not but I might have been in
some hypothetical World a flat earther
and I might start panicking saying what
does that actually say about me
fundamentally that I was amable to those
claims whatsoever is there in some
computational formulation or just some
conceptual formulation an idea about why
some
people
tend more than others to be wrapped up
in conspiracy theory or group think um
this monolithic way of um cognizing
rather than cognitive flexibility and
again I don't mean to put these two on
sort of um binary polarities as if one
is amazing and one's terrible as you say
we do spend time with people we agree
with all of us as as we should or else
we'd have no friends
um but is there a reason perhaps
why some people end up really going down
that rabbit hole and S you know and and
and it's it's bizarre for those on the
outside as to how they've got to that
point right so let's always remember
that anything we're going to say is u a
conjecture because social systems are
extremely complex and it's a little bit
like chaos theory like ascribing one or
two causes to a very complex phenomenon
is all always wrong we can have a model
and it's an approximation but we can't
make too many blanket statements so
that's how I'm going to caveat what I'm
about to say next the second thing I'm
about to say is another caveat is
everyone does group
thing everyone does it like it's just
that some group think is considered and
that's what I meant by the truth yeah in
the
end can you reproduce any of the
experiments that come out from the
scientific field
can you like reproduce a proof can you
run it yourself do you understand
everything that comes out the truth is
no you have to rely on others for an
epistemic chain like is this a
justifiable belief yes maybe I think you
know that person looks really confident
and other people seem confident in them
so I'm you know I'm to follow that and
sometimes what their model allows you to
do his predictions about the world and
those predictions happen to come true so
you through abductive inference believe
it must be true but it doesn't mean that
in fact it could be completely unrelated
maybe this is just like you know
something that happens anyway if
everybody told you you've got to jump
and the sun will come up so we've jumped
and the sun keept coming up and you're
like all right I'll jump and you're like
you're right the sun did come up wow
that works so like it could be
completely wrong but you still you know
that's your best explanation so far it
allowed you a prediction your prediction
worked okay well there you go there's
some evidence for that in in our case
it's more along the lines of our beliefs
are the right beliefs and our ideology
is the right ideology because it leads
to XYZ kind of kpi we've arbitrarily
defined as the kpis that correspond to
what allows us to minimize free energy
but it's it's highly contentious often
times
the the kpis we Define are the kpis that
allow us to stay in the state that we
are and so it's heavily slanted towards
people in power right propaganda media
Etc all of these tools are built to get
you to believe that you are correct and
you are doing the right thing and that
right thing is to give more money to
rich people so you know let's let's keep
that in perspective for the time being
um why do some people fall down rabbit
holes it's a very known thing that there
are key um funnels for certain kinds of
ideologies because certain kinds of
ideologies have a
dynamic they very quickly allow you to
feel better about yourself feel better
about yourself or or feel more in
control of the world like you now have
an answer you you can now understand
what's going on your model feels like it
reduce free energy pretty
quickly um that's one of the reasons
conservatism is often very popular or at
least populist conservatism it tends to
rely on very easy very simple answers to
very complex problems why is your life
crap immigrants obviously it's
immigrants it's not the vast complex
industrial um uh series of Institutions
that keep you in a position where
everything around you has been eroded to
the point where you have nothing to grab
on to because that would be really
complicated it's immigrants so we when
we understand that certain kinds
of patterns of Stark reduction of free
energy exist exist in specific
rhetorical uh patterns we then
understand okay well who needs these
kinds of reductions who are the people
that are currently Feeling High
uncertainty very vulnerable and need
something to hold on to it's probably
people whose model had evidence and sort
of no longer does there is nothing in
the world around them that continues to
value validate their perspective so now
they're searching give me anything
anything that will allow me to continue
this model of myself which has crafted
who I am my phenotype depends on this
model if it no longer
exists now I have to accept that I am at
the bottom of the food chain and I don't
see a way out because it's complicated
so who are the people likely to be like
that well currently it's men who feel
like they're in a crisis of uh of
masculinity it's very poor people who
feel like they're disenfranchised and
nobody's helping them and um the only
reason that would be the case is because
the elites are um sucking the blood of
babies and uh to do to to fulfill their
evil ends to bring more immigrants in
because the immigrants are the reason
that you don't have jobs anymore etc etc
etc like these conspiracy the theories
generally tend to give you erroneous but
easy answers and the problem is they're
usually very wrong so they have to prop
themselves up with these webs of Tangled
beliefs which locally are a very easy
answer right they're like why uh why do
I see this well because you know that
thing and that thing is conceptually
related therefore that must be the
answer and so we get into this really
interesting space where there's people
with
incredibly complex
webs of where you be like well that
doesn't make any sense if it's more
complex why would they hold on to this
well because remember these things are
layered they also get a sense of control
from this they're minimizing free energy
somewhere at the level of the easy
little answer the easy little thing they
got a small chunk of explanation it
validates their position in the world
and they now feel like they have control
over things they understand the world
it's actionable so all of these reasons
give you a very clear profile for the
kind of person who is likely to fall for
that pattern of
beliefs fascinating okay good that's a
yeah yeah that's that's really useful um
and yeah perhaps good to remind people
that um in terms of the actual
formula for the free energy Principle as
you know it's can be cast as accuracy
minus complexity of your model so always
seeking the so-called most accurate
accurate model in the sense it fulfills
our preferences without added layers of
complexity about greater degrees of
freedom and maybe to to flesh out what
you were
saying you're right people have these
incredibly complex models of how the
world works and it's a pedophile ring
and that's somehow linked to 911 and
them but they kind of internally cohere
in some strange Nar narrative way
they're not complex in the sense that
they involve contradictions because if
they did that would be the buildup of
prediction eror so it's like you have
this stacked uh generative model but
because everything kind of
contextualizes and constraints
everything at the lower level there's
actually minimal prediction ER to reduce
it's just that if you actually spit that
out to an external World it just it
turns out to be [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and I think
that kind of explains why some of these
people have massive existential crisis
at some point if they're just like oh
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that whole thing was really really
wrong because the whole edifice comes
crumbling down and you get this enormous
Spike of prediction era every
layer um and there's something
interesting too like even when they
encounter a
contradiction they have the power to
resolve it right they can just make up
another thing they'll just look at the
patterns and be like this is sort of
like that that's the explanation and
that's that's powerful right you have
direct power to minimize free energy
right there and then right it's super
powerful and attracted so I can imagine
What's Happening Here in the way you've
just described it is you have this
sensory signal which signals that oh
your belief was wrong but because my
prior are so sticky because they're
granted so much Precision I can kind of
just ignore that evidence against them
and it's not like I'm actively doing
that that's just part and parts of the
way that I'm
constituted good why I think well that
that's um it's kind of a bleak picture
but actually I think um it it impels us
to have some epistemic humility which is
that our explan all of our explanations
for the world are probably in the
service of minimizing
complexity um while trying to maintain
the modom of accuracy and we're missing
out on some some important details and
that's true for all of us not only the
the so-called Crazy Ones this leads us
quite nice yeah go go go go pleas I
think it's not just a bleak picture I
think it's also hopeful because it gives
you a pathway like how do we allow or
help people to potentially get out of
that yeah um and the way to do that is
through kindness through empathy and
through a soft approach out you can't
you can't bash someone on the head to
change their beliefs but you can slowly
without making fun of them without
without telling them that everything
they believe is wrong just slowly
untangle one thing you know like be be
part of who they are and if you approach
this in clinical practice what this
means is instead of telling someone your
belief is psychotic this is absolutely
not real you should more like be like
okay well tell me what you see bring me
into your belief and together from your
perspective let's move out slowly it's
it's it's actually something that they
do now uh in certain approaches um to to
clinical practice with people who go
through psychosis and it it does work it
does make people feel better it pulls
them away from the edge and it's an
epistemic stance that is generally um
less pathologizing right it come yeah it
comes back to what we're saying it's
kind more Humane approach to
understanding one another and yeah and
and just flows nice ly from like it's
we're not making this stuff up this is
how the math and the physics unfolds in
in active inference um you would slowly
change the Precision that you Deploy on
certain parts of your model through
conversation but as you said it's very
rare that you can do that in a single
blow so probably not advisable um which
actually leads us you know this
conversation regarding social norms um
the way we group together the way our
cognition is distributed right we're not
just siloed inside our skulls we rely on
one another we offload to one another
that brings us very nicely on to a
second part of your work which um I feel
like because of your background in
sexology you've been working on social
scripts for a long time um and you have
a very deep rooted interest in it so
it's going to be really cool to unpick
this with you um and yes it is well I
I'd like to discuss social scripts and
the kind of active inference account of
them um obviously when people hear the
words script they think of drama the
theater films whatever they might not
think that their life is scripted unless
they they've got some sort of Truman
Show syndrome um what again very simple
question to start what is a script and
what does it say about our
Behavior right so there are many again
many definition of scripts this is part
of the reason we did these studies is
oftentimes in social sciences the work
is beautiful it's deep it's um again
empathetic um but it tends
to not perfectly Define its terms or at
least not agree on the definition of the
terms so many paradigms exist that use
the same term and can't agree on exactly
what it means if you try to bring it
together they will adamantly disagree
that these terms can be combined because
of fundamental um issues in the uh in
the definitions that's something I kind
of want wanted to curtail through a
formalism and so what we showed is that
there were basically two main ways to
understand scripts the first way was
through weak scripts we weak scripts are
the cluster of Concepts that generally
exist together and you can sort of draw
a mark of blanket around it so um that's
the reason that prototype Theory
essentially shows well can you really
Define a chair like there's many things
that can be a chair most things that are
a chair do not fulfill what we generally
consider to be the Prototype of a chair
and lots of chairs don't have backs or
lots of chairs uh possibly can be sat on
is it still a chair or some would Define
it as a chair nonetheless like like
there's there's many ways that you can
define a chair but in general you know
there's like a cluster of elements some
of which which are higher probability
and other lower probabilities so think
of a restaurant it's the it's the
example everybody gives in a restaurant
you generally know uh there's probably
food you're probably going to sit not
every time but probably you're probably
going to sit probably food it's probably
paid it's not free you know you can just
go and get it um and in general but not
always there's people giving you the
food and making the food for you so
that's the you know these are Concepts
that are Loosely and more likely or not
asso iated with the concept of
restaurant but now there's the strong
scripts so inside that cluster of
scripts there's a sequence you don't eat
right away you're going to enter the
restaurant probably going to get seated
by someone you don't always pick your
seat sometimes you do sometimes you
don't but you know you're going to sit
somewhere and then you're going to order
something you look at something you're
order something and then you're going to
eat maybe maybe you pay first so you see
how the scripts themselves have some
Wiggly Ness to them like some parts of
the scripts can come before or after but
there is generally a sense that
something comes before another thing and
there's this some of these are higher
probabilities so like I have to enter
the restaurant before I eat there and I
probably have to eat before I pay these
are like generally uh generally pretty
high
probability uh in between can wiggle a
lot like um maybe I'm going to take 30
minutes to order maybe I'm not even
going to look at a menu maybe I'm going
to be brought food in the dark like see
what I mean like there's there's
wiggleless um and that allows for some
scripts to sort of um change a little
bit this is also why scripts in general
tend to be a little bit porous they
don't stay the same thing forever so you
have scripts that are of a very long
temporal scale in the way they unfold
and there are scripts that have a very
long temporal scale in the way they
repeat
so for instance a wedding a marriage
that's something that's hen this existed
for a while like we've had marriages for
a long time the exact way that marriages
unfolded that you know that's changed
over time and it's still changing uh and
its purpose also has changed to some
extent the the people it applied to
changed also but in general you know we
consider marriages to be between two
people who are going to pull their
resources together and we assume
want to stick around with one another
for a
while
um and so in
general we need for a wedding to happen
for two people to know each other at
least a little bit you know at least
once just a little bit they need to go
through the ritual of marriage because
otherwise that doesn't apply and then
they probably need to share some of
their resources that repeats over time
that's repeated for maybe like I I don't
exactly know when the first weddings
happen but I know there are marriages in
the Bible so you know there's some
degree to that um but each marriage
lasts like 20 years maybe maybe 40 maybe
60 if you're lucky like you know what I
mean like it used to be very short
bursts of time now it can be shorter or
longer but the repetition of it happens
so that that time scale is very long
even though the actual script itself is
very short and then there's very long
scripts like um
like a war will happen over a long
period of time or like
um the rise of uh The Rise of an Empire
generally follows the same kind of
elements of a scripts or the rule of a
rulle or Etc so these can be very very
long um so that's that's a script that's
a script good
um I think um yes the first thing that I
that I can think of when it when when we
hear the word script again it's
obviously acting to some degree before I
get into the question I'm kind of
authenticity um there's I think when
people hear about mechanistic
explanations of behavior they slightly
worry that they're being reduced to some
automated robot um especially when we
talk about something like habits in
active inference so um lots of papers
talk lots of papers sort of borrow from
reinforcement learning um approaches to
habits this notion of belief free um
habits versus belief-based
behavior um or value free value based
however you want to formalize it but it
kind of comes down to the idea that
through repeated practice we arise in a
certain context and act in a certain way
and under very sort of stringent
conditions like if I touch a hot pan um
you know my body is reacting in a
habitual way I know it might seem
extremely reductive to say so but I'm
jumping out of the way but I'm automated
in that way I I do not choose to um and
it seems like in principle one could
codify a loss of behavior in that way
whether it's opening a door whether it's
what to do in a restaurant so how much
um flexibility or degrees of freedom it
does the active inference framework or
or or scriptology I don't know if that's
the word theology for scripts um Grant
the agent in these social constructs you
said that they they they're quite porous
they change over time but within the
actual synchronic moment where the agent
is
acting where does their own um agency
and and and power to actually act upon
the world come
from well it depends on where you're
positioned relative to the script so
everything is perspectival again and
let's imagine that you co grain the
world into things um you're not seeing
every pixel right you're seeing clusters
and again these clusters are defined by
these weak scripts so how can you
recognize something as a door well
something is a door because it has a
handle and you can sort of see the shape
it's not quite the wall but have you
ever been say uh to Japan where it's
wood panels um would you be able to tell
where the door is if there isn't a
handle like you'd have to see someone
opening the door and then you be like
all right that that's that's a door it
opens and I can go through like that's
that's a door um similarly have you ever
been to one of those very fancy fancy
mansions um where everything is
glass and there's no specific handle so
you're like oh God I I want to go
outside and it's like it's right in
front and you don't know what to do yeah
yeah you wait for someone to do it so in
that sense
that's why scripts are interesting you
are going to learn by looking at other
people do things and instead of you
figuring out a new way to interact with
that door you're just going to repeat
that because it's computationally
efficient to just you know you have a
purpose you want to be on the other side
let's just do the same thing but now
let's imagine you know there's a door in
front of you it's it's obviously a door
and there's someone
coming and you're at this awkward
distance where it's like if you don't
open the door for them it's kind of rude
yeah they're not quite there yet so what
are you going to do you don't have the
right answer there's no proper way to
exist here because it's a little bit
ambiguous what you're supposed to do
you're in the middle of two scripts here
you could open the door for yourself and
go and risk being a little rude so
there's there's a there's a cost here or
you could open the door for yourself and
wait for them and there's a cost of
maybe it's awkward because now they feel
obliged to run so you're going to weigh
the costs of this and you're going to
change by your by your decision by your
script by what you're choosing to enact
here you're going to tip the scale a
little bit so in
general the way the scripts change is in
these uncertain places in these moments
of like this hasn't quite been defined
there really isn't much of an answer
here that is like the obvious one so I'm
going to tip the scales and next
time depending on the outcome the cost I
paid this will act as evidence for the
future of you and that other person you
have crafted the world through your
choice here so I wrote a paper on this
with uh Pierre on um on gender
essentially explaining in gender seem to
be pretty binary like this is not a
blanket statement obviously it's not
binary every everywhere not across
cultures not all the time
but let's say in North America let's say
in the 50s it was pretty binary right it
was pretty clear you if you were a woman
you were this if you were a man you were
this it seemed like it fit within
specific roles or let's say let's say
the let's the 30s because the 50s is
exactly the time where it started
shifting but let's say in the 30s and
then the war happened and what happened
well you didn't have enough men to do
what was need to do so the script that
was generally functionally Associated to
a role was no longer being able to be
fulfilled but we still needed the
function and so then we were like well
okay what's the closest thing to a man
well you know another human a woman
woman could do this it's just not in
their current role but they can do this
and so it's like all right well the
script that generally was Associated to
women now expanded a little
bit because it expanded the porosity
also expanded because the the semantics
semantics are either um very strictly
constricted or they start smashing into
each other because if I connect one
point everything else can now be
connected right so if I can work I can
wear pants if I can wear pants I can
wear skirts if I can wear skirts I can
control my body if I canol my body I can
have sex you see what I mean like it it
kind of all flows from these natural
normally rigid connections but you made
one connection and therefore well now
you can make more connections and there
was no
real functional error when women did
that right when women wearing pants it
might shock you socially but she's not
going to die you're not going to die so
it's acceptable you just have to find
the right people around whom to do it um
and so with urbanization with the fact
that after the war uh people gathered in
City Senter with industrialization Etc
like with you you you had to repopulate
you had to find a job you had to etc etc
etc etc you ended up with people being
able to connect with one another
technology also increased and grew uh we
had more access to Media more access to
each other and through this mish mash
you were capable of fostering certain
kinds of paracity such that well now
gender is you know does it mean the same
as it once did do we even really need
those categories anymore some people
don't even think so anymore it whether
they're right or not is irrelevant to
them it's now meaningless they they
don't need that category to exist in the
world some people still do and they use
it but we found that the fluidity of
gender has been made so overt so clear
to people that they feel they can act
upon that they feel they have the choice
to change the script themselves so I
think it starts from there's either a
functional need for a switch to happen
or there's so much uncertainty that
effectively it can go either way so
it'll really be about you know your
decision It's Kind it's it's a little
bit random maybe your specific um
position in the world will make it so
that you are going to make that choice
but somebody else coming from a
different perception would have made a
different choice so the script in itself
was slightly um uncertain at that
level cool yeah and I guess the
conception that comes to my mind is that
one can't think about script evolution
in terms of these enormous steps I mean
clearly you do have these occasional
historical moments that call for radical
shifts in Social convention but if you
think about the evolution of a
restaurant for example there's been no
single event at least that comes to my
mind which means that people have to
wait to be um sat in a European
restaurant and maybe they go and sit at
their table in American whatever it is
but maybe through these kind of
incremental changes require you know
Necessities pop up in certain niches and
are less relevant in others so you you
see this kind of staggered Evolution um
which brings me kind of question I
probably should have started with which
is in terms of active
inference you spoke a lot about function
of um like you know when the function
changes so the script will change well
that brings me to just ask a very simple
question which is what is the function
of a script for um free energy
minimizing creatures like ourselves what
what does it allow us to do and maybe
perhaps on the flip side of that how
does it constrain
us so scripts allow us to avoid
Computing everything all the time
because you have a script you can make
plans much further into the future you
can know how to act um in a situation
even though it might be a little novel
so you stay relatively stable no matter
where you go right there's never I mean
it's not true if you have a lot of
scripts and you know about a lot of
scripts no matter where you go you're
probably going to be fine you're
probably going to know how to get what
you need who to talk to when you need
something etc etc so because you have
these sort of pre-baked policies that
have high certainty that you can
recognize because you can understand
what triggers that script you're very
adapted to the
environment and that also allows us to
avoid friction so when I know what I'm
supposed to do at a restaurant I'm not
going to cause a big commotion by doing
something ridiculous or by doing
something highly unexpected for
everybody else we're naturally going to
self-organize into the purposes we meant
to fulfill when we went there that's why
it's a it's an interesting experience to
go to a different country and and make
errors and realize oh wow okay my
assumptions were wrong this is not how
things are done everywhere there are
other ways to do things you loosen the
prior over this is the script and you
add an extra layer of context yeah this
is the script here and this is the
script here and your model becomes a
little bit more complex but also more
adaptable so scripts are superb useful
for self-organization and for planning
over time Splendid yeah yeah that that's
just a super useful addendum um in so
far as yeah we we are limited creatures
if we could compute if we could do
perfect basian inference and compute
every single contextual element of our
world then then then we probably
wouldn't need them right we would just
act um omnipotently and omnisciently in
all context unfortunately well maybe not
unfortunately it's probably quite a good
thing um you know I was talking about
kind
of one inherent worry that perhaps all
of us have is
that we're just becoming the vehicles of
our culture that we're acting without
really thinking that we're just um yeah
that we just embody our Norms Without
Really ever having a moment to think
well did I choose those did they choose
me um this may be irrelevant but I'm
curious to see what you think about it
um there's an Italian playright called
pandelo Luigi p who was writing in the
early 20th century modernist uh playr
and he wrote a play called um Henry IV
and K in Italian and in that um a kind
of man acts um they're doing a sort of
play in which he is playing the role of
a nobleman on a night and he falls off
and he ends up believing that he is
Henry the 12th century Henry ivth and
acts accordingly and shapes the whole
world so that because he's very rich
originally so that all of his Butlers
end up wearing Med evil we and whatever
anyway it it it it unravels during the
play that actually for the past five
years he's known like they will think
that he's mad he's actually returned
back to his normal condition but
continues to act as Henry IV because
philosophically those people are more
mad than him because he's actually
chosen his Madness he's chosen his
script whereas other people just embody
or vehicles for the ideas that are
relevant to their cont text which brings
me to something that Yung said which is
that um people don't have ideas ideas
have people so just s of throwing it out
there all of this kind of a smus board
of authenticity to what degree um do you
think that active inference agents
really are anything beyond the
contingencies of their time like do we
have anything new that we can bring or
is it only um a matter of circumstance
when we do something kind of random and
and change is is there any notion here
of like genuine
agency o genuine agency I know I know I
know I know I know it's full it's loaded
that question I think agency is a
Continuum yeah it's first of all agency
is really hard to Define in Psychology
you sort of Define it but if you try to
Define it anywhere outside of its
functional like observable metrics like
they did this and they assigned it to
themselves kind of thing um it's really
hard to Define but if we were to Define
it as say a degree of
entropy let's imagine that I expect you
to do this when that right so there's
like this absolute Baseline that you can
be perfectly predicted and then based on
that anything you do outside of that
prediction is a form of
agency like if I don't Factor your
actions into this you're going to be
this but given your actions there's a
degree of entropy and uh the more
unlikely your actions are the more
agentic you might be because you
factored into the shift in the decision
um let's assume that's a definition but
it would be a very contentious one not
everybody would agree with that I
think we are very agentic we're
constantly exploring we're not just
exploiting we're not just uh pragmatic
we in fact these two terms exist
epistemic and fragmatic within the
active inference framework where you try
to balance between the two you are
trying to balance between uh a pragmatic
outcome that keeps you alive uh which
would be what these people are doing and
following the the person they're trying
to stay alive and doing what he's saying
because they kind of don't have a choice
if they want to keep going
but to do so they might also be very
creative they might improve their model
of the world they might be gathering
different things they might not act
exactly the way he had thought because
if he could compute it all then why
would why would other people do it you
need somebody to gather the knowledge
that you currently don't have so there's
always a degree to which agents within
certain sets are agentic and so that's
where we Define those scripted super
sets there's highly certain things like
who has the money well it's not me it's
you so that thing I know if I want the
money I know that you're going to tell
me to do something but in the way in the
something in the distance between the
moment that something is fulfilled and
me fulfilling
it there's
like there's there's a million miles
it's practically infinite like depending
on the granularity of the order as well
there's there's some um space for agency
and so what happens is um we sort of
agree on what fulfillment means here
maybe you know but you didn't
necessarily have a very clear picture of
what that fulfillment meant you you have
some criteria and everything else kind
of Falls outside and if we were again
fully try to Define what those criteria
mean we would go in sort of infinite
regress of it's impossible to Define
everything you need a definition to
Define yeah so
um because of that like infinite momy
because of that space in between the the
the time you are given the action and
the
Fulfillment there is space for agency
interesting as you said it probably
would ra you know raise some contentions
from the philosophers um I guess my my
push back on that just to sort of play
Devil's Advocate would be um this notion
I mean just back down to the definition
of agency and we don't have to go deep
into this um because it's somewhat
peripheral but I guess it's interesting
to to think of it as entropy um away
from my expectations of you given my
model of you is obviously contingent on
my knowledge of you right so if I'm a
baby well everyone is super free because
they're doing wacky stuff the whole time
so I guess the on the complete other end
of the spectrum you have a a God or
thees demon who can model everything
you're going to do and in that you're
just kind of some porn in some chess
game so completely depend as you as you
said it's dependent yeah exactly it's
all perspective um which which I guess
is actually one of the fundamental
insights of active influence which is
that um what is free energy to you might
not be free energy to me because we're
all self- evidencing or self-organizing
for for our own ends for for the
maintenance of our own models all right
excellent um cool well then we we'll
jump to the third paper the third theme
but it actually all kind of ties
together I think which which makes sense
given that obviously it's it's your work
and these are coherent uh you know
coherent interests um you wrote a paper
I think it was this year with um with
Ali Ali ramju who's obviously is a great
friend of The Institute um and and helps
Daniel out with with everything so shout
out to ali um and this one really piqued
my interest um so this is intraaction
inference um I think right now it's am I
right to say it's only out on Sai archiv
at the moment is that right m
uh yes it's the preprint it's still the
preprint well definitely people should
check out because it's a it's it's a
great paper um they might have to get
their head around some
terminology uh because it's quite rich
with with with specific
terminology but I'd love to be able to
unpick some of the insights that you and
ali uh came uh came up with in that
paper I guess the first one here is that
you say that um and I can quote here a
genuine Fe so Fe is free energy
principle a genuine Fe based ontology
must reject any discontinuity between
matter and subjectivity as FP does not
confer any uniqueness to cognitive or
active agents the same mathematical
technology applies equally to a whole
range of entities from inert rocks to
the brain
so there's a natural tie there to what
we've just been talking about in terms
of agency and free
will but I want to actually
stay a little bit away from that and
talk more about this discontinuity this
um this separation that we in sort of
intuitively make between matter and mind
or matter and
subjectivity just for the kind of um
Layman people out there go well of
course they're different because this is
all mental and the chair in front of me
is not and okay um so what does this so
This sounds bizarre for them what does
it mean to reject a discontinuity
between matter and
subjectivity
right so let's start from the beginning
please
materialization is the key here matter
isn't static it's constantly becoming
it's shaping itself it's being shaped
and basically it's that's that's how
what we were discussing which is neom
materialism is distinct from materialism
where materialism presupposes elements
outside of say the perception of the
individual it presupposes it there is a
true outside in the world and you have
to do your best to figure out what is
that truth in NE materialism we're
basically
saying it's not that simple um we have
basically um a relationship between what
is being perceived the
perspective The Observer and what is
being perceived at all like like this
this
um the element outside is really just um
a a relationship between two things
becoming together um so basically we we
try to recognize that there's an
indeterminacy of matter and
um the this this move movement of matter
is constrained by possibility spaces um
so like we discussed like the scripts
right scripts are possibility spaces but
they are also constrained by say um
physical constraints like you can't fly
like that's just not a thing yeah um but
you know um there are perceptions that
shape what you consider to be things
around you and you will shape the things
based on what you consider to be these
things um so basically given these
possibility spaces you're going to
create metastable
formations and you everything is going
to align around these metastable
formations it's the niche formation idea
right and so materialization in this
sense is um the iterative process where
matter continually redefines limits and
boundaries these are are constantly
changing and being um
negotiated and this negotiation is due
to the way that things um self-evidence
right so matter being
relational and in a sense self-caused
because things
self-organized is is moving this um this
division between the
ontology um that aligns the view of um
the self and the matter here Everything
is self- evidencing Everything is
self-organizing and effectively um you
you you are also constituting others and
they are constituting you others or
other things so the the the boundary
here is virtual it's dependent on a a
third sort of perspective that defines
that you are not the thing in front of
you um the um this is where we basically
determine that there's a probability of
sensory State that's interpreted as
evident for the agent's existence uh and
so everything around you both uh is
evidence for your existence and you
evidence as well right does that so far
is that is that clear yeah yeah
um just for those who maybe are more
familiar with the terminology and active
inference am I right to say that this
possibility space could be uh defined as
an attractor set um that is that bit of
a blanket
statement uh no I think that's that's
interesting so basically um in the
possibility spaces or at least according
to Thea and
the uh you have virtual and
actual uh properties and capacities uh
and so if we relate them to the Dynamics
of fe uh and active inference um you
basically just have a temporal depth of
these possibilities that are um directly
afforded to you or potential given say a
new agencing of the the elements in play
and so yes you have farther away
attractor set that are more or less
likely given the complexity that would
need to be given that would need to give
rise to them so if you think of energy
energy is just um the the the
improbability of something happening
high energy means it's highly unlikely
for it to happen um and so um when we
when we deal with these uh possibility
spaces we're basically talking about um
the
co-constitution of what might happen and
what is happening given the collapse of
the
possibilities by what you are doing and
what the world is doing to you so you're
constantly in this sort of
[Music]
um
twister in this twister where you act on
the world and it acts on you and it's
constantly being uh being shaped right
and I guess an important elision there
not only between subjectivity and matter
but also ontology and epistemology so
ontology this this the study of what is
and the epistemology the study of how we
know what that is or what it is in the
sense that a free energy minimizing
agent is in the game of basically
getting to know themselves in some
strange way so they're garnering
evidence for this own implicit model
that they have of themselves and the
world that they want um given this
attractor state so that's a really
beautiful way that to know oneself is to
be oneself or vice first and I Know Carl
has some strange inversion of the
cartisian
um I think therefore I
am this is this is a really interesting
question because I think uh or it's a
really interesting area because it yeah
I mean just brings up so many
fundamental questions one being that I
think in your paper you speak about how
one can never perfectly actualize a or
or or be static in the possibility um
set or or put in terms of attracting
States you could never be at stasis
where you could never be fully attracted
to your attractor set um you're always
uh in well at least for us we're in this
kind of itinerant state where we uh are
open to the world and therefore has to
deal we have to deal with its kind of
stochastic
nature um I guess maybe I'm being an
idiot what would the World maybe um what
would the world look like if we managed
to reach that stasis so this I I
understand that this
Dynamic um unfolding this um this
mutuality of self and other this getting
to know oneself what we're really coming
to is the notion that matter as a
process rather than as this kind of
rified static
thing but if that I mean if that process
essentially came to a halt are we
invoking that matter itself recedes the
matter hides matter if matter is
processed once this thing stops if it
reaches its attracting state if I reach
perfect homeo States whether do I stop
is my ontology rooted in my dynamism or
is there something over what was the any
materialist say about that or is there
something over and Beyond this process
of self-
evidencing no I think you touching upon
it I think if there's no more energy if
there is no more information being
exchanged there's nothing happening and
therefore if nothing's happening me
you're
dead is there a strange Paradox there
that from the outside right like if the
claim is that this extens existential
imperative is to minimize free energy to
try and get to this precise level of
homeostasis it sounds like what we're
trying to get to is
equilibrium right like it does I just
want to stop right like why am I cursed
with this fact that I can't right that
like I'm cold and H and off you know but
like that seems to be the goal but
paradoxically it would all stop if that
was fulfilled right yeah that that's
kind of the way that I'm interpreting
what you're saying
so again i' careful here I'm not giving
a Tey to something that doesn't have a
teolog um but how how do you kind of
unpick that Paradox yeah well it's
because this isn't we're not meant to
fulfill it right we are the way we are
because there because the universe is
the way it is like the
universe leads towards entropy right
eventually there is no more energy
eventually everything is spent
eventually everything is equivalent
there's there's no information to be
gathered anymore that's just how things
are and it and it exists on such a
temporal scale on such a massive
temporal scale
that at the level of us this is and
always will be so we are not meant to
ever reach a state where there is no
information to be exchanged where things
don't change anymore so obviously we are
constantly pulling in the other
direction and it kind of looks like
we're trying to reach a point where we
no longer move but that will never
happen right so it's natural that if the
slope is like this you're trying to go
like this and and basically what you're
saying yeah but what if you reach the
top of the mountain what happens then
well yeah if we reach the top of the
mountain eventually we would cause our
own issue right we would we would um we
would reach the point we're trying to
avoid
reaching we'll never really get there
and at the same time consider um we are
a product of this system because the
system is
ongoing so we also contribute to
reaching this point we are consuming
energy and we are going to help
eventually reach the heat dep of the
universe this is not like obviously
we're we're trivial at this point right
we're a blip but imagine we got better
at it then we would probably just make
it much much much faster than it would
have been otherwise that's what a lot of
people think that's what well in many
ways that looks like what it kind of
looks like what we're doing yes I um
yeah maybe I need to just banish this
romantic notion that there might be some
top of the mountain um my sopian
struggle will actually have a have some
benefit you know some positive outcome I
think something that you mentioned there
in passing which is really important and
really interesting and
might not always be made explicit to
those who are learning about active
inference is that we're talking about
information here so I'd love for you to
um be able to I I'd love to hear a bit
more about information um we think of
Mata again as this kind of static entity
the models that we we learn at school um
but at least to my very Layman ears we
have this with um free energy principle
and just modern physics as it's
unfolding this really beautiful
convergence of matter and information
and you have uh statistical mechanics
and you have stuff like Shannon
information and all of these really
fascinating Concepts when you say that
we will get to a point where there is no
more information trans er um where
basically yeah just everything is as is
um again I just digging into the
ontology there is that to say that and I
know there's no hard and fast answer is
that like are you postulating some kind
of it from bits as David Charmers would
say that like kind of the fundamental
unit that we're talking here is
information and matter is in some way
emerging from that is is there some
ontological hierarchy ontological
structure that you can point to there or
is it
fuzzy so that's an active area of
research obviously there is no perfect
answer in the relationship between
information and matter like we can
always point to the land hour principle
you know uh we can talk about um how um
mass and energy are related and if you
have energy then you have a sense of
information because effectively
um information is related to the concept
survival where like the negative log
probability of an observation becoming
true uh is effectively you know
surprisal and therefore information so
there's a relationship there right and
if what we're talking about is the
relationship between um you subjectivity
and therefore perception and uh or at
least Observer Dynamics and matter which
are mutually shaping their is a sense in
which the way that information is is is
exchanged effectively shapes the
boundary which gives rise to what we con
consider um the ontological stale scale
at which matter exists so in a sense yes
but really when we talk about
information we're really talking about a
degree to which
um a certain bound on a surprise
is related to a sensory data in a model
of the world so um information is
negentropy when you
have unlikely something that's
information if everything is equally
likely then there's no information there
right so that's where we get to this
relationship between the heat death of
the universe and the absolutely
equivalent um
probabilities for anything because there
is nothing there and the fact that uh if
you reach the point where you weren't
exchanging any information effectively
uh you you there's nothing going on
there there is no information to
exchange yeah I think that that sheds
light on um a potential point of
confusion that people might have when
they read the active influence
literature which is that when we're
talking about
self-information we are not talking
about
a kind of self- evidencing result
maximal self-information is not self-
evidencing in fact it's quite the
opposite um so that's that's that's
useful to remember that the in like if
everything was unfolding predictably you
would have less information right like
your model would be working optimally if
you're getting more information out of
your model well then there's some
Divergence going on here and so so so
yeah it can all be kind of cast as this
um quite simple statistical picture
excellent good well M the last thing I
want to speak to about I mean this was
fascinating and honestly on this topic I
would love to just go on forever um
because you've also got another um
excellent paper that people should check
out which is about
Consciousness um and holographic
screens and so there's plenty there's
plenty for people to get their teeth
into and we've really barely touched the
surface but I guess the last thing that
I want to speak about in some depth is
your work at
verses um um and artificial intelligence
and and your PhD as well of course which
is in cognitive Computing so obviously
within the um the limits of disclosure
and how much you're allowed to talk
about maybe you could kind of give us a
little bit of information pardon the pun
about what versus is what versus does um
and how it's kind of
revolutionizing intelligence in some
ways um and and how that's being
embodied or encoded into artificial
agents right so I guess I can give you
the key
difference most people consider just
like we discussed that intelligence is a
property
of an inside and that everything else is
outside what we consider is that
intelligence is a phenomenon it happens
as a function of the interactions
between different kind of um individuals
agents objects there is information
being passed and it's the integration of
this information that can be
self-reflexive through different kinds
of boundaries that enable acting in a
specific kind of way relative to an
outcome you wish to see happen so you
acrw
agency uh given how much information you
can sort of pull together
so our approach to intelligence is
shared intelligence and um we consider
that shared intelligence is not just
about shared bits of
data it's also creating perspectives
forcing and embedding into the world and
because you have an embedding into the
world you have the possibility to
dissolve and when you have the
possibility to dissolve and information
you have veilance when you have veilance
you have emotion and then you have the
possibility for empathy you have the
possibility for theory of Mind
coordination cooperation and eventually
shared
intelligence these are key elements that
have not been used in the literature so
far at least are not being um delved
into as much from say the machine
learning uh crowd they're doing amazing
work they've allowed for very deep U
processing of data but this data is
always
decontextualized the key issue currently
is llms hallucinate and they hallucinate
because they have no clue what the
context really is or what you're trying
to do really and where they are relative
to this context they have no Loop and
more than no Loop they have um no true
sense of how to coordinate with you they
don't know if something happened they
they don't know if you're happy with the
answer really like you can give a thumb
up or a thumb down to Chad GPT but while
it's giving the answer it doesn't have
that so all of these elements together
make it so that U potentially this
approach is going to hit a wall our
approach is more natural and gives rise
to this
fundamental principle of mutual
information exchange where in order to
improve your model of the world you have
to get to know the thing in front of you
better you have to integrate part of it
as a part of you and now you're shaping
each other so this whole alignment
problem sort of falls out because it's
no longer one about One True Value
alignment it's about how all of these
pieces coordinate together and create
create a harmonious self-organizing
system that reaches towards something
that resembles a metastable state
awesome so just to kind of backtrack
there and and maybe give a a broader
picture um really good that we now have
a kind of understanding of of of what
versus is trying to implement I thought
the mention of kind of the machine
learning LW and the llms is really
useful here because people have I think
have in a notion now because there's
been so much news about chat gbt and
Bard and neural networks that that's
what artificial intelligence is perhaps
you could give us a very simple um
carving up of the space in which if you
could a very brief sort of synopsis
about how what an llm is what a large
language model is how it
works what you know like vector spaces
and probabilities and stuff like this
and then what an active inference system
might look like um whether that is
embodied or not so I might be leading
you down a down the path yeah so
essentially uh Transformers or attention
mechanisms that have self attention and
attention to uh the text in question
they embed different
uh relationships between different
different words that give you
essentially a probability of a next word
being produced uh it's really that
simple it's a it's a hierarchy that
retains certain words and then gives you
probabilities at different scales so the
more complex your Transformer hierarchy
the more complex your attention can be
but effectively it's just that it's what
is the probability of this word given
that that word and that word and that
word were said so it's content to
content really it's not it doesn't
understand the structure of the world it
doesn't have a model what it has is just
a sort of given this word that word
given that word that word given that
word that word and it's very performant
because knowledge the acrude knowledge
that we have grafted in
language has a sort
of underlying model you know like we
don't talk nonsense most of the time
when we talk we try to make sense we
we're not just spouting out a bunch of
random words out of nowhere that speak
to nothing of our reality but that's
limited to
that our approach basically gives our
our models the capacity
to from what it observes create another
layer and that layer tries to understand
what the causes are why the this happen
not what word preempted that word but
why was that word used and in that case
what you would get if you created an an
llm with an active inference agent what
you would do is it's not just something
that predicts the next word it's
something that predicts the cause of the
next word and therefore has a sense of
why you're saying what you're saying
what you're trying to do and what it
might say if it chooses to go along with
that perspective um another difference
is that the Elms are not really placing
themselves in that Loop it has self
attention relative to words but it
doesn't know what it is right it doesn't
know what its actions are it can't make
a choice relative to an objective that's
something that you get if you have an
agent that places itself within the loop
and under understands the outcomes of
its own actions relative to these uh to
these causes great yeah yeah that's a
really useful um separation there
distinction between the two um an
interesting aside that we could get into
but maybe it's maybe down the time it's
not worth it which is about the degree
to which language does indeed refer to
some external world because you have all
the exter you know the semantic
externalist semantic internalist I'm
sure Mr Chomsky would have something
interesting to say but actually I'll
refrain um something I have heard which
I think is bit more interesting and I I
was really happy that you mentioned the
action perception Loop that you are
encoding but maybe a better word there
would be that you're embodying or you're
allowing these agents to embody and I
really want to have just a moment to
speak about embodiment because these
large language models don't have sensory
States they don't have active States and
and for anyone who's seen a markof
blanket that seems pretty fundamental to
to Adaptive intelligence to being able
to enact self-organization in the way
that we do it um something that I have
heard is that in some ways this
embodiment grants us and perhaps the
robots in the end with a sort of care um
and I mean care they're in the hiigaran
sense there there's a kind of um there's
a tendency to lean to towards the world
in the way in which we're interested in
the way it's coupled to us and and the
way it interacts with us and the way we
interact with it whereas if we are not
embodied exactly because you don't have
that causal impact on the world
um you don't you don't embody that
fundamental phenomenology of care um it
doesn't really mean much to you to put
it in s of layman's terms I guess
bringing it back to some a topic that
always I want to speak about and need to
stop speaking about so much is
consciousness it's a very loaded
question but is there a degree to which
embodying an artificial intelligence
doesn't just endow it with um goals that
are just in principle more align with
ours but an actual sense of
phenomenology a
Consciousness and if not why not and if
not what else would we need to add and
again I'm not expecting you to solve the
hard problem in 10 minutes but just what
is the kind of active inference
perspective on a question like
that right so I think we need to
reformulate what embodiment means I
think embodiment is just a relation to
self within a context right and so
because because why would a body just
mean this yeah are you less embodied or
you're in when you're in the virtual
world I would argue you actually are
because in effect your perception of
your own body is just an illusion
created by your brain so what is
embodiment really I think embodiment is
that it's a relationship to self
relative to context which means there's
a boundary
somewhere if you are the entire context
there's no boundary so there's no real
embodiment you have to somehow separate
separates something now maybe you
separate your own Parts maybe you are
every part but you understand how the
different parts are different from one
another that's maybe one thing right if
you if you imagine the the scenario of a
say an Overlord AI that is connected to
everything and everyone its embodiment
might be how it can pull different
strands of perspectives given its
different pieces for instance so we have
to
rethink our understanding of embodiment
to be a little less centered on our own
experience and this leads us to
isometry why would phenomenology only be
given to something that resembles a
physical because I imagine that's what
you kind of had in mind right you had
sort of in mind like an humanoid sort of
Android thing which we we would give to
an AI and therefore they would be
anchored in the world in the same way
that we are and if effectively that
would give them a phenomenology but I
think if we're thinking of embodiment
we're really just thinking
of how the thing the agent relates to
itself relative to its boundaries and
how those boundaries Define how
information is processed relative to its
objectives I think the problem with that
is that it doesn't ensure that we will
understand each other what we want is to
endow the AI with the possibility to
truly grock us and for us to truly grock
it we need to be able to exchange this
information in a way that's you know
useful um so we tend to want to give it
an embodiment that resembles ours I do
think embodiment in the sense that I
defined it is required for what we
understand to be Consciousness because
you need the boundaries to reflect each
other without the boundaries reflecting
each other you have a form of
information being integrated but you
don't have self and therefore you don't
have self- reflection and I don't think
given that you necessarily have
um access and agency over that access
you just have you know movement along
some gradients um so that's what I think
will be required to give a form of
Consciousness to um AIS that have a
version of embodiment but just to
clarify are you saying that a um
recursive or embedded system of markof
blankets in which information is being
exchanged up and down and in which
errors are being passed up and um
temporally slower levels contextualizing
these higher order levels are you saying
that
is sufficient for Consciousness I
understand that it might be necessary
for Consciousness but something that
I've heard you and Maxwell speak about
actually on with the active inference
Institute is this notion that the that
Consciousness might might entail some
layer of that cake which is so-call
right only so it isn't being
contextualized it it it it's just I
don't know what issuing information how
would you what does that model look like
um and have I well yeah um I I I don't
want to completely butcher it so I I'll
pass it over to you I think the right
only parts of the models are
just they're dependent like um depending
on the scale everything can be right
only like it's it's it's really a
question of what is the degree of access
and I think when we Define right only we
Define the conditions for the thing to
survive you don't have a choice but to
breathe air right you don't have a
choice but to drink water these are not
um choices you're making so to some
extent there is one layer at which
something is like it has to happen right
um and therefore it's not something that
um that is written on because it's
likely to
change so at the level of an AI That's
what I mean by the perspectival aspect
of their
embodiment with a boundary if they have
a boundary some boundary whatever that
boundary is they have a condition for
that boundary to be dissolved and that
condition those
conditions Define the right only uh
layers of the
boundary does that mean in some sense
that being able to for the system to
recognize it it's distinct from
something else from everything else is a
prerequisite condition for Consciousness
within this model that's right that's
right in order for an a thing to have a
self and an embodiment it has to be
somehow bound from other things like it
it has to be different to some extent or
it has to be able to take perspectives
that enable this difference like I said
if you had this Overlord that can pull
into different consciousnesses it would
still for a time being be able to pull
this specific boundary and embody it in
a sense yes yes and that and that feeds
back very nicely into this Hy doarian
notion of care to take a stance on
something I think is a way that he might
Express that wonderful I mean I I guess
my final comment on this would be what
given this given that a kind of um the
perspectival the the self versus other
distinction is so at least in this model
crucial to a sense of what it is like to
be anything how much Credence or how do
you
rejoinder those who speak of um
boundless Consciousness experiences or
um yeah
ego death or Oneness are these um
delusional do they or do they invoke
some minimal sense of self where do they
fit into this
story
so I think that's a really interesting
topic and I'm not someone who's going to
um invalidate anyone's experience so
obviously again take what I'm saying
with a grain of salt your experience
trumps my perspective on your experience
what I think happens
is you're not actually
dissolving right you are dissolving
certain layers of what generally
constitutes
yourself and that
experience
is powerful and
transcendental and because you feel like
what usually constitutes yourself is
dissolved you feel like you're connected
to everything else but you're not you're
still you you're still embedded in your
body right these practices are
conceptual and tap into what we believe
to be what that would be like but the
truth is you don't know no one who's
ever reported that experience wasn't in
a body so I think we all tap into that
same experience when we go through
something that resembles ego death in
the sense that there are layers that
become um Nill like we dissolve these
layers but not all layers which means on
a fundamental level that infinite
Consciousness is still being tapped into
from a
perspective awesome yeah I mean um I
guess I ought to point people to where
this philosophical Foundation is and
people should definitely check out
Thomas metzinger um and something that's
really important to point out here is
that when we're talking about self one
ought to keep in mind that there's a
distinction here between the so-call
ontological self this kind of entity
that I think people instinctively
associate with a kind of cartisian Soul
this unchanging entity and perhaps what
we're more concerned with which is the
so-called phenomenal self model how the
system um models itself how it reflects
on its own being how it takes a stance
on its own being and what it conceives
of itself and perhaps the attenuation of
some of the self- modeling is exactly
what's happening in psychedelics and
here we speak to people like George Dean
who I'm trying to get on and I think
that would be fascinating and some of
the work that I'm working on is is
completely to do with self modeling so
so if this is all very neatly tied into
current work going on in active
inference M this has been awesome um I
know I know our time is basically up um
where what so what what do people have
to look forward to on your side what
what are the kind of interesting things
that you're working on where can people
find you uh where can people reach out
to you if they're exhilarated by the
stuff we've spoken about today and want
to find out
more so I'm working on several papers
one uh on uh emergence in uh in active
inference I'm also working on a paper on
self-esteem and how to model it in
social groups and I'm working on a paper
on sustainability and how uh that rises
from the notion of resilience and
mutually uh effective resilience um you
can find me on LinkedIn on Google
Scholar uh and uh sometimes on Twitter
very very rarely I would much more
encourage people to reach out to me U by
email if they find it on one of my
papers or on LinkedIn directly awesome
thank you Ma this was
great thank you
