today's episode is a magnificent start
of a series it's on this book The Hidden
Spring by Mark zomes the journey to the
source of Consciousness and will bring
you multiple parts to bring you through
that it's an incredible book and really
mind-opening mind expanding as is the
goal of the show our guest is one of the
boldest thinkers in Neuroscience he's a
pioneer of dreaming a heretic of
Consciousness the man who discovered the
brain mechanism for dreaming
it is a pleasure to welcome the author
of This Magnificent book the Hidden
Spring a journey to the source of
Consciousness Marx homes welcome to the
show thank you very much and glad to be
here it's great to have such an
innovator in his field on the show
marker I am absolutely fascinated by the
book and I'm very grateful for your time
because you've committed a few hours to
us over a few days to really from from
my perspective so let the knowledge seep
in because there's so much as I said a
lifetime's worth of work in this book
but I I thought we'd start with where it
started for you because as a child A
peculiar question occurred to you you
taught how do we picture the world as it
existed before Consciousness evolved I
thought that would be a wonderful way to
set it up for our audience I think we
underestimate children uh the questions
that they Ponder are are profound ones
um and you know as we all as we enter
the the world and understand the world
um these questions arise and because
we're children they arise in a entirely
fresh fashion you know you don't you
haven't yet learned what questions
you're supposed to be asking and still
less uh do you know what the answers are
that you're supposed to give to those
questions
so I like many other children I'm sure
you know thought about these sorts of
things and
um tried to try to understand what the
difference was between the the world as
we perceive it and the world itself you
know it may it made a kind of obvious
sense to me that I'm perceiving the
world through my eyes and so my
Consciousness is how my eyes and brain I
don't even know if I thought about it in
terms of the brain but I realized that
my picture of the world is mine you know
it's something my Consciousness belongs
to me and I am not inside of anybody
else's Consciousness so you know
presumably they have their own version
of of what I'm perceiving but this this
one that I'm perceiving must be
different from the actual World itself
um and and then you know I went
backwards from that to try to imagine at
that stage I didn't think that uh
simpler creatures were conscious I I
just assumed only we human beings were
conscious
um not that I really thought about that
but I assume there must be a time before
there were human beings and therefore
before there was Consciousness and then
I was trying to picture uh What what
would that world look like and and it
was a real conundrum obviously because
it's an impossible task how can you
picture A World Before picturing things
was possible
um and I had a kind of the conclusion
that I came to was something like this
that the the world itself must be made
up of numbers or some sort of some sort
of abstract system of of computations or
forces and energies I I pictured that as
being uh in in black and white
um and I and I imagined my Consciousness
was a sort of a bubble and out and
beyond that bubble uh the bubble the
surface of the bubble is the way that
I'm representing the world but beyond
that bubble was the sort of black and
white entirely abstract
mathematical uh world and
you know
because it's an impossible task of
course that itself was was was was not a
solution to it but I you know I I I I I
remember it vividly and it obviously was
the beginning of the path uh that led me
to writing this book which as you say is
the sort of culmination of of my of my
life's work in this area as the book is
it's part biographical and full of scar
tissue of experience working in Soweto
in you know not so pleasant experiences
but also in more glamorous experiences
and showing actually what apartheid was
like back at the time when you were
studying as well but these formative
experiences had a dramatic effect on you
in your childhood
and I'm sorry to hear about what
happened to your brother Lee because
that had a major consequence on you as
well that had a major impact and really
sent you on this path to understand
about the brain as well well first of
all about the autobiographical aspect
um I very deliberately
set about writing the book in that style
because it flows so naturally from from
what we've just been talking about that
that
our consciousness
m is subjective uh and the subjective
perspective that I've brought to trying
to Grapple with these things first in a
childish and maturish way and then
gradually as I became better educated in
a in a in a more rigorous scientific way
um it is nevertheless a personal
question and it's and it's it's from a
particular point of view so I thought
that with this subject matter it's
particularly apt to to bring in this the
experiential uh subject of uh aspects of
that of that scientific Journey but now
um as regards my brother
um we started with uh this you and I did
this discussion we started with uh that
image uh that I that I I think it was in
the preface to my book where I mentioned
this this
um childhood
um mystery uh pondering you know what
what is the world itself as opposed to
our perception of it
um the I said I think that children do
uh Ponder questions like this uh quite
generally but in my own case uh it it it
occurred that there is thoughts uh
occurred in the wake of um my brother's
accident
uh for those listeners who don't know
what we're talking about
um my brother clambered onto the roof of
a of a clubhouse
um a yacht yachting Clubhouse
um which was
uh I think stupidly designed this
Clubhouse because it had a sloping roof
uh and it was and it was built on the on
the on a on on slope in ground sloping
in the other direction uh toward the
water where where the where the Yachts
were so you could climb onto the roof at
the back of the building and then
clamber up it
um and at the other end uh you're facing
the water that is uh that there's a
there's a steep drop down to the uh
Paving below and so my brother climbed
up there with a couple of friends of his
and he tripped
um and fell off the you know the the the
high part and down onto the paving below
uh and the cracked uh he was not just
practice smashed to his skull
um and sustained a brain injury
um including a cerebral hemorrhage which
um
you know it's just a matter of luck if a
hemorrhage grows too quickly inside of
the cranium uh it's a it's a life and
death situation because uh you have to
remove it immediately and um obviously
where we were located at a yachting Club
you know there's no way that that can be
done there and then but worse than that
we lived in a very small village so
um even if he could have been taken to
the local hospital in time they they
that hospital wouldn't have had the
expertise he had to be flown to Cape
Town which is where I live now
and um so it's just a matter of of good
luck that the the the the Hemorrhage
didn't continue to expand
um and so uh he was he was saved
um the they managed the the thing
conservatively uh uh there was no need
to drain the Hemorrhage because because
it wasn't uh continuing to expand and um
they they just um stabilized him he
regained Consciousness
um once he got to Cape Town a few days
later he would gained Consciousness and
um then uh the only treatment that they
gave him was uh if treatment is the word
for it was they they plunked a helmet on
his head uh because his skull had been
broken
um and uh was therefore vulnerable
and then sent him back home and so um I
had the
deeply disturbing uncanny experience of
my brother returning looking exactly the
same apart from this silly helmet
um but he was not the same person I mean
literally not the same person
um he was my older brother I didn't
mention that he was two years older than
me I was I was four uh I was four going
on five
um and uh one of the first uh sort of
disturbing and distressing things that I
realized was that he he he many of his
developmental Milestones you know my
bigger brother uh that they were they
were developmental Milestones that he
lost like for example reliable bladder
and bowel control
and that just illustrates
very um crudely the fact that he was now
in a manner of speaking my little
brother you know he there were things I
could do that he couldn't do and uh you
know it's pretty obvious why to us now
but uh you know as a four-year-old kid
it's just it's just completely uh uh
incomprehensible uh how can it be that
I've overtaken him how can it be that
he's gone backwards uh and but more than
that you know he just wasn't the same
person in the sense of his personality
he he had a different personality so you
know imagine the The Experience uh as as
a little child you know just thinking
but who is this guy you know he looks
like Lee but he isn't Lee where's
where's the other lead and how can you
become a different person
um again just to illustrate what sort of
thing I'm talking about we um we used to
play together uh with the the town we
lived in was a diamond mining town
um
in um in a in a country neighboring
South Africa which at that time was
occupied by South Africa illegally I
might say
um and it was it was a diamond mining
town where the diamonds were what are
called alluvial that is to say that you
don't have to dig a deep holes uh into
the Rocks they just the diamonds are
just lying in the sand in the top soil
um so we used to play my father was a
senior person uh in that company and so
he took us as kids to go and see these
open cast Minds so my brother and I used
to we had little toy
um uh earth-moving machines and you know
we would mine in our garden uh and it
was you know wonderfully complicated
games you know where where we would be
removing the the diamonds trying to
create the same sort of scenario as we'd
seen uh with our father
and um this this I remember very very
distinctly that we we I suggested to my
brother that let's go and play our
mining game and we went out into the
garden and I I realized that the game
had changed completely and for him the
game now just meant let's dig holes you
know it was just digging holes in the
sand you know like a like a toddler
would do playing in a sand pit and all
of the symbolic and imaginative uh
aspects of the game were just lost on
him
um
you know and so on that was the sort of
thing that happened
um and so that and it was explained you
know that that this it was explained
that he had injured his brain so I knew
that this had something to do with his
brain I remember also looking at my
parents encyclopedia we had an
Encyclopedia Britannica uh and and uh it
had these
um there was a there was one sheet which
showed this the body uh the external
anatomy of the body and then you turned
that over and the next sheet showed the
the the musculature and then you turned
that over and then the next one you know
showed the the skeleton and then the
next one showed the soft tissues you
know the the internal organs and and I
remember look looking at the brain in
this in this uh encyclopedia and
realizing that this part of my brother's
body you know had been damaged and
somehow that turned him into a different
person
um and you can you can well imagine how
from there uh the path leads directly to
what I later chose to study uh which was
not only the brain uh but the the the
psychological functions of the brain so
so I trained uh in the in the field
called neuropsychology
um it's not that I decided at age five
you know I'm going to become a
neuropsychologist but it must somehow
have have led
um directly down that path in fact I'll
tell you another thing since we have so
much time I'll I'll give you the long
version
um
the
you know my brother struggled enormously
at school uh in consequence of his
injury in fact that year of the injury
he failed that year he had to repeat it
um and
and I should also add as an aside there
was it was a sort of a taboo subject in
in my family
we didn't talk openly about what had
happened and its consequences and you
know it was just this horrible
thing uh so my brother would you know
would always do badly at school and I
would do well
um
and normally you would be uh your
parents would be pleased to know that
that their child is doing well at school
and coming home with good marks but in
my family it was fraught that that fact
you know that I was doing well wasn't
something to be
celebrated and it was something to be
sort of hidden you know you you mustn't
you mustn't draw attention to it and um
you know I gradually
um began to feel guilty myself you know
about doing well and I just didn't know
how to deal with it that I didn't know
what how are you supposed to manage this
because I wanted to do well you know I
was I was a keen little student and I
was you know
enjoying school or at least enjoying the
intellectual aspects of school
um so I think that by choosing the the
field that I did I think that there was
a sort of a compromise again none of
this was was deliberate uh and and
conscious but but when I look back on it
I think that it was my choice of
profession was a compromise between on
the one hand my guilt about my brother
and on the other hand my ambition which
nevertheless remained you know I was I
wanted to do well
um but but I but it was I felt bad about
doing well and I think that the idea was
the unconscious notion that I that that
I that I think drove me in that
direction was that this is one field in
which I can do well because it helps
people like my brother you know so in
this way I would simultaneously be doing
well for myself but I would also be
doing something which was not um
disregarding my my brother's
difficulties and and
possibly even being able to help people
like him I think that's one of the
reasons why I not one of the reasons I
think it's the reason why I also didn't
want to just be a scientist you know I
wanted to be a clinician I wanted to do
clinical work
um but right from the beginning uh I I
as I entered the field I knew I wasn't
only going to do research on what I was
I I wanted to work with patients it
makes sense Mark when you read it when
you've read the book and then you hear
your story because I I my mental model
is is pulling parts from later in the
book back you know you talk about
early fears for example High fears are
instilled in childhood for example how
imagination as well imaginations almost
like a virtual practice in the mind so
you don't have to do it in real life as
a child and then the importance of play
all these things are hopefully we'll
have time to cover later on but they
they were all part of that story as well
and how
again you're constantly learning
subconsciously and as you tell us in the
book feelings are there for error
correction they're to make us do better
Etc so these are all parts that this is
why this story I think is so important
to tear us up for later on but let's
start to zoom in a little bit into your
theories and I mentioned that for
example you were a Pioneer in dreaming
and also a heretic and Consciousness and
we'll talk about it in a moment the
three departures that you made from
common thought at the time which were
breakthroughs eventually which is what
we love on this show as well as those
change makers who actually go against
the grain but I thought I'd share a
quote to give context the book and I'd
love you to expand on this Mark you say
many philosophers and scientists
believed and still believed that
sentience serves no purpose no physical
purpose throughout the book you persuade
us of the plausibility of an alternative
interpretation and you suggest that feel
things as I mentioned are part of nature
that they are not fundamentally
different from other natural phenomena
and that they do something within the
causal Matrix of things Consciousness
Consciousness you determine and you
demonstrate
is about feeling and feeling in turn is
about how well or badly we are doing in
life almost like a compass to try and
figure our way throughout life and you
say Consciousness exists to help us do
better thank you so
um
listeners might be puzzled by one aspect
of what you've said
um which is this you know I seem to be
using the word uh as as you quote me
there I seem to be using the word
Consciousness synonymously with feeling
and uh I don't think that that's
necessarily everybody's starting point I
think that most of us think of
Consciousness in perceptual terms
because our our Consciousness is so
dominated particularly by visual
perception
um so I think when when you use the word
Consciousness that's the thought the
sort of thing that's conjured up in most
people's mind oh this you know this this
thing I'm seeing now is my Consciousness
or this thing I'm hearing now is my
Consciousness uh perceptual phenomena
um but I I don't believe for for all
sorts of reasons which we'll have time
to unpack in due course uh I don't
believe that that's the correct starting
point
um I I think that something as
complicated as Consciousness
um if you're going to tackle it
scientifically
um you you need to you need to address
its most basic elements
um first and then you build up from
there to to the full the full the full
complex phenomenology of consciousness
so I won't go into it now but I'll just
say that for reasons that we will have
time to unpack I came to the conclusion
that the the most fundamental form of
Consciousness is feeling
and by feeling uh I mean things like
um
being hungry uh or or or or being in
pain or being sleepy or feeling too hot
you know the the those very very
rudimentary bodily States uh which alert
you to the fact you know that's that's
some things the matter some things you
know you're heading in the wrong
direction
um if if you feel pain you know
something is injuring you you must do
something about that which is withdraw
from that stimulus
um if you're hungry you know you need to
imbibe some energy supplies and if you
don't you die likewise thirst likewise
sleepiness Etc these things they're
manifestations of bodily needs
um and uh bodily needs are rather
important things and uh this this is
there must be some way in which the
owner of the body uh you know it
registers its needs and that's What
feelings are I I'm I'm deliberately
focusing now on the most simple forms of
feelings of course I'm aware that
they're much more uh elaborated forms of
feelings than namely what we call
emotions and moods and so on but these
these simple bodily forms
and I'm not just saying this by
um by logical deduction uh it turns out
uh that there's very good uh evidence
for uh this conclusion but let's just
take that as as given for now
um so if that's what Consciousness in
its most fundamental version is it's
bodily feelings
um then you know how can anybody in
their right mind if you'll excuse the
pun how can anybody believe that they
they don't do anything you know the the
in fact uh if you stop for a moment and
reflect on it
everything you do is about feelings you
know it's the feelings are at the
absolute Center of Your Existence that
they what motivate you to do everything
that you do and and to avoid what you
avoid and to be attracted to what you're
attracted to you know all of our
decision making all of our choices
um all of our endeavors ultimately are
about uh regulating your feelings and
trying to feel better in one or another
respect
um and and and trying to avoid feeling
bad
so um I I think the idea are two things
I'm emphasizing here one is that the
idea that Consciousness uh and and uh
and particularly feelings uh that they
that they don't have any place in the in
the you know causal Matrix of things is
just crazy at the time that I was
writing the book I mean people say the
scientists even neuroscientists you know
they say it all the time their
Consciousness doesn't do anything
um it's not it's not part of the
physical you know uh universe
and has no consequences for it
um while I was writing the book I I just
read a paper uh and therefore I quoted
it in the book because it was just the
latest version of somebody saying that
in which these colleagues cognitive
neuroscientists
tried to explain uh the place of
Consciousness in the universe by saying
it's a bit like a rainbow you know the
rainbow uh naturally uh happens uh out
of the interaction between the water
molecules and uh and and light and then
there's this refraction of the light and
it produces the rainbow but the rainbow
doesn't do anything the rainbow just you
know just there what is what is the
purpose of functional uh causal power of
rainbows nothing that's what they said
and and that's how they see
consciousness
so
um as I am saying if you just reflect on
your own personal experience it's clear
that your feelings uh have consequences
for what you do so how can you how can
you for a moment suggest that that it's
not it has no causal power it has no
consequences for the physical universe
but the other thing that I'm saying
um is by linking feeling to uh bodily
States
um which which uh which you can in the
sense that I've just described that the
most basic forms of feelings are uh how
you come to know your bodily States
your needs and whether they're being
satisfied or not
um
what could be more physical for us than
our bodies you know and um if you don't
if you don't have the right amount of uh
water and the right amount of sleep and
the right amount of glucose and the the
the the the right you know the the the
the the right temperature uh you know if
you deviate from the very narrow range
of temperature that is viable for you
know for us human beings to to remain
alive uh then it has dramatic
consequences physical consequences
namely you die you know what what could
be more physically consequential in
biology than you know that the the
organism dies and if feelings are there
in order to prevent that from happening
then clearly they're doing something
physical so yeah I mean uh
that's that's the absolute starting
point for me but I really do need to
emphasize that it's not it's not by
logical deduction alone it is when you
start taking apart the brain mechanisms
of Consciousness you find that the the
most fundamental form of Consciousness
is indeed feeling uh and the the parts
of the brain that generate feeling
um are intimately interconnected with
the parts of the brain that regulates
our bodily States
I love that chapter you dedicate the
whole chapter to feelings and I love to
cover that in depth in part two of this
episode of this of this series Mark as
well I absolutely I was suddenly before
we came on there so many aha moments Ah
that's why why fears often happen before
we're you know in our childhood States
and they're so hard to remove because
it's before the brain is fully formed
all that kind of stuff so many great
moments play for example why do children
why do play always finish in tears for
children all those kind of things where
we're magnificent to read about and of
course heavily influenced by your friend
and colleague Yak princep as well is
that do I say his name right there
markip yes
it was important to share your three
departures Mark as well because one of
the first departures is is hidden in the
title The Hidden Spring it's important
as well so I thought we'd establish that
as well the the three departures you
made from common thinking at the time
and you've touched on some of them
already so what those three departures
are uh the first one as you say I've
touched on already
um it is to um to depart from the idea
that Consciousness is fundamentally
perceptual
um which which is the same thing as to
say that it's fundamentally cortical
because the parts of the brain that
generates perceptual Consciousness is
the cortex
um and and when I say perceptual
Consciousness let us not lose sight of
the fact that thinking uh cognition
conscious cognition is also derived from
perception the same images that we that
we perceive here and now uh the the
memory traces of those uh those images
uh are reactivated in our thought
processes and so we have these virtual
images uh including words words too are
ultimately derived from perception from
from hearing and so you know even our
inner speech it's all of it derived from
perception so the these um perceptual uh
and and cognitive functions derive from
perception uh these phenomena uh of
course dominate our Consciousness
um but for the reasons I said earlier uh
I I thought well feeling uh what about
feeling
um this seems to be you know the reason
that we
represent the world that we have
perceptions of the world memories of the
world engage rhetorically with the world
is because that's where all our needs
get met you know so uh we we have to do
things in the world in order to meet
these these bodily needs uh and the
emotional needs that we'll come to you
um
but the part of the brain where feelings
are generated is not in the cortex uh
the the parts of the brain is that is
much more ancient uh much more primitive
uh and I say ancient in The evolutionary
sense of the word you know that it's the
the part of the brain that generates
feelings
um we share not only with all other
mammals in other words it's at least 200
million years old but we share it with
all other vertebrates at least the basic
architecture of the of the parts of the
brain that generate feeling States these
these things like hunger and test and
whatnot that I've been talking about
um we share with all vertebrates which
means that there are at least 500 and
something million years old you know so
so
um I I I I thought that we should focus
on on that part of the brain and on that
form of conscious this
um when I say that part of the brain I'm
talking about the upper brain stem the
cortex is like a like the Petals of a
flower
um and the the stamen is you know is the
brain stem uh the the the the the the
the the bottom part of it the the narrow
part of it
um and uh the odd thing is
that we've actually known since the
1950s uh that uh the the the upper brain
stem a part of it called the reticular
activating system we've known since the
1950s that all Consciousness is
contingent upon activation by this this
reticular activating system hence its
name reticular activating system
um the the cortex uh which indeed is the
the the seat of perceptual Consciousness
um it is only rendered conscious by the
reticular activating system so the
reticular activating system is the
source the the spring as the title of
the book suggests uh this the the source
of all Consciousness including this
perceptual Consciousness uh is in the
upper brain stem so you know you you
might wonder well why
if that's the case if we've known that
since the 1950s you know why why didn't
we all look there uh from the from the
beginning or at least from the 1950s
onwards but that's another story but
this we didn't uh so that's my departure
I said I think we should be looking
there perhaps I'm over elaborating the
point But at the risk of doing so uh I
will add one further detail just to make
sure that listeners get the the the the
point which is that if you damage uh two
cubic millimeters of the upper brain
stem
um a part of the reticular activating
system called the periaqueductal gray if
if that is damaged to the extent of the
size of a of a match head you know two
cubic millimeters tiny tiny little piece
of tissue you go into a coma you know
that's enough to obliterate all
Consciousness just two cubic millimeters
of damage there in in the cortex you can
take out two cubic millimeters anywhere
you like you won't even notice it you
know
um so that's the first departure it's a
it's a shift of emphasis a shift of
focus from perception to affect
perception and cognition to affect and a
shift of focus from the cerebral cortex
to the reticular activating system of
the brain stem
now the second departure
um might I might lose friends uh and and
stop influencing people uh when I tell
them this but
rev what can you do it's the it's the
truth
um the second departure is that I
returned uh through the history of my
field
um I I I went back to its Origins
um and trying to understand you know how
did it happen uh that this this idea
that Consciousness doesn't do anything
um and and what is even worse when I was
a student which was in the 19 early
1980s it wasn't only that Consciousness
doesn't do anything it was that you must
not speak about it you know it's bad
science
you must exclude subjectivity from
science science is objective and so
anything that's subjective you know must
be eradicated how can you have a science
of the mind uh which excludes
subjectivity I mean what is the mind if
not something subjective it is it is
fundamentally subjective so to have a
psychology that excludes uh
Consciousness is is a
or feelings is to have a psychology that
excludes the psyche I mean psychology
excluding the psyche uh somewhere we
took a wrong turn
um and uh it's a behaviorism uh which
you mentioned earlier was was was a
dominated psychology in the in the
middle of the 20th century and it's
still left a long shadow on the
neuropsychology that I learned in in the
early 80s
um so uh that that I I became interested
in the history of the field where did
this crazy notion come from uh that we
that we can't include subjective
phenomena in the science of the mind
um and uh went back via behaviorism uh
to the early 20th century and the late
19th century and in the late 19th
century it turns out that um
introspection and the study of uh
subjective experience uh was very much
at the center of of psychology which
which seems natural enough obviously
that's what you should be studying if
you're studying the mind and so that
made me that brought to my awareness uh
the the the the the field of
psychoanalysis psychoanalysis
uh which was then rubbished by the
behaviorists and uh and thoroughly
discredited uh during the course of the
20th century
um for all of its faults uh it it takes
as its starting point uh if you want to
have a science of the mind then you
wanting to have a science of
subjectivity uh and it puts subjective
experience slap bang at the center of
its conception of the mind and of the
methods that it uses psychoanalysis the
the method of psychoanalysis called free
association
um it just takes samples of of this
stream of Consciousness as it's as its
raw data
um but even more so that was that made
me interested in psychoanalysis which
let me just make clear what I'm saying
so that's the other departure that I'm a
I'm a neuropsychologist and a
neuroscientist and I started becoming
interested in psychoanalysis and uh and
eventually actually even trained in it
uh as I I so I'm also a psychoanalyst my
colleagues were appalled you know they
said it's like a a a one colleague said
to me it's like an astronomer studying
astrology you know what are you doing
um
but uh why I did it was because I
thought that the neuropsychology of the
early 1980s that I was learning uh it
was just really it might have might as
well have been called neurobehaviorism
you know the there was no psychology
there it was it was all just about
behaviors and and and and about
um the information processing mechanisms
you know the uh it was all third person
kind of abstract description and and and
questions like you know so okay so
that's the memory system that's how
that's how it works that's where it is
in the brain you know these are
sub-components and so on but why do you
actually experience a memory you know
why why does remembering feel like
something it's the most remarkable
property of the brain that it feels like
something uh it's it's the only thing in
the known universe that has subjective
experience surely the subjective
experiences of doing something and if
you leave them out of account you won't
understand how this organ Works
um but when you ask your professors as I
did you know those days but what about
feelings and why do you know what why
why do we actually have conscious memory
because we learned that these
declarative memory systems and then the
non-carative memory systems and the
declarative ones are the ones that you
can bring the information up into the
buffer of short-term memory and so on uh
as you know but nobody ever spoke about
but why why does this buffer exist in
the sense that the the owner of that
brain actually experiences the memory
what is the experiencing do what is that
for when I asked questions like that I
was told don't ask questions like that
you know they're bad for your career
these are not these are not proper
scientific questions so you know that's
why I I turned to psychoanalysis as a
discipline uh which had
no qualms about studying experience
trying to understand experience and and
most importantly uh have methods for
studying experience and uh a conceptual
uh ornamentarium as a language a
theoretical language or or describing
the the different aspects of experience
and the and the things that underpin it
um but even more interesting than that
as I started delving into that field uh
remember this was all part of the going
into the history of of how we came to
this past that that I was at in the in
in the 80s where you you know you
weren't allowed to ask about about
subjectivity
um I I learned
while going into that history that Freud
was a neuroscientist I had no idea Freud
was a neuroscientist
um Freud was a neuroscientist for a long
time you know he published his first
neuroscientific papers in the late 1870s
and the last ones uh in 1900 so you know
that's that's 22 years
um of Andy published if you count all of
his Publications including the little
ones okay he published more than 200
titles in in in Neuroscience 200
Publications so he was a very serious
neuroscientist and um so I became
interested in in why did he abandon
Neuroscience uh in you know because as
much as it's um an obvious thing that
you should be studying experience if
you're studying the mind it's equally
obvious that you should be studying the
brain if you're studying the mind so why
did he let go you know and so I read I
read those early papers and uh and and
uh tried to get a sense of how his
career veered away from Neuroscience
toward a more or less pure psychology
um and I I realized it was actually not
very complicated it's just that didn't
have the methods uh the these kinds of
questions uh about you know how do
feelings work etc
um there were no neuroscientific methods
whereby you could study them
neuroscientifically so the only
empirical science that was possible was
using purely psychological methods and
Freud made very clear that this is
provisional you know one day there will
be progress in neuroscience and then
we'll be able to you know supplement our
cycle ecological observations with
neuroscientific ones and we'll
understand you know how they how the two
things work together you know how the
how these subjective States
um
um relate to the physiological uh and uh
anatomical and and chemical things that
we know about the brain so that there
there it was I I thought well that's my
job you know I must pick up where Freud
left off and uh finished the job and
that's uh the second departure it's it's
going back to the origins of
psychoanalysis uh and and uh and and
building up the neuroscientific side
that was that Freud had to had to let go
of and then try to integrate
um what what what he had learned about
subjectivity about the feeling lived
life of the mind uh linked with with
what we with we now have wonderful Tools
in Neuroscience there's there's
next do nothing about subjective
experience that you can't study also
from the neuroscientific point of view
so that's the second departure Mark
before you go into the the third
departure I I just one of the
observations I wrote down in my notes
was
I wonder
because you you speak truth you're a
truth speaker you call out the Emperors
naked and I thought I wandered it to
myself because you're talking my Freud
and Freud always reminds me of young Etc
I was like
because I work part-time one of my hats
that I wear is executive coach and I
always kind of go wonder what happened
in in your early stages that caused that
and I wondered was it because of that
not speaking about Lee at home that that
you had this burgeoning desire to be
able to speak about it and kind of go it
would be better to call it out it's
annoying me that you know I wondered was
that in there and then the other thing
that dawned onto me and many of our
audience know this is there's a great
Axiom of innovation that Innovation
happens at the intersections of
different disciplines of different ideas
of different people from different
organizations coming together and that's
where the magic happens and I really
felt that from your work and then you
were also influenced by many change
makers like Oliver Sacks like your
friend Eric kandell who writes a
wonderful recommendation for the book as
well I have one of his books on my on my
bookshelf there displayed especially
because he's one of your friends and of
course Antonio DiMaggio who's due onto
the show as well so these wonderful
thinkers were all supporting you as well
I felt I'll I'll tell you about that in
a second let me just say that I agree
with you about
um
uh linking as you just have a cycle
analysis with speaking the truth you
know that's uh that that there there are
things that we don't want to think about
um but they're still there and uh you
know they they have their uh effects
whether you whether you pay attention to
them or not in fact if you don't pay
attention to them they have their
effects despite you
um if you do take them into account then
at least there's a possibility of being
able to uh or being able to gain some
measure of control over them
um and and uh so that that uh ethic of
of
uh speaking about
unwelcome things facing up to them
dealing with them uh I think you're
quite right to link uh that aspect of my
um the path that I took uh also to the
the the difficult situation in in my
family the the the the fact that you
know the the I remember thinking not
when I was very little but thinking
somewhere along the line if if we could
just talk about Lee you know I wanted
help I I don't want to hurt him uh you
know we can just discuss it let's come
up with a strategy how are we getting to
deal with this awkward thing but but it
was it was just a taboo subject
um you you speak then about
um about these these other figures uh um
and and the interface between Fields I
completely agree
um that that's where Innovation happens
I I want to tell you just in case I'm
giving the wrong impression I didn't
decide I want to be the
interdisciplinary you know this is where
Innovation happens uh it to me I keep on
saying this it's just absolutely obvious
that you should be doing this you know
if you're wanting to understand uh the
the the mind you should be studying it
first of all from a subjective point of
view you know you need to understand
where does subjectivity come from and
where does it fit in to to to the causal
metrics of things and secondly you need
to use all the neuroscientific tools
that you've got and so there you have
interdisciplinarity just you know uh it
just it just happens
um but when I did start doing that
um from the from the 19 late 1980s
onwards in the 1990s I well in fact was
in the late 1980s I started training I
moved to London to train in
psychoanalysis and and so and then
started integrating the two fields from
the 1990s onwards I I was like a kid in
a toy shop and it was just like you
couldn't help but make discoveries you
know every every week you know because
it was just all so obvious that this
links to that and this links to that and
nobody had tried to do it before so you
know you're lucky enough to be the first
one there you just it's just wonderful
um so that sense of innovation that
you're talking about a rising out of
into discipline interdisciplinarity I I
I have lived that I've experienced it
and it's it's thrilling
um to to do so
um the the the the people you mentioned
um Oliver Sacks was the one who came to
my uh Aid first
um he wrote a book in 1984 called a leg
to stand on
um which was an autobiographical account
of a of a of a rather serious nerve
injury that that he sustained uh he
himself sustained uh and it was a kind
of a uh that was the whole uh uh uh of
the narrative structure of the book was
about his own injury to a nerve in his
leg hence the title the leg to stand on
but then from there he elaborates and uh
um and and speaks about the importance
of subjective experience and you know
why one feels pain
and so on and and then at one place uh
in his narrative he makes this remark he
says neuropsychology is admirable
um but it ignores the psyche
neuropsychology is admirable but it
knows the psyche and I thought that's it
you know this is exactly what I'm
experiencing I'm training in
neuropsychology and it ignores the
psyche you know and this in other words
the subjective mentioned so I wrote to
him and uh and said you know that's the
truest thing I've I've I've I've I've
heard uh in in the few years that I've
been trying to come to grips with
neuropsychology
it ignores subjective experience and he
then went on to write
um a couple of years later
um the man who mistook his wife for a
hat uh which was this glorious set of
case studies
um all of them being about the
experience the subjective experience of
the new of these neurological patients
and so we we uh we corresponded uh uh
through those years and then eventually
uh established a friendship as I started
to travel more and got to know him in
the states and uh and in fact he also
came across the pond quite often so we
spent a lot of time together and he was
a great great I think that you know he
was obviously not a serious scientist uh
Oliver Sacks it was a Storyteller and a
writer of case histories and so on but I
think that his work is enormously
important for neurology and
neuropsychology precisely because he
told the stories of the patients lives
and their experiences of their weird and
wonderful things that happened to
neurological patients and what they can
to teach us about what the different
parts of the brain that are diseased in
them what they're doing from a
subjective point of view what what
contribution they make to subjective
experience you know this so this is the
importance of sex like many change
makers markers you tell us he was
reviled and often disregarded by many of
his peers and I had a dramatic effect on
them I often call that out because it's
important to know for change makers in
organizations even that when you go
against the grain like you have you get
attacked the status quo does not like it
and one one of his detractors I told you
the name of his book that his most
famous book The the man who mistook his
wife for a hat one of his distractors
said that Oliver saxes The Man Who
mistook his patience for a literary
career yes really nasty
um I I I have suffered the consequences
of uh of going off the Beaten Track but
I also don't mind that I I think that
you have to accept that's the price you
pay if you if you're going against the
the compact majority you know they're
not going to like it uh if you say hey
no you're going the wrong way let's go
this way you know the the the they're
going to resist
um so if you don't have people
um opposing what you're doing they're
just ignoring you you know it's uh have
you've got no hope of influencing the
field if they're ignoring you uh if they
if they start arguing with you and
saying nasty things about you then you
know at least uh you're being you're
being noticed and then you have a an
argument on your hands and you know you
shouldn't expect otherwise and then you
you know then you engage in that
argument
um Eric Kendall uh the reason that he uh
became so supportive was that that he in
his youth
um I never knew this till he told me he
in his youth um uh by which I mean at
Medical School uh he wanted to become a
psychoanalyst
um and his his girlfriend at the time uh
was the daughter of a famous
psychoanalyst Ernst Chris was the name
of the this Viennese emigre uh in New
York as was Kendall a Vietnamese
Emigrant of of a different Generation
Um and as Chris said to him you don't
have the right personality to become a
psychoanalyst you should become a
research scientist and that's what
prompted Kendall to become a
neuroscientist but he always retained an
interest and a great respect for
psychoanalysis I don't know how many
people know that uh so so he was
delighted when when I started to trying
to draw the
um links between the two Fields trying
to integrate the two Fields he said you
know that's that's what he would have
loved to have done you know if I mean
I'm I'm a generation again younger than
him so um he was he was thrilled to see
that somebody was doing what what he'd
always thought should be done once we
had the tools to do it
um Antonio de marzio I became his pal
because
he was a neuropsychologist and a
neurologist of great
um respectability
um he he'd done very good work uh on on
um particularly on cortical mechanisms
of vision and it was highly regarded
um
and and uh uh trained in fact under the
great Norman geshwant who was the who
was the the leading figure of Behavioral
Neurology and neuropsychology in America
um and I'm telling you all of this about
his credentials because
um in the mid-1990s uh which is when I
was myself you know grappling with all
of these things
um he brought out a book out of the blue
it was called Descartes error
um which which uh basically argued uh
that that we're we're we're missing a
trick here why are we only focusing on
cognition you know what about emotion
um and it was a it was a a a brilliant
um uh uh clean uh with with reference to
to Scientific evidence saying look this
is very important the emotions are a
very important part of how the brain
works and we're not going to understand
it unless we focus on these things too
and because his credentials were so
impeccable you know uh he more or less
single-handedly brought a respectability
to the study of feeling uh in in
neurology and and neuropsychology so so
that's why when I read that book I I I
immediately made contact with him and
we've we've worked um together and and
established a friendship ever ever since
um but I think we were going to get to
the third of my departures
let's do it let's do it yeah so the
third the third departure
and again
um I think that I'm at risk of of of
people losing all confidence in me when
I when I say this but um the the
the third departure arises out of
another uh research collaboration and
friendship that I established
um uh over the years and this one in
more recent years uh I only met him in
2012
um a very very very brilliant
neuroscientist uh in London named Carl
friston and um
Briston is is quite different from the
others that you've just mentioned uh he
wasn't especially interested in feelings
um
in fact his his watch is called a
computational neuroscientist uh he he
was interested in trying to
um reduce uh neurophysiological
processes to the underlying
computational mechanisms what algorithms
are are driving the the the physiology
of the brain and um I I don't want to
run too far ahead of myself but uh he he
published a famous paper and when I say
famous I mean Carl friston is super
famous he's the most widely cited
neuroscientist in the world
we measure the influence of a scientist
by their each index
um and I didn't even know it was
possible to have a three-figure edge
index I've never heard of anyone whose
Edge index was in the hundred so his is
248 or something like that it is truly
objectively the most influential
neuroscientist alive
um and uh I read a paper of his in 2009
uh in one of the journals of the Royal
Society and the paper was called Life as
we know it and it was about a basic
biological mechanism which lies at the
heart of all living organisms it's how
they stay alive it's called homeostasis
um and and I mentioned in the beginning
of our conversation about the importance
of feelings I said they tell you you
know how well or badly you're doing in
relation to your bodily needs
um well how well or badly you're doing
in terms of your bodily needs is
regulated by homeostasis if you're in
your homeostatic range that means you're
meeting your need if you're deviating
from that range it means that now
there's an increasing Demand on you on
your body to do something
um and as I said in our conversation
earlier how we become aware of that
deviation is we feel it so so uh
unpleasant feelings
are how the organism registers it's
moving away from its homeostatic bounds
and pleasant feelings or how we know
we're heading back towards our
homeostatic bones and um so Kristen's
paper
um the the one that I just mentioned
um which
um oh sorry it wasn't 2009 it was 2012
in 2009 he published a paper about the
free energy principle in 2012 he
published this one which is which is an
elaboration of his 2009 paper where
where he says that the basic mechanism
at work in in the brain is is that we
have to minimize something called free
energy which we'll get to in in our
conversation into your course but but
then in this 2012 paper he links free
energy minimization to homeostasis the
base so this deviation from your
homeostatic bounds is increasing free
energy and uh so I read this paper in
which he reduces
um homeostasis to its basic
um mathematical
formalisms you know what it reduces it
to a set of equations that these he
wrote a set of equations for formalizing
how homeostasis works
and that was like a bolt out of the blue
to me because I had come to the view
that feelings are basically homeostatic
as I just explained and now here was a
computational neuroscientist uh reducing
um homeostasis to a set of equations and
remember our starting point it was how
do you bring feelings into physical
science
you know how can we connect feelings
with with everything else that we know
about the physical universe and he had
just reduced to a set of equations
causal mechanistic equations uh the the
the the the the fundamental biological
principle of homeostasis if feelings are
an extended version of homeostasis then
it must be possible to write equations
like that about how feelings work it
must be possible to bring in this most
concrete way it must be possible to to
to be able to include feelings into a
physical mathematical causal account
just like anything else in in in biology
and so I I joined up with him and we had
several meetings from 2012 onwards uh
and we wrote a joint paper in 2018 uh
called
um Power and why Consciousness arises uh
where where we reduce it
to an extended version of homeostasis
and and therefore an extended version of
the equations that he wrote in the 2012
paper now now I come to my point
um there was a famous physicist Richard
Feynman when he died it was found
written on his Blackboard it wasn't
quite his dying words but you know it
was one of the last things he wrote on
his Blackboard he said if I can't create
it I don't understand it
um and that it's in that Spirit uh that
I made my third departure I thought look
if this really if if Tristan and I
really believe that these equations
describe
um uh precisely uh the causal mechanism
whereby a feeling is generated in the
brain then we should be able to create a
feeling we should be able to instantiate
that very same architecture the same
computational architecture in in a
artificial agent uh and we should be
able to engender feelings we should be
able to literally engineer a a feeling
robot a robot that that that is trying
to survive
um and uh that has has multiple
competing needs like a need for an
energy Supply and the need to not get
damage when it bangs into things and
they need to stay within its viable
temperature range not overheat and so on
if that's all that this robot is trying
to do is trying to survive and it uses
this extended form of homeostasis
that we are claiming uh is the is the
mechanism whereby feelings are generated
then then there should be artificial
feelings in this artificial version of
the same thing if it's got the same
mechanism if that mechanism really is
what generates feeling then it must be
possible
um that there's a gigantic leap that's
required here which is you have to take
you have to you have to look at this
from the robot's point of view you know
in other words you have to you have to
Grant subjectivity uh to the to this
agent and then there are all kinds of
philosophical and scientific questions
methodological questions about how you
go about demonstrating uh in a way
that's that meets the the ordinary
requirements of science but but I think
that unless we can do do that unless we
can actually remember feynman's comment
if I can't create it I don't understand
it so what we're trying to do and have
been for about two years now is exactly
that we are trying to we're trying to uh
uh engineer a a a artificial
Consciousness
um and we are not there yet but we're
making bloody good progress
um and uh that's obviously uh is uh it's
it's that's a gigantic departure the
idea that we might actually be able to
engineer a simple form of Consciousness
and let me emphasize again it's just
simple raw feeling uh and it's an
artificial kind of feeling it's not like
yours and mine
um but but but that's what we're trying
to trying to engineer beautiful
I'm laughing because my my intention was
this would be the introduction for the
show we were gonna do and we've done an
entire show which just shows you the
depth of knowledge that's in this book
it's it's such a brilliant book and I
I'll have to re-calibrate mark on what
episode two and episode three will be
perhaps you you might have time to do
some more because there's so much in the
book and
you mentioned some of the themes there
that we haven't even delved into but the
history is fascinating you cover it in a
fascinating way through the lens of your
experience as well which is really
magnificent and I I really look forward
to sharing part two with our audience
for people who want to find out more
about your work Mark and find out more
about your papers and indeed your books
where can they find you my first request
is that they should read this book
because you know that really
um the reason it's a book as opposed to
a paper is because the same reason why
our conversation today has we've just
scratched the surface and we've spent an
hour and a quarter doing it yeah you
know it's it's this is a complicated
topic and if you try to reduce it to a
few sentences you're not going to be
able to convey what what's you know what
it's all about however having said that
um obviously you can't expect everybody
to read the whole book so so what I
would suggest
um is that anyone who wants to get a
sort of short version
um they can just Google my name Psalms
um and
um hard problem uh which refers to the
hard problem of Consciousness so Psalms
hard problem and then the word Frontiers
um and it will bring up an Open Access
Journal article which is entitled
um the the hard problem of Consciousness
and the free energy principle but they
don't need to remember all of that just
my Psalms odd problem Frontiers it'll
bring up the article uh Open Access
there it is and it's a summary
um of of of uh what what Kristen and I
uh have have done in this in this field
brilliant Mark and I'll I'll share that
I'll put that link on the YouTube video
on any of our channels as well to make
sure that people can find that easily
it's been fascinating it's been a
journey as the book is a journey to the
source of Consciousness we're only at
the very very start of that Journey
we're only actually mapping it out at
this point author of The Hidden Spring
mark zomes thank you for joining us
thanks Eden thanks very much I look
forward to part two
