I'm delighted to welcome back for part
two this time he's coming to us live
from the hospital such is his busy
schedule the author of The Hidden Spring
a journey to the source of Consciousness
Mark zones Welcome Back Sir great to be
back in thank you it's great to have you
back and I thought today we'd talk about
how you got on your journey towards
Consciousness because at the time as we
established yesterday it was kind of
frowned upon to explore conscience that
was even seen some might say his career
suicide and you were it was frowned upon
for you so you looked for somewhere that
was a little bit safer and this was
looking at sleep but in particular the
difference in state between wakefulness
and and sleep and in there you kind of
snuck out snuck in a little bit of
Consciousness because that wasn't
frowned upon so maybe we'll start there
about where you started because this
became the subject for your research
doctorate it may be
um difficult for
people nowadays to appreciate uh that
really not that long ago 40 years ago
um it was not a respectable topic
Consciousness uh in neuroscience
um the only aspect of Consciousness that
was respectable was the Sleep waking
cycle
um so the the brain mechanisms as to how
uh what is happening uh when we fall
asleep and what is happening when we
wake up again
um and that also included the brain
mechanisms of REM sleep rapid eye
movement sleep
um which is when we dream
so um because I was so frustrated by the
the neglect of Consciousness and
subjectivity and all that went with it
um I thought well this was my this was
the back door that I could go through
um I would I would make my research on
brain mechanisms of sleep but in
particular focusing on rapid eye
movement sleep
um and thereby looking at this
intriguing phenomena not dreaming which
is after all just uh a paradoxical
intrusion into the unconsciousness of
sleep are these are these episodes of
Consciousness so
um by by linking what I was doing uh to
all of those sort of respectable
questions about sleep versus wakefulness
and so on
um I was able to sneak in uh what is in
fact an intensely subjective uh uh uh
phenomenon which is which is dreaming I
say intense subjective because
with other subjective States waking
subjective States you can at least
interact with the the person who's
experiencing them whereas in sleep
obviously that's precluded so the only
way that you can study dreams
um is a retrospective uh single witness
account because that's the other thing
about dreams is that you know if I say
to you I am subjectively experiencing
the color red and then you look at this
person you say yes I do I'm experiencing
the color red that thing over there
we're both calling it the color red you
can't do that with dreams because only
the dreamer experiences their dream so
it really was
um uh quite a leap to go from brain
mechanisms of sleep and wakefulness to
going to the brain mechanisms of
dreaming but that was how I managed I
managed to do it
um you know my my aim was to
um we had already uh by the time I I did
my research we had already pretty much
nailed down uh what's going on in the
brain uh when uh it's it switches off as
it were uh and and turns into sleep mode
and we also knew um a good deal uh in
fact in fact pretty much most of what we
uh what we needed to know about how the
brain transitions from ordinary deep
sleep into rapid eye movement sleep but
nobody had studied the subjective
experience of dreaming in relation to
these things all that all that we knew
was that the two things correlated if
you wake people up during REM sleep you
have pretty much 90 chance of getting a
dream report if you wake people up
during non-rem sleep you have less than
a 10 chance of getting a green report so
we knew these two things occur at the
same time but we also knew that if
there's damage to the part of the brain
that that generates REM sleep
um then obviously REM sleep
either fault as severely or it's lost
entirely but nobody had taken the next
step which is a pretty obvious question
which is to ask those patients who have
lost REM sleep
tell me uh Mr or Mrs so and so now that
you've lost REM sleep I presume that
you've also lost dreaming is that the
case that had haven't been done so it
was that sort of thing that I wanted to
do to actually talk to the patients
about their experience and tie it to
these objective observations as to where
the damage was in their brains on the
assumption that damage to different
parts of the brain uh the the two-fold
Assumption the one that damaged to the
part of the brain that generates REM
sleep will lead to loss of the
experience of dreaming and secondly that
damage to other parts of the brain
should have differential effects on
dream content and quality so for example
if you have damage to the visual parts
of your brain which affect your visual
perception in waking cognition
presumably there should be some
analogous or equivalent alteration in
the in the visual quality of your dreams
and likewise for language parts of the
brain and and so on and so forth so so
those were the the things I was I was
interested in determining because it's
subjective
um you know you you need relatively
large numbers of patients because you
need to see if I have 10 people with
damage yeah 10 people with damage there
10 people but damage in the other place
whether they're whether they report the
same thing and I just want to emphasize
that you know there's something hidden
in what I've just said which is kind of
obvious but but deserves saying which is
that although we're dealing with
subjective phenomena if 10 people with
damage to the same part of the brain
report the same experience well there's
no reason to doubt that even though it's
subjective you know it happened in all
10 of them so it's probably a thing and
uh so I I I was really not
as you can gather I was really not
um I couldn't quite grasp why is it that
we can't do science on subjective
phenomena it seems pretty
straightforward to me I really
understood this and from my Layman
perspective you in your research you
expected to find the patients like you
said with damage to the visual cortex
with their for experienced non-visual
dreams and language language damage so
damage to the language cortex would have
non-verbal dreams so as you say this is
the ABCs of research this is what you
would expect but you discovered
something entirely different which why
was that subjective reports but across a
multitude of different types of patients
um so because as as as you by now
um and our listeners and viewers by now
will have noticed I'm I'm giving you
very full responses I have to try and
restrain myself because that study it
was as I said in our previous discussion
once you start doing this sort of thing
um the sort of thing that we're talking
about which it was so anathema in
neuroscience at the time you you're like
a kid in the toy shop you know you just
can't help discovering things because
nobody's bothered to look before and so
you know the discoveries flowed thick
and fast in that study which which
extended over several years because as I
said a moment ago I had to I had to
collect uh data on hundreds of patients
and of course unlike animal studies
where the scientists actually cause the
damage in the in in the poor creatures
that they study when it comes to human
studies
and you have to wait for nature to to
visit these misfortunes
upon people so you know it takes a long
time to do a large study like that
um but as I said I'm going to restrain
myself unless you tell me not to I won't
report everything that I found I'll just
zoom in on on the the the the the really
most important observations
um the the first one was a whopping grid
surprise uh which is that damage to the
mesopontine tegmented that's the
anatomical region we're talking about
which generates REM sleep and as I said
a minute ago it had already been
established uh both in in humans and in
other animals because it's not only
humans who have REM sleep um all mammals
have it
um that damage to that part of the brain
does indeed lead to loss of REM sleep
but nobody had ever talked to the
patients and so
um my uh
observation again here's an example of a
kid in a toy shop where you can't help
but discover something because nobody's
ever talked to the patients before
um one after another I got 18 of them
all together with damage to that part of
the brain each one of them reported
preservation agreement
so you know there you see
the the price we pay for not collecting
subjected data you know that uh yes we'd
established the object the fact that REM
sleep is lost with damage to the
mesopotamicum but we also know that REM
sleep correlates with dreaming
um but nobody had bothered to actually
gather data on the dream experience
itself and when I did so each and every
one of those patients reported
preservation of dreams so again just to
pick up on what I said a few minutes ago
why would you not believe them why would
18 people with serious illness you know
affecting a a really
life-sustaining part of their brains uh
you know why would they all collude and
conspire uh they don't even know each
other of course why would they why would
they all report that dreaming is
preserved when when it's not so there
was every reason to believe that what
they're reporting you know is is a
scientific finding and a reliable
um solid finding
um it was made all the more
um
um sort of convincing by the fact that I
then uh well I say then that these
things happened in parallel but
alongside the dawning realization that
patients with loss of REM sleep due to
pontine brain stem lesions do not lose
dreaming I was simultaneously observing
that patients with lesions elsewhere in
the brain did lose dreaming but in those
patients REM sleep was preserved
so we call that a a double dissociation
we in neuropsychology we call what I've
just described a double dissociation
which works like this if damage to brain
part A leads to loss of function a but
the preservation of function B and
damage to brain Part B leads to loss of
function B but preservation of function
a then you're dealing with two different
functions they're not the same thing I
mean it's pretty obvious
um so that's what I've found damage to
one part of the brain leads to loss of
REM sleep with preservation of dreaming
a damage to another part of the brain
leads to loss of dreaming with
preservation of REM sleep that means REM
sleep and dreaming are not the same
thing
um and you know when we teach research
methods to undergraduate students we
point out to them that a correlation is
not a cause you know the fact that two
things happen at the same time doesn't
mean that they that the ones causing the
other or indeed which was what we which
is what we were led to believe by the
earlier researchers or indeed that they
are the same thing that REM sleep and
dreaming are just the same thing
observed objectively and and
subjectively they're not the same thing
they merely correlate with each other
um the the interest then turned in in my
research
uh my interest then turned to uh those
brain regions the damage to which lead
to loss of dreaming
um and actually there were two such
areas one of them was not such a
surprise
um we were speaking earlier about the
visual parts and the verbal parts of the
brain uh the part of the brain that
damage to which the one of the two parts
of the brain damaged which leads to a
total cessation of dreaming with
preservation of REM sleep is the
parietal occipital Junction which is
which is
um where Visual and auditory and somata
sensory information all come together
um and so it's the the technical term
that we use for that is heteromodal
perception in other words all the
modalities combined and if you think
about it well that's what a dream is a
dream is a perceptual experience which
is both Visual and verbal the auditory
uh and and somatosensory and so on so
the part of the brain that's able to
generate this kind of heteromodal
perceptual experience if it's damaged
well it's not such a surprise that then
you can't experience
perceptual things like dreams so that
wasn't so interesting apart from the
fact that there was a double
dissociation with REM sleep
um which was interesting and but the
other part of the brain and that I found
leads to damage to which leads to a
total cessation of dreaming with
preservation of REM sleep is called
forgive all these technical terms it's
it's it's called the ventromesial
quadrant of the frontal lobes it's the
white matter at the bottom and in the
middle of the frontal nerves in other
words just behind uh and above your eyes
um patients with damage there on both
sides of the brain in other words
bilateral damage
um that you have to have damage on both
sides affecting those white tracts
um in their entirety that these patients
lost the capacity to dream and um the
the the interesting thing there was
clearly this region is crucial for
dreams because if it's damaged dreaming
becomes impossible
um but
um there was no obvious reason why that
part of the brain should be involved
with dreaming in other words it has
nothing to do with perception it has
nothing to do with memory
um it's it's it's its functions are
entirely uh on the surface on the face
of things entirely unrelated to what
goes on in dream experience so it was a
real surprise
um that damage there should lead to a
loss of beaming and so that that made me
interested in what is the function of
this part of the brain
um because it's a forgive the imagery
but it's like Spaghetti Junction there
you know there's Pathways going left
right and Center we're connecting
everything to everything
um so it there many is sub Pathways
within that area which were which came
into
um the the realm of possibility it might
be this part where it might be that one
they all come together there and run
very close to each other so so the
question for me then became which one of
them is the critical part
um and then that became the focus uh the
next focus of my of my research in in
that area
um and that you said correctly that that
study that I just described was my
doctoral study
um that ended with just the the
discovery that this area broadly
speaking is crucial but then after my uh
doctoral research was concluded I then
pursued this question further
um and uh
that led me to the next phase of my
research yeah no it's great it's
fantastic Mark and I you know I I have
to remind our audience again us this may
seem yeah yeah at the moment but this
was 40 years ago again you were almost
flying under the radar here so nobody
would notice and as you said I I keep
thinking of you kind of going I can't
believe nobody's looked at this before
and and I think about the behaviorists
and for me
when I was a kid I used to love taking
apart toys and seeing okay well what
happens if this wire stops you know if I
cut that way oh no my my remote control
car won't work anymore and behaviorism
was very much like that it was very much
oh pressed this lever and that will
happen press that lever and you were
discovering well I snipped this wire and
there's seemingly no circuit connected
here but it's still working what the
heck is happening here so that's that's
how I understood it in my very
simplistic terms that's perfectly
correct uh the analogy you're using I
think is a very very epic one brilliant
so I I'm on the same page almost
so I thought then we'd discuss a couple
of things a couple of more ingredients
I'm going to throw in and please do
bring us on to the next part of your
research one of the things you mentioned
was
the pharmacological impacts so levodopa
was a drug used for example by your your
friend Oliver Sacks May rest in peace
who tested this on for those people who
haven't seen it the movie Awakening but
also then with an awareness and for
people with Parkinson's for example what
we're doing there in those cases is
giving people dopamine and this can lead
to psychosis and this is why if anybody
who I know for example I know some
people with Parkinson's they've
experienced sometimes very realistic
dreams borderline hallucinations Etc so
this is all important because this is
where it brought you next so let's start
with all of the sexist patients they had
a disease called Encephalitis lethargica
which destroyed the very part of the
brain we're talking about now
and the fact that giving them dopamine
it didn't cure it but it's it's at least
temporarily the problem with dopamine
with those patients as it turned out is
it reawakened them oh let me make clear
it's called Encephalitis lethargica
which means the sleeping sickness but
the patients don't literally fall asleep
they just lose all motivation they lose
all spontaneity they lose all initiative
so hold on to that fact because remember
we're trying to find out what does this
part of the brain do what that tells us
it has something to do with motivation
something to do with generativity with
the with the thing that makes us with
with with volition you know what what
what gets us going because that's what
these patients lose with damage there
um so so so
um Oliver Sacks gave me the levodopa
which increases the availability of
dopamine it's a brain chemical which is
depleted in those patients and it woke
them up in the sense that they regain
their Vitality they regain their
interest and and and and
engagement with the world uh sadly after
it did that it then pushed them over the
top
um so it was very hard to find a happy
medium either they were completely
unmotivated and a dynamic and denote or
they were hyper manic uh too excited too
engaged with everything and and frankly
psychotic
um and uh delusional and hallucinatory
um so there's a there's a a first clue
in what I've said is that that part of
the brain seems to have to do with
motivational drive and secondly when it
is when it is hyper activated it
produces a psychotic state with
hallucinations and delusions and
um that's what a dream is
a dream is an hallucinatory delusional
state
um
so
that
points us perhaps in the right direction
um the the other thing that I observed
was in the old
psychosurgical literature which was in
the old days it's really horrible to
remember this but in the very old days
sort of 90 years ago or so
um patients who were psychotic
um for for psychiatric reasons they were
given an operation a brain operation
called prefrontal leukotomy
um prefrontal dichotomy was the severing
of fibers in the brain which in a
particular area which is the very area
we're talking about same area
um and cutting those fibers
um had the effect
of reducing hallucinations and delusions
in those patients it also had side
effects
um one of the side effects was that they
lost all motivation
um but one of those psychosurgeons uh
reporting on these patients a German
name Schindler uh writing in the 30s or
so
um observed that if the I when I say 30s
or so I honestly don't remember but it
was somewhere you know in the in the
first half of last century and um
he observed that patients uh who wake up
from this operation
um who continue to dream
um they are that's a bad prognostic sign
it shows that the operation hasn't
worked and that made me because I was
going back over to solve literature
trying to make sense of what it was that
I that I'd discovered and and what it
meant and that uh remark by Schindler uh
was the one that made me make the
connection uh that I just said to you
that dreams are a psychotic State
um and so if you can dream
um it means you can generate
hallucinations and delusions which are
artificially generated by giving the
patient dopamine which is the chemical
that is transmitted by these pathways so
that narrowed my focus down between all
of those multiple Pathways I was
thinking it's the dopamine one the
dopamine one seems to be the crucial one
um and um the the the other reasons uh
two for for
um being before for for thinking that
this might be the crucial one uh that is
that um when uh that operation was
abandoned uh uh around uh the middle of
the 1950s or so uh people stopped doing
that operation on psychotic patients it
was because there was a new drug that
had been discovered
um which those days was called a major
tranquilizer
um but nowadays we call that drug an
antipsychotic and what does the
antipsychotic drug do it blocks dopamine
so chemically blocking dopamine
prevents hallucinations and delusions uh
boosting dopamine chemically promotes
hallucinations and delusions cutting
those dopamine fiber Pathways prevents
um hallucinations and delusions and so I
thought this is probably the system this
is the one uh that's that I'm that I'm
that I can focus on
and of course in science you then have
an hypothesis that doesn't mean that you
then rest on your laurels you've got a
good idea
um you you have to then test your idea
by having
um falsifiable predictions uh and uh
again uh you know this that's normal
science all I was doing that was
different was I was saying that we can
make falsifiable predictions about
subjective experience too
um you know you I you can predict that
if you increase dopamine chemically uh
the the the the person taking the drug
the research participant will have more
dreams
um if you they'll report more dreams if
you block dopamine chemically they'll
have they'll report list reads if you
give a placebo nothing will change in
their dreams and so that's what we found
um
there were in fact two studies that I'm
referring to there the the one was
looking at the blocking of dopamine the
other one was looking at the boosting of
dopamine uh you boost dopamine patient
has more dream they're not patient these
are research participants volunteers and
they have more dreams but interestingly
they don't have more REM sleep so REM
sleep stays the same but they have more
dreams when I say more dreams I mean
more in number they have more per night
they also have longer dreams uh they
also have more emotionally intense
streams they also have more bizarre
dreams they also have more nightmares so
basically every dimension of dreanness
is increased by by dopamine and those
very same dimensions uh are reduced this
is what the other study showed uh when
you blocked opening when you give
antipsychotics
um so that was one line of evidence
which um which confirmed the hypothesis
but there were other lines too
um one of them was that if you put now
now remember I said animals have REM
sleep and and just like we do
um we don't know if their dream just
like we do but we know that in US
dreaming and REM sleep happen at the
same time they correlate so um that led
to the hypothesis that during REM sleep
which is when dreams are most likely to
be happening
um looking at other mammals because this
this method you can't do with human
beings but well at least you can't do it
unless you have clinical reason for
doing it you can't do it just for
experimental reasons you put a electrode
into those dopamine Pathways and you
measure the firing rate of those neurons
and we it was possible to show that the
firing rate is maximal during REM sleep
in those dopamine neurons another method
called microdialysis which is where you
measure how much dopamine is released at
the terminals of that circuit
the maximum amount of dopamine is
released during dreaming sleep
um so those those findings together
their lesion findings in other words
damage there leads to a loss of REM
sleep
um um boosting that neurochemical
increases I mean dreaming sleep
dreams decreasing that chemical
has the opposite effect on dreams
measuring the firing rates of those
neurons those dopamine neurons
correlates with when dreams happen and
then measuring the actual release of
dopamine directly with microdialysis
um that during during sleep dopamine
releases maximal you take all those
things together you know you've got
pretty solid evidence that what drives
dreams is dopamine uh in that circuit
um and therefore not uh it's it's not
the same as REM sleep because not only
does REM sleep have a different circuit
starting in a different part of the
brain leading to a different part of the
brain but also it has a different
neurochemistry the neurotransmitter that
generates uh REM sleep is called
acetylcholine whereas the the
neurotransmitter that generates
streaming is dopamine so uh not only had
a further confirm that these are two
separate mechanisms but I'd now
um I got in my grasp what the nature of
the mechanism is that generates streams
it's this particular pathway called the
mesocortical mesolympic dopamine pathway
therefore the chemical involved is
dopamine and now comes the question what
is the function of that pathway and it
is the major motivational
volitional Drive uh mechanism of the
mammal brain so remember I said hold on
to that observation that sexist patients
lost all motivation and this was the
side effect of the operation that was
done on the psychotic patients in my
non-dreaming patients there was also a
striking loss of motivational drive and
so we had now had an idea that somehow
dreaming is related to motivation to
this positive motivational urge that
that dopamine circuit mediates there I
was on the on the track of uh what is
what is it that causes dreams well it
seems to be dreams are motivated in some
way in some very powerful way I'm gonna
go off the book a little bit here
because I'd love your opinion on this
because one of the things doing shows
like this and reading eclectically
absolutely does for me is it gives me a
huge sense of empathy so
when you encounter somebody with a with
a what is essentially a euro
I suppose they're neurodiverse in some
type of you know ADHD or even where the
Parkinson's as I mentioned or Dementia
or something like that you family
members can get frustrated with them is
schizophrenia psychosis and you kind of
kind of come on just get out there and
hit the gym and you'll feel better but
when you read about this and you read
about dopamine and we've covered great
shows on the on the show recently Mark
we had Anna Lemke talking about her book
dopamine Nation Daniel Z Libra man
talking about the molecule of more which
is beautifully positioned for what you
talk about because you read widely at
the time and you said also that
Neuroscience owed Freud an apology
because he talked about wishes which is
an important term
admin Rose talked about the reward
system
seeking your friend jakransep talked
about the seeking system and we'll talk
about that later on when we talk about
his work and effective Neuroscience but
this was all part of dopamine and I'd
love you to share Maybe
a word on that that what I mentioned
about understanding that everybody is
almost like a graphic equalizer they
have different settings of different
neurochemicals therefore that affects
Behavior it affects how they experience
the world expects it affects how they
dream but also then what you found in
the research when you deeply delved in
at that time that's a very important
point the one you just made uh that you
know the the
patients who have a a deficit of
dopamine uh they can't help it but that
they will lose motivation they will lose
there's a symptom called anhedonia which
is you know nothing gives pleasure
energy which is a lack of energy a
booleo which is just doing nothing you
know
um the these patients can't help it
because they're lactopamine conversely
you know if you have too much dopamine
you go manic
um you have two interested in everything
an ADHD which you mentioned earlier is
is also dopamine mediated so you become
hyper distractible everything's
interesting everything attracts your
attention
um your mood becomes too elevated in
hyper Mania and and megalomania and
eventually you know they they they go
completely psychotic if you give too
much as happens as you as you know
um when you're treating Parkinson's
disease you've got to be very careful
not to give too much though because you
push the patients into a psychosis which
by the way
the first symptoms of which are
excessive dreaming so it Heralds The
psychosis once the once the Parkinson's
patient starts going into that too too
many dreams too many nightmares then you
realize gosh the better titrate the
therapy because next thing they're going
to be psychotic
um it's very important that we recognize
that you've got no control over these
things you know it's this is just uh
this is just uh and and so I did
something
um which I recommend uh every
neuroscientist or probably every
psychiatrist should do
um which is to take these drugs yourself
um and see what effect it has on you so
that you know
um from your own personal experience
what these patients are going through
um not only in terms of the underlying
neurodynamics of their Illness but also
what what they what what effect it has
on them when you give them these drugs
you know what does it feel like to take
an antipsychotic for example I can tell
you it feels bloody awful you know
um what does it feel like to take
libidopa I can tell you it feels great
um and uh you know so so I know from my
own experience
um that you are changed you as a person
as a personality uh or or radically
Changed by by uh
um fluctuations in these brain chemicals
the brain chemicals which the ones we're
talking about you know which are
fundamental to to our feeling life to to
to emotional life now you mentioned
Freud
um Freud had as as as you uh as as you
just said Freud had
um claimed on the basis of purely
psychological studies in other words
talking to people
um remember the free association method
that I mentioned in our previous uh
discussion
um getting people to free associate
about their dreams in other words to say
everything that comes into their mind in
connection to the remembered dream Freud
observed that those associations aren't
random uh that they seem to sort of they
seem to converge on a on a on a subplot
on a sort of a
um what he called the latent content the
sort of implicit ideas behind the dream
and he said that they are intensely
motivational
um and that that the moreover that they
are Wishful that they are sort of which
is which is exactly
um
what this dopamine system does it's it's
it makes you optimistic enthusiastic
interested positive expectations you
know good things are going to happen
would be let me get out there
um
the the that theory of Freud's was uh
discredited when REM sleep was
discovered and the Brain mechanisms of
REM sleep were discovered
um which happened between the 50s and
the and the 70s of last century
um by by the late 1970s
um it was well established REM sleep is
driven by acetylcholine and the person
the scientist who who made those final
discoveries in terms of unpacking how
REM sleep Works its name was Alan Hobson
a professor of neurophysiology at
Harvard and he wasted no time in
pointing out that this mechanism is
incompatible with Freud's theory he said
dreams are motivationally neutral that
was the praise that he used
um because they're driven by
acetylcholine which has no obvious
motivational certainly no wish you don't
start feeling like you do when you take
dopamine if you take if you take a seat
or curling you feel a little bit a
little bit uh crappy actually so so it's
sort of the opposite of what you would
expect if if if dreams were wishful
um but also Hobson pointed out
dreams happen during REM sleep then
they're happening uh uh every month it
was REM sleep occurs every 90 minutes
it's a pre-programmed you know Clockwork
so it every 90 minutes the acetylcholine
goes through the roof uh and then you're
dreaming and then the and then you know
it stops and then 90 minutes later and
you dream again and so Hobson said this
clearly is incompatible with Freudian
Theory it's driven by the brain stem you
know this very reflex type of part of
the brain nothing to do with the minds
in Hobson it's driven by acetylcholine
nothing to do with motivation and it
happened happens every 90 minutes like
Clockworks so it can't be the results of
these complicated psychodynamics
um so when I discovered uh 20 years
after that
um because although I started those
studies in the late 80s I I only
published them in the late 90s because
it took me 10 years to to finish the
work because of the numbers that we
needed
um I I said well first of all
um the critique the demolition of
Freudian dream theory
um on the basis of the discovery of REM
sleep
um it no longer applies because the loss
of REM sleep doesn't lead to loss of
dreaming dreaming is not is not um
generated by the same mechanism as REM
sleep so REM sleep might happen uh but
with through a cholinergic acetylcholine
Clockwork
um 90-minute bursts
um like a reflex but that's not what
drives dreams and then secondly uh what
I found is the part of the brain that
does generate dreams is motivational
it's anything but motivationally neutral
in fact it's the least motivation in the
neutral part of the brain and it is it
is positive motivation it's it's it's
it's
if there's any part of the brain if you
had to ask a neuroscientist who knows
anything about the circuitry for the the
basic affects of States
um and say which one would you associate
with wishes which is the most Wishful of
the of the affective circuits of the
brain they would say this one
um the dopamine one which as you said
jacquesit called seeking
um it can bearage calls wanting uh
Edmund Rawls calls reward and so on in
fact it's most widely known as the brain
reward system
so uh you know this is this this is the
system you would predict
um if you were frauded and once once we
started understanding all these things
about the brand which was way off the
bridge time
um you know that's the one that you
would most expect of light of his theory
psychological theory that is the the
anatomical pathway and and the chemical
the physiological mechanism that you
would most likely expect so I said to
Ellen Hobson he invited me over to
Harvard to you said I was under the
radar I must tell you after the after
the publication of my findings in which
was 1997.
um I I I was no longer under the radar
because I had as I told you I couldn't
help but discover things you know
and so um that that was a big discovery
that dreaming and REM sleep were doubly
dissociable
um and uh that dreaming is generated by
dopamine not by acetylcholine so Ellen
Hobson invited me over to talk to his
group in Harvard and um
and he was he was you know perfectly
decent about everything in fact he wrote
a very good review uh of a I published a
book at that time called the
neuropsychology of Dreams he wrote a
very very good review of it
um but but then when I went to his
Department I said to him what you just
said
perhaps you were quoting me when you
said that I I said to to to Ellen Hobson
I think perhaps we owe for read an
apology because it seems you know as if
he was perhaps on the right track after
all
I then went back home which those days
was London I was living in London at the
time uh that I that I um remember I told
you in our previous conversation I went
to London to train in psychoanalysis so
um it was from there that I went to
Hobson's lab
and when I got back to London he sent me
an email this was the early days of
emails I must tell you you remember it
was still a novelty well maybe you maybe
you don't know uh maybe you're younger
than me by a long shot but um he sent me
this email and in it he said
um did I hear you correctly uh that you
said that um you are going to interpret
your findings as being supportive of
Freudian dream theory he said because if
you're going to do that you know I'm I'm
not going to uh I'm not going to uh um
sort of champion them you know yeah
because he had as I said written a very
good review of the book and it and and
he had been very decent in our
interchange in in in Boston uh but but
he said you know I'm going to withdrawal
support from you if you're going to use
your phone or interpret your findings as
being sympathetic uh to Pride
so um that's the kind of thing when we
said uh in the previous discussion you
know that there were three radical
departures in this book the second one
of which was a return to to to
um the the Freudian idea of putting
subjectivity and feelings at the you
know at the center of of of mental
science
um this was the this is and was the kind
of response that you get
um it's people don't people don't feel
neutral about Freud
and regarding Freud you in chapter two
then and I'd love to get onto the
cortical fallacy but I loved the case
studies that you share both your yours
and others that you experienced but you
said regarding dreams your case your own
case of Mr s the man who lived in a
dream helped you translate Freud's
inferences about the functional
functional mechanisms of subjectivity
with their physiological equivalence and
this all led to your term
neuropsychoanalysis and your Journal of
the same name so maybe you'll tell us a
little bit about that and Mr s remember
I I started
um this journey uh by by
um way of brain mechanisms of sleep and
wakefulness
um
because that was the only way to study
Consciousness at that time and then I
brought in dreams uh and there's an
obvious link between when it comes to
dreams there's a there's a link with
that tradition the psychoanalytic
tradition address the study of Dreams
was was foundational to uh to Freud's
work
um
but that wasn't the only one you know
once I had taken that step then it led
in all sorts of directions and so um I I
studied among among other topics uh in
the 1990s and early 2000s
um a a condition called confabulatory
amnesia
um also known as korsakov psychosis
um and it's caused by damage to a
particular part of the brain
and um the I I if you interact with
these patients who who by the way let me
just explain what confabulatory amnesia
is uh they have absolutely terrible
recall uh so they're a music because
they can't remember especially recent
events but it goes quite a long way back
you know the the the earliest childhood
they can remember reasonably well but
but uh progressively their their recall
for for for for more and more recent
events uh is terrible but um much more
interesting than that uh is that they
don't realize they're not remembering
um they they draw up the wrong memory
um and they think uh that's what they
were looking for uh so
um for example with Mr s who was a case
of this kind
um when he met me he didn't he didn't
think I've never met this guy before
which was the dream he'd never met me
before but when he met me he thought oh
yeah you're saying sir you know the
chapter is on my rowing team
um he he had been on a rowing team 30
years earlier at University because he
was now in his 50s
um he was an electronic engineer
next time I saw him he thought I was a
client of his bringing him an electronic
problem wanting him to solve you know
and so on so they had they have these
mistaken memories uh but they they don't
realize their mistaken memories uh and
so this is the confabulatory aspect that
they they've their false memories as it
were
um
so and usually quite bizarre uh that you
know the the sorts of things that they
that they get themselves into a terrible
model as you can imagine
so um I I was studying these patients
and Mr s is just one example of them I I
studied a good many of these patients
and I used Mr s to illustrate the the uh
in fact he was one of the first ones I
saw
um but if you if you sit and talk to
these patients
um
and you you are as I was then beginning
to become uh you're a psychoanalyst who
who's looking not only at the behavior
and the cognition and the cognitive
mechanisms you're looking also at the
subjective experience uh the the the
emotional uh Dimension uh of the of the
of you know you see the behaviors and
the cognitions but you also see
something you you you don't neglect uh
the the the affective side the emotional
side if you do sit with the patient like
that uh with with this bifocal kind of
um lens where you're looking at both
things as something stands out jumps out
at you which is that the confabulations
are not a motivationally neutral the
confabulations are quite obviously
tendentious in other words they quite
obviously Wishful uh the the the the
things that the patient misremembles
um are they they turn the the
rather than just being a random mistake
uh the thing that they think they're
remembering
um actually makes the current situation
much better now the examples I gave
earlier are not are not such good ones I
mean I could I could force it and say
well it's it's better to think you know
somebody then that you're with a
stranger it's nice to be with somebody
it's familiar it's nice to think that
you're 20 years old when you're 50 years
old
um you know it's nice to think that this
uh doctor is Consulting this is not a
doctor this is my client he's Consulting
me about about about uh his problem
rather than I'm Consulting him about my
problem you know the The Wishful element
is is there but it's perhaps not so not
so easy to see in the examples that I
gave you that the better examples are
that that Mr s uh when that he he had a
big scar he had a brain operation so he
had a big scar on his head
um and uh so he
realized I've had an operation because
he doesn't have to remember it it's yeah
he has he has the score
um so he he's he he misremembered the
operation as being a dental operation
which he had in fact had it had implants
dental implants
um which had which had gone suingly
um and uh you know his his chronic
dental problems were fixed um he'd also
had a pacemaker cardiac pacemaker fitted
there was another operation he'd had he
had an arrhythmia and the the pacemaker
were like a charm uh so he he mistook
this operation for those operations this
one was botched those ones were were
wonderfully successful and and so again
I can't um without going uh on for too
long I can't give you enough examples to
to convince you but so I'll just go
straight to this it looks to me it's
sitting there as a clinician who's also
interested in feelings that Mr s is is
is improving his situation in his he's
misremembering so so what I then did
because again remember in science you
don't just have theories you have to
test them
so I gave a transcript of of Mr s's
confabulations at the first 150 or so
contabulations that he made in in an
interview
um and uh gave blind rages in other
words Raiders who weren't weren't didn't
know what it was that my hypothesis was
and I asked them to rate uh whether
whether the confabulation makes things
better or worse for the patient from the
patient's point of view is the
confabulated memory uh does it make
things better for him uh or worse for
him affectively and the blind rate is to
a very high degree of statistical
significance that they make things
better for him then we did that with 10
more patients and so it wasn't just the
stairs uh all 10 of them uh it made
blind rate disagree it made things
better for them and then we did several
other studies including ultimately
studies which got people to rate the
mood of the patient immediately before
the confabulation and the mood of the
patient immediately after the
confabulation and it shows that baby
improves with the configuration so
um the the this patient that you're
talking about
the the the the the lesion
um
uh is in the this Mr s the lesion is in
the basal forebrain nuclei which I must
tell you by by a funny historical
coincidence uh is also a set of nuclei
that release the neurotransmitter
acetylcholine
um the one the one that um that that
perhapsism had identified was
responsible for REM sleep
um and uh acetylcholine that one that
generates REM sleepers from a different
part of the brain the mesopotamicum this
uh the the basal forebrain nuclei that
cholinergic pathway is is crucial for uh
for for what we call error monitoring or
or recognized for detecting uh errors uh
so if you predict you're expecting
something and it doesn't happen that's a
prediction error
um and acetylcholine is necessary for
registering these errors
um which is why patients without
acetylcholine don't register their
errors
um and and and incidentally learning we
know that acetylcholine of this type is
very important for learning learning is
just recognizing errors in other words
something new happens something not will
have something different from what I
expected happened I better update my my
predictive model of the world
um so that's what he had lost
now you said that through this kind of
work I started being able to map
um the the the Freudian vocabulary the
value of which was that it gives a
language for describing subjective
experience and and analyzing it you know
its component parts uh it's it's it's
not just for its own sake what one wants
to be anachronistic and use
old-fashioned Freudian language it's
that this language was what we have you
know for being able to describe and
theorize about this part of the the mind
and brain then it gives us a basis for
improving our knowledge you know once we
know which one is which
um so so yes probably had a concept
called reality testing for example
um and clearly what's missing in Mr s is
reality testing you know so that's a so
now we know that's that's that
psychodynamic function when I say
reality testing I crucially have to add
this that the cholinergic system the
basal forebrae nuclei
um they they are inhibiting The Wishful
thing I was talking about earlier so
this is how I want things to be uh sorry
mate it's not like that error you know
so it's so your your The Wishful part of
the mind is constrained uh by this
reality testing part of the mind and so
you know you slowly uh get all of your
uh you have to curb all of your
enthusiasms and and uh and and get with
the program of how the world really
works so Freud's idea of this Wishful
system which he called uh the libidinal
drive uh is constrained by this reality
testing system
um and that's what I've just described
to you is the mechanism of what happened
in Mr s but it's also uh in terms of in
terms of dreaming it's a that mechanism
that same Wishful mechanism that
underpins his um confabulations that
that mechanism and Freud had posited the
same the same Mecca this drive is the
you know this Wishful Drive is a so in
this way I slowly pieced uh slowly sort
of like
translated uh psychoanalytic terms and
Concepts into their neurological
equivalence so that we can bring to bear
on them all the Technologies and methods
of modern neuroscience and and in this
way to use the phrase that I used in our
last discussion finish the job in other
words pick up where Freud left off he he
had to leave the Neuroscience side
because they just weren't any worthwhile
tools available then now they are
available and so I I I I saw my uh at
least a a central part of my life's work
was I want to finish that job I would
now that we got these tools let's apply
them to these the study of these
subjective phenomena as they were
conceptualize psychologically by Freud
and and and let's let's find the
anatomical physiological equivalents and
then finish the job in the sense of you
know make a better Theory than than the
one that was to us on the basis of
psychological observations alone now
lastly you you mentioned the word
neuropsychoanalysis so we are now at the
year 1999
um that's where where we got got into my
journey and um at that point
um I was no longer the only one
um who thought this was a good idea to
to try to integrate try to use
neuroscientific methods to to
um to um to progress psychoanalytical
Theory and also to use psychoanalytical
Concepts to progress neuroscientific
Theory and um and all of which is to
better understand how the how the
instruments of the mind works the the
mind
not only in its objective manifestation
but in its subject of the most
interesting part about the mind is that
it feels like something
so um so I I was beginning to get a few
colleagues uh to uh alongside those like
Hobson who were not at all impressed uh
with this uh there were others who who
thought well it's not a bad idea let's
let's do that and um you mentioned some
names in our previous conversation Eric
candel was an example and he was he was
Keen to join this this uh this Quest
um so was uh Jacques panksip who you
mentioned so was Antonio de Mazzio who
you mentioned so was Oliver Sacks uh who
you mentioned and you know and a good
few others uh Joseph Ledoux
[Music]
galezi and so on some really you know
solid uh eminent neuroscientists were
were saying that this is a good idea if
if I was around man I would have offered
to make you guys tea and just listen to
the background that's why I have the
books here on the shelf by the way I
recognize candel and I have so many of
them on my iPod as well on my iPads all
the all the books of the guys you
mentioned as well magnificent
conversations I'm sure
yes indeed so in 1999 we decided that
we're going to found a journal that we
said that we could commune like-minded
scientists could communicate with each
other and not have to fight every time
we want to have a paper published uh
fact for the right to do this sort of
thing you know we all agreed it's a good
thing to do and so we needed our own
journal and that journal needed a title
so I came up with the word
neuropsychoanalysis you know there's
neuroanatomy neurophysiology
neurochemistry and neuropsychology which
is the field I Trend in uh and so I
thought let's call this
neuropsychoanalysis the reason I wanted
to do that was because I wanted to make
clear that because the word
neuropsychology was associated with uh
as I said it might as well have been
called neurobehaviorism Because by the
word psychology they were excluding the
psyche you know and I said the word
psychoanalysis makes clear what we mean
by psychology that is a psychology that
that that that takes seriously and holds
I mean keeps Center Stage
um the subjective uh and and and
emotional
character of of the of the psyche of
mental life then we had a first Congress
this new uh this we had this new Journal
but we also started a society
um for neuropsychoanalysis and we had
our first Congress it was at the Royal
College of Surgeons uh of England in in
London
um and uh our speakers included many of
the names I just mentioned the mazio was
there and panksip was there and and um
and uh Sachs was there and I didn't even
know this uh with a venue which as I
said was the Royal College of Surgeons
uh that his mother had been a prominent
member of that college and and she had
taken him as a child to the hunterian
museum this is a pathological Anatomy
museum with the most awful specimens and
when you see the most horrendous things
in that museum you know our children
with two heads and you know this sort of
thing and um and and Sax said my mother
took me around this Museum I was
traumatized but he remembered it so
anyway so that that's then we founded a
society that we've had a congress every
year
um ever since but except for the the two
covered years we didn't
um and the journals going strong and the
society is going strong and that's what
that word uh how that how that word came
came into into being and why there's a
couple of things I'd love you to share
with our audience maybe and we're I
don't think would do justice to jump
onto the cortical fallacy today I think
we'll we might do that another time Mark
if you're on for us because uh it's it's
fascinating it's one of the key
departures you made which is really
important so I don't think we'll do
justice in the time you're in the middle
of work and you've kindly given us your
time your lunch break to join us today
but one of the things you mentioned
there was
how
Freud's work gave you a Common Language
and it's one of the big things in one I
think that's of interest to that people
who listen to this show is
transformation in organizations or
innovation and having a Common Language
across the organization is absolutely
key that's that's one thing I'd love
your thoughts on that and then the other
is I think it was Ludwig Wittgenstein
who said that the limits of our language
is the limits of our world and that goes
to your point that well you had to
create a new word like neuropsychic
psychoanalysis because it didn't
encapsulate what was available now so I
think we're we're seeing that in the
world today we're coming to the limits
of of language in a way and if we use
the old tools to describe future modes
we limit ourselves as a species as well
I think this this is an important point
you made look
I'm going to address what you've just
said directly but before I do I just
want to say something as an aside which
is that the word psychoanalysis also
carries baggage you know um so so I told
you that my colleague said to me you
know an astronomer studying astrology
you know that's that's what a
neuroscientist study psychoanalysis is
like
um and uh so I'm I've been very mindful
of that that that word uh carries
connotations uh of all an old-fashioned
funny daddy you know 19th century
actually early 20th century
as a sort of early stuttering of the
field but but I but but after
psychoanalysis the field you know
although it progressed enormously in all
sorts of respects it lost sight of those
things that I keep on saying I think we
should have sent a stage if we're going
to have a science of the mind which is
subjective experience and the and the
and feelings you know everything pivots
on our feelings everything we do is in
order to feel better and to not feel
worse and so on so so I I wanted to
finish that job in other words not go
back to those old theories but to but to
bring them back in and build upon them
so I felt you know I didn't not that I
don't care but I mean even though the
word has has baggage uh sounds
old-fashioned yeah I think that we have
to give credit where credit is due you
know Freud pioneered that approach
that's the approach we're building upon
and so you know whatever cost is
attached I think that's the right word
to describe what we're doing
now the other things you said about
language a Common Language you know it's
it's really really important there's
that well-known saying uh if all you
have is a hammer then everything looks
like a nail
um and you can you can use that analogy
for language you know if if the only
Concepts that you've got are cognitive
then everything looks like cognition you
know if you don't like when I when I
what I said about confabulatory Amnesia
if you don't have concepts
for the subjective and affective
dimension of things then you know your
Concepts limit what you what you can see
and so this really very obvious thing
and that's confabulations are Wishful
um it just doesn't even register you
just don't even see it it's as if it
doesn't exist because you don't have a
concept the concept of wish is
absolutely Central to to to the
psychoanalytic vocabulary wish
trained by reality testing and so on so
if you've got these Concepts then you're
able to see their the manifestation
you're able to see examples of those
Concepts I
um I live as you know in South Africa
um where the first people the indigenous
population of southern Africa uh the the
the they the the sort of origins of of
of of humanity the direct descendants of
of the of the first people you know
because the Out of Africa theory that
you know everyone comes from Africa
um the the greatest diversity in the in
human genome is found in the people here
the the indigenous people here because
they are the origin of all these little
offsprings you know so they're the
direct descendants and uh so I I I know
several people who studied the languages
that were spoken and some of those
languages are extinct but some of them
are still Spoken Here
and it's absolutely fascinating you know
talking to those to those um uh experts
on on these uh uh early pre-colonial
Southern African languages
um You by by by studying the vocabulary
um you you you get to see what kind of
world this vocabulary is describing you
know it's uh so the sorts of things that
people were experiencing the sorts of
things that mattered the sort of things
that deserve names you know it's just
absolutely incredible so that
illustrates I think the thing that
you're saying that that uh
um you know language
um is I don't want to you know sort of
reify language there's a lot about the
mind that's interesting other than
language but um but uh you know in our
minds human Minds a language plays an
absolutely Central role
um in in what we can think about and and
and how we pass the world and what we
observe and and what and what just
passes Us by and so I I I
um that point that you've just made is a
very very good one that that's in a way
what I and my colleagues uh who joined
uh up under the banner of neuropsych
analysis that's exactly what we were
trying to do to bring these Concepts in
so that we can also think about these
things and enrich our understanding of
mental life in the process and I really
think that's what we've done
beautiful I knew I was just gonna say
you've absolutely done that you've
written this book in a very accessible
common language way I absolutely love it
as I said to you I I so many aha moments
and it's a pleasure to listen to you to
tell us about them and I hope these
episodes go far and wide and spread the
good work that you've done over the past
decades as well so it's it's a
fascinating chat and I'm very very
grateful for your time grateful for you
sharing it Mark with our audience for
those who might not have caught episode
one you recommended a link that we share
I'm gonna put that into the show notes
but where else can people find your mark
find out more about your work etc I'll
tell you a story
um I went to a conference it was a few
years ago and somebody came up to me
during the coffee break and said you
know um
you really should get a more
professional person uh to to edit your
the the videos you're posting
um so some of them are quite quite low
quality I mean not all of them but some
of them are you know a bit amateurish
and that's how I discovered
um that
um many many many of the lectures that
I've given are posted on YouTube
sometimes by people just sitting in the
audience filming it other times by the
organizers who film it in a more
professional way so there's there's a
plethora of
um on YouTube a plethora of of videos
um of me talking on many many topics all
of them in one way or another related to
what we're talking about in these
conversations because as we said in part
one of our conversation
um this book The Hidden Spring really is
the culmination of my life's work it
sort of brings everything together
brilliant Mark and I can attest to that
as well it's a great read for people who
aren't that much into factual content
it's autobiography I can't say that word
very well it's biographical as well so
Mark tells the story and how he's
gathered all these different lenses put
them together to create this true
Kaleidoscope of looking at Consciousness
it's it's a fascinating read author of
The Hidden Spring a journey to the
source of Consciousness mark zomes thank
you for joining us thanks Aiden I look
forward to part three
likewise
