that's what I've done you know I had
that one plan which is that I'm I'm
going to bring these two Fields together
it seemed like a good idea for the
reasons we've discussed uh and I didn't
stop in other words I didn't give up and
inevitably eventually you start seeing
the big picture you know you start
seeing you start being able to simplify
and see how it works and that's um I
wouldn't have predicted that I would be
in exactly this place no I certainly
wouldn't have um I wouldn't have
predicted just about all of the actual
steps that I took hello everyone and
welcome to this inaugural episode of our
podcast my name is Ross Gilmore and I'm
a PhD candidate in the philosophy
department at the University of Kansas I
work on issues of metaphysics and
psychology and ancient Greek philosophy
but I also have a keen interest in
contemporary scientific approaches to
these same kinds of questions which tend
to cross disciplinary boundaries and
since first discovering his work a
couple of years ago there's no author
I've been more excited to read or as
proven a better model of an
interdisiplinary scholar than Mark s
Professor SS wears many hats he is chair
of the Department of neuropsychology at
the University of Cape Town in South
Africa and a researcher in its
Neuroscience Institute he is also a
psychoanalyst and has recently overseen
the publication of the revised standard
edition of the complete psychological
works of Sigman Freud as its General
editor and he has played a pivotal role
in putting these two Fields neuroscience
and psychoanalysis into conversation as
a founding chair of the neuros
psychoanalysis Association and its
excellent Journal
neuropsychoanalysis over the past few
decades this new field has borne
remarkable fruit in particular I will
mention Mark's articles the conscious ID
revision of Drive Theory and its
companion piece a revision of Freud's
theory of the biological origin of the
edus complex as well as his most recent
book The Hidden Spring a journey to the
source of Consciousness so Mark welcome
and thank you very much for speaking
with me today thanks very much Ross glad
to be
here so I'd like to do a little bit of
stage setting um for the questions that
follow I'm going to be asking uh a
variety of questions that might seem to
have uh this biographical bent you know
kind of what did you do and when and
when did you learn about these authors
um but I hope it'll be obvious that
they're not of merely biographical
interest um I take that you might you
know serve as a kind of a case study for
what you talk about feeling feeling our
way through life through these decisions
that we're making in our lives um kind
of balancing on the one hand uh what we
might call these sort of bottom up
interests things were're interested in
at the time uh particular desires we
have to pursue these different Avenues
uh while on at the same time balancing
to get these you know long-term goals or
projects it's kind of top- down uh
perspective so I'd like to start towards
the beginning of your career um if you
could imagine yourself back I think you
started training as an analyst in the
80s um so when you were first setting
out um at that time why were you
pursuing uh this formal training as an
analyst in what ways did you think that
your neuroscientific training uh might
bear on it and how did you think it
might in turn influence the way you
conduct your neuroscientific
research well um the branch of
Neuroscience that I trained in is called
neuros
pychology and I started studying in that
field in
1980 and uh there was there was very
little psychology in it um even though
it was called neuros pychology um it
seemed to exclude the psyche uh because
for me the psyche uh is first and
foremost something subjective uh it is
it is uh the lived experiencing eye uh
and that was absolutely um airbrushed
out uh of neuros pychology we learned
only about these third person kind of
descriptions of the mechanisms of the
mind and in particular cognitive
mechanisms and uh I kept asking myself
but where is the subject uh of these
perceptual mechanisms uh where is the
subject of this language mechanism you
know who who's in there and and where
where does he or she fit uh Within These
information flow diagrams um so uh in a
word I was frustrated um by how little
psychology there was it might as well
have been called neuro behaviorism um
rather than neuros pychology and the way
that it treated the study of the of the
mental functions of the brain was no
different from how we might study you
know respiratory functions or digestive
functions uh the the the most
interesting property of the brain is
that unlike any other organ or actually
any other uh known physical thing in the
universe uh it feels like something to
be a brain so uh it was out of my
frustration on that score uh that I that
I was uh led to uh become interested in
psychoanalysis um for all of its faults
uh psychoanalysis at least takes lived
experience uh subjective mental life um
as its starting point uh as its as it
central uh object of study and so uh
that's that's really why why I I did
what I did to the horror of my
professors and and my colleagues they
said or one person in particular said uh
that it's like an astronomer studying
astrology yeah so how did you at at that
time how did you envision your career
going I I don't think that you were just
planning on becoming an analyst and
leaving the neuros psychology behind but
did you have any particular notion of
how the two might inform each other at
that
time yes um well I I don't want to um
give the impression that I had a a
richly articulated notion but I had uh
the basic idea that a psychoanalysis
taking the observational perspective
that it does upon the mind in other
words the subjective perspective as
opposed to the objective one uh that uh
in doing so it was able to study those
aspects uh of mental life that were
excluded from neuros psychology and
there was a theoretical yield from that
study um a methodological um yield but
more interesting to me was the
theoretical yield in other words there
was a conceptual
armamentarium um that I wanted to then
um uh import into neuros psychology uh
and in this way to inject some some
psyche into neuros pychology um you know
I'm speaking of uh Concepts like um well
those days even even feelings you know
affect emotion it was utterly neglected
in neuros pychology there was no neuros
pychology of emotion I remember my
excitement um when in the in the I think
it was in the mid to the late
1980s a book um edited by halman and
SATs came out called the neuros
psychology of emotion it was the only
book on the topic you know and uh so to
have um theories of emotion and and
motivation um and drive you know how the
mind is embodied nowadays in the era of
embodied cognition uh we perhaps forget
or perhaps people of your age don't even
know that it ever was the case that we
didn't think of the Mind as embodied uh
in in in in cognitive
Neuroscience um so um even Concepts as
simple as those uh but uh
also um the more sophisticated Concepts
you know about the structure of the self
um and to go even more deeply into it um
Concepts like narcissism I don't know
how anybody can understand mental life
without having recourse to the concept
of narcissism but I can absolutely
assure you U probably this day other
than my me and my closest colleagues no
neuroscientists speak about
narcissism um and and so on you know so
I was wanting I thought that to put it
um as as as uh you I'm sure you've heard
the phrase if all you have is a hammer
then everything looks like a nail so I
wanted to bring more tools more
theoretical tools to bear um on
neuropsychology so that we would have a
way of describing uh conceptualizing and
theorizing these phenomena which must
somehow uh also be part uh of part and
parcel of of the field um remember
neuros pychology is meant to be uh a a
discipline which which uh helps us to
understand the mental functions of the
brain and if we don't have Concepts like
those I think that we're we're really
hobbled um and and I'll tell you
something
else um as I began to to learn more
about these Concepts so uh exactly what
I've just said uh about you know if all
you have is a hammer uh I started to see
things clinically uh with my
neurological patients uh which I was
unable to literally unable to see before
um like for
example it would be too uh complicated a
topic for me to go into in any depth but
I will just say patients with damage to
the right hemisphere of the of the
cortex they become extremely egocentric
um and they can't see things from from
it's partly because of a spatial problem
uh you know they're unable to put
themselves in the shoes of the other
because you have to that's quite
complicated spatial thing to be able to
see things from somebody else's point of
interview but there's a very uh profound
emotional Dimension uh to this
egocentricity of these patients and it
just you know dawned in me uh in a Flash
oh my word you know these patients
suffer from from
narcissistic mental organizations and
and that really um helped me to
understand much better uh the why these
right hemisphere patients have these
curious emotional disorders now I'm
giving you really just one example uh
but I could multiply it uh you know
tenfold or hundredfold um that what I
what I expected and hoped uh would come
to pass is exactly what did uh namely
that I was I I I was greatly um
uh the having these psychoanalytical
tools at my disposal really enabled me
to be uh to have a much deeper
understanding as a neuropsychologist
um of the pathological and normal
functions that that I that I was
studying okay and and I'm interested in
your kind of developing views on this
psychoanalytic as you say uh conceptual
armamentarium so when you first started
training as an analyst what was your
impression of Freud before you had you
know done any of the the coursework that
might have been associated with your
training institute and then I'm also
curious what it would have been at the
end of your time training obviously
before you know the rest of your
career yes well um as I told you uh I I
began my my neuros psychological
training in
1980 um and I would say for the
first five years or so what little I
heard about Freud was was a caricature
you know the usual sort of thing about
um about Freud um you know that that he
was not a scientist uh pseudo science uh
that there was no evidence base for
these theories that this is these all
very oldfashioned Notions that you know
um even psychiatrists have long since
abandoned and um so that was that was my
Prejudice I I shared the Prejudice that
that was uh imparted to me by the
scientific mure within which I was
training but
then um I read Freud's book on AP fasia
uh which he wrote in
1891 therefore before he became a
psychoanalyst um and it was it was a
classic in the field a fasia of course
is part and parcel of neuros pychology
the disorders of of of language that
arise with with with with brain lesions
and uh so it was considered a classic
and what struck me about it um was
actually What drew me to to reading it
was some very
um uh praiseworthy things that were said
about it by Alexander luua uh the great
Russian neurologist and neuros
psychologist in my time Laura was you
know the absolute at the absolute
Forefront of U of of neuros pychological
thinking so um I I had no idea by the
way I learned only years later that
Laura had in fact been a psychoanalyst
in his youth uh and he had abandoned
psychoanalysis um under the uh during
the stalinist purges you know
psychoanalysis became uh centia nrata in
the Soviet Union and uh so he he dropped
it you know like a hot potato um did
Laural uh so I read that a phasia
monograph which was which was really
very very impressive and and very
similar in its in its underlying
assumptions to to to the to the
assumptions of luua for reasons which I
then subsequently understood um then I
was led to reading Freud's project for a
scientific psychology which he wrote in
1895 um and that was because another
leading neuros psychologist of my youth
uh namely KL pribram uh had had been uh
effusive in his in his praise uh uh uh
of this um this work of freuds saying
how how incredibly preent it was um and
so I read that and you know it was I I
remember spending an entire weekend um
in fact some somebody asked me to house
sit for them I was living you know like
a student in a in a dingy apartment and
so I was it was great I had this whole
house to myself for a long weekend um
but all I did was sit there you know
like like a mad you know just reading
this this this uh Freud's project for a
scientific psychology it was so
enthralling uh that was really the when
when I started to take Freud very
seriously and um then my first when I
was saying earlier I could multiply the
examples of how Freudian Concepts um
proved useful to me as a as a
neuropsychologist um my first um
exposure to that was in relation to
Dreaming um my first piece of research
in fact it was my doctoral uh
dissertation uh was on brain mechanisms
of sleep and dreaming and it it was I
sort of smuggled Consciousness in by
studying dreaming because the the one uh
respectable topic uh under the uh
heading of Consciousness uh in the 1980s
was sleep and wakefulness you know this
this kind of the level of Consciousness
and the Brain arousal mechanisms that
underpin it uh this was a respectable
topic so I I I I studied sleep in order
to uh study this uh Curious fact that
the unconsciousness of sleep is
punctuated by these conscious phenomena
called dreams um and uh so during that
uh period uh I I mean while I was
conducting that research uh I attended a
seminar uh uh of all things you you you
must remember that I I was studying you
know natural science uh and of all
things this seminar which was open to
all faculties uh was led by a professor
of comparative
literature um and so you know it was a
it was a revelation to me you know as he
unpacked and luckily uh he he uh Drew he
drew upon the project for a scientific
psychology in order to help us
understand the metapsychology of Dreams
because you know there were many
assumptions that Freud carried over from
his project to his to his dream theory
that um you you wouldn't understand the
theory unless you understood those
hidden assumptions um and so that was
really when the when the um what did
they say there's something bit uh the
bug bit or something anyway I then got
the you know I really decided this this
was what I wanted to do I wanted to
train uh in in this stuff you know
called
psychoanalysis and so um you ask how my
views of Freud change so it went from
Prejudice to to interest to Fascination
um but then um you know when I went to
London because I I had to uh I had to
leave South Africa in order to train
because there was no psychoanalytic
training in apartate South Africa uh but
also because I was conscripted into the
army all white males uh were required uh
to defend the heus you know apartate
system so that was the the the push uh
to for me to leave was that I needed to
escape uh the draft the pool was the
prospect of training as a psychoanalyst
in London and um I don't know if you
want me to go on anymore perhaps I've
said enough but obviously then you know
my my my my views of Freud changed
during during my training um as I got to
understand him uh better um but I have
to say I think that I understood Freud
and therefore psychoanalysis Freud being
the kind of Bedrock of all of the
subsequent developments in
psychoanalysis I think I understood him
in in a way slightly not slightly I
think I think uh you know considerably
differently from my fellow um trainees
and my teachers for that matter because
I had followed the same trajectory that
Freud had you know Freud had gone from
Neuroscience via um neuros pychology uh
into um into
psychoanalysis and um and by the way uh
so-called hysteria what we now call
functional neurological disorders you
see them in our Wards all the time you
know I mean these patients are you know
to a penny in the neurology Wards so you
know I was I was familiar with these
sorts of things in a way that I think
that my colleagues colleagues were not
so I uh I I think I I had a kind of a
leg up in that way in terms of uh what
use I was able to make and what sense I
was able to make of what I was
learning yeah that's really interesting
how you describe your career as
mirroring freuds in that way starting
from the neurological side and then
moving into the um subjective side of
the experience you might say um and it
sounds like you know in your training
institute Freud was taken seriously you
know he wasn't you know played down in
favor of other maybe more trendy
analysts at the time it sounds like he
was being taken seriously at The
Institute no not um I think that uh um
that wasn't it's not that he wasn't
taken seriously but he was certainly
taught as a kind of historical figure um
the British psychoanalytical Society is
very clan um so the the emphasis was
much more on on melan Klein uh and the
other the Clans the senior clinians who
were my teachers um and and also the
broader um what's called object
relations approach people um in the mold
of of winot and and bulby and so
on okay and I'm curious when you know
you've um written more recently about um
you know revising the theory and
technique of psycho analysis and I'm
curious um when you started having these
ideas um that your neuroscientific
training your neuros pychological
training could help you rethink you know
how how sessions are conducted or you
know the kind of metapsychology at work
was it throughout your training at The
Institute or did that kind of come on
later no uh it was not during my
training at The Institute um I have to
say so that I don't give too um rosec
colored uh picture of the whole thing I
I was also you know um struck by the
lack of scientific thinking uh in the
psychoanalytic Institute that I was
trained in I I don't mean a total lack
but you know it was much more of a kind
of a passing down received wisdom and uh
there being sort of a right way to see
things without it being obvious why that
was the right way to see things you know
so it became a very soon uh although my
intention had been to import into
neuroscience and neuros pychology in
particular um tools that I acquired as a
psychop or as a trainee
psychoanalyst um but very rapidly it
became apparent that there was a need
for for the the bridge built in this way
to to become
a to to be traversed in both directions
and um it was clear that psychoanalysis
could benefit from uh an importing of
not just Concepts from Modern cognitive
and affective Neuroscience but just also
its methods you know that there there
were I mean like for example in my my
that research I mentioned my very first
research on brain mechanisms of dreaming
um POA
famously declared um this Theory uh to
be
pseudoscientific uh because it was
unfalsifiable the analyst Freud's view
was that behind every dream there's a
heartfelt wish but the emphasis there
falls on behind you know you don't see
the wish in the what Freud called the
Manifest dream in other words the actual
explicit uh experience and memory of the
dream uh has to be uh interpreted uh by
the analyst and and and the the
underlying unconscious latent wish um is
inferred and um poer not unreasonably
pointed out that if this is the method
you know you're always going to be able
to confirm your your hypothesis because
you can interpret every dream you know
as having an unconscious wish behind it
even if the patient disagrees with you
there's there's no there's no falsifying
it uh but using other methods like for
example um in in my study uh I used the
lesion method in other words studying uh
what happened to dreams uh as in
consequence of damage to different parts
of the brain uh What uh became evident
was that the part of the brain that is
most centrally implicated in generating
dreams in other words the part of the
brain which when damaged leads to a
cessation of dreaming a loss of the
ability to dream it's uh it's it was
those days it was called the brain
reward system you know it's nowadays
more commonly um thought of or called um
the seeking system or the wanting system
system you know it's this this deep
dopaminergic uh it's the major positive
motivational system of the mammal brain
so and and that was just my studies uh
looked at brain injured uh patients but
uh then uh you know using
pharmacological probes because it's a
dopamine system you know we were able to
manipulate up and down the dopamine
levels and see test predictions about uh
if it is this dopamine circuit that
drives dreams you should be able to
increase them by giving dopamine and you
should be able to decrease them by
blocking dopamine and that's exactly
what we found uh and single cell
recordings of those um of those dopamine
cells you see that they they fire more
rapidly during dreaming sleep than at
any other time uh even dur even during
the most rewarding of of of daytime uh
activities a positron emission
tomography uh which allows you to image
where the uh
differential areas of act activation are
in the brain during any mental function
positron emission tomography of the of
the dreaming brain shows this part of
this motivational circuitry light up
like a Christmas tree so the point that
I'm making uh is that U although POA was
right that uh by the psychoanalytic
method uh these uh these hypotheses were
unfalsifiable uh using neuroscientific
methods there become falsifiable uh so
it's not a matter of the theory being
pseudoscientific it's a matter of you
know you need the right kind of methods
so so so that's so it rapidly became a
two-way thing um and uh you're saying
you know did I did it did
it how early did I start um uh
introducing revisions to psychoanalytic
theory it wasn't that that early because
it was remarkable the extent to which
what I found about the dreaming brain
was consistent with psychoanalytic
theory so there was very little to
correct but uh it was in subsequent
research of mine that uh you know I I
increasingly stumbled upon um
inconsistencies between what we can
learn uh about the um the the the
functional organization of the Mind from
a neuroscientific point of view and uh
the conclusions derived D from
psychoanalytic observations and then it
became a matter of you know well the
these these two views can't both be
right um and in in increasingly over the
years of course um inevitably uh it I
found in several instances that the the
psychoanalytical theory was untenable uh
in light of the neuroscientific findings
but it was it was only after that that
um I mean as I started to get a a bigger
picture um it was you know that you get
little peppercorns of findings and then
you you you know you you you you you you
lose confidence in this aspect of the
psychoanalytical theory and then in this
aspect but it takes a while for a a
whole new story a whole new um uh a a
picture um comprehensive enough for for
it to lead to uh implications for
clinical technique uh that was slow
incoming I I would say it's only been
over the last um well Dozen Years uh
that I've been able to make uh
contributions uh via the uh neuros
psychoanalytical uh platform uh to the
clinical practice uh of of of
psychoanalysis and um you know you might
have thought that this would be this
would bring about the greatest
resistance uh to what I was doing from
the psychoanalyst but actually it's
proven to be the opposite it's once they
started realizing that this actually has
some practical utility that it actually
makes a difference to I mean most
psychoanalysts are not scientists you
know they they're clinicians and um so
it became more valuable to them um than
and more interesting to them than it had
been so I think the the the the the the
the enormous um recognition that
neuropsychoanalysis has enjoyed has
really only come in the last 10 years
prior to that it was was a pretty
marginal activity uh I mean from the
point of view of of of most
psychoanalysts yeah that's the
impression that I had just based on the
the Articles I've been reading um it
seems like in the last you know as you
say decader so um you've really been
able to articulate this comprehensive
picture of um what's going on in in
therapy you know drawing on some of
these other topics we'll talk about um
you know pens Up's work in effective
neuroscience and um you know memory
reconsolidation and all these different
things and so it seems like
psychoanalytic Community would be in
this interesting position where on the
one hand your work is validating so much
of what they have been doing this whole
time um at the same time it's uh you
know taking a bit of the mystery out of
it in a sense and so um I don't I don't
know they might have to uh yeah be
willing to revise some of the some of
their previously held beliefs but um but
it does seem like things the pieces have
kind of clicked into the place in the
last decade or
so um so I wanted to ask you um earlier
you were talking about
um how people in these you know training
institutes they can have you know they
were they were taught in certain sorts
of ways and you know themselves not
scientists and so there can be a bit of
you didn't use this word but tribalism
we might say um and so I'm when you do
write about Freud
um you do so in a way that that I admire
as someone who's also trying to write
about a historical figure where on the
one hand you're you're very generous
reader you try and find you know as as
much to validate and for it as possible
you're you're good at showing how there
correlates with um contemporary
scientific Concepts um but at the same
time you know you're perfectly willing
to say when when you think he was wrong
about something and articulate that and
so I'm just curious um you know when it
comes to uh critic izing someone that
you you know admire but the S hisorical
figure that you're revising um has that
it seems it seems like it it seems like
it's pretty easy for you but I'm
wondering if you've had uh if it took a
little work to figure out how to set the
right tone in articulating you know not
wanting to to Downy um Freud's marriage
well at the same time not not wanting to
minimize your own you know contributions
to what he's
doing I think um the
the main uh what has what has guided me
in in that respect um is that Freud
unlike many of his followers um was very
open to changing first of all changing
his own mind you know on on major
questions um he abandoned his own
theories and and came up with better
ones in with unfolding evidence uh and
he fully expected uh his U his um
scientific as or whatever they whatever
the right word for it is um the people
who followed in his in his scientific
footsteps uh who explored the same the
terrain that he had opened up he fully
expected them to continue to do the same
uh and in
particular uh Freud was very uh
optimistic uh that the neuros science of
the future would make important
contributions
um in especially in some areas where it
has in fact made important contributions
um to the development of of um what
we're now calling neuros psychoanalytic
theory uh namely the theory of the
drives for example you know Freud said
uh you know we we it's not the most
propitious method for studying the
fundamental bi ological motivating
forces um of an of a species by sitting
you know behind the couch and listening
to
what falls into somebody's head he said
that really we need guidance from from
biology here uh but the biology of his
time didn't provide such guidance so um
I mean in a nutshell what I'm saying is
that the the ways in which I have uh had
to uh revise and correct and in some
some in some instances radically revised
and correct um classical
psychoanalytical Notions uh is entirely
consistent with I believe you know what
Freud would have wanted from uh this
psychoanalysis of of the future so I
never felt I was killing my father you
know I never felt that that this was a
kind of a um a a um uh well perhaps
that's the best way to put it wasn't it
wasn't some kind of patricide it was out
of respect for the importance of these
things that Freud had laid the
foundations for um our understanding of
these things it was out of respect for
the importance of all of that that you
know they deserve to be taken seriously
and that means uh scrutinized
scientifically and developed
scientifically improved scientifically
so I didn't feel that I was doing
anything in opposition to the Spirit uh
of uh the pioneers of
psychoanalysis now that that again
because I don't want to give you too
Rose tinted a picture of it um it's not
as if there was no opposition from
psychoanalysts there was uh but I took
solace in the fact that you know that
they are they have strayed from from uh
the the the the way of science you know
it's the the the
and
unlike you know what I was doing was
more in the spirit of what Freud had the
discipline that Freud had founded than
what they were doing so that it pained
me to to to be to to to receive the
resistance that I did uh from um The
psychoanalytical Establishment which is
greatly reduced as I said happily um
over over the more recent times uh but I
I I didn't feel particularly conflicted
Within Myself about what I was doing I I
felt quite sanguin about
it yeah and it's interesting how you say
that in no small part that's probably
because for himself was you know
acknowledged that he didn't have the
kind of um neuros psychological basis
that he would have liked in order to
elaborate theories that were consistent
with it and so you're kind of saying hey
you know here I am benefiting from the
past 100 Years of research and I'm going
to kind of pick up where you would have
off um so I'd like to ask you now so
there's just been the Revis standard
edition
published um I've heard that maybe
you've been working on this for three
decades or so I'm not exactly sure if
this was something you worked on you
know every day every week every month
how exactly what the nature of your
involvement with the project was um but
certainly this must have taken you know
no small amount of time in your part and
so I'm curious if someone who I work on
Playdoh I could easily spend my ire
career doing nothing but working on
Playdoh um but I'm also interested in
putting ancient philosophy into
conversation with with contemporary
science and and it seems like this is a
difficult Balancing Act to strike
because there's always more you can
learn about the primary source there's
always more you can delve into the
scholarship um and you chose to
undertake this this massive project so I
mean what how did you think this was
going to be worth it and and and was it
I mean did it was it just simply love of
you know getting into the weeds and and
understanding how his brain worked or
did you explicitly think that there was
going to be some sort of transactional
benefit that you were going to learn
about his psychology in a way that you
couldn't have done otherwise I'll tell
you how it happened uh I upon my arrival
in London uh in in
1989 uh I um decided to undertake a
translation of Freud's neuroscientific
works uh people for the reason that I've
already articulated you know that I I I
thought that I understood better uh
where these Concepts had come from
because I had a neuroscientific um
training also because I understood
German I was able to read uh you know
Freud's U neuroscientific writings uh
which most of my peers were not able to
do because they've never been translated
so I thought this is an important thing
to do I need to translate these papers
um so I was working on that um deeply
involved in that project um when I was
asked to uh to do this editing and
revision of the translation of and
translating of some new material of
psychological interest uh that that that
um that revised standard edition project
now the the point I'm trying to make is
that it wasn't my own idea I didn't I
didn't decide oh I'm going to spend well
first of all it wasn't my own idea to do
it at all uh let alone you know to spend
30 years on it because I had no inkling
that that that's what it would take and
you're quite right in your intimating
there that part of the reason why it
took so long is because it was not the
only thing I was doing you know I had to
do it alongside a whole lot of other
commitments
um but
um I if there was any
transactional is that the word you use
transactional benefit uh it was this you
know by the time I was asked to do that
which was
1994 I mean literally embarrassingly 30
years before U I actually published it
in July this year um the the oh and let
me also sorry I'm being a bit scatter
brand I want to just tell you the neuros
scientific Works took up four volumes um
the the psychological Works took up 24
volumes there was a much bigger much
much much bigger project um but the
benefit to me by
1994 when I was asked to do this I was
already someway along uh the path that
we were discussing earlier of trying to
integrate these two Fields um and and
and beginning to experience some of the
resistance uh that um that came
primarily from I mean interestingly
primarily from the psychoanalytical
community neuroscientists were much more
open-minded about what psychoanalysis
might offer than psychoanalysts were
about what Neuroscience might offer and
so I thought I mean it's not as if this
was my motivation it really wasn't um
but it it certainly occurred to me that
it won't do me any harm uh if if I'm if
I'm going to be um suggesting some um
unpop po uh and um what what what might
prove to be you know rather radical
revisions of psychoanalytic theory uh
it's better to do that from that very
authoritative base within the field you
know if if you are the authorized
translator of Freud psychological works
well at least you know what you're
talking about you know at least you're
you're you're you're one of us if you if
you're stretches a and you know you're
now you've been entrusted with this
um I mean it really is the the you know
the the the Bible of psychoanalysis you
know Freud's freo's complete works so
the the other benefit uh along the way
um is that I really did get to
understand Freud a hell of a lot better
than frankly if I may say so better than
anybody because um if you want to
translate somebody you got to sentence
by sentence you have to ask yourself
what is the idea you know that is
cloaked in these words so that I can
address them in in the words of of
another language you know you really
have to uh make a very close study uh of
of of those ideas uh you have to really
understand them in order to translate
them so that that's been a that's been a
a pleasurable benefit uh of doing it
alongside everything else that I've
already he
said and if you had it to do again it
sounds like you would
then uh well there's I I think I would
have I would have done it um I would
have done it even even had I known that
it would take me that long to finish it
but um you know it's like it's like
Parenthood um you know when you become a
parent for the first time you've no
inkling of what you're taking on you
know it's it's a it's a it's a that's a
commitment second to none and it never
ends um but you know that doesn't mean
that you regret it far from it you know
it's extremely
rewarding yeah I've heard people say
that about a variety of things I'm glad
I did it but if I had known what it was
going to inail in the first place I
don't think I would have um all right so
I'd like to shift from uh Le for behind
for a second and shift to a couple other
figures that have proven to be
incredibly influential in your in your
thinking namely Yak p Carl friston so
maybe we should start with yuck pank up
I'm curious at what point in your career
you first discovered his work and then
you know did you immediately realize how
well it would kind of suit this I don't
know theory of the mind that you were
elaborating or did it take a little
while to appreciate the role that it
would end up
playing uh well remembering what I told
you about the state of play in the
neurosciences uh those days when I when
I started out um when I came upon his
work he the first paper of his that I
came across was was in the handbook of
clinical neurology I've said that
Freud's standard edition is the Bible of
psychoanalysis the handbook of clinical
neurology is the Bible of Neurology you
know it's it's now in about 150th volume
or something like that um and uh there
was a volume um one of the volumes on
neuros pychology uh in it was uh this
most rare of things a paper on emotion
you know you recall what I said to you
about hel halman and sat's book well
same applied here it was in the handbook
of clinical neurology a chapter on
emotion and I read it and it was just
fantastic you know this this guy my
thought was know this guy gets it this
is this is a real um you know not only
is he studying emotion but he's taking
it seriously putting it at the center of
how the brain works uh the that mean
every all of this cognition uh that that
I was taught about um you know the only
reason we have all of these cognitive
capacities is because they we we we have
to learn about the world where we need
to meet our needs uh and and our needs
are felt uh as feelings um so this was
the sort of thing that pip was saying
and not just it wasn't just a um a flag
waving exercise I mean he had been
studying it for decades he'd been
studying uh brain mechanisms of emotion
which necessarily means the brain
mechanisms of motivation and of Drive uh
deeply um so I didn't meet him then uh
it was in the it was in the late 80s um
uh and maybe early 90s that I first came
across this this chapter he written in
the handbook of clinical neurology but I
then his book um his his Magnum erus um
affect of Neuroscience uh was published
in
1998 and that was just a work of Genius
you know it was it was the most
comprehensive synthesis of a of a
century of uh of of work on this topic
that we I was describing uh including
you know the Decades of his own work on
this topic and um so I asked him to um
engage with me uh in a uh
cross-disciplinary um dialogue in the
very first issue of our Journal uh which
was published in
1999 um and so that was how I came to uh
personally engage with him uh and he
really Rose to the occasion you know he
put He took it very
seriously we each he wrote a an overview
of how we understand the well I wrote an
overview of how we understand emotion
and motivation and drive in
psychoanalysis and then he wrote the
equivalent uh from the point of view of
affective neuroscience and then we had a
you know a a discussion of each other's
papers in the pages of our Journal
that led uh that was so satisfying uh
that uh that led to me inviting him to
speak um at our inaugural Congress of
the international neuros psychoanalysis
society that was in the year 2000 the
other speakers at that Congress or the
other main speakers were um Antonio
deasio who was also doing excellent work
by that stage in that area and and
Oliver SA who was uh who who who had
this wonderfully subjective perspective
upon neurological disorders know the the
being of the neurological patient uh um
so that was when I when I um when my
personal I mean I I met him obviously
Yak we had dinner together and uh we
became dear friends and uh we just you
know from then onwards we we
collaborated very closely on these
topics of mutual interest um until until
the when you introduced me as the
founding chair of the international
neuros psychoanalysis Society he was my
founding co-chair um and and and he
remained in that position until he died
sadly in
2017 yeah it it it makes sense that um
you were able to appreciate the
relevance of his work for what you were
doing so quickly
um I'm wondering if that's the same for
this other other figure carlen I think
I've read you um mentioning in some
article that you know it takes a little
while to get some sense of what he's
talking about this is a notoriously
obscure uh perspective on uh life you
know it gets referred to as a free
energy principle or act of inference um
so I'm curious you know when you first
became aware of it and then more
importantly when you became aware that
it to provide this kind of undering this
Foundation from a radically different
perspective almost as different as you
know the objective perspective of of
neuropsychology is from subject
experience of the you know
psychoanalytic um experience that this
free free energy principle active
inference perspective is just uh just a
complete complete different game yes
well it's it's rooted uh in statistical
mechanics it's a computational framework
but um I just want to say before I
address your your comment about Carl uh
friston I want you to say one more thing
about PP which I neglected to say it was
um that also it was clear from his 1998
book that here we had the we had what we
were looking for what Freud had always
predicted that biology would eventually
provide us with a better understanding
and classification of the drives and so
that was also you know why why why pip
was so
influential in in in my scientific life
so friston um is notoriously
incomprehensible you know it's uh um he
he's he's he he he writes in like you
know it's I mean he writes like like a
physicist I he actually started out as a
physicist and he writes in equations and
so although I was aware of his Rising um
influence I mean frankly Rising fame um
you know during the the the the from the
late 199s into our own Century uh he's
he was a very increasingly very very
prominent figure um but I didn't take a
deep interest in his work mainly because
it was just too hard you know um then in
2010 to my amazement uh he published in
the journal brain which is a very
conservative neurological Journal U and
highly regarded one uh he published an
article um saying that his free energy
principle was basically um a sort of a
restatement of the of the fundamentals
of Freudian Drive Theory and I thought
what you know friston is claiming to be
a Freudian uh and and all of this this
this stuff that he writes about you know
he thinks it's in the tradition of Freud
which was doubly surprising because I
mean Not only was he writing in a
computational sort of language but he
wasn't writing about deep mental
processes he was writing about
perception and action and you know and
learning about cognition uh and and
where and when the the bits of his work
that I could that I could get my head
around which were you know relating all
of this to the brain it was all about
the cortex nothing about the deeper um
you know subcortical and brain stem
structures that that is where the the
deep emotional and and motivational
action is and for that matter where the
font of Consciousness is so um uh I was
surprised uh I I then um uh met him a
few time I made it my business to meet
him a few times I invited him a few
conferences um and we had conversations
about these matters and then I realized
uh his I realized properly uh how much
uh what he was doing really was of
profound relevance uh to understanding
what a mind is and also that the way in
which um he was formulating it was
within this tradition of homeostasis I
hadn't properly understood that he he
published a paper in 2013 called Life as
We Know It uh which is uh which grounds
his free energy principle in basically
in homeostasis in other words it's how
in how the organism the in the basic
motivational mechanism of of all organic
life and um I had to master the physics
uh because I invited him to be our
keynote speaker uh at our 2017 Congress
uh of our neuros psychoanalysis society
and so you know what but by then I was
motivated to do it I mean that's also
why I invited him to come and speak and
you know I realized all of these things
that I'm saying to you um then and um
and then then he and I started to
collaborate and he was only too uh
willing uh uh uh to to bring his way of
thinking down into the brain stem and
and into affective and emotional life so
I I I I like to believe that it's been a
mutually rewarding exercise but uh from
the most unlikely as you said in your
your remarks about him you know like why
why on Earth would you turn turn to this
um it's because it is fundamentally a
theory of uh of of
homeostasis of therefore of Drive of
motivation of the fundamental driving
forces of of of of living things and how
mental life uh uh arises from these uh
very basic biological
principles uh but also uh remember what
I said about Freud's project for a
scientific psychology uh Freud um the
the the project in the broadest sense of
the word Freud's project was to bring
subjective experience into Natural
Science it's part of nature you know
experience exists difficult as it may be
to study subjectivity it's it's it's
it's there sorry you know and uh you
know it must therefore somehow be uh
possible to integrate it with our whole
natural scientific Von Chong it must
somehow be of a peace with everything
else that we know in physical science
and and friston's approach seemed to me
to be Head and Shoulders above anybody
else the most promising Prospect of us
really developing a natural science at
the of the you know at the level of of
of of of of physics and and and of
computational um you know things that
can be reduced to quantities
um and measured uh and and modeled uh um
you know this I thought was an
opportunity not to be missed to to to to
uh finish the job that Ford started in
his project of of trying to have a truly
natural science of of the mind um in the
sense that I've just described
it yeah and it's it's amazing to hear
you say that friston I guess I wasn't
aware that friston himself was making
these connections with Freud back in
2010 as you say I haven't looked at some
of those earlier papers where he was
starting to articulate this free energy
principle um I know he has published on
Freud but uh yeah itd be very
interesting to hear how he started
making those connections between Freud
and um yeah what what can look very very
uning in the sense of like you say these
equations and um yeah reducing
everything down to hierarchies of
neurons and it's just yeah it's amazing
um so I'd like to put on the table maybe
the the last piece of the conversation
which is is I I have this general
impression that you're involved in some
project to work on an artificial general
intelligence um and I'm curious what
your motivation for doing that is um
there's this quote I don't know if it's
actually something that fan said but I
think get said that you know if you
really understand something you should
be able to build it and so I'm wondering
is your interest in this project testing
your ideas is there something in
particular that you hope to learn you
think you could learn otherwise um
what's what what's your motivation in
this project uh what what you said about
Fineman is is is something that he
actually said uh in fact he wrote it on
the Blackboard um that was in his office
uh and um when he died it was this this
was written on the Blackboard doesn't
mean it was his last words but it's
something close to his last words um if
if I can't create it I don't understand
it um or something to that effect and I
I think that that's very true I mean
remember what I was just saying uh our
when I say our I mean mine and Carl
friston's but um I mean it also it
occurs to me as I say it mine and freuds
our aim is to is to develop
a a proper natural
scientific um understanding of what a
mind is how a mind arises uh in nature
what are are the fundamental causal
mechanisms that produce sentient being
um and this is you know this is a very
very very important question it's it's
it's it's actually been the question
that has uh been Central to my own life
I'll have to just quickly as an aside
tell you not only my my scientific life
I mean ever since I was a child uh you
know there for all kinds of complicated
reasons which we don't have time to go
into
uh you know but questions of mortality
and you know what what happens to me
when I die and what is the relation of
me to my body and H how you know how how
how come we are embodied creatures and
you know and and where does where does
being come from it seemed to me from an
early age the only thing if all you are
going to get is these few years of
biological existence and then you're
going to Snuff it forever more um what's
what's worth doing what what is what's
the the point in doing anything you know
it's all going to come to nothing and I
I I I had the idea somewhere along the
line in childhood that one thing that
certainly worth doing is understanding
what being is you know what sentient
being actually is so um at this end of
my career uh you mentioned in your
introductory remarks my book The Hidden
Spring which is very much um the
culmination uh not only of my life's
work but of my collabor with friston it
it was you know this was the I think the
the the yield of everything that I
learned from friston in terms of trying
to understand what subjectivity actually
is and how it arises um within the
within a natural scientific conception
of the universe and um if you're going
to I mean it's there's there's there's
there's a sort of uh hubris you know a
sort of a hootspa as they say in Yiddish
you know like you really think that you
get you you got a mechanistic
understanding of what causes subjective
experience well then you know going back
to what you said about Fineman okay make
make one you know so that that was the
idea that that is the idea that is the
motivation uh that that uh if you if you
really do have within your grasp um an
an understanding of of of how not an
artificial intelligence but an
artificial general intelligence in other
words it true mind um uh if you really
if you really think you understand in in
the in in in in basic terms uh how this
comes about then you should be able to
produce an artificial one that has all
these properties uh that Minds have and
so that's the motivation I mean there
times especially when I first started
this project because it's still ongoing
uh when I thought I was I was crazy you
know I mean I I would I would suddenly
wake up from my my fasc with us and
think Mark you know you're a Lun you're
like a Dr Frankenstein you know what are
you doing um but but slowly and also the
ideas um it seems to have changed really
just in the last few years it's not such
a crazy idea many people seem to think
it is possible you know so it's out of a
sense of of wanting to test the theories
and to develop them because when I say
we have within our grasp I mean I think
that the things I was explaining in the
Hidden Spring are kind of the right
Clues you know the right basic ideas but
it's one thing to write about you know
the in Broad brush Strokes how the thing
works it's quite another thing in the
mechanical detail of actually manufactur
actually make engineering such a thing
you learn a hell of a lot about what you
don't know in the process so it's been
an enormously rewarding enormously
rewarding research project but
absolutely not in my Wildest Dreams did
I imagine when I first started out uh on
this scientific path that I have tro
that that this is where I would end up
um I had no interest whatsoever in
artificial intelligence I thought it was
the most it was the most inappropriately
named thing you know it's got there's
nothing intelligent about but you know
there you go I mean I thought that it
that AI lacks fundamental properties of
a mind but uh I I I I I don't think that
it has to be so I think it really is
possible to make a
mind yeah and reading your treatment of
that and um Hidden Spring definitely
changed my views on um just how you know
crazy of an ocean it was it um and also
you make the point well if someone's
going to if it is possible and someone's
going to do it it's better that certain
people uh with a sense of responsibility
are the ones to do in the first place um
I'm glad you mention that because that's
that's terribly important yes
yeah um so I'd like to end asking a
question and I'm I'm not exactly sure uh
you know what you have to say but
thinking about your career as a whole um
so to to start again um you describe you
know when it comes to satisfaction of
drives that we we we we learn from
experience we feel our way through the
world um and it's just striking how you
know I'm asking how you became
interested in Freud and pink step and
Frist and so much of it is well I found
this article or I met this person just
these little pieces of coincidence in
your life and they seem uh you know
potentially profitable and so you pursue
them um but at the same time you
describe having these kind of
overarching concerns that you alluded to
things about the nature of Consciousness
mortality and things like that um so I'm
wondering is there anything to say other
than that you're just feeling your way
through your career is there anything to
say at a high level about um you know
the kind of uh projects that you might
set for yourself at a at a longer
timeline or is it really just you kind
of take each year as a
comes I I think I had um only one idea
um that in terms of what I'm going to do
in terms of you know um mapping out a um
a my scientific career uh and my and the
and my scientific um you know goals or
projects it was the one that we started
our conversation discussing you know
just that it seems to me that that
Neuroscience is suffering from uh a a u
a lack of U due regard to the subjective
aspect of of of of what the brain does
and uh that in order to rectify that I
think I should I think I should learn
about
psychoanalysis uh that was the and then
you know rapidly after that it becoming
this two street that was the plan uh it
was it didn't have any end goal in mind
it was just I want to continue down this
path and take it as far as I can but
I'll tell you since we're at the end of
our conversation I'll tell you I I
believe I have two talents uh the one is
that uh I I I have an ability I I I
don't give up um I I just don't give up
you know I mean obviously there things
that are not important that you must
give up on but I mean if something is
important I don't give up I just carry
on and on and on and on and on because
you know this is important and why would
I give up um and uh the other is which
is probably closely related to it is
that I can see the Deep structure of
things you know say if you spend enough
time with a complicated messy problem
you know you inevitably will eventually
see um the underlying structure it will
it will it will you you will be able to
see this this the simple
framework you know through all of the
through all of the mess and um so um
that's what I've done you know I had
that one plan which is that I'm I'm
going to bring these two Fields together
it seemed like a good idea for the
reasons we've discussed uh and I didn't
stop in other words I didn't give up and
inevitably eventually you start seeing
the big picture you know you start
seeing you start being able to simplify
and see how it works and that's um I
wouldn't have predicted that I would be
in exactly this place no I certainly
wouldn't have um I wouldn't have
predicted just about all of the actual
steps that I took uh it has been my
great Good Fortune to have had
collaborators um of the caliber both
human and scientific I mean they are
good people um Yak pip and and Cole
friston um it's it's been my great good
fortune that I that I was able to um to
learn from them and and work with them
along the way but none of it was planned
beyond the as I what I've said to
you well I hope you take some pride in
the the the fruit that it's born I I
feel like in the last decade or two um
it seems like these these strains of
your thought and the neuros pych
analysis movement um really has started
to present a a comprehensive picture of
the human psyche and what how things go
wrong how to you know make things better
um so I don't know from my perspective
job well done thank you very much thank
you very
much yeah well I think that's about uh
the the end of our time so I'd like to
thank you very much for talking with me
this afternoon it's been a great
pleasure it really has thank you thanks
so much
