[Music]
and capitalist realism isn't just there
being pushed by neoliberal ideologues
um it's in us as well
and
[Music]
i think nothing illustrates this more
clearly than
the real widespread failure of
so-called left if there was any such
thing anymore in in
um
in parliamentary terms you know in the
in europe to have taken advantage of
the most spectacular failure of a
political project
ever probably
you know which was the um
the financial crisis and the bank
bailouts
of 2008.
living in a contemporary global
capitalistic world one that has siphoned
out any radical economic dissent the
question looms are we able to escape
capitalism is there anything past it is
any such endeavor even possible to an
arguable majority
they understand the looming issues with
capitalism even if it's something
painful to admit but this supposedly
post-ideological world a world with the
end of the soviet union of an actual
communist chinese government is there
any coherent vision past global
capitalism this is a central ethos of
this book can we escape capitalism what
is capitalism and what is this
capitalist realism that mark fisher
talks about it should be noted before
the body of the video
i have been told numerous times to read
this book and it's whole and i regret i
have not done it sooner after reading
this this is hands down one of my
favorite works of theory and the
greatest visualization of american
capitalism i have ever seen it is bleak
it is depressing but more than anything
it is beautifully relevant a relevancy
from an author who fundamentally lived
what he wrote and who understood these
very conditions to his core
i want these core points to be
accessible to all if possible for these
ideas to work into the collective
unconsciousness and to help break and
understand this weird matrix that we are
in there has been numerous videos on
capitalist realism but i want this one
to be the absolutely most ambitious one
i want it to completely encompass this
book in its whole and with an accessible
form for all more than anything i want
to do capitalist realism justice this
video is capitalist realism just in
video form
when after 1989 when cap capitalism
loses
its visible antagonists um
in the
sort of soviet empire
um
then capitalism doesn't have to defend
itself as such
it just becomes the you know horizon of
the imaginable
it doesn't have to be you know that
doesn't have to be named anymore it's
all the more powerful because it's not
named
right from the start mark fischer comes
out swinging with the phrase it's easier
to imagine the end of the world than the
end of capitalism a phrase widely
attributed to frederick jameson and
slavojijk as shocking as this phrase is
it's undeniably true in almost every way
that capitalism isn't a mere economic
system it's an imposed psychological
reality and condition that has
permanently altered our being if
postmortem consciousness existed and we
collectively destroyed our existence at
the whims of capital the very idea of
restricting capitalism would possibly
scare more than a very real apocalyptic
scenario in this context capitalism
isn't a mere system it is us this is why
when the impending threat of climate
change is brought up the reasonable
response is i just simply try not to
think about it to end capitalism is to
end our contemporary human subjectivity
today but given the nature of this book
we must closely define what capitalism
is and how it molds to us mark fisher
does just that with a whole host of
prior theory from the start he
elaborates on the traditional ethos of
capitalism with a quote from marx and
angles and the communist manifesto
capital has drowned the most heavenly
ecstasies of religious fervor of
chivalrous enthusiasm of philistine
sentimentalism an icy water of
egotistical calculation it has resolved
personal worth into an exchange value
and in place of the numberless
indefeasible chartered freedoms has set
up that single unconscionable freedom
free trade in one word for exploitation
veiled by religious and political
illusions it has substituted naked
shameless direct brutal exploitation
capitalism is the human condition that
is left after culture ritual and
symbolic elaboration is dead the new
culture is now consumption and spectacle
it moves into the aesthetic realm and as
aesthetics and rational ideation go we
see capitalism as the ultimate purveyor
humans do not merely go on military
conquest like genghis khan we do not
merely kill and burn down villages for
fundamental power and control instead we
set up camp in foreign countries and
systematically set up shop and exploit
human labor with the shiny facade of
progress but only when the exploited
recognize the game they are being
subjected to they revolt and fight back
then extreme brutality emerges a
brutality that is arguably worse than
prior forms brutality like we saw in
king leopold ii's free state of congo
plantation slavery in cuba and in the
caribbean brutality doesn't cease to
exist it's simply masked it's a more
efficient and systemic endeavor
capitalism sucks up culture it sucks up
history turns the very things that often
made us human into museum pieces
everything is objectified it's
commodified with fukuyama's idea that we
have reached the apex with liberal
capitalism after the fall of the berlin
wall mark fisher believes that critical
insight into late capitalism is often
nichian rather than marxist nietzsche
wrote about the overflow of history into
the human condition we have replaced
human engagement in life culture and
politics into spectatorship we
retroactively learn what it is to be
human we retroactively examine truth
rather than engage into activities that
make it so fisher quotes nietzsche's
most prescient pages are those in which
he describes the over-saturation of an
age with history it leads an age into a
dangerous mood of irony in regard to
itself he wrote in untimely meditations
and subsequently into the even more
dangerous mood of cynicism in which
cosmopolitan fingering a detached
spectatorialism replaces engagement and
involvement this is the condition of
nietzsche's last man who has seen
everything but is decadently enfeebled
precisely by this excess of
self-awareness
this quote absolutely hit me to my core
think about what we are doing right now
we are learning about something very
abstract theory orientated while
simultaneously ignoring the very woes
that we are learning about in reality
this learning this education this
self-awareness simultaneously pacifies
us if this isn't one of the most scary
insights i have no clue what is
moving on mark fisher visualizes this
living from history with kurt cobain
kurt cobain understood this new society
of historical life kurt cobain knew as a
star of mtv he was just a prop a prop
that will eventually collapse he was a
spectacle a newer mimic of stars like
jim morrison and hendrix there's nothing
more embarrassing than a
group of people walking up to you and
and shaking and clamoring and you know
and
and praising you like you're some kind
of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] god or something it's
embarrassing further even understanding
this phenomenon to cobain was a cliche
these anxieties he expressed further
resulted in the nihilistic facade he
portrayed why does it matter if i will
be replaced by something greater why
does it matter if i am just another
spectacle another object of desire it's
not fundamentally me anyway this
abundance of history creates a weird new
form of nihilism if we know the results
of our action how time will repeat
itself why do anything at all this is a
nihilism that works perfectly within
post-modern capitalism this is often not
a conscious nihilism either the nihilism
of the past the very nietzsche and
anxieties around the loss of culture the
loss of things that make us human is
child's play to this new form of
nihilism today and in many ways it isn't
just nihilism it's a new pernicious form
of it one that convinces you of the
opposite fischer showcases this in the
film wall-e a movie that shows an
uninhabitable world from radical human
consumption a movie that actively
decries the forms of capitalism we are
subjected to and face right now this
movie isn't just spectacle it invites us
in to interact and participate in it
gauge the world around us how we are
contributing to global disaster because
of this there was a mass outcry from
right-wing observers for quote-unquote
attacking its own audience in many ways
wall-e is a marxian-like film but there
is one thing there's one huge caveat at
hand this film ironically feeds this
capitalist realism the very film
performs our anti-capitalist activism
and education for us we can consume this
film with impunity this corporate
activism does all the work for us and
perfectly pacifies us pacifies the very
innate threat of human destruction into
an ideal that we can pervasively enjoy
where in other societies propaganda is
needed to cover up repressive acts the
exact opposite is true with contemporary
capitalism capitalism is strengthened by
its own critiques these corporate
anti-capitalist critiques ironically act
as a very reinforcement and an
unconscious pacifying agent
as reinforcement goes fisher brings up
the mode of mental health and
contemporary capitalism mirroring the
work of arrows and civilization by
herbert marcuza link right up above if
you are interested we see that mental
health is a radically individualistic
and internal problem psychology and
mental healing are purely partitioned
into an interpersonal thing you have a
chemical imbalance you are super
stressed etc yet we recognize that
external events play a role in this
regardless you go to therapy after a
family member dies after you are having
a rough time in life but the medical
apparatus never touches work it never
touches economics that is purely off
limits it's off limits because of
capitalist realism the idea that
neoliberal contemporary capitalism is
simply innately us therefore it presents
a depth that even psychology hasn't even
been able to systematically penetrate
this moves us into the newer economic
working conditions that affect the
western subject we used to live in a
forest world a capitalist framework that
mirrored henry ford's production model
line workers doing the same menial task
over and over and over again this is
where traditional marxists derive much
of their ideas around alienation and the
modern state of industrialized work yet
today we are living in something more
pervasive and totally different we are
now in a very post-fortis economic world
we see that in this post-fortist world
flexibility nomadism and spontaneity are
absolutely essential you must be
flexible willing to stretch yourself to
the absolute max hyper individuality is
now favorable you must follow unfounded
rules that are constantly made up on the
spot the main character of this film is
in a constant state of useless menial
tasks sent from hyper bureaucracy yet
the reagan and thatcher promises that
neoliberalism market capitalism would
eliminate the very bureaucracy and false
appearance of progress found in stalin's
soviet union a bureaucracy that was
supposedly only found in the public
sector is ironically worse in today's
post-modern capitalism today's
capitalism has found itself in the same
dilemma of ex-soviet states the pursuit
of symbols and the appearance of
productivity and progress more than the
actual progress itself teachers and
professors are now tasked to adhering to
strict curriculum where administrators
will watch their lectures these
educators are now more concerned with
fulfilling the appearance of education
rather than the education itself but
this isn't a phenomenon found because
education is within the public sector
this is a new phenomenon posited by
neoliberal right-wing and
hyper-capitalistic governments a
strategy that originally took place in
private schools but then subsequently
found its home in public schools from a
neo-liberal government mark fisher
quotes this is in part a consequence of
the inherent resistance of certain
processes and services to marketization
the supposed marketization of education
for instance rests on a confused and
underdeveloped analogy are students the
consumers of the service or its product
the idealized market was supposed to
deliver friction free exchanges in which
the desires of consumers would be met
directly without the need for
intervention or mediation by regulatory
agencies yet the drive to assess the
performance of workers and to measure
forms of labor which by their nature are
resistant to quantification has
inevitably required additional layers of
management and bureaucracy what we have
is not a direct comparison of workers
performance or output but a comparison
between the audited representation of
that performance and output inevitably a
short circuiting occurs and work becomes
geared towards the generation and
massaging of representations rather than
to the social goals of the work itself
this is what capitalism is it's an
elastic system that adapts that consumes
our former subjectivity that pacifies us
into forms of entertainment and material
idealism evaporating the very prior
subjectivity that made us human for
better or worse the concept of this
contemporary capitalism is one of
profound ironic contradiction fischer
quotes the french philosopher elaine
badu on this very late 20th century
post-modern capitalistic paradox a
brutal state of affairs profoundly
unegalitarian where all existence is
evaluated in terms of money alone is
presented to us as an ideal to justify
their conservatism the partisans of the
established order cannot really call it
ideal or wonderful so instead they have
decided to say that all the rest is
horrible sure they say we may not live
in a condition of perfect goodness but
we're lucky that we don't live in a
condition of evil our democracy is not
perfect but it's better than the bloody
dictatorships capitalism is unjust but
it's not criminal like stalinism we let
millions of africans die of aids but we
don't make racist nationalist
declarations like milosevic we kill
iraqis with our airplanes but we don't
cut their throats with machetes like
they do in rwanda etc what separates
today's capitalism of a post-soviet
world is one of post-modern capitalism
where universal values do not really
exist there is a rejection of
responsibility outside of the pursuit of
capital but fisher articulates that this
realism he talks about isn't merely
post-modernism it's more intense than
that it's a form of post-modernism
beyond itself fisher says capitalist
realism no longer stages this kind of
confrontation with modernism on the
contrary it takes the vanquishing of
modernism for granted modernism is now
something that can periodically return
but only as a frozen aesthetic style
never as an ideal for living this is
what capitalist realism is it is a
rejection of concepts of space and time
history everything capitalist realism
rejects absolutely everything except the
pursuit of capital and subsequently we
see a world that completely cries out
for modernity and of the very better
days of the past and in a very
capitalist realist society this is what
crying out for modernity looks like you
feel it let vote now
make sure you in fact let people know
you're a senator i'm not going to answer
the question because you answered that
because the question is the question is
justice radical left would you
listen who is on your list joe this is
on your right gentlemen i think
this segment we're going to move on to
the second segment that was really a
productive segment wasn't it
biden represents our prior tame
post-modern capitalistic world one just
with a nice modern facade this world
still has a connection to modernity
though he is a representation of
normalcy a horrid neoliberal normalcy
but he is a cry for a return to better
days admittedly still terrible days yet
better than the latter stages of this
realism but while there is a connection
to modernity this normalcy is still
removed from modernity itself with trump
trump is the very embodiment of elastic
capitalist realism he is the embodiment
of the ultimate form of post-modernism
as capitalist realism really is a
hyper-potent form of post-modernism
we've covered a bit of post-modern
conservatism on this channel here's a
link above if you are interested biden
acknowledges the fact of climate change
student loan debt and the woes affecting
capitalist subjects
yet it will still be a massive struggle
for him to do anything of substance on
these issues he will fight tooth and
nail to keep capital at the forefront of
importance compared to trump trump
denies these issues altogether it's as
simple as him claiming these massive
issues don't really exist and like that
they quite honestly disappear from his
sphere of responsibility as his base
simply follows along he's a reverse of
the former he lies about the issues
plaguing humanity yet he's ironically
honest about the result see that where i
could stand in the middle of fifth
avenue and shoot somebody and i wouldn't
lose any voters okay it's like
incredible
you see he is cryptically honest about
the political reality we are residing in
and the very disturbing yet true results
of his actions but these actions these
desires for a return to modernity to
normalcy can be viewed through the
psychoanalytic lens of the lacanian reel
in this case fischer uses the reel as
something that any reality must suppress
an unattainable void that can be viewed
through the fractures and
inconsistencies of what we perceive
reality to be and in more likane
psychoanalytic terms the appearance of
reality can be seen as the symbolic
order and the imaginary but of course
we'll have to refrain from doing a
complete deep dive and delicate
psychoanalysis yet through this lens of
looking at the fractures within
capitalism fractures that give us a
glimpse into the reel the concept of the
reel can be used as a tool to uncover
the true reality of capitalism capital
is realism and the very psychological
effects it attempts to cover up rather
than using a more ontological or
metaphysical approach to the reel mark
fisher is simply using the reel as an
application how the reel can kind of
ironically be used in concepts
symbolically so with a very symbolic
approach to the real fisher gives
environmental catastrophe as an example
of a reel it's impossible for capitalism
to truly assimilate climate change and
induce apocalypse into a potential
reality this statement might be
confusing to some given we use the
example of wally an ultimate critique of
capitalism yet even within the most
cynical examples such as wall-e we don't
even concede that human annihilation is
actually possible within wall-e humans
are still alive with robots to do the
fixing of human woes and mass
consumption even the most cynical
critiques within mass entertainment and
media does not truly contend with
absolute catastrophe rather the idea of
catastrophe is just ironically
reinforced within the system of
capitalism solutions are just repackaged
within the commodity packaged into
advertising and marketing campaigns in
simpler terms under this stage of
capitalism the solution to climate
catastrophe driven by capitalism is
repackaged into more capitalism
fisher quotes environmental catastrophe
is one such real at one level to be sure
it might look as if green issues are
very far from being unrepresentable
voids for capitalist culture climate
change and the threat of resource
depletion are not being repressed so
much as incorporated into advertising
and marketing what this treatment of
environmental catastrophe illustrates is
the fantasy structure on which
capitalist realism depends a
presupposition that resources are
infinite that the earth itself is merely
a husk which capital can at certain
point slow like a used skin and that any
problem can be solved by the market in
this case the hidden reel in a
capitalist system is the emergence of
surface capitalist solutions to solve
the very issues capitalism has created
the privatization of stress a new
emergence of neo-liberal hyper
bureaucracy a very much worse
audit-based version of bureaucracy
neoliberalism promised to solve fischer
describes this massive issue of mental
health and how capitalism privatizes it
and re-establishes mental health as
purely internal a natural occurrence
this mirrors the naturalism that
neoliberalism espouses when you ask the
majority of americans if they want
socialized medicine government-funded
health care universal health care and
the like a likely majority show fear or
shudder and confusion that's because
private health care is as natural as the
trees around us not only this but the
private entity of any tangible service
or product mark fisher calls this
existence people in the u.s are thrusted
into as a business ontology mark fisher
talks about how theorists like foucault
and badyu have described potent and
successful politics as something that
explodes the very appearance of the
natural order to make their ideology
core beliefs policies appear as
something innate as nature fisher points
out that the sheer amount of
privatizations that took place in the
80s were unimaginable in 1975
denationalization of utilities railways
the existence of prisons as a profitable
enterprise these used to be things that
were unimaginable this changed because
of the emergence of neoliberalism as
something natural and with our new
existence being centered around profit
and finance a complete business ontology
as we see
this is why 21st century americans still
seem shocked at the idea that something
isn't for sale that something's
existence isn't centered around profit
that being business and even people thus
a world where our existence and ontology
is centered around business despite a
universal a single-payer not-for-profit
health care system being statistically
cheaper more efficient and an ultimate
benefit to nearly everyone many in the
united states still shudder in fear or
complete confusion at the prospect of it
despite these findings but this business
ontology goes further than this it's the
prospect or hope that monetization can
reach absolutely everything it's a world
in existence where commodity fetishism
is at its highest point chapter 6 of the
book brings us back into the new hyper
bureaucracy that's present in 21st
century capitalism fisher argues that
the consequences of this new economic
world is a world that melts into pure pr
substance and progress is gone work now
exists for the illusion of work it's an
ultimate anti-production work strategy
he sees this new phenomenon that
marketizes stalin's aesthetic approach
to production the irony in this is
beyond comprehension neoliberalism has
sought to become the most efficient
system that would fight the stalinist
approach to the appearance of work
fischer uses the example of stalin's
white sea canal in the 1930s this canal
was one of the most impressive feats in
engineering but only on the surface the
canal was too shallow to use for most
20th century cargo thus it was a symbol
of production and more importantly
anti-production at that stalin's ussr
would turn this canal into pr people
would photograph it whole soviet public
relation teams would be tasked with
showcasing this canal an empty canal
that was really only pretty and useful
on the outside this is the very symbolic
anti-production neoliberal capitalism
sought to destroy yet neoliberal
capitalism has made this pr business
meta a more efficient endeavor under the
use of constant auditing because of
managers bosses constantly breathing
down your neck workers are more
concerned with the image of production
teachers are more concerned with
adhering to complete guidelines and the
very appearance of education rather than
education itself this is what capitalist
realism is it's a post-fortis system
where we cannot get too attached we must
move all the time sentimentalism is
turned into pure profit motive we are
sucked into the end of history an end of
history that turns to new nihilism a new
nihilism that makes the old look like
child's play so can we get past this
capitalist realism can we break through
capitalism to fisher there isn't a huge
tangible prescriptive answer 7 8 of the
whole book is descriptive of our current
capitalism but there are prescriptive
bits and pieces he gives us the first is
not to underestimate the system we are
living in it's arguable the traditional
marxist approach that capitalism will
kill itself is far too optimistic marx's
critiques of the past cannot hold a
candle to the situation we are currently
in the reality is way more grim
capitalism will kill itself by killing
virtually all life via ecological
disaster the second is we must
constructively approach neoliberalism
post-modern capitalism as a framework
that is hyper-artificial because it
ultimately is it's a massive ideological
construct that isn't natural whatsoever
it's constructed for the benefit of a
few oligarchs with the expense of the
many we need to point out that our
capitalist realism relies on public
fundings it relies on bailouts when it
will ultimately fail every decade or so
capitalist realism hides that collective
intervention is necessary we need to
make this public the existence of purely
private enterprise is the artificial
reality that has been implanted onto our
being our approach should be new it
should be organic it shouldn't be hyper
fixated on ideology it should be humane
with the approach to mental health the
material conditions people face and most
of all we must create new politics that
exposes the prior reality as something
purely artificial as a world past
capitalist realism is the natural order
of things fisher ends the book with this
in any case rationing of some sort is
inevitable the issue is whether it will
be collectively managed or whether it
will be imposed by authoritarian means
when it is already too late quite what
forms this collective management should
take is again an open question one that
can only be resolved practically and
experimentally the long dark night of
the end of history has to be grasped as
an enormous opportunity the very
oppressive pervasiveness of capitalist
realism means that even glimmers of
alternate political and economic
possibilities can have a
disproportionately great effect the
tiniest event can tear a hole in the
gray curtain of reaction which has
marked the horizons of possibility under
capitalist realism from a situation in
which nothing can happen suddenly
anything is possible again
thank you guys so much for watching and
making it to the end capitalist realism
in my opinion is one of the most
important books written in the 21st
century and hopefully i was able to do
it justice as always guys i have a huge
request to make these videos are only
possible patreon and without it this
channel could not survive so if possible
if you could pledge a couple dollars a
month this would absolutely ensure our
survival and would help me out immensely
and of course using our amazon link for
any purchases you make helps us
immensely as well aside from that feel
free to follow me on twitter instagram
and come join the discord and come hang
out thank you guys so much i thoroughly
hope you enjoyed and hopefully i can see
you in the next
[Music]
you
