uh right we're going to do metaphysics
and epistemology today there's some good
words to conjure with uh metaphysics and
epistemology uh metaphysics is the study
of
reality uh it deals with questions like
what is there or what
exists um if you that's actually a
branch of metaphysics called ontology
you've I think you've probably heard me
mention ontology before no uh ontology
is your your onology is your list of
what exists so who believes in
ghosts couple people okay well on your
ontology you have ghosts uh if you
believe in God on your list of what
exists you have God if you don't believe
in God on your list of what exists God
doesn't feature and if you don't believe
in ghosts ghosts won't feature on your
list of what exists but chairs probably
would lecturers probably would um
necklaces things like that um probably
feature on your things list of things
that exist um so metaphysics looks at
what is there in the world and what is
its nature because once you've um
postulated the existence of something or
decided on the existence of something
you have a further question to ask well
what's it like so um for example um I
told you that heraclitus postulated
atoms um more than 500 years
BC well he didn't know what they were
like except that by definition they were
the unsplit bles okay because an atom
was as far as you can go an atom of
water is as far as you can go uh sorry
no I'll have the water down here
please um I don't want them to drink
it that's all right thanks just stick it
down on the floor there
um where was I water
water yeah exactly look here they're
quite a few atoms of water on my finger
um but at some point you'll get down to
something such that if you go below that
it won't be water it'll be CO2 uh it'll
be a molecule but it won't be water
itself because you'll have gone too far
for it to be water so you postulate the
existence of atoms for whatever reason
could be as a theoretical entity so some
people postulate God as a theoretical
entity how do we explain all this we
need something like this let's call it
God okay so how do we postulate this we
need something unsplittable let's call
it an atom and of course you might when
you actually because once you've
postulated the existence of something
and you have some idea of what it's like
you then want to find out more about it
and you want to see if you're right to
think it exists
so for example the higs boson uh we have
reason to think it exists we have
various ideas of what it's like which I
won't go into because I don't know
enough about them um we believe in its
existence enough to spend Millions on
this large hron collider um in
Switzerland uh but when we actually find
it if we actually find it then we're
going to know more about it and that's
what we're doing we've postulated it we
said this is on our list of things that
exist at least as a hypothesis now we
want to test that hypothesis and see
whether it's true so metaphysics asks
questions like what is there and what is
its nature now obviously many of these
questions are questions of
science um so the higs bows on does it
exist what's it like these are questions
for science but questions like causation
what is causation does causation exist
causation the relation between cause and
effect that's not a question for science
the scientists must assume that
causation exists philosophers ask does
it and what's the nature of causation
could causation go backwards for example
could there be a cause that happens
after its effect
um is causation a relation between
events or between objects or between
facts or what are the relat of the
causal relation so these are all
questions of
metaphysics
um epistemology on the other hand is the
study of
knowledge so there's a big difference
between what is the case and what we
know or can know to be the case there
may be things that are the case that
we'll never know and I've mentioned
three consecutive sevens in the decimal
expansion of Pi before so what you know
and what is the case you hope that what
you if you know well actually if you
know something it must be the case um
but what you hope is that what you
believe you know is actually the case
but the study of what is the case and
what you know to be the case are two
different questions one's to do with
metaphysics the others to do with
epistemology so epistemology looks at
what can we know can we for example know
that the sun will rise tomorrow do you
remember when we were doing logic we
looked at
induction um can we know it well we
don't know for certain must knowledge be
certain knowledge or could it be the
case that we know something that we
don't know we know do you see what I
mean what is knowledge like um so
actually I should have put that here
what is knowledge what can we know and
how can we know it so for example
example if there are moral values um we
don't know it by uh sensory perception I
never see right and wrong uh certainly
not through my eyes or through uh
tactile sense or or anything like that
so there must be some other way how do
we know that 2 + 2 equals 4 again you
don't see that that's the case how do
you know that all swans are white I know
they're not but let's pretend for a
minute um how do you know that all
Ravens are black that's a better one um
well let's forget albino ones I know
what you're
like I could see you thinking that how
do we know that given that if you if
you're going to say that all Ravens are
white you're talking about all Ravens
even the ones that you've never seen
even the ones that nobody has ever seen
even the ones on Mars if there are
Ravens on Mars you're saying all Ravens
are black includes those Ravens on Mars
well how can you know that
that do you see what I mean so there are
two different questions as what is
knowledge in the first place must we
know that we know something or can we
know something that we don't know that
we know um what's it got to do with
justification what's it got to do with
belief Etc uh and how can we know these
things so that's the distinction between
metaphysics metaphysics is to do with
truth and what is the case and what's
its nature epistemology is to do with
knowledge justification belief and how
we can know whatever it is that we do
know so that's that's the main
distinction let me just pour myself some
H2O H2O what did I say
earlier I I suddenly remembered that
I I heard myself saying something false
well right okay let's look at ontology
the study of what there is or what
exists okay one question I I said
earlier that there are many things that
uh questions of what is the case and
what is its nature that are questions
for science but questions like does God
exist um in The God Delusion if any of
you have read it uh Richard Dawkins
claims that this is a scientific H
hypothesis like any other um well if
that's true it must be possible to
conduct experiments
observations um in order to determine
the existence of God I have no idea what
experiments or observations he has in
mind but I actually don't think this is
a question for science I think Dawkins
is wrong to think this this is a
straightforward scientific
hypothesis um I think this is question
for philosophy um our evidence our
reasons for thinking God exists take the
form of uh arguments rather than
evidence or observation ations so for
example the most obvious argument is is
the one I used earlier God is a
theoretical entity uh he's postulated to
explain the existence of the universe
okay that's the simplest argument it's
the argument that people have used uh
from the beginning of time um other
people use different Arguments for
example the moral argument you don't
need God to explain the existence of the
physical world but how come there exist
People Like Us
who are capable of rationality who
reason who have free will who make
choices uh and in particular make moral
choices People Like Us who value things
who see right and wrong good and bad
beautiful and ugly and things like that
um physics can't see right and wrong
good or bad
ETA uh this is not the sort of thing
that physics or or any physical science
can investigate
um but you might think that God is the
explanation for the existence of things
like that or you might deny that you
might say no you don't need God to
explain right and wrong you can easily
explain right and wrong by appeal to
evolutionary biology so altruism is is a
a question of um either kin support uh
or if I scratch your back you'll scratch
mine Etc so if you look at Dawkins
chapter I think it's it's four but I may
be wrong about that uh he offers four or
five Arguments for how you can explain
morality without god
um so does God exist lots of different
Arguments for the existence of God lots
of different rejections of those
arguments lots of different comebacks on
those rejections and philosophers are
going to have a job for at least a
couple of hundred years I think I think
the God's illusion is far from the final
word on it um but there are other
questions like that that that's a biggie
obviously U but there are other biggies
do moral values exist is there right and
wrong do does right is there really a
property of an actions being right or
wrong or can we reduce the idea of being
right to
something um some people would say uh
natural like um happiness so the
utilitarians want to reduce happiness to
the sorry reduc right and wrong to the
idea of the greatest happiness of the
greatest number so there's no more to
right or wrong than than how many people
you make Happy by an action that you do
now what you're doing there is you're
reducing one thing to another thing so
here's something we don't understand
right and wrong and we think that it
needs an explanation and we're tempted
to postulate God for it maybe um but on
the other hand if if we can say well
actually we don't have an explanation
for that but there's actually no more to
that than this in particular
combinations um and we do have an
explanation for this or at least this is
something for which we can think that
there'd be a much easier explanation
than God so on the grounds of oam's
Razor um given two explanations both of
which work you always go for the simpler
one if you can explain happiness and you
can reduce morality to happiness then
you haven't got a problem with morality
you don't need to postulate God
see what I mean so um you might I mean
some people try and reduce the idea of
God to um I mean actually Dawkins again
does this uh he thinks that God is the
idea we all want for security for a
father figure something to to rely on um
so he's reducing God to that um the
utilitarians try and reduce moral values
to uh happiness K on the other hand
isn't a reductionist he thinks right and
wrong exist that the moral law exists in
and of itself and that it's quite
different from anything else so if you
remember last week for Kant a moral
action is an action that's carried out
because of reverence for the moral law
it can't be said to be anything else it
can't be said to be something that just
as a matter of fact produces the
greatest happiness to the greatest
number and reverence for the moral law
or says K is not something you can
reduce to anything else something easier
to understand another example of this
would be mental States I I thought I was
going to come to mental States but I see
it's not on there so I'll put it in
anyway um do mental States exist
well what are mental States well mental
States divide into two there are the
so-called prop propositional attitudes
so attitudes to proposition s things
like beliefs you can't have a belief
unless it's a belief about something can
you so I believe that um Anne is wearing
sort of maroon that maroon right there
you are uh I believe an's wearing maroon
uh I believe when um Anna's got a
necklace on uh somebody's got a lovely
pink jumper on just in front of Anna
fuchia sort of color
um okay all of those beliefs have a
content uh but there are other
propositions propositional attitudes so
I can have a desire towards the same
content desire is a different attitude
but I could have the desire that Anna is
wearing a necklace or I could wish that
um God an is wearing is all the same
names isn't it is wearing maroon um I
could also intend that Anna's wearing
maroon I I could set out to make sure
she wears maroon today because I want to
use her as a an example so these are
lots of different attitudes to contents
and you can get the same attitude and
different contents and the same uh
content and different attitudes so
that's one type of mental state the
so-called propositional attitudes the
other type is the so-called qualitative
States so um when I looked at this
lady's lovely fuchia colored
cardigan I have a certain experience
okay there's something that it's like
for me to see that cardigan there's
something that it's like for me to see
these chairs there's something it's like
for me to be in pain or to feel a tickle
or something like that and these are
qualitative States they're states that
have a quality to them um so I'm sure
you can do your own Rough and Ready
distinction now into states that have a
certain raw feel to them and states that
are attitudes to
propositions why do we think these exist
well how could can I possibly explain
your behavior without citing desires
beliefs intentions hopes fears you know
why did she suddenly get up and leave
the room um answer because she suddenly
realized it was the wrong lecture she
suddenly realized it was the wrong
lecture so she had a belief about what
the right lecture was she suddenly came
to believe that this was the wrong
lecture so she formed an intention to
leave the room so in order to explain
your behavior I postulate all sorts of
beliefs and desires but here's another
little
story um
woodlice um why do woodlies congregate
under rocks and things tell
me it's dark why why do woodlies
congregate where it's
dark because they want to be safe or
something like that okay and they and
they believe it's safe under
rocks the ones that are under rocks are
still
alive okay you're a bit reluctant to
attribute belief so wood yes I've stud
wood well don't give my a story
away they just keep moving until they
get yeah absolutely okay when we first
hear woodl and certainly if we're
speaking to a child or something like
that we we would use belief desire
psychology to explain woodlife behavior
because it that's what comes very easily
to us so woodlife believe that it's safe
under rocks and they want to be safe so
they intend to go under rocks as a
matter of fact the correct explanation
of woodlice behavior is that they embody
a mechanism such that when it's dry
around them uh they move and they move
in a a speed that's determined by how
dry it is around them um and as it gets
damper they they come to a halt and
instantly they move in whatever
Direction they happen to be pointed they
don't sort of turn around and make for
that rock if they're stand
in that direction there's a rock over
there they'll go for that one except
they're not going for that one are they
they're being pushed by the dryness now
once you know that explanation have I
got it right yeah that's right I wasn't
going to use technical terminology but
there you are okay so that's the proper
explanation of woodl behavior once you
know about kesis like this you can
explain the behavior of any woodlouse
anywhere at all as long as it's a normal
wood louse anywhere at all at any time
once you know that belief desires have
been made redundant haven't they you
know why should you postulate woodlice
beliefs now or woodlice Desires in fact
all their behavior is explicable in
terms of things like like kineses
they're not All Canes but they're things
like that what about your behavior Can I
explain your behavior well a lot of your
behavior I can explain if I Chuck my
chalk at you that shows how old I am
doesn't it if I Chuck my chalk at you
you're going to duck um that's not a a a
desire or belief driven Behavior that's
just a hardwired response to the fact
you see something coming towards you if
you put your hands on a hot plate do the
same thing so lot of your behavior and
that's just one if you hear an ambulance
coming you'll move out of the way that's
a classically conditioned response lot
of your behavior doesn't need to be
explained by appeal to beliefs and
desires but much of it does and this is
why we po ulate beliefs and desires this
is why we say that beliefs and desires
exist but perhaps ethologists people who
study animal behavior are going to find
out one day that we can explain all our
behavior in terms of brain
States and it might be that we can um
one time in the future we'll be able to
saw off the uh skull of newborn babies
and fit a perspect dome instead so that
we don't have to go into all this
interpretation which we're not very good
at is it um trying to find out what
we're all going to do instead we can
just look at somebody's brain and say ah
okay I know what you're going to do
perhaps we'll all wear woolly hats so we
can surprise people or something like
that but do you see if we could explain
all our Behavior without appealing to
beliefs and desires we'd no more have
reason to think you had a mind than we
do to think wli do so again the question
do mental States exist is a huge
question lots of people try and reduce
mental states to physical
States uh and then explain physical
States that's it's much easier to
explain physical States than mental
States but if you don't want to be a
reductionist if you want to say you
cannot reduce mental states to physical
States and there are all sorts of
reasons to think you can't um then
you're going to have to postulate mental
States you're going to have to postulate
contents and and quaia and the minute
you do you're going to have problems
with with functionalism with um physics
being able ever to understand mental
States and my goodness you might end up
having to postulate God or something
again or maybe not we don't know so
again the question is what is this does
it exist at all if it does exist can we
reduce it to something else if we can't
reduce it to something else what is its
nature here's another one what about
possibilities okay I might have been
wearing jeans mightn't I okay that's a
possibility but and what's more it's a
possibility that's actual isn't it it's
an actual possibility well what is a
possibility what's the nature of a
possibility it's not something that
actually exists is
itti okay so maybe we've got to
postulate a different sort of existence
now there are things that actually exist
and there are things that possibly exist
and there are things that don't even
possibly exist so there are square
circles don't even possibly
exist unicorns might they exist or not
maran's wearing jeans certainly is an
existing possibility do you see what I
mean you're you're now getting layers of
existence different levels of existence
well I me that little kitten on the
floor down there is it fat
you all
looked um you understood what my words
were don't you need to
postulate um a little kitten down there
in order to give meaning to my words
some people have thought that if you do
then that little kitten exists but it
doesn't exist like an does so you need
again another layer of
existence but is that
existence well some people have said no
it's not not really existence let's call
it persistence instead
um but but the thing is you've got to
say if you say that every um in order
for you to understand the meaning of
that little kitten is fat there needs to
be a concept of a kitten or or a kitten
or something you know there's a kitten
that gives meaning to the words but it's
not an existing kitten like the kitten
that some of you may have at home so
it's a persisting kitten or or a an
imaginary kitten is another way of
thinking about it but do imaginary
kittens exist well do they imagination
in imagination there you are there's
another way of thinking of it so its
existence different types of existence
there's existence in the real world and
there's existence in your imagination
there's existence in novels I mean when
when it comes out this little kitten
down here it could be black ginger or
anything couldn't it I haven't told you
anything about what it's like but we all
know that Sherlock Holmes wore a deer
stalker didn't we did he something like
that wasn't it okay so there you've got
again different levels of existence we
all know that unicorns have
horns you know well there aren't any
unicorns well how can unicorns have
horns if there aren't any do you see
anyway so do possibilities exist is is a
really difficult one that's the sort of
thing that leads people to postulate the
existence of possible worlds and I think
I've mentioned possible worlds to before
lots of people postulate possible worlds
but they're not realists about possible
worlds mathematicians logicians
physicists many of them all all those
disciplines postulate possible worlds
not all people in those disciplines do
but if you postulate possible worlds you
can see possible worlds as reducing to
possible situations in this world or you
can see possible worlds as
real um and David Lewis very famous
philosopher postulated the reality of
possible worlds and he said well I've
never really heard a very good argument
against them a look of blank
astonishment doesn't count as a as an
argument what about physical objects
well you might say well obviously they
exist you know how can I deny that that
exists okay well let's do a cartisian
thought experiment in fact let's do the
cartisian thought experiment when I have
some
water dayart was um interested in the
the fact that we know that some of our
beliefs are false but in the very nature
of things we don't know which those
beliefs are you see what I mean I mean
would you like to tell me for sure that
all your beliefs are
true I suppose that depend on
watching right okay what about you I
said no and then sudden what is a belief
a belief is you're certain about no it
isn't no no a lot of your beliefs are
false I I guarantee you believe it if
you believe it you believe that it's
true that doesn't make it true okay does
it no no I I believe it's true you
believe it's true exactly but this this
is the problem with beliefs every belief
you have you believe it's true because
that's what a belief is to to have the
attitude of belief towards a particular
content is is to Ascent to as
philosophers would say that content so
in believing that this chair is blue
there's the content that chair is blue
and I Ascent to it I say that is true
that's what a belief is but of course I
may be wrong I may be colorblind or
something like that you believe the
chair to be blue surely you say you know
the chair to be BL well given the
circumstances in this case I probably
would say I know but the fact is let's
not bother about that I was just
offering that as a but but you have
beliefs about a lot of things the
question is you know that many of those
beliefs are false but you don't know
which they are and in the very nature of
things anything that you believe you
believe to be true because that's what
truth is you cannot have a belief that
you don't believe to be true but you do
know that not all your beliefs are true
well deart became very interested in
this and he said well what I'm going to
do is I'm going to take myself away from
the world in the world we have to assume
that our beliefs are true because we
have to act on them um so in believing
that chair is blue if I'm looking for
something to match it I'll go and look
for something blue okay we have to act
on our beliefs he's going to put himself
away and think okay how do I know that
my beliefs are true what is it that
justifies me in believing that my
beliefs are true um and he thought the
method I'm going to use to do this um is
to treat as if false any belief I can
entertain the slightest doubt about so
if the belief that I believe to be true
could be false I'm going to put it on
one side as if it really is false and by
that means hope to find something that I
can that is absolutely
certain and from that maybe I can build
up the rest of my knowledge so it's a
bit like you know some of the apples in
your baskets are rotten but you don't
know which they are so you take each one
out and any that's a little bruised you
put on one side as being maybe that's
rotten and you hope to be left with Only
the Good Apples in the basket so deart
wanted to look at his beliefs and say if
there's any about which I can entertain
the slightest doubt I'm going to treat
it as if false okay so he's not saying
that his beliefs are false he's saying
it's as if they're false for this so
first he went down three levels of
Doubt
um the first one was the argument from
illusion
okay the argument from illusion tells us
that um well our senses have deceived us
I expect all of you have been deceived
by your senses sometimes you've got home
that wonderful skirt that you thought
would go so well with that blouse and
you got the color wrong uh the lights in
the shop were the wrong color or
something like that we we've all been
deceived by our Senses at some time well
if we've all been deceived by our Senses
at some sometimes should we take all the
beliefs that we base on our senses and
put them in the doubting basket treat
them as if they're false should we if
our senses has deceived us should we
treat all our sensory beliefs as
false okay put your hands up if you
think
yes okay put your hand up if you think
no okay now tell me why you think
no must be the possibility
that it is
why must there be that
possibility because you can't know
otherwise well hang on we've got two
lots of can't knows here there's what
we're suggesting is that your senses
have sometimes deceived you does that
mean you can never be sure that your
senses are are not deceiving you
now no I can't be sure no you can't be
sure so sometimes we do trust our senses
don't we I mean as a matter of fact how
do you know that your senses have
deceived
you prove well hang on you experiment
you prove it how how do you do this how
through your senses through your senses
give can you give me an example possibly
not I go to pick up a frying pan
expecting lots of heavy weights and I
pick up a light p w yes like that yes
good one okay um so your belief that it
was Heavy although that's actually not a
sensory belief probably is it well yes
because you put so much anticipated no
no but it's not a when you your belief
that the frying pan was Heavy yes you
can't really look at a frying pan and
tell it's going to be heavier maybe you
can maybe you can let me give you
decart's own example because I think
it's a it's a good one decart said if
you put a stick in water and it looks
bent okay you've got reason for thinking
that the stick is bent you take it out
of water woo it's straight you've got
reason for thinking the stick's straight
well okay there are two possibilities
maybe when you put the stick in water it
bends it or maybe it just appears bent
so how do you test this you put your
hands in the water you feel the stick
when it's underwater and low it's
straight okay so you've now got two
reasons for thinking the stick's
straight and only one but the thing is
you couldn't even know that your senses
were deceiving you unless you rely on
your
senses so all we got to here from the
argument from illusion is that we know
that not all our sensory beliefs are
true not all our
sensory beliefs are true sometimes
usually in um unusual psycho optimal
conditions or maybe not unusual but um
not perfect psycho um physical
conditions are sensory beliefs deceive
us but you can't go from the um
Universal possibility of Illusion to the
possibility of universal illusion would
you like me to say that again no oh I
like saying that would you like me to
say it again thank you thank you you
cannot go from the uh Universal
possibility of Illusion to the
possibility of universal illusion are
you with me okay so all those who said
no you're right uh we do know that our
senses sometimes deceive us but that
does doesn't tell us that we we can put
all our sensory beliefs into the
doubting basket because we would never
know that our senses deceive US unless
we rely on our
senses so that's the first argument
second argument deart went to was the
argument um uh from the
demon the demon argument rather than the
argument from the
demon um the de sorry dream and anyone
who knows what they're talking about
will know that I'm talking rubbish
second one was the dream the argument
from
dreaming okay so you're sitting here
you're in the fire your uh the lights
are on everything's fine you're looking
at your hands in front of you how can
you doubt that your sensors aren't
deceiving you now are they but on the
other hand says dayart haven't you ever
been in the situation where everything
has seemed to you to be a certain way
and then you've suddenly woken up and
found it wasn't that way at all so it
looks as if all all the sensory evidence
is in and yet you're still wrong your
belief was false so you believe that the
hand is in front of you it's exactly
with you as as it would be if your hand
was in front of you but your hand's not
in front of you as a matter of fact
you're
dreaming okay does that mean we should
put all our sensory beliefs in the
doubting
basket put your hands up if you think
yes put your hand up if you think no
you're beginning to get this now aren't
you why
not uh man in White's um or beigy sort
of
Jumper sorry I've picked on you and you
don't have
to okay would anyone else like to answer
what why can we not put all our sensory
beliefs in the doubting basket now
wake up because we know we up because we
wake up and what does that tell
us that we've been dreaming that that
we're not always asleep exactly that
sometimes our beliefs are true sometimes
when I've got my hand in front of me
like that and I'm thinking my hands in
front of me I am awake and the reason I
know that is because if I didn't wake up
I couldn't know I was dreaming so it's
exactly the same structure of arguments
as as in the first one but whereas we
got rid of all uh sensory beliefs that
are formed in in suboptimal
psychophysical conditions here here
we've got rid of a lot more haven't we
why do you want to no I was going to say
but how do you know you woken up that
might
beam well it's the contrast isn't it
there are people who don't aren there
occasionally I understand it's very rare
but there are people who go through this
cycle of thinking they've woken up and
then they wake up again and so right but
seriously but in order to know that they
are like that they must have woken up I
don't know to what they know
whe
well okay but but with you I'm quite
sure you've had lucid dreams where
you've had the dream and suddenly you've
woken up and you thought wow you know
who could have believed that I was
dreaming sometimes you can know you're
dreaming but it's the lucid dream that's
that's good for this one but what have
we lost here what's in the doubting
basket
now no incidentally there's another
thing I want you to notice that lots of
people think I mean it's hell sheare
hell being a philosopher at a party um
because that when people find out you're
a philosopher they're going
for little games like oh good tell me
that this exists does this exist why and
you say something and they say oh no it
doesn't you know tell me how tell me how
and they're playing a sort of skeptic
game that's extremely irritating I hope
none of you ever play it um deart found
reasons for doubting everything he
didn't just doubt he took beliefs he
believed to be true and he looked for a
reason to doubt them and it's only when
he found a reason to doubt them that he
put them on one side um so he wasn't
just doubting um he wasn't playing the
SK the Skeptics game he was actually
looking for reasons to doubt
so what are we what are we lost here
what's in the doubting basket once
you've got the argument from
dreaming sense
perception well no because when you are
you know that sometimes your belief
there's a hand in front of you is
correct is
true so you don't you don't lose that
you do sometimes see your hand in front
of you but what do you
lose reality
certainty no no you no we're looking for
certainty we're we're wanting to know
what isn't certain as a result of this
some things are left certain uh I mean
it's left certain for example well okay
I'm asking you that what is left certain
have to be
awake um that when you are awake your
dream your beliefs your sensory beliefs
if they're formed in in um optimal
psychophysical conditions are true you
still got no reason to doubt that you
put
sleeping it's just that um you can say
that unless I know I'm awake I cannot
know for sure that there is a hand in
front of me okay do I know that I'm
really awake answer no I don't because I
could be having a lucid dream but I do
know that hands exist and that I can see
them and that chairs exist and that I
can see them or if you don't like that
because I can in in our dreams we
sometimes put together things in strange
ways um I can know that blue exists and
that um so you can go to Simple Things
horses horns whiteness things like that
the simple things from which we build up
complex things I know that they exist so
we're losing something of the world here
but we haven't lost the whole world yet
um there's still an awful lot that we
know I don't know anything to be true
now but I do have reason to believe that
it is true if I it is true sometimes I.E
when I'm awake and I have these reasons
to believe things but then we get down
to the demon
argument and at the demon argument deart
says okay well I'm assuming aren't I
that
um these experiences that I have as of
my hands and of bless and so on I'm
assuming that these experiences are
actually caused by something outside
myself um and that the experience that I
have is a is a guide to the nature of
the cause of these experiences so my
experience of bless as of a blue chair
is causing me to think that that
experience is being caused by a chair
that's blue and you've got a problem
here
because in order to know that a a causes
B you've got to be here haven't
you you've got to see a correlation
between a and b in the same way to know
that a resembles B you've got to be able
to see both A and B but are we ever in
this position with result with respect
to our
experiences and the causes of our
experience never we're always here
aren't we didn't leave enough room for
my arrow um we experience the world if
you like through our experiences we can
never get outside our experiences to see
what the world is like to see what's
causing these experiences um so it could
be that our experiences are caused by
something completely other than we take
them to be caused by so here's the demon
sorry I know it looks like a cat but
it's a demon okay the demon opens up a
gap between our experiences themselves
and the causes of those experiences and
he actually says how do we even know
these experiences are caused why aren't
there just
experiences one following the other
following the other following the other
and there's nothing out there at all and
actually dayart at that point says I
can't do this um I'm going to put the
demon there because I can't I find it
impossible to believe there's nothing
other than my
experiences um but I can think that
there's some cause of my experiences
which is completely other than I take it
to be and some people have tried putting
evil scientists in here um but that
doesn't work because an evil scientist
isn't Magic um what you're trying to do
the demon is just there because it's
impossible to imagine that your
experiences don't have causes at all so
you're putting something there so that
there is a cause but the cause is
completely other than you take it to be
is that
why did he panic because it's like
people saying well after death there
must be something otherwise there's no
point
it's um he didn't Panic for that reason
no he he just literally couldn't wrap
his mind around the idea that there's
nothing outside causing your experiences
you try
it it's really very difficult to to get
yourself to the point where you
understand that there might be no
physical world at all your experiences
could be exactly as there are as they
are even though nothing else else
exists so all there is is an's
experiences as of maranne giving a
lecture in philosophy there's no Maran
there's no philosophy there's no lecture
there's no blue chair it does seem to me
very similar to people
have is this experience all I have it's
it's it is a frightening experience
beyond that nothing Beyond Death it's
nothing Beyond but it's nothing to do
with God it it's I just said that
sometimes why people want to have a God
yes I didn't actually say about God I
just said people worry that there is
nothing after death okay but but this is
a a different thing because it's it's
not worrying about ex uh that sort of
thing it's but it is a worrying thought
I mean we want our beliefs about the
external world to be true don't we and
yet what's happening is that we're
discovering that what akart said was
that uh actually once you've done this
thought experiment you realize that um
there's the
world and there's your picture of the
world okay all your beliefs that you've
formed about the world and you go
through the world updating your beliefs
all the time um but once you've um
retreated into your picture
of your picture of the
world which should be here but I ran out
of room um the world actually becomes
unnecessary because if all there was was
this you couldn't ever get outside to
see whether this is there or not so once
you've pushed yourself back into a
reflective position um you see that uh
the world that you picture is quite
different from your picture of the world
and that your picture of the world could
be exactly as it is even though the
world was completely
different and that's the cartisian
thought experiment that's hyperbolical
doubt at this point youve you've started
the question of how can we know I mean
we do take ourselves to know that
there's an external World a physical
world out there but what's our what
possible justification could we have for
this given that um all we can do is go
and look for more
experiences and our experiences are
exactly what we we are asking are they
caused by something and if so what I
can't step outside my experience of
course no scientific experiment is going
to tell you the answer between are my
experiences caused by an external world
or are they caused by an evil demon
there's no I can't go down and say oh is
it a chair oh yes here we are it's a
chair why can't I do
thaton making it up for all I'm doing is
giving myself more experiences aren't I
I'm now having a tactile experience as
well as a visual experience and there's
an auditory one there as well but I mean
they're only more experiences aren't
they but if we have the same on who are
you hang on I'm having another
experience at this moment it's an
auditory one there's um you know it's as
of someone that's why people say did you
see what I saw they do but no no hang on
you haven't got yourself into
hyperbolical doubt has she why hasn't
she got into hyperbolical
doubt
experience she's not looking at her
picture of her picture of the
world exist she said no no she still
thinks that I should think that she
exists
um I have lot I have very good reason to
think I'm having experiences as of a
female wearing maroon sitting in front
of me who's speaking to me but these are
just more of my experiences aren't I I
can no more get outside my experiences
to check whether an's really there and
whether she's really telling me what I
think she's telling me than I can to see
whether the chair is there all I've got
is more
experiences so all I've got is more of
this
um here and I still haven't got this
which is what I
need so there's no point in looking for
collaboration which is why there can't
be any
scientific um way of testing Which
hypothesis is true so here I have my
experience in the external world of
those I can be certain okay I ABS I'm
absolutely sure now that I'm having
experiences as of a lecture theater it's
Etc what I want to know is are those
experiences causing me to form beliefs
that are true I.E there is a leure
theater now notice the difference
between I believe there's a lecture
theater and there is a lecture
theater okay the latter is metaphysics
isn't it the former is epistemology I
can be certain of the former I can be
certain of my own
beliefs but I can't be certain that
these beliefs are true can I
and it's at this level of hyperbolical
Doubt at the third level of
doubt that you start to wonder do
physical objects exist at
all interestingly dayart thought that
you could show that they did deart
wasn't a skeptic um lots of people think
he was but in fact he wasn't he did this
skeptical um thought experiment in order
to preempt skepticism um he ended up
believing in the existence of a physical
world but he thought it was necessary to
believe in God
first isn't he didn't he say I
think he
did that's right kogo osum and the
reason he did that can anyone think why
he did that thinking of what I told you
so far what that was all he had left to
believe that's right once you've got
yourself back into your picture of your
picture of the world um and your
inability to determine the existence of
the world that you picture the only
thing of which you can be certain is
that you're thinking isn't it so here's
my belief
um and let's the content of my belief is
um the chair is
blue uh I've got the attitude of belief
towards that I've now got another
attitude which is that of doubt
towards that belief do you see what I
mean you can't doubt your own beliefs
without seeing that you have these
beliefs and that's what deart says he
said the very Act of doubting makes me
see that I believe and if I believe I
exist I don't know what I am like but I
exist because I exist as a thinking
thing as a thing that thinks so I think
therefore or I am is because that once
You' in hyperbolical doubt that is the
only certainty you
have you actually have a few more about
what you think but but you don't need to
I think therefore exist encapsulates it
rather neatly I think but you see you
cannot doubt your own beliefs without
seeing that you do believe something or
other all you don't know is whether that
belief is true could I come back to the
argument from
and just sort of question
around we we're saying talking about our
sense data
and however sometimes those are what
sometimes those are true or or can be
believed but if you I mean looking at
evidence for example from physics about
the nature of the UN about sort of wave
particle forms about what the nature of
matter is all that kind of stuff what
we're seeing is an extremely
distorted view of reality looking at the
evidence from psychology our perception
is a highly flaw all our senses are
highly flawed our brains are constantly
filling in stuff that's around the edges
and doing all kinds of fiddling about
with what actually might or might not be
out there so actually we know pretty
much what we are experiencing much of it
is an
illusion
um I'm afraid that in what you're saying
you're making it clear that you haven't
got into hyperbolical doubt either well
I do understand hyperbolical doubt well
in that Cas other hand I I wasn't
arguing from the point of hyperbolical
doubt I do understand what the nature of
that is personally I think there is
stuff out there but I don't think it is
what we experience well we can but we
can agree with all that and and accept I
mean all dut's asking is can we be
certain that our experiences are being
caused by anything secondly can we be
certain that our experiences are a good
guide to what there is now what you're
saying is that the second we we know
empirically that the answer to the
second question is no but of course for
him the most important question is the
first one and not the second one there's
evidence coming out about sort of nature
of Consciousness and the self which the
implication is that that what we may
perceive as being ourself is actually
again quite
illusory yeah sure but I mean this is
more Gris to deart well I mean it's
either irrelevant excuse me or or it's
Gris to decart's Mill I mean um you can
say you can add these in if you like to
the argument from illusion but the
argument from illusion is only the first
step of dart's argument and and the step
that really matters is this one and and
that's the one that takes us to
hyperbolical doubt and that's very
definitely a philosophical or
metaphysical question not an empirical
one there's no way science can show us
no there is no such thing as empiricism
if all there is in my experience uh well
there still is but the empiricism is
nothing more than me testing out one
experience against another which is a
bit like testing out one newspaper
against another um it's not going to get
you very far why why does he prioritize
thinking so much I could better
understand it if he said I doubt
therefore I exist well doubting is a
form of thinking I think is is is
less proof of existence than a blue
is well you at least bring in other
people no you can't bring in other
people say that chair is blue you can't
bring other people I think no you can't
you can't bring in other people at all
the doubting is not what's your certain
of by doubting is that you believe
because in order to doubt the thing that
you doubt is a belief of your own or you
can doubt that you think well exactly a
belief is a thought it's a type of
thought so you're you're doubting that
you're thinking and in try you try and
doubt whether you're thinking and you
will become completely certain that
you're thinking and so deart um says
isn't it strange because I would have
thought that the world was far more um
present to me than my own thoughts in
fact my own thoughts have always seemed
to be rather shadowy you know things
that I'm not really certain of at all
you know I can't hold them or see them
or touch them or so on but having done
this I now see that my thoughts are far
more certain to me than the external
World which could be
nothing um so he he you know he thinks
he's gone from something he's found
something really surprising once you
move from the perspective of um
picturing your world so I'm I'm thinking
of the worlds that I picture not my
picture of the world usually the only
time I'm thinking of my picture of the
world is when something's gone wrong you
know I thought I hang my I hung my coat
here okay I believed I hung my coat here
I now have reason to believe it isn't
there what's gone wrong so I've been
pushed back into my picture of my
picture of the world in order to
question whether my belief is true or
false but of course usually I come back
almost immediately oh there it is and
and so I immediately moved back into my
picture of the world looking at the
world but what deart did is he he forced
himself to stay here where what he was
reflecting on was his picture of the
world rather than the world that he
pictured so he's looking at his beliefs
and thinking are they true are they
false are they Justified are they not
instead of looking at the chair and
thinking is it blue is it hard is it
okay do you see why people are out here
not in here
an isn't a belief my belief about an is
a belief but an is here and mariann's
belief about
Anne is what I am certain
of but I'm certain of it until I doubt
it and the minute I doubt it I can be
certain of that belief but I can't be
certain that it's true so whatever an
says is is just more of my experience is
so if an says it's blue you are
experiencing an say that's right or I
believe that Anne says it's blue and I
know that um my belief that Anne says
it's true does not make it true that
Anne says it's true and as I can you too
will be able to do this when you become
philosophers do you see what I mean you
once you understand what you're saying
it it becomes easy to say it although
now I can't say it again but I have to
get the flow of it back okay do you see
why people are
outside just I thinking when my when my
daughter was little she used to think we
had two houses and she thought we had
one that was down the end of the road
that came from preschool and one that
came oh yeah down the road from school
my cat thinks we have two houses and I'm
just wondering is it but she would have
had no doubt about
that and was it when she began to doubt
the belief and then obviously then
realized I'm not quite that rich we've
only got the one
and is that almost the doubt of the
belief makes it really I don't know well
there's a very interesting change your
between three and five children actually
acquire the context the cont concept of
a belief and until that point there's
evidence to think that they don't
properly form beliefs of their own but
this um there's a an experiment that
goes um Maxi the puppet um whoever it is
who's looking after Maxi I can't
remember um puts a chocolate in a box
and then Maxi goes out to play and the
children are watching this and Maxi's
mom comes in takes the chocolate from
the box and puts it into a cupboard or
something like that then Maxi comes in
from playing and the children are asked
where is Maxi going to look for the
chocolate now all the three-year-olds
say in the cupboard because that's where
they believe the chocolate is they know
the chocolate is in the cupboard okay so
they that's where they think Maxi will
look the five-year-olds will all say
she'll look in the drawer because
they've understood that the difference
between appearance and
reality okay the world can appear to you
to be other than the way the world is
and what your daughter did she she
linked up her two beliefs and saw oh
that house is that house but what she
had really wasn't a belief in that sense
then how old was
she yeah she she probably wasn't really
having beliefs at that point
yeah you the thought is you don't really
have a belief until you have the concept
of belief because once you it's only
when you've got the concept of belief
that you have the difference between
appearance and reality um and you see
that beliefs can be either true or false
so you can grasp the contents concept of
conditions of Truth and falsehood and at
that point you can really actually
believe something whereas up until then
it's just that you're just responding to
a world because the world is you don't
make any distinction between the world's
being one way and it's appearing one way
you don't see that those can come apart
Define it as a belief then no in that
cont no except I mean we'd call it one
when we're speaking Loosely but no okay
um right let's move on a bit because um
I mean we've we've been doing a lot of
epistemology here under the heading of
metaphysics but uh of course actually
there's the metaphysics of epistemology
just to confuse you um because of course
if you want to know the truth about
knowledge then you're doing the
metaphysics of knowledge and therefore
the metaphysics of
epistemology so we were looking at
ontology before we got on to uh
skepticism um but so we asked ourselves
whether these things exist but we can
then go on and ask well what are they
like you know if we believe that God
exists is he all these things um how can
he be all these things cuz surely
there's contradiction here isn't there
if he's omnip omnipotent he can do
anything at all if he's omniscient he
knows everything at all and if he's
benevolent or good then how can he see
the suffering in the world and not do
something about it um so can God be all
those things what about moral values if
they exist are they absolute or relative
do we all have our own moral values or
is there a moral law that's objective
and that exists for all of us
um are there different possible worlds
or only different possible states of
this world and what's the difference
between those two and what about
physical objects are they independent of
us or bundles of our ideas Barkley uh
Bishop Barkley thoughts that
um skepticism was so threatening the
idea that we couldn't be sure we had
knowledge of the external world but what
he thought is we had to build the
external World from what we could be
sure about so the only thing we can be
sure about is our own experiences so
what is the external World other than
bundles of our own experiences now this
may sound Dar you know I mean there's
more to an than my experience if I touch
her she'll say ow or excuse me or
something like that um but actually
there again what have I got other than
my own experiences auditory experiences
uh Etc um so what Barkley was saying was
actually if you think of all your
experiences and all your counterfactual
experiences in other words if I came
into this room at midnight that blue
chair would still be there do you see
that's a counterfactual experience I
would still see that blue chair um there
is no more to an object than our
experiences or counterfactual
experiences and actually you try and
convince me that you have any reason to
believe that the physical world exists
that doesn't appeal to either an
experience of yours or a counterfactual
experience of yours and you'll
fail I don't understand how you using
counter I thought counterfactual I
thought counterfactual was against fact
it is if I came into this room last
night at midnight that's that's not true
I didn't come into this room at midnight
I was fast to sleep in bed um but had I
come into this room at midnight last
night I would have seen that blue chair
so and that's part of my reason for
thinking that that blue chair exists
independently of me is that it was here
all the time it would still be here if I
came back tomorrow it might not but it
might well exactly and so what Barkley
is saying is is that there is no reason
I can give for believing that that chair
exists that doesn't depend on either an
actual experience of mine here it exists
you know and you're having experiences
of this chair now as well if you exist
um or counterfactual ones if I came in
tonight it would still be here I I would
still see it it might
not that's true um but I would still uh
okay but that that's come in last night
it would have been there if I had come
in last night it would have been there
yeah but I should be able to answer that
and I can't because I'm tired um
um what about bruises if somebody had
moved it I wouldn't see have seen it
okay I might not be able to follow it
but it's certainly true that I have
reason to believe that this chair would
have been here simply because it's tied
to the floor um I mean that's not
conclusive and that's not a very good
response to what you're saying no reason
it I have no reason to think it won't be
and my what's more important to the you
you try this as a thought experiment for
yourself try and give yourself reason to
believe that something that you believe
exists exists okay so you believe this
exists what are your reasons for
believing it exists and see if you can
find one that doesn't depend upon your
own experiences either your actual
experiences I can see it feel it touch
it hear it or your counterfactual
experiences if I was there then if I did
this then if do you see what I mean then
I would so so you won't be able to do it
Barkley was much cleverer than people
think people tend to think that he
thought of the external world as a
ghostly sort of thing but he's just
offering another explanation for our
experiences and the fact that we go from
these experiences to thinking there's an
external world we do that immediately
what why do we do this okay so so this
is that's metaphysics then moving to
epistemology what is knowledge
okay do we have knowledge we've looked
at that in some depth already do we have
knowledge deart would say we can't claim
to have knowledge of the external World
unless we can get over his thought
experiment which he thinks we can um
what is knowledge though some people
believe that it's okay well no let me
ask you this what what is knowledge
we've been talking about knowledge for
the last hour and a half or something
what what is it it's experiences that we
have
it
is that was very optimistic OB wasn't it
launching out like
that good for you go on see you I'm just
saying that it is what we have
experienced and gathered from our
experience to the
external what do you mean my gathered in
our
sensual in our senses but we have
knowledge of things that don't involve
senses don't we 2 plus 2 equal for is
not sensory knowledge so what is
knowledge collect it and put it in our
brains we collect it and put it in our
brains how do you put something in your
brain well I don't
know well actually you don't
um I'm not sure you intentionally
acquire knowledge anyway most of the
time the knowledge you acquire isn't
acquired intentionally it just um sorry
what did somebody else say I said
acquired
acquired it's certainly acquired but
what is it we acquire M memory memor is
involved but there's a difference
between memory and knowledge isn't
there I mean in order to remember
something that something has to have
happened you have experiences but you
only have knowledge if you remember it
so I think memory is a very important me
memory is important but memory is
different from knowledge it's not the
same thing memory is essentially time
related whereas knowledge isn't
essentially time related it can be time
related but it's not essentially so in
the way that memory is you could look
look in a book for knowledge me remember
yeah
well and and I mean there are different
sorts of knowledge aren't there as well
I mean that I know how to ride a bike
well I remember do I remember it well
it's not propositional
knowledge
um okay let me tell you what one answer
the classical answer to the question
what knowledge is is that it's Justified
true
belief okay if you're going to have
knowledge you must have a belief that
belief must be justified and that belief
must be true so um you believe or you
you know that I'm wearing an obene dress
don't you you all know that have very
good color concepts here you have a
belief that I'm wearing an Obe dress do
you y okay is that belief just ified yes
how you can see it yeah okay you're
justified in believing that and and let
me tell you that it's true okay so you
know I'm wearing an oine dress so that's
the idea that so if a student comes to
me and says well I deart said such and
such and I say why do you think that and
he says uh I don't know and I say okay
well what what follows from that belief
and he says um I don't
know uh and I said well why do you think
that and he says uh don't know he
doesn't know it does it does he he may
have a belief about that um but it's and
it what more it may be a true belief but
it's not justified therefore it doesn't
count as knowledge he doesn't know it at
all um if you don't have a belief about
something you certainly can't know it
but the other one and the one that most
people get more worried about is that
you cannot know something
false if you cannot know that I'm
wearing a yellow dress for example you
can believe that you know something
false but your belief that you know it
is itself false are you with me so if
you actually know something that thing
must be true so Maxi comes in from
playing and she does she know that the
chocolate is in the
drawer no she believes she knows the
chocolate is in the drawer but what she
doesn't know is that her mom took it out
and put it somewhere else so she has
what she thinks is knowledge but it's
not knowledge because it's not true
she's got the belief she's justified in
the belief but the belief isn't true
therefore it cannot be counted as
knowledge so you've got to again make
that distinction between what you
believe to be the case and what actually
is the case because you can believe you
know something that's false but you
cannot actually know something
false this is the the CRA of William
Morris's dictum only have in your house
those things which you believe to be
beautiful or which you know to be useful
yes I'm not sure it's the Crux of that
but it certainly comes into it yes
absolutely um yeah okay so um but here's
a little problem for you Geer came up
with this little problem it's called and
it's been called ever since gettier
problems um you have seen me driving a
um a Golf GTI around Oxford um you've
come to believe that I own a Golf GTI as
a matter of fact there is a Golf GTI
that I own but it's in my garage and the
one that you've seen me driving around
belongs to a friend okay do you know
that I own a Golf GTI no you believe I
believe
no sorry you believe that you know but
do you know you don't know no you don't
know why not it's not justified well it
is Justified no you've seen me driving
around in it you're perfectly Justified
not true it is true I've got one in the
garage you don't know that you don't
know no you don't know that you don't
know but you don't
know only you know that that's not the
point
yeah we don't know that you own
it why
not because we haven't seen the bill of
sale or we haven't told us that you own
it um there's no reason necessarily to
assume that you own that car but we do
usually Claim about um claim to have
knowledge without having certainty don't
we I mean you've seen me driving this
car often um so you know you you think
you're justified in claiming to know
that now I'll tell you what's happened
here is the conditions that make your
belief true I.E the car that's sitting
in my garage that you've never seen me
in come apart from the conditions that
justify your belief the Golf GTI you've
seen me driving around in and it's only
if the conditions that make true your
belief are the same as the conditions
that justify your belief that you can
have
knowledge uh that what you have counts
as knowledge so what Geer showed is that
it cannot be the case that knowledge is
Justified true belief Justified true
belief may be necessary for knowledge
but it's not sufficient you need some
other claim that makes it impossible for
the truth conditions
