uh so thank you again for everyone's
time and attention um I know this this
is a busy group uh with a lot of folks
who um have a lot of responsibilities
and their attention is pulled in quite a
few directions so we appreciate the
consideration here um this is the same
presentation that was sent over uh for
review with some minor um changes to fix
a couple of things that were identified
during the back and forth um the emails
with Barry uh um so we'll get right to
it and I will try and address um some of
the uh comments and considerations that
have already been provided about this in
the course of it um so the the way that
this started was the bfo um in its
current form we've been working with for
quite some time um and the matho and the
fizo ontologies were sent over and we
were exposed to some of the I's current
work vectors and uh um we we weren't
asked for feedback but we've had a lot
of thoughts for a lot of for a long time
so we've tried to organize those and to
communicate with you and our our goal in
these communications is is not to Simply
criticize we we want to learn we want to
understand um and if our questions and
conclusions are valid we hope to
motivate change within the bfo and its
subsequent iterations and uh uh to
hopefully inform some of the iof working
group uh directions um so with resp with
respect to the bfo it buil down to
quantity versus quality um which was
discussed at length in some of these
emails material versus immaterial
entities which the uh delineation of
which um
became um less useful as we got into
more and more domains and then the
subjectivity of object Aggregates or
perceived subjectivity um so this is
this is something that we're looking to
understand a little bit more and then we
get into the systems engineering working
group specifically talking about the
classification of systems um and and how
they relate within the bfo and then
there's also some matho and fizo
considerations we're going to try and
get through this uh in 20 minutes as
fast we can so regarding the bfo
everyone's very familiar or at least we
assume everyone is here's the basic
breakdown of the continuance and when
using this our biggest problems that
we've encountered been here it's been
material versus immaterial object versus
object aggregate uh and the qualities uh
the quantification of qualities um this
has been these three in particular have
been specifically difficult um so uh and
again this is one place where minor
changes were made uh since the submitted
uh version of the presentation um so
when we talk about qualities and
quantities quantities are currently
considered an instance of qualities and
uh there in in owl there is very little
um differentiation uh between instances
of classes and and subclasses it's just
a a different way to handle it but so
can I just clarify that that quantities
are a subass of sorry some quantities
are a subclass of qualities not an
instance and some quanti is our subass
of characteristics which is our name for
qualities of
processes the continuing quantities form
a subass of
qualities not
instances point point
taken our bigger issue was the quantity
being a subclass of quality um when when
you think about
um happy is happy plus happy equals what
um the the distinction uh between
qualities and quantities seems uh
greater than what can be described by a
a subclass
relationship um so the the the subclass
just comes about uh according to whether
the quality such as length or
temperature can be measured or or
counted that's the sole difference so
from the very beginning of bfo we've
allowed length and area and so forth to
be qualities and now when we come to uh
think more carefully about physics we
realize that some of those qualities are
new are countable on or uh can be
associated with uh numeric measures and
so we created a
subclass
and um so we need to me be able to
measure length if we're going to do
justice to what length is and length is
equ
quality completely agree that we need to
be able to measure it and the the
quantification of um what is what is
currently being referred to as qualities
is certainly important and necessary uh
we provided in the previous email a
definition for quantity um and
uh hopefully you'll have a moment uh to
take a look at that definition and uh
poke holes in it um when you can we
haven't provided definitions for
everything as requested um if if the the
ultimate if if the ultimate decision is
to leave quantity under quality as a
subass and to continue on this way we
don't think it's necessarily a
significant problem but
we'd like to bring this up for
additional consideration in the
subsequent iterations of the
bfo uh because having having qualities
or subclasses of qualities being
siblings in a taxonomy to
quantities
seems IL
defined and if Dr Smith you you ask
specifically to speak in terms of
definitions which is why it's taking us
so long to get back to you because we
don't want to provide anything that is
ill formed
um our our our big Point here that
there's no way we'll get through in the
the 20 minutes is that the quantities
being siblings with subclasses of
qualities does not to
our perspective and intent for use seem
complete um and and if it's not of
course because there are
some
occurrent quantities such as velocity
and so forth so uh but let me just point
out that uh this is not a ground on
which we should do
battle uh because quantity is not a term
in
bfo uh it is a term and a treatment that
we proposed in the paper on fizo and
matho but that paper is a very very
early
draft it it might take years before we
produce what we are all happy with and
it might deviate a lot from that early
draft the reason it's going to take a
long time is because we're trying to
deal with physics and we're trying to
deal with um quantum physics and general
relativity Theory as well as with the
kind of classical physics which
underlies
bfo and we just don't know how to do
that is there a specific reason that
that you assert quantity should not be a
a sibling category or sibling term to
Quality well the the main reason so as I
say this is not uh ground on which we
should do battle because quantity is not
determined bfo but my intuition tells me
that length is a quality and that length
is also a quantity and so that means
that
length is an example of one quantity
which is also a quality and since there
are many qualities which are not
quantities it follows that quantity is a
good candidate for being a subclass of
quality it's not it's not going to be
acceptable to do that precisely because
of a
current quazi qualities which we call
characteristics which also are
quantifiable able and so we say that
some quantities are qualities some qual
quantities are characteristics and some
quantities and this is for uh
consideration down the road are going to
be neither of those things because they
do not fall within the domain of bfo
because they're not quantities belonging
to classical physics they belong to
quantum physics or general relativity
Theory the treatment of time in general
relativity theory is completely skew to
the treat M of time in
bfo so we can't have temporal region in
in bfo used to deal with temporal with
with what G general relativity Theory uh
calls uh time or time intervals or time
Regions they're just so so
strange uh so uh radically different
that we have to leave that for the
future in in the interest of time uh
we'll we'll move on to the next point
but I I completely agree that um we this
is not a place on a ground on which we
should do battle uh we will concentrate
our questions and inquiries in the
subsequent
emails uh into a a definition
perspective on why uh quantity is not
considered possible within the bfo um
that that I think is the the inquiry
route that that will pursue in the near
term and may ultimately be persuaded
that we wrong qu for quantity for
non-classical physics is what I was
referring to I think quantity for
classical physics like length and
velocity can be treated in bfo terms
although that doesn't mean that the term
quantity will be added to bfo it may be
that we put it in the iof core or in the
Common Core ontologies we not made a
decision on that yet okay thank you
thank you very much uh for the
perspective um this is This concerns the
material versus immaterial so when we
started we were creating a a domain
ontology for prognostic Health
Management in spacecraft avionics I've
worked in uh space radiation effects for
quite some time and have a degree of
expertise in the the causation and
effects of particle radiation in space
and while the standard model is by no
means complete and uh many mo no most
physicists understand that it is wrong
though we do not understand why or how
it is wrong just yet that's what most of
the experimental physics at the moment
concerns the
taxonomy of the standard model in its
current form and possible future
forms has subclasses with both material
and immaterial terms the example for
this is the uh B
uh gauge bosons in particular which
contains both photons which do not have
mass and other gauge bosons which would
do have mass and doesn't super matter
what they are um this is where we
encountered the most problems
taxonomizing these independent
continuant clearly independent
continuant uh under the delineation of
material versus immaterial and so we
we've emailed back and forth a bit about
this between providing this presentation
and um presenting it now uh and uh Dr
Smith has provided perspective on the
future of of this um and I I believe
we're in agreement that material and
immaterial could use some
polishing would would you care to
comment yes so I think it's of parallel
to our issues regarding quantities so
the reason why we didn't consider things
like bom in bfo was because we were
considering bfo as a an ontology which
would deal with the what we might call
the empirical world or the world that we
experience around us which includes
factories and machines and uh raw
materials used in factories and it
includes um uh things moving with with
smallish velocities uh and having
smallish lengths and so forth we we
didn't we didn't we were not ambitious
with regard to bfo in claiming that it
would also be able to deal with quantum
physics and with uh particle physics and
with general relativity Theory we are
now finally reaching the point where we
are trying to work out how bfo should
deal with those things and the
experimental idea presented in the maop
fizo paper is that uh bfo should stick
with classical physics and it should
leave those more controversial parts of
contemporary physics for a separate
ontology to be called
fizo and fizo and bfo would be linked
because practically everything in
physical experimentation including
experimentation in quantum physics for
instance does fall within bfo so then
the equipment used to the the uh Shan G
Equipment for
instance um that's that's Falls within
bfo it's it's a material entity
now Michael uh you made a very important
Point uh in our interchange which I
think we have to think about very
carefully so bfo claims to be a top
level
ontology
our strategy as presented in the fizo
paper gives gives up the idea that bfo
will be a top level
ontology uh and it says bfo is for one
part of the universe and fizo is for
another part of the universe in some
strange sense of part I am I I'm not
happy with that um outcome but I still
don't know what the correct way of of
solving the problem of immaterial
entities like bosons which are not
counted as entities within bfo because
they're just not within the world that
bfo wants to deal with so there are two
options either we become more modest
about bfos claims to be a top level
ontology or we find a way of having bfo
have a a non-classical physics
branch and um I don't I just don't know
what that will look like and it will the
second uh Avenue will indeed involve
removing the current definition of
immaterial entity from
bfo so you have raised an important
point which we need to
address that's the the philosophy of how
the problem was approached is incredibly
useful per perspective and in the
discussions of how this possibly may be
remediated the uh a a parameter a
measure called the nuden number KN and
uden number was uh discussed which in
fluid dynamics
describes at what point at what length
scales do what are called Continuum
mechanics break down and generally that
is when you get to the atomic subatomic
levels and below and the very very large
structures uh Galactic and Intergalactic
web type structure structures where the
physics does again change so it sounds
like the original bfo um taxonomy of
continence was squarely in what many
engineers and physicists would describe
the Continuum mechanics region and then
when we approach this problem with the
gauge bosons we are squarely in
subcontinuum mechanics so it I I
certainly have no sense of if this would
be the appropriate solution or useful
but a possible solution may be to
address continuance based on the scale
of what kind of physics we are talking
about subcontinuum Continuum and the the
grand structures which I do not think is
the right way to say it um but con the
the concept of tangible Continuum
identity may be useful in the taxonomy
of different structures where material
versus immaterial is directly relevant
for Continuum structures and it's in
subcontinuum where you get
to uh the breakdown of material versus
immaterial being less
relevant um it nudson does have to do
with the molecules
specifically I think that you're uh
you're you're hitting the nail on the
head um so we need to do something like
what you just
said uh
I I just off the top of my head this
would mean creating a new top level term
or a new understanding of the top level
term entity and then having two children
of in the continuent hierarchy I'm not
sure what this would do to the the
occurrent hierarchy but for the
continuing hierarchy we would have two
new children one
one um one child would be
continuance for which we would need
another name so a
kuden um miso level or something
continuent and then kuden micro level
continuent would be another top level
term and then everything the N the nson
number is specific to molecules and here
we are talking about below molecules
concept we would need an expression for
that
dichotomy uh it would come to the same
thing as having a separate fizo as a
child as a as a sibling ontology of bfo
uh so we really putting entity and hold
and and merging those two into one
single tree is a bit of a trick uh but
it would preserve bfo as a top level
ontology which probably is a useful
thing to have
um are many many issues however so um uh
I don't think I want to go into those
issues here but still I we on the same
page uh I I think wonderful um I think
we are uh past this this next slide um
again I don't presume to have the
answers we don't have the solutions here
uh and we are we are merely presenting
problems and we hope they are not taken
as simple criticisms we we hope to work
with the team and not um not not against
it here uh
the this is something that we we
discussed in the The Interchange as well
and uh this like like quality and
quantity this this may be something
where we um
ultimately capitulate we're persuaded
that we're wrong but at the moment we
find object versus object
aggregate to have a uh severe and
insurmountable context
dependence um and this this is from our
attempt to use these Concepts um in the
The
Interchange uh it was described of
course um the uh the ship of thesias we
all know the the story of identity all
the the boards get replaced and the the
crew gets replaced is it the same ship
the concept of someone's identity is not
the same as the composition of their
atoms um and when the the
the point or perspective that I offered
was that is a rock an object you know Pi
pick your independent continuent here is
a rock an object or is a rock a
composition of the atoms in the Rock
and both could be true depending on the
context of how you're trying to use it
which therein lies the problem for from
our perspective both are relevant you do
need to be able to describe both but you
can describe a rock having the
composition of its set of atoms in some
lattice
organization without the context
dependence of object aggregate so we at
the
moment are not persuaded object
aggregate is useful and
there are implications for where system
is taxonomize for the iof systems
engineering working group I I would love
to hear the the commentary in
perspective here okay so the I I don't
really understand what you mean by
subjective to me it's very clear so
let's not choose Rock Let's choose
organism so we'll take a human being as
an object in
bfo there is wherever you have a human
being being an aggregate in the bfo
sense of
cells and so every human being coincides
roughly speaking with an object
aggregate of cells it doesn't coincide
exactly because there are parts of human
beings which are not made of cells uh
the the
intercellular or the digestive tract is
as a whole running through the length of
the human being is often regarded as
being a part of the human being but it's
not made of cells so we have the human
being and we have the aggregate of cells
and they are it context free distinguish
and whenever you
lose uh well no let let me then move
down to the next level and this level of
uh series of levels or series of
perspectives for viewing any given
object is discussed at length in the bfo
uh literature so this is not some
something new so and that a human being
is also made up of
molecules and so we can say that
wherever we have a human being as an
object we also have an aggregate of
molecules it's not however again quite
coincident with the human being it's
never
identical because an aggregate of
molecules is one thing and an object is
another thing um it's not identical
because again the digestive tract is not
made of molecules and then we can move
down to atoms and we could even move
down to subatomic particles all of this
is completely objective it's going to be
necessary when you deal with machines
versus Aggregates of machine parts or
with raw materials versus Aggregates of
um uh con constituent uh parts of raw
materials which are uh going to be uh
drawn out of the whole collection of raw
materials that as you uh manufacture
things using those raw materials so we
need object aggregate we need other
kinds of Aggregates too which we have
not documented and which we must uh
document in due course um and I don't
see anything subject to here at all it's
a sub a scale dependent classification
but not of the same
thing is the purpose of object
aggregate solely to express
composition well um so composition is
not so easy uh I am an object aggregate
of cells sorry let me start this again
there is over here on this chair an
object aggregate of cells I this object
aggregate is constantly losing cells and
constantly gaining cells but it's still
the same object
Aggregate and that's one big difference
between object Aggregates and sets in
the mathematical sense sets in the
mathematical sense are defined by their
elements object Aggregates are such that
they can gain and lose
elements um without changing there we're
talking
about there we talk about cardinality a
set having cardinality which may be
dynamic or static or in mathematical
terms set
uh so if a set a has such and such
members at one time and and some of
those members cease to exist or for one
reason or another are not in the context
that
issue uh then it's a different set sets
are defined by their members not by the
cardinality of their members object
Aggregates are defined neither by the
cardinality of their members nor by
their members because an object
aggregate can gain and lose parts and be
the same aggregate so an example we like
is the example of a stamp collection you
have a stamp collection and it grows
over time it's the same collection but
it has more and more
members and this is all defined in the
bfo uh
documentation um that we're trying to
create a an axiom set which will hold of
the object aggregate definition it's
quite difficult because in set theory
you gain a lot of Clarity by having this
identity is defined by your members rule
uh if you don't have that rule then you
have questions for instance supposing
that we have a stamp collection and I
begin my stamp collection I begin to
sell stamps to other people and
eventually I only have one stamp left do
I I still have a collection in other
words do I still have an object
Aggregate and we say yes an object
aggregate with one member is a perfectly
good aggregate provided the object
aggregate had more members at some
earlier
time okay so is understanding that one
stamp is still an object aggregate my
previous question was does object is the
intent of object aggregate to solely
Express composition
I now amend that question it to is
object aggregate intended to express
composition at
all in in system hierarchies we have to
express compositional hierarchies um in
CML these are generally block definition
diagrams where does that compositional
hierarchy fall and is it under object
aggregate actually I think it will be
under object aggregate but it it will
then be under what we what we might call
element Aggregate and that takes us
Beyond object Aggregates and this is
what I said earlier that there are other
kinds of
Aggregates element aggregate would be
another kind of aggregate because not
every element is an object in a system
hierarchy I'm understanding so as I
understand
it so let me just explain my
understanding which may be quite wrong
so the simplest kind of system is going
to be a collection or aggregate of
elements but then there will be more
complicated kinds of systems of
systems where the elements of the system
of system is a system rather than an
element in the simple uh or element
sense now if that's correct then we need
a theory of element aggregation which
will allow both elements in the or
element sense and systems to be
aggregated and we have not worked out
the mathematics of that kind of uh
aggregate definition but we we do state
in the documentation that the object
aggregate definitions which include a
definition of membership which is the
important part of that treatment uh need
to be extended to allow uh other kinds
of agregates to be defined and a
system aggregate or element aggregate
which includes systems among the
elements would be one example of a new
kind of
definition point point taken and uh the
the problem that I
see uh with the compositional hierarchy
existing as as a subass or some form of
subclass uh under or near object
aggregate is the material dependence and
it does it goes back to the material
versus immaterial um if just as a set
would be some generically dependent
continuent um under some information
entity uh a compositional hierarchy like
a set does not necessarily have to be
material um the the
yeah it it may be under generically
dependent continuent itself which I'll
I'll you know um yeah this is there are
many long stories here let let me try
and create just
one uh track through this complicated
set of questions so I don't know what
your position is on system but in the
iOS uh and specifically in the systems
working group we have been working on
the assumption that all systems are
material material entities and we can
rephrase that by saying we are only
going to be interested in those systems
which are material entities or more
precisely those systems which are either
immediately or
ultimately uh defined on the basis of
physical elements so we're not
interested in the decimal system or the
Library of Congress catalog system we
only interested in natural material
systems such as the weather system or
artificial material systems such as an
engine or a laptop or uh a train or the
kinds of systems that iof deals
with certainly um our
biggest uh the the thing our biggest
recommendation the thing we are most
persuaded about out of all of this is
that a system understanding that a
system whether it is natural or physical
it is a software system or or whatever
comprises and expresses that system
systems can be described in terms of
functions capabilities use cases
behaviors States modes requirements
verification reliability integration
those are all inherent aspects of
systems and the relations from systems
to those can be expressed we are
strongly persuaded that system should
exist under role not object advate so
let me uh just just uh pause for a
minute so I think you agreed that there
would be natural systems on the one hand
and engineered systems on the other hand
I don't think it makes sense to talk
about requirements for natural
systems can you not I'm I'm not
convinced that natural should be a
prefix for a subass and may be more apt
as a quality for that because you can
engineer a natural system I'm not
convinced engineered should be a prefix
either well uh all right so we that your
remark about roles reveals that we are
talking at Cross purposes here so let
let's let's think about this I will tell
you how we would try and do justice to
what I believe are your initions
concerning roles because there is a uh
uh that there are certain ways in which
we talk about systems in which what what
looks very much like roles do seem to be
in place so let me try and express what
you're getting at when you say things
like that so we have a um uh a planet
with lots of molecules and lots of um uh
people and lots of buildings and lots of
railway tracks and lots of oceans and so
forth uh called the
Earth and it would it would not be
sensible for a scientist to who wants to
understand what's going on on the earth
to create a single system which would
contain all the elements which are
relevant to what's going on on the earth
it would be impossible it would be way
too
complicated the in order to do science
of any sort with a complex uh phenomenon
or entity like the Earth you need to
divide your targets you need to choose
certain kinds of elements and certain
kinds of inter interactions and then say
you're going to work out scientifically
how this system with these elements and
these interactions
works and if we're talk we're not
talking about engineering now we're
talking about natural systems but
something similar would apply in
engineering if you want to understand
how a um Stern gak machine works then
you're not going to spend very much time
looking at the subatomic particles in
the
wheels uh which enable the machine to be
moved to different parts of the lab
you're going to be looking at those
parts those elements within the stern
Garlock machine which work in way
relevant to your scientific inquiry so
when we are dealing with systems in the
world we always
select we select elements we select
interactions and then we study the
system which which results from
examining those elements in those
interactions and the element set or the
element aggregate might grow over time
as we discover that the the interactions
extend uh for whatever reason and so the
selection is not necessarily determined
it from one time to the next it may be
that the system itself grows or it may
be that the system itself proves to have
more elements that we hadn't noticed in
the first place now that sounds very
much like
creating uh a
role view of certain parts of a larger
hole so if we take the planet again
we're only interested in the Brazilian
Railway system and so we create the role
object of scientific interest role for
all the
elements uh and all the in well we all
all the elements the tracks the trains
the passengers and so forth which are
relevant to our study of the Brazilian
Railway system now I think that's fine
there's nothing wrong with doing that
but that it doesn't follow from that
that the system is a role all it means
is that defining systems involves
assigning roles to to certain kinds of
elements namely the role of being part
of the selection which led to this
particular system being picked out for
scientific
purposes if if I'm designing an object
aggregate of a Brazilian Railway system
or what will be a Brazilian railroad
system I have the compositional elements
that comprise that Railway I have uh
allocated requirements to it that I know
this Railway must have functions and
capabilities behaviors use cases States
modes um some form of integration some
concept of reliability and through its
relation to those would that object
aggregate not assume the role of
system
um so
my assumption is that object the object
aggregate will be the
system in virtue of the fact that
the elements and we we just talk about
one level of system we won't talk about
systems of systems yet the elements of
that system have the role of being
elements of that
system you have the role of being a
participant in this
discussion and and you the discussion
between you and me now
uh looks very much like the interactions
of a very simple system which has you
and me as its elements and which where
the interactions are the uh the
expressions of
thoughts now that doesn't mean that the
system here is a role nor does it mean
that you are a role or that I am a role
rather you have a role and I have a role
and thereby the system exists which is
you in that role if you like and me in
that other role if you like and that's
why the role notion is relevant to the
system discussion but that's not because
a system is a
role I think the the the underlying
disconnect is that these things a a
Brazilian Railway system or uh a uh
business interaction
um and the the a a company that builds
terrariums that that Engineers natural
systems the fundamental disconnect is
that in at present uh the iof is
considering uh object Aggregates to
inherently be systems things are systems
immediately that they are being designed
as such that is is what they are but
what what we argue here is that these
object Aggregates are not systems until
you start treating them like systems
through system definition architecture
and integration verification processes
there are analysis inspection
demonstration test interface definitions
when you start formally treating them
like
systems that is when they can be
described as systems they are not
inherently systems so if they become
systems by virtue of how you treat them
and they are not materially changed by
the treatment that would assert them as
roles would it not no no so I agree with
everything you say I just think that
you're using role in a non bfo sense so
a lawyer is not a role a lawyer is a
person with a role a system is not not a
role a system is a collection of
elements with a role if you
like it so do you think a lawyer is a
role or a
student I think vocations are
roles yeah that's fine that's fine
but so I again I think that we are
fighting over a a relatively minor issue
about the uh the the the the
interpretation of the term role and I
haven't made this point yet but it's a
point which I will uh make
uh because I think well you you know
this point you I'm repeating myself from
your purposes but bfo has been around
for 20 years we've been defining things
as carefully as we can and these
definitions have gone through an
enormously painful sequence of critique
speaks from uh
bloody-minded uh friends and enemies of
BF and we've survived with a set of
definitions which work very well and
which thousands of people now are
using and you come along and you say no
I want role to be used in a different
way and we we we don't know what to say
to this we really like what you're doing
it's very helpful to work with you
already but you can't just come along
and say no role should mean this it that
that's not how the game is played the
game is played by you formulating what
you want to say using the term role in
the way that bfo defines the role
otherwise you will you will just fail to
become part of this
community it is it is not our intent to
to change the way that role is defined
and it is certainly not our intent to
create bfo light we we want to use the
bfo we want to understand it we want to
be a part of the community most
certainly
unequivocally um and and I hope I hope
that our our inquiries and our our
perspectives do not come off as
dismissive of the importance and
relevance of the
bfo we are uh by virtue of our um I'm
I'm 30 but I'll say youth um we're less
experienced in this Arena so we have had
obviously less time to deal with these
Concepts and to understand them
however because of our youth we we
certainly understand the bfo has uh been
around for 20 years it has survived
thousands of criticisms and is used by
thousands of people but use the the
implications of the small difference
between role and object aggregate has
big uh results if if system goes under
object aggregate or role that has
significant implications that will
propagate throughout the rest of its the
bf's use and while we respect certainly
that it had bfo has thousands of users
and has survived thousands of
criticisms we would like to
caution that there is not a sunk cost
fallacy that the bfo or iof ideas may be
willing to change due to the fact that
it has survived so long okay so let let
me just push you a little bit you say a
system is a role you agree that the
system has
elements are elements parts of
roles I think a system element is a role
yes that's some composition hierar is a
so if a system is a role and an element
is a part of a system then it follows
that an element is part of a role
could you say that again yeah if a
system is a role and a system has
elements as
parts then it follows that elements are
parts of a role I do not assert system
element to be a subass of system no no
it's a a system element is a part of a
system compositionally yes okay so
whatever sense of part you like you are
asserting that system elements are parts
of
roles system elements are
roles but so okay so if a system element
is a role then you're saying
that a system element is a itself a role
and it's part of another role from this
we can infer that the system element is
part of a
role now that doesn't correspond to the
way we normally so a an example of a
system element might be something like a
molecule
yes I um I system
elements uh would be would be
constrained by the same constraints
applied to systems such that you can
apply requirements and uh uh States and
modes functions of capability I have a
hard time saying molecules would be a
system
element okay then
person a person can be a system element
yeah a person could be a system element
within an Enterprise System yes good and
so if the enterprise system
is the system at issue and if that
system is a role which all systems are
according to your view then it follows
that the person can be a part of a
role sure now that's that's not the way
we use role in
bfo a person has a role and we can say
everything that we want you want to say
in bfo terms just by saying that a
system is a collection of elements uh
with a role I'm I'm simplifying at the
moment but it will work for this purpose
each of those system elements has a role
uh that role includes being one of the
elements of this system but the system
itself is not a role and the element is
not a role it has a role just as a
lawyer is not a role a lawyer has a
role point taken I think I would have
agreed had you said as a role rather
than is a role PRI previously but what
I'm hearing is I I should have said that
previously if I didn't then I was It was
a slip of the
tongue systems are sorry roles are
defined as being specifically dependent
realizable continuent which inhere in
independent continuance like people or
planets if if there was to to to hearken
to the the previous example if there was
a company that was developing
terrariums and I and you are uh putting
some requirements on that terrarium and
it it is some natural system there the
the glass and the sphagnum Moss and any
bugs in there the the entire terrarium
would have the role of system and the
glass and the bugs they would have the
RO I'm agree have the role it wouldn't
be the role they would have the role of
system elements good so we agree we can
use roll terminology to describe systems
by pointing out that certain systems
have certain roles not that they are
those roles certainly agree there okay
then we we're finished we're done we
agree the iof currently has system under
object
aggregate yeah which has a
role so system is a subass of object
Aggregate and there is a role of
system yeah of course
that the
the we take the elements that we choose
to form our system and we're talking now
about systems which actually exist not
systems which are being designed and so
forth that's another story which is is
also not going to be solved by viewing
systems as role so we take the elements
that's an object aggregate we want to
treat it as a system so it acquires a
role the role of being a system this but
it's not the system which is the role it
has the role of being a system just as
when you appoint when you give your
certificate to a lawyer he acquires the
role of lawyer he doesn't become a role
he acquires the
role I think you should just
agree we only have five minutes left
right right right I think I agree
most of what the rest of the the
presentation includes um covers what we
what we've already discussed here it
had physical can you go back two slides
there system role arose role that
inheres in an entity in virtue of it
being an arrangement of Parts uh I I
think this
is uh a good definition of what you're
getting at with system role I I
certainly agree s system role may be the
appropriate way to define the concept of
of systems under roles are our bigger
our
bigger my bigger point is that
roles sure I may have misspoke my bigger
point is that
systems may not be
taxonomize
themselves we can describe systems but
I'm not sure that trying to
taxonomize the wide wide world of what
could and could not be a system under an
independent continuent of system is the
right way to go that is the idea that
I'm hoping to bring to the surface of
the group that having a independent
continuent somewhere to find a system
and then taxonomizing systems under
there that that may ultimately present
problems let me uh explain what we're
doing and then I will agree with you
that it may ultimately present problems
because everything ultimately may
present problem so we start with natural
systems such as the weather system of
the earth and so forth and engineered
systems such as the Brazilian Railway
system and we Define them as collections
of elements
uh which uh interact in certain ways and
that means that there's a selection and
what that means is that we are assigning
in a way certain roles to these elements
they're not just pieces of metal they
are pieces of metal that form parts of
of railway tracks in Brazil and we're
assuming in both of those cases that the
system actually exists so it's a it
falls within the realm of independent
continuance just like lawyers and uh
students do and the the elements have
roles in virtue of the fact that they
are part of the Brazilian Railway system
now the problem is that there are many
places where we want to deal with
systems which are not in the independent
continued world but rather they are in
the world of design or planning they're
in the future for instance or they may
be in the realm of
simulations um and there you can't use
independent continu there it may be that
you have some to use something like
gdc's we'll see we haven't got that far
and it may be that when we do get that
far we move in a direction which is
closer to your uh role idea but I hope
that for the weather system and the
Brazilian Railway system at least you
will agree once and for all that they
are not roles they rather well the
Brazilian Railway system has a role I'm
not sure about the weather system even
the weather system has a role in the
sense that we pick out certain
interactions and certain elements as
forming the weather system we could have
picked
others the the advocacy that we
make I I believe the the summarized way
to say it is that the iof should
consider creating a tax aomy of system
role but not a taxonomy of
system yeah so we got already come quite
a long way with our working group uh so
I think we we you you what you should do
is criticize some of the things that we
already have and then conceivably your
criticisms will be so powerful that we
will change some things but what we're
not going to change is the meaning of
role so rol certainly are things like
lawyer role a lawyer is not a
role and the system is not a role it has
a role well we're willing to accept
something along those terms I'm sure we
the our time will tell of course but we
we shall back up and evaluate our our
perceived use of role there is only one
short final point that we would like to
make um that we believe to be relevant
to the math o fys o and the mbsc and SE
ontologies that iof has been working on
this fizo is just one example of this
but this point can be made for all of
the domain ontologies we've seen so far
all of these domain ontologies that we
have seen have started with a single
domain specific root entity this is not
considered the root entity of the full
ontology it's the the only root entity
per se exist of the T but the domain
ontologies for physics start with
physics entity the domain ontology for
math starts with math entity the one
that we saw for systems engineering that
Jin Z showed was I think systems
engineering entity we argue that this is
not the appropriate development
methodology that domain there is no
reason that domain ontologies needs
start with one do root entity because
each of these wherever they may lie if
they are approved and decided upon and
um published um and peer-reviewed
critiqued and ultimately successful
there they would not fall under the same
single term these would be split under
some section of the bfo they would go
other places and this is the same for
Math and physics and systems
engineering we in our limited
participation with the iof and our um
dubious understanding of certain bfo
terms uh
certainly we do not understand why these
domain ontologies are being developed
with a single root entity can anyone
comment on that that yeah I think that
you've hit a nail on the
head uh but the nail is there only for
show it's only to show that these form
part of the same ontology The Entity
term in bfo doesn't play any role in any
kind of
Axiom um then the physics entity here
doesn't play any role it just it's just
a convenient way of bundling together
those three
children I don't think it does any harm
but it doesn't do much good either it's
purely for show well it may be purely
for show but
if if you don't start I I you mentioned
in the email that that the
bfo uh should only be used by the people
who need to see it but if you make your
taxonomies of you know here system inity
magnitude model and you know any
potential potential problems with them
notwithstanding uh putting them under a
bfo term May ultimately result in some
subclass of say system entity going
somewhere else under the bfo Why not
start there yeah yeah it it's going to
have problems as soon as we start
talking about system entities in other
domains uh but so far we've assumed that
all systems are going to be
physical uh and I I hope we're going to
hold on to that in some sense even a
software system in my view is physical
there there is a general principle in in
kind of more advanced systems
engineering theory of specified design
build test fix it is the common way that
that businesses Enterprises build
systems specify design build test fix
and the problem with it is the fix part
you have to go back and fix it later
which ultimately results in more time
money resources specifi design build
test fix has no discernable outcome
other than finish on time and under
budget and then fix it later we argue
that while you can come back and put
this under bfo when
necessary that's just going to result in
more time effort and work for this group
start with the bfo so
we we put this fizo uh taxonomy it's a
very very small version of a very very
early idea uh and we want it to be
criticized and we we've learned
something from your criticisms already
um but we have to start somewhere uh we
can't fix first and then
build um we have to start somewhere and
this is where we started this is not a
criticism of
fizo this is I'll use the word criticism
but like I love the work everyone's
doing um this is a criticism of the way
these domain ontologies are being
developed within the iof if you start
with the bfo and then put the terms
under them and then your domain ontology
can have multiple I'll say root entities
for the domain ontology you don't have
to go back and fix it and you'll have a
better understanding you're drawing
conclusions from this slide here and
from similar slides like the ma slide on
the the
math all of these are mathematical
entity
too but actually if you look at the
Domain ontology work that's going on
within the iof and within other
foundaries
uh we are not making the mistake that
you suppose so the geneontology has
three root nodes for instance and the
geneontology geneontology is great is
the is the uh the Masterpiece in all of
this work yes so I think that you are uh
you're worrying about a problem which
actually when you examine what's on the
ground is not such a big problem I don't
think it will ultimately be the pro be a
problem because it would be fixed later
before you know ultimate integration and
whatever holistic Suite of ontologies
exists this is more to say that if the
work continues with single root nodes
and then reorganization later it'll just
take more time that's that's all I don't
think there will ever be an ultimate
tree which cont contains bfo at the top
or bfo Plus at the top and all the
domain ontologies neatly bined
underneath it that will never work and
we shouldn't even aim for that uh but
anyway we understand why we should stop
oh I'll follow up on that yeah it it
because it it's uh it won't
work uh because there are too many diff
there are to if you might say that it
has to do with
context uh what biologists mean by um
cell for instance is different from what
uh prison uh administrators mean by
cell that's a trivial kind of example
but that it would just be too
complicated to have a universal ontology
of ontologies what we can have we hope
is a single top level ontology which
everyone can share but then as we go
down we'll get into more and more
problems when we try to build
interactions uh so you're more ambitious
than we
are well I have a lot to learn so an
expert someone who's made all the
mistakes is possible and I'm not an
expert here yet so hopefully I can make
those mistakes
soon good thank you for the time and the
attention I really appreciate just the
time of day uh from this group um and so
it it strikes me it might be a good idea
to put this discussion on YouTube would
you agree I I would have no qualms so
Jim are you still there can you uh
either you yourself or I would do it put
this on
YouTube if anyone is still
there yeah so I'm here I thought I was I
thought I was speaking uh off of mute
yes I'd be happy to do that good okay
yeah thank you Michael and Barry for
this exchange it's a shame we kind of
ran out of time here and had to hurry
yeah um let me know if you'd like to
continue this discussion next week I
think probably we should uh try and
harvest some results so that we're not
arguing over the same grounds so briefly
um my next two months are hell I have
some a very bad October and then there's
two papers uh one is specifically on do
Dr Smith some of the onl ontological
questions that have been brought up
here if if we could I would love
to wait until early December to get you
a fully fledged response to some of
these questions I know that's not ideal
it's not
soon I I have limited bandwidth for the
immediate future and then we'll be
working on this almost exclusively for
my PhD dissertation so um it's not that
I'm leaving and won't come back things
are going to get bad for me in the very
near term and then
better
good so I'll I'll send a short email to
everyone but it won't have the
definitions that were requested in the
previous
email good okay so jiny and I will talk
and maybe if if others want want to talk
about it as well U please send an email
to the mailing list suggesting topics
for the meeting next week um and jindy
and I in absence of those messages will
come up with some topics for the
agenda so thanks again this has been a
really great conversation thank you
thank you bye-bye bye
