welcome to an episode of let's explain
why this common is done and I want to
talk about a common comment that I get
downplaying the usefulness of minimalist
or suck list software and I want to
respond to why it's dumb con I don't
want to say dumb coming but why it is a
inappropriately informed comment so
yesterday I got I get this kind of
comment relatively often but yesterday I
got one example of it so I'll use it as
a straw man to talk about so it comes
from the sky Christian and now I'm not
bullying him or anything like that I'm
just responding to the comment although
I reserve the right to read his comment
in the dumb voice so I will so let's
read it let me get this right you're
using st from suck list because it's
small so why did you apply so much
patches instead of using a terminal
where this features already included
masochism just use a terminal like Kitty
and simply press control-shift you and
pick search favorite a smiley to simple
all right let's talk about this so
notice the implicit assumption of
comments like this the implicit
assumption is people who use minimal of
software or suck less software in
particular they're doing it just to be
there being masochistic they're doing
it's just a big meme there they're all
hipsters they're doing things for no
reason and they just want to make life
hard on themselves that mind you this is
the same thing that people who use
Windows and Mac say about people who use
Linux just bear that in mind and most of
you as Linux users probably think that's
a stupid thing to say
so I feel the same way but again that's
an understandable thing if you don't
really look let me just explain to him
why okay so let's take the example he
uses the example of s T versus Kitty and
inserting emojis so let's do that I
actually have the source code for Kitty
right here I just downloaded it a second
ago as an illustration and I'm gonna
pull up the source code for my st build
now first off there's a misunderstanding
that that minimalist software is just
about lines of code there are some
people who care about that I think it is
an issue some it's more like a symptom
of a deeper problem but in general yes
ST even though I have patched in all
these bloat features I mean people make
fun you know they like to
people complain when I use minimal
software and add-in features I like
that's what you're supposed to do but
you'll see that the source code to my sd
build the whole thing is seven point
three Meg's of course most of that is
the git folder so that doesn't really
count and if we look at kitty we will
see that it has a good bit more 33 Meg's
now of course most of that is the git
folder as well but and also in Kitty's
defense they have things like images and
you know lots and lots of documentation
but if you compare even a built out
beefy build of s T you will see - pretty
much any other terminal you'll see that
ST is nearly always significantly
smaller in terms of source source code
it's not an issue about getting rid of
features first off it's an issue of
getting rid of bad written code that's
one of the things that suck less is
about but let's talk about something
more tangible let's talk about the
feature that he mentions that is
inserting Smiley's emojis stuff like
that okay so first off you'll see in the
Kitty source code there is quite you
have four and a half Meg's of that
software or of you know of the source
code that is about Unicode input okay
compare that that is more than my entire
ST build now I have Kitty installed so
I'm gonna bring it up so here it is now
let's look at their Unicode insertion
thanks so again control shift you gives
you this menu in Kitty to insert some
kind of emoji so I can pick let's say I
want that one
that's my face right now or let's say so
of course not everything is here you can
go to different tabs stuff like that you
can type in I don't know words from it
or something like that right so that
that's a nice way of inserting emojis
but it's terribly inefficient okay let
me compare that to what I use to insert
emojis now I have no feature in my st
bill to insert emojis no feature
whatsoever because I use an external
script for that and I'm gonna explain
why that is better here's what my
external script looks like here you know
basically just brings up a little menu
with all the emojis and all their names
and you just start typing a name and you
get your emoji okay you can insert that
simple as that now first off mine is
quite a bit more sitting more
ergonomic you just have the menu you
don't have to really think really think
about it you just start typing it's sort
of like one of those taps over here I
guess the the yeah f2 tab but here is
the superiority of my system versus
theirs and it has to do with it being a
minimalist piece of software the
superiority is this is not built into my
terminal it is a general all-purpose
script that works on my terminal it
works on my browser it works on a
messenger application I might use and
works on email it works on every program
or even if I just want to put something
in my clipboard
I can always you know use this to get
some kind of emoji no matter what okay
it just always works whereas the kiddie
way of inserting emojis is specific to
kitty now here is the big problem here
here is one of the reasons minimal
software is so much better if you you if
you have the kitty mindset oh we'll just
program four-and-a-half Meg's
into our terminal build for inserting
emojis hey you have to make sure that's
good but then you have nothing for
inserting emojis than other programs so
I guess in my environment I'm supposed
to have an emoji insertion mechanism in
my terminal build one in my browser one
in my messenger application one of my
email one in every single program that I
have the minimalist mindset the suckle
is mindset is that's stupid that's a
waste of time you should just have one
general all-purpose script where you can
select an emoji and insert it or do any
kind of operation separative in each
individual program and insert that and
it does not add it's a feature that
anyone including you even if you use
none of my software you could download
and use this feature itself
so it's not reliant on anything and it
is useful for everything okay so that is
why it's a sort of inefficient thing to
have now let's actually compare now I
mentioned a second ago let's go back to
Kitty and we'll go we'll look again at
what was the size of all this okay yeah
so four and a half Meg's let's compare
that to the economic Nestorian I have it
in here it's actually well there are two
files one is the emoji file that I have
open that up it's local share marbs
emoji and this is a file I opened up in
the last video it is literally just a
list of all the emojis I happen to keep
they're you know a little uh I don't
know hex whatever it is the Unicode not
sequence or whatever and of course a
picture of the emoji and that that's all
the input to all the input you need now
the script that actually pops up the
menu is this one here D menu Unicode and
this is all it is so they have four and
a half Meg's I just have one single file
here which is let's actually see how big
this file is it is less than a single
Meg okay and this little script that is
20 lines could probably be way less
frankly that takes the content of that
file provides it as a menu with D menu
and then allows you to just type in and
whatever you select it copies to your
clipboard
and even gives you a little notification
just to make sure you click the right
thing that is not even necessary you
wouldn't even need to do that
so my feature compared to that four and
a half Meg's it is much more useful
because you can use it with any program
at any time and also it is much more
minimal it's basically as minimal as it
can get all it is the input is just a
file with emojis and the script that's
doing the the heavy lifting and it's not
even that heavy it just it just does
what you want and that's about it so
that is what suckler software is about
minimalist software it's not an issue of
oh just deciding oh emojis are bloat I'm
not gonna use emojis or something like
that or deciding that this feature or
that feature is stupid and you want to
make you make life difficult for
yourself so you're not gonna use it that
is absolutely a hundred percent not what
it's about it's about thinking where is
the most efficient place to have that
kind of operation is it really efficient
to have emojis and stuff like that as an
emoji module in every piece of software
how stupid is that why don't I just have
one for everything now mind you a lot of
the other features that st doesn't have
by default the reason you patch some
things into it for example
he does not have a scroll up abilities
by default you might think of that as
being a basic feature to terminals and
in most terminals it is and if you want
it an ST there's a you just download st
and you apply the patch for it but the
reason st doesn't have that is because
the thinking is that that in a lot of
use cases is totally redundant if you're
talking about people who use t mocks or
something like that because t met t MUX
has its own built-in way for doing that
so that is the mindset it's not suck
lists is in particular is about two
things it's about well written code
efficient and well written code and it's
also about just only having the features
that you need in the best situations
okay
now additionally to that one final note
especially about suck list stuff is that
it is infinitely easier to add features
to suck less software than it is for
anything else one thing that I added you
might remember if you've been watching
my channel for a while last year I added
the feature let's say I have some output
on my terminal I added the feature with
the help of a subscriber where I can
just have a key that says okay select
which command you want and once you do
that it will copy that output to your
clipboard so if I go in another you know
let's say I open up vim or some in BIM
in vim let's say I open up vim I can
paste in the output of that command ok
so a lot of things that you might take
for granted as not being automatic on
other terminals it's easy using a
minimalist piece of software an
extensible minimalist piece of software
you can easily add in features I didn't
know nothing about you know copying
output from the terminal or something
like that but we sat down and did it in
an evening ok it's not that hard and
that is the mindset so when you're
saying something either this guy
Christian or anyone else if you're a
normal there you like using Windows Mac
that's fine you you think it's easy ok
but if you're the kind of person who is
computer oriented I don't know why
people say this it's kind of stuff like
it using software like this is not like
a big joke that people do for no reason
it's something that you
can get a lot of bang for your buck out
of and I encourage you to try it and
don't just think it's stupid because you
don't understand it okay I mean you
don't understand because you're dumb or
something that's not what I'm saying
just lurk more it's just play around
with it and don't don't knock it till
you've tried it
that's all I got to say all right see
you guys next
