everyone how's it going Stefan here
whether Neanderthals made art or not is
one of the most controversial but
interesting aspects of modern research
for sure luckily for me and you dr. rag
Sikes Paleolithic archaeologist in the
and earth all expert author and
all-around good egg for hopping onto my
channel agreed to talk through some of
these issues from the controversy to the
evidence and how it affects our
perspective of Neanderthals and our
relationship to them super interesting
really changed how I viewed Neanderthals
so sit back relax make yourself a cup of
tea I'm sure you will enjoy what she has
to say thank you so much for joining me
on here and sharing your knowledge with
my viewers I know we've all really
appreciate it oh you're welcome it's
always nice to talk about something that
you're passionate from exactly yeah and
we're all definitely passionate about
Neanderthals here on my channel so can I
start by asking how controversial is the
idea of Neanderthal symbolism and art in
the wider academic community and is it
still very controversial or is it
gaining acceptance um I think it's safe
to say it's it's the key area where
there is still large disputes and since
really the past 10 years or just under
10 years since we had the ancient
genetic evidence that has laid out that
there were deep connections between our
population and Neanderthals so when I
say our population I mean Homo sapiens
living people the majority of living
people and have a small percentage of
Neanderthal ancestry that didn't used to
be believed to be the case the dominant
theory in human origins was based on a
lot of different evidence including the
mitochondrial DNA which suggested that
there wasn't any ancestry in us but it
took the nuclear DNA which arrived in
2010 to show that that wasn't the case
and they they are part of
direct common in ancestry and until that
point that was one of the big sort of
issues of debate and now that has been
pretty much you know laid to rest we
can't argue about that the issue of
symbolism cognition parallels in
behavior has really remained debated
over and quite contentious in some in
some aspects definitely so what it what
are there's the points of contention
mainly revolving around the dating of
the sights is that the issue and whether
they sort of accurately dated enough to
predate Homo sapiens in Europe is that
where the controversy still lies um no
not really I'd say I mean there is it
depend the real controversy I suppose is
is what one regards as evidence of
particular levels of behavioral
sophistication in terms of and if you
want to talk about technological
complexity but in terms of symbolic
thought sort of abstract thought the
ability to displace yourself in time and
space and imagine other things and play
in your imagination so you know play
with categories of ideas and things like
that
and that that does still raise issues in
that one scholar might see a kind of
evidence say a site with with red
pigment and interpret that in a
particular way that would support
symbolic behaviour whereas another
scholar might see the same evidence and
see it quite differently so nobody would
be able to to have an argument that
could be supported these days where you
could say that there's drastic
differences in the actual archaeology
with the exception of a couple of sort
of factors that I can go into more
detail about so but in terms of
comparing Neanderthals to
temporary Homo sapiens so when I'm
talking about contemporary I'm talking
older than 40,000 years so that would be
a homo sapiens from mostly the Middle
Stone Age in Africa and 340 thousand and
although that has begun to change and
but generally the evidence that we used
to regard as quite sort of striking and
not shared within the antis also things
like shells or pigments and bone tools
that those borders between early homo
sapiens and the ant atolls have really
become fuzzy in terms of the actual
evidence that we now have so the
remaining argument is about what those
those things mean and that's really
where you kind of have to go off into
understanding other fields like
neuroscience or sort of art theory and
things like this so it does become sort
of bedded somewhat into particular
scholars who may have long-standing
theories that look very different with
the evidence we have now compared to
what they might have looked like twenty
years ago so that's kind of where the
controversy still exists mm-hmm
okay that's interesting that's not where
I thought it would be
I thought the debate would be more that
the the presence of symbolism wasn't up
for debate it was about whether it could
be accurately dated to in the end at all
time period so that's what it's it's
kind of both and I mean if you want to
take if we take pigment and so pigment
so I mean like minerals that produce
color so that could be red ochre which
will be like iron is produced in the
color there and there's variations on
that you can have yellowy ones or orange
ones or very red ones or you can have
black pigment which could be charcoal
but you can also have mineral pigments
and manganese pigments often but there
are others and so the reason people get
so excited about pigment obviously is
because the use of color is a
foundational thing that most people
understand
is a you know the visual basis of art
visual art there's other kinds of art
obviously so if we have a prehistory
going way back where people are
collecting minerals processing them into
powders the question then is why and
because we are coming from a position of
hindsight we're looking back with the
wonders of the Upper Paleolithic painted
caves in our eyes and we're trying to
see the origin of that looking for the
use of pigment in the absence of any art
it seems obvious as a place to begin
trying to understand whether there was a
sort of in a nascent symbolic
understanding purely through the use of
color the problem is that you can
potentially use minerals like ochre for
other things so in the history of sort
of where we see pigment and when it's
quite different now as I say than it was
a few decades ago everybody you know was
looking to see the earliest painted
painted caves and things like that and
that remains now the it's still about
40,000 39 40 that's the earliest dates
that we have for any kind of painting on
a wall the big change is that what was
the really early sites which were
Chauvet in Europe or some potential
early pieces of stone in in Africa that
had some figurative designs in black on
that may have come off a wall they
weren't so well dated but they could
have been about 40 but that's not quite
so sure so it was like Africa and Europe
which seem to make sense if you were
coming from a traditional understanding
that Homo sapiens evolved in Africa and
then moved out of Africa so that made
sense but the big change there is that
we now have painted caves dated to
exactly the same time 14 hours
in East Asia Southeast Asia so that has
changed but that still gives what we
currently have there is still like a
border there that we don't find any
painted caves earlier than that and
those are all as far as we can tell
associated with homo sapiens
so in terms of what we have for
Neanderthals the age of what we have for
Neanderthals is not really an issue
because we have very old use of pigment
in Europe between 250 to 200 thousand
and that's that's interesting because
it's not just sort of a lump of red
stuff from a cave it's actually an
open-air site where analysis of the
sediments and pulled out very tiny
basically splashes of what must have
been a liquid red ochre essentially so
that immediately sort of doesn't really
fit in with the use of dry powders for
something it still doesn't mean that
that has to be related to kind of any
kind of painting in the sense of of what
we would be thinking of with Upper
Paleolithic paintings but our
Neanderthals processing pigment into
liquids during a time when we have
absolutely no evidence there's Homo
sapiens around yes and there's no
question that that was going on very
very early but yeah the question then is
well all these pigments that we find is
there any evidence that would push it
towards being something that is
non-functional can I ask what what are
these sort of old alternate uses of the
pigment if they weren't using it for art
what else could they have possibly you
can use pigments for any range of stuff
I mean it's it's once you start to kind
of get your head that it color or just
pigment doesn't have to be about art and
you actually look at the graphic
literature there is a lot of different
things so you might use focus for
hafting so these when you want to stick
a stone tool to a wooden or some other
kind of handle and you need to make an
adhesive if we know Neanderthals we're
in actually quite varied ways now we
have multiple different materials they
used bitumen natural bitumen they used
birch tar and they used pine tar mixed
quite amazingly with beeswax that's a
very recent fine just this year that
came out that's still blows my mind at
you well I'm quite what to think about
that but in ethnographic context and in
the early homo sapiens
sites in South Africa people were using
hematite or other minerals in the
adhesive and stuff that they had which
was plant-based but different to what
Neanderthals were using as because it
improves basically the the material
qualities so that's that's been an
argument that maybe it was to do with
haften we have never found any traces of
minerals being used by Neanderthals in
hafting so that's possible maybe not but
you could only people use minerals
traditionally on their bodies for
protection in the Sun it doesn't have to
be something that's to do with
aesthetics it can just be to do with
skin care that sort of never even
crossed my mind before I'd have used
this for something like that yeah you
could be putting on you for camouflage
purposes I mean we are assuming that
based on sort of biological and and
thermoregulation principles and a lot of
the time when it was in the cooler
periods in the glacial periods
Neanderthals had to have been wearing
some kind of reasonably tailored clothes
so we're not talking about first
wrapping around you know in the in the
icy winds and that wouldn't have cut it
but during the warmer periods because
they did live in interglacials in times
warmer than today even or rather where
we where we are heading they wouldn't
have needed those clothes and it was
quite hot during some times so
potentially if they had a fairer skin
which we believed that they they did
some of them did not all of them some
had darker skin then some kind of
covering of the skin using mineral
pigments that might make sense to theirs
and also you
use one of the big things that we know
that they spent a lot of time doing was
processing animal skins and again that
could be close but there's so many other
things you can use skins for cluding
bags you know had to carry their stuff
around somehow and you know hide hide
wraps for babies could be the original
reason why you would begin to process
skins but anyway using mineral pigments
as an aid to processing animal skins is
another real possibility so there are
actually a lot of different angles that
you might think of as to why powdered or
liquid minerals could be in an entire
site so what you want really is a
context where the pigments are
associated with something that doesn't
have any obvious functional use I mean
something really unambiguous well yeah I
mean I mean that's the caveat there is
the Western philosophical traditions
like two separate things into binaries
nature culture art practical you know
everyday stuff that's not how all
cultures think so it's perfectly
possible for something to be massively
symbolic and aesthetic and art and also
just be something that you use every day
and it's vital to your survival so
bearing that in mind that something can
be both we still as archaeologists want
to have a situation where it's very
difficult to say that pigment associated
with something else is actually you know
just something that they were using and
there isn't some some other explanation
so what that's what we need for
Neanderthals and now there are sort of
more cases of that than they used to be
so let me let me ask you this and whilst
run it what are some what are some of
the more clear-cut examples of a
Neanderthal symbolism or at least some
of the most promising ones that we have
okay well I can if I stick with the
pigment because actually pigment sort of
doesn't sound very exciting
but it has been one of the areas where
we've just slowly amassed a lot of
different cases where we have this sort
of setting where it's very difficult to
see the practical purpose so one of
these is in a site in Belgium there is
some black pigment black pigment has
been argued potentially in other sites
where it's from manganese people have
done some really cool experimental work
recently that shown that actually
manganese can be a useful accelerant
when you're starting fires it can
basically like reduce the heat the the
point at which the fire will spark and
every and it just makes your fire
lighting easier so black pigment itself
does have a practical purpose but in
this site in Belgium they have small
pieces of a silt stone basically that
leaves nice marks when it's rubbed and
it's it looks like in terms of the the
size of the piece so everything they
could have been used they actually
washed them before they realized that
they report them with the archaeologists
so they can't see Hama traces on it but
it's it's it's interesting so that's
that's one case that there is a black
pigment with no possible practical use
that we can see but that's that's not
sort of that impressive there are other
sites where you get pigment on weird
things so one of those is pigment being
associated with stalagmites in romania
in the Carpathians i think it's in
romania yeah and there's a connection
between a very weird geological object
that was found it's basically it's a
geode it's sort of about the size of a
ball that would fit in your hand very
very heavy but you would know if you
picked up it's just odd you know like it
it doesn't feel like a normal rock
because it's just naturally heavy and
it's very very dense and the research
has found this I mean and they were
digging this site and they scanned it
and they found it was a geode but what
they know
was that they were remnants of color on
the surface it had a crust a carbonate
crust that had formed over it and when
they removed parts of that and they
could see that there was pigment and it
was red red ochre and that was actually
overlain by some sort of black as well
which they could not identify what that
was so this is a very odd geological
object that would fit into a long
tradition we see in the an tiles and in
other hominids where they seem to be
attracted to odd things so sort of rocks
and basically it's usually rocks but
fossils as well that cannot have come
from the science that they are found in
they had to have been brought in there's
no you know like it wasn't a flood or
anything like that they had to have been
brought in
there's no clear explanation for why
they would bring those in and generally
people just refer to them as curiosities
this object would fit into that it's it
could I think it could have come from
the the local geology but the fact it
has pigment on it it that's two strange
things there's this odd geological
object and then you've got the pigment
associated with it so that's kind of
like interesting but in the same cave
from a different layer
they were also found some small sections
of stalagmites systemic mites are the
ones that come up from the ground and if
you get quite thick ones and you chop
them in half or if they're still forming
you can get like little bowls basically
natural bowls and that you can sort of
grind a little bit if you need to but
some of those and there are eight of
them I think that they found so far and
some of those on only on the insides of
the little Bowl area there's more of
blacken and red residues so it's a
different layer it's it's a later layer
but it's just very interesting that this
site you have pigments that's not
naturally you know forming within the
the the geology of the site that that
pigment couldn't have got on there by
accident basically and that's on two
different strange things in that site
and so that's an interesting case but
if it was alone you'd be like okay
strange but it would be an anomaly but
it's not there are other cases in
various sites where we see pigment
associated with shells and shows where
do we assume that they were sort of used
as mixing bowls or something like that
no well we don't know I mean in some
cases it might be and generally it
doesn't look like these are shells that
are sort of food waste in some cases
it's possible but in others it really
doesn't look like that the this there's
two nice examples one what is this a
couple of sites from Spain and one of
them has pigment mixes basically like
recipes where they there's different
kinds of pigment different colors reds
and oranges and yellows and but they
also have what is some kind of black
carbon in it which might be charcoal or
bone but also pyrite which is sparkly as
fool's gold if you grind that up that's
going to have quite a striking aesthetic
quality if you mix it with other powders
and these are associated with shells in
in one particular site so there were a
lot of headphones when that came out
like oh Neanderthals had makeup or they
had a special jewelry yeah you cannot
say that but there was a mix of minerals
that would have been visually striking
on shells some of these were probably
collected for food but other ones may
not have been so that's interesting
again if it was just one site with
shells and pigment
okay fine but it's not there is another
really cool site which for me is it's a
bit of a clincher really this is an
Italian site called grata for money and
in this well it's an amazing site anyway
it has just vast amounts of cool
evidence for many different kinds of
behavior a familiar that's somewhere
between about 47 or 45 thousand years
just for the record sorry okay so the
people listening unaware what sort of
the rough time for homosapiens entering
your
just so we can have that in the back of
our minds at the moment
well the fossil evidence for early homo
sapiens is really minimal but in terms
of the combination of their
archaeological signature what we would
believe to be an archeological signature
and any fossils
there's no nobody in southern Europe pre
41,000 and similarly in northern Europe
there may be in Eastern Europe it looks
like sort of there at the fringe is more
like 44 45 maybe maybe not that early or
it's difficult to tell because there are
a lot of I mean we'll have to get onto
this later in terms of what transitional
industries are but generally we would be
assuming on the fossil evidence that
there was no homo sapiens in Western
Europe until 41 at the earliest more
like 40 more than 40,000 just if you're
talking 45 plus I think most people
would accept that just on a date but
also in infer money this is in this in a
layer which is absolutely unarguably
classic Neanderthal artefacts there
would be no question about that so this
object it's only one of them and it's a
tiny fossil shell so it's a shell
but more interestingly it's a fossil so
it's nothing to do with food and that
fossil came from deposits and outcrops
roughly a hundred kilometers away so
this was not that arrived by accident
and microscopic very careful analysis
found that there is red mineral pigment
in tiny tiny little natural pits on the
outside of this shell and if you zoom it
right in you can see it it's only on the
outside of the shell and sort of the
little lip of the hole something that
makes it sort of more exciting but it I
don't think it even needs it to be a
good
evidence assemblers missing this shell
may also have once been threaded onto
something because there is some very
sort of distinctive abrasion marks that
appear to be sort of linear as if they
were rubbed in the same direction on me
on the lip of the shell just the tiny
micro scratches you have to use like
very high magnification and to see it
but potentially it means that that shell
had some kind of thread or something
going through it in and out through
through a hole in the side well but even
without that you have a fossil which has
nothing to do with food it came from a
very long distance and it has pigment on
it those three things if that was in a
homo sapiens sight you wouldn't look - I
should just be like yep okay that is
something symbolic so oh yeah I mean you
can't carry something for 100 kilometers
by accident in terms of how many days
that object was held on for hold on to
for you know it's it's interesting we
can't tell but given that Neanderthals
were all of our evidence says that they
were highly mobile they moved around a
lot they don't seem to have stayed
anywhere particularly long the stuff
that they carried was meaningful to them
whether it was vital for survival or
something else but they were they they
would have been very choosy about what
they chose to carry because they had to
carry everything they had no new
transport no you know dogs or whatever -
to help carry the load so it was all on
their own backs so even if you're
talking about a tiny shell that's still
something that's got to be packed and
carried with you so there's a choice
happening there I can still think of a
practical case in a sense if you I mean
like potentially shells if they were all
strung together it could have rattled
and maybe that was some kind of thing to
do with hunting but I can't really
believe that I think this site this
shell from firmani is really strong
evidence for me and because you then
look out from that site all the rest of
this
it's where we have pigment there's
pigments where they clearly being rubbed
on things some pigments have got strange
sort of little lines engraved on them
there's the association's of sheller
other science this is strange geodes you
know once you start to see the whole
picture that we have now it really
starts to look as if something is going
on doesn't mean everything is symbolic
and you know every sight but once you
kind of have this accumulation of stuff
it becomes difficult to say well we have
nothing and we do have a record that is
broadly I would say equivalent to what
we have for early Homo sapiens in in the
African contexts and there are shells
then there's pigment there's that
there's a much sort of a more impressive
little pigment and processing kit from a
South African site and early South
African sites that's like about I think
80,000 where they have a shell and this
pigment inside it and things like this
and it's just like it was all found
together and so that's kind of you know
that's like the whole package they've
got there but in terms of if those
objects have been found distributed
through the cave it's not that different
and there's no painted art at all in
South Africa so we have to sort of think
well what were they using their pigment
for some aesthetic things and and some
practical things in as we can see in the
hearty so there's no reason why the
antennas couldn't have been doing both
things in different sites in different
places yeah that's amazing why the
pigment is really a good example because
the overall amount of stuff we now have
means that we have to look at the
individual sites differently I think yes
I mean I'm talking to you now totally
changed how I view Neanderthals in my
mind's eye I mean I know I shouldn't get
carried away like the newspapers always
do with imagining them in sparkly makeup
but well I didn't I mean
color and visual appearance it's a
really basic
thing for mammals and you know and
chimpanzees in in the world they're you
know they're always brought up being our
closest primate relative they don't
really do anything like that in the wild
but if you give them in a captive
setting if you give them paint they go
for it yeah but they are aesthetically
stimulated by painting and that's kind
of an interesting angle to look at
things really because the other thing
that has kind of been getting people
excited about Neanderthals is engravings
and sort of interactions about sort of
you know cutting into materials rather
than covering them with with a substance
so she would be doing with pigment so I
was just gonna say when I was
researching the videos that I did on the
Neanderthals one of the examples where I
said people were debating and I think it
was is a Gorham's cave yeah Roza weather
sort of like a hash mark on the rock
yeah yeah
Goren's I mean different I think
different people are still have
different opinions about that sorry that
was my cat okay yeah I mean in terms of
the context of if that marking there had
the hashtag errs yeah it was called in
the headlines that is under a load of
archaeology basically so it has to be
pretty old and old enough to be
Neanderthal I mean it's covered by
layers that look as if they are
Neanderthal archaeology and the question
of well is the experimental archaeology
that's been done to claim that that was
created and intentionally it wasn't like
a bear or something and I think for me I
I I would buy that as a intentionally
created form partly because there is a
lot of evidence from other sites that
they were interested in not only in sort
of engraving but just in material
properties of things so and this is the
other thing that you kind of have to
have in mind when you
talking about aesthetics or art or
engraving is that Neanderthals were like
they were incredibly picky about what
they ate and the materials they used for
their practical tools so they were
really careful generally to choose the
best rocks for whatever they task they
were doing they would carry the higher
quality rocks as tools for further they
would reach sharpen those preferentially
they would only transport the bits of
animals from kill sites that had the
highest fat or marrow content and you
know those patterns are repeated
everywhere and then if they're making
bone tools tools from bone they're
really picky about the species or the
actual part of the skeleton that they
use so they're like they're like
gourmets for materials you know they
they know what they want very much so
they're aware of the physical properties
of things so that I think is interesting
in that we we see across a number of
sites not only this interested in
pigments but if sort of cutting into
bones and there's a lot of engravings on
bones that people have debated for a
long time some of those have really not
held up they're just natural but other
ones when they're examined with modern
technologies modern microscopic analysis
you can see that they're not they're not
some sort of natural scratches and
numerous cases have now emerged from
sites that all in a good context you
know they're not old and random stuff
where you have parallel markings and it
seems to be that there is in some cases
a concern to create series of markings
very careful they're not sort of graphic
designs in the way that the Gibraltar
thing seems to have a graphic character
to it and with having you know lines
that intersect each other they're just
single lines they're either sort of
having an origin point that they all
come out for and it kind of looks like a
fan shape or they have these small sort
of cuts that seem to be that they're
parallel and some really cool analysis
has been done and
like looking at whether you can argue
that they're trying to keep the gaps
between them consistent and on some
pieces that does seem to be true so that
it it's basic level that's an aesthetic
activity you're trying to create a
visual effect whatever the meaning of
that is is uncertain but you have that
in many sites it's on animal bones
sometimes it's on animal bones from
species that are not particularly
interesting other cases it's from
species that are a little bit less
common like bears or Birds and in one
case there's a Neanderthal skull that
seems to have some of these markings on
they're very small but they don't really
fit into into butchery because this is
from a site where they appear to have
been butchering the dead as well which
is a whole other topic but the
interesting thing about engravings is
it's it's an interaction with the
material and you get lines in some sites
not hardly any of the pigment sites but
they are still there where there's
pigment seems to have lines on it
doesn't really necessarily fit in with
trying to get powder off these lumps of
pigment so there's a overlap between two
different things that we would otherwise
if it wasn't the undertones we would say
that's potentially symbolic and it's
overlapping between those two different
sort of aesthetic realms if you want to
call it that and um that really I think
because we're getting so many different
signals for behavior that doesn't really
fit anything obviously practical it all
starts to build up and in terms of
comparing it to early Homo sapiens in
some cases Neanderthals have got more
depending on what sort of one you what
area you look at that's incredible
that's totally uh that sounds very
convincing to me for their like you said
it's a if it was found in a homo sapien
site it wouldn't its symbolic nature
ABB's wouldn't be questioned oh yeah me
and in the and little ones it is
important to remember as well that we
talk about the Neanderthals as if
they're sort of a monolithic thing and
they definitely wouldn't have been and
they lived across a massive geographical
range you know from it was Pakistan to
Wales into the elders Beca standard
where Neanderthals story yeah you know
it's a huge huge range of landscapes of
environments of animals you know like
what they ate in in Palestine compared
to Germany would have you know probably
surprised each other you know very
different so we shouldn't expect
everything to look the same everywhere
we should expect that what Neanderthals
were doing in one place would not have
made sense to what other ones did
somewhere else and it's the same thing
we you know we wouldn't expect
necessarily that to be the case for
early homo sapiens and also there's the
question of change through time as well
it has been a trope for Neanderthals for
a long time in sort of human origins
textbooks that it's always claimed oh
the middle Paleolithic so that's their
their culture their broad culture
basically did nothing and didn't evolve
at all for the entire time that they
were around from about 400 350 thousands
until 40,000 and that's that's totally
changed nobody I think who who knows the
the stone tools and would would argue
that and there was massive change over
time in terms of sort of little
flowerings of what was going on in
particular ages there were there were
technological traditions that were very
long-lived
but it wasn't just sort of one thing
happening the entire time it was really
varied and so we should expect that
other things aesthetic traditions
symbolic activities would have been
changing over time as well as across
space and I was actually going to say
one of the other really intriguing sites
that
probably well I know it has because I
asked colleagues to tell me what they
thought the most sort of jaw-dropping
recent thing was and basically everybody
came out with the same site which is a
French site and called plenty Cal in
southwest France that doesn't have
pigment but it does have static mites
again and this is a site people can find
it on like because there's lots of
there's lots of images of it basically
it's very deep cave 300 meters or so
deep into this hill and there's a
chamber where people cavers had found
these bizarre large sort of rings of
broken pieces of stalagmite and it was
dated right accommodated it came out as
older than 40,000 so people like oh okay
well that's interesting but if you date
really old stuff with radiocarbon it
basically gives you infinite dates and
it could be anything so when that was
really examined that came out to be
about 174 thousand years old oh wow yeah
it's it's super interesting that site
because it's kind of described as just
arranged rings of stalagmites and then
like with this little piles in the
middle but it's a lot more than that
it's a built structure albeit on a small
level so it's not like a big built wall
but in microscale
it is a built wall because they don't
they haven't just kind of like shoved
them together there are parts in these
rings where they've got like two or
three things balanced on top of each
other like verticals and then a flat one
and then other ones on top of that and
almost like several long ones all lined
up together leaning against the wall
that is a absolute sort of miniature
megalithic structure if you want to call
it that you know it's not just kind of
like something it's not bears didn't let
structure we don't we don't have the
language for this it's interesting you
know questions to what we actually cool
it but it's not burning
as well and in amongst this the style
might some of them were really heavily
burned and there seems to be like half
that we've built a long way or in I
don't know it's really hard it's so hard
to know what's going on that site was
very recently found and a couple years
ago well not found but published an
analysis is still ongoing there is a
flow stone floor that this is basically
on so we we can't see the surface of the
of the cave floor because it's covered
by the natural flow stone that came over
afterwards that's also incidentally how
some of this was dated because there was
flow stone but was over these rings
later in time so we the dating is very
good for this site but nobody really
would be living in that cave because
it's 300 myths in you would have
terrible smoke if you try to illuminate
it not to mention sort of having to
continually bring fuel in to have light
do anything so there's no way this is a
site that they were living in so and
then if you add up it just goes to show
the extraordinary amount of effort they
must have had to put it into yeah you
can do a back-of-the-envelope
calculation on on how long it would have
taken to make that and even if you sort
of assume several of them whom doing
it's about two tons is the amount of
stuff that is arranged it would be at
least six or seven hours you know that's
that's my little basic calculation they
must have been under there like hours
and hours maybe even days doing this we
have no clue why so that that's not
pigment it's not paintings on the wall
it's not a carving but that is something
I I don't even if I call that aesthetic
because the VIS a little bit you know
like the the arrangements of stones in
in South America you can only see the
visual effects from above but but the
arrangement it's not necessarily the
visual side of it is not the important
thing that's Society the creation of it
itself could have been the thing that
was meaningful and this is where I want
to come back to the engravings because
for some of those we might be focusing
too much
from a cultural position which values
final visual effects of things like
paintings whereas actually that's not
necessarily the thing that may have had
the meaning it may have been the actual
creative act itself could have had a
meaning or an importance to the person
doing it or people watching or whatever
and so I think really we need to open up
how our own expectations of what
symbolic behavior might actually look
like or feel like and/or sound like you
know anything and so that's kind of
where we are with Neanderthals for me
that there is an abundance of
archaeology that we have now is just
bringing together what that means in
terms of their minds is the really
really difficult thing that's incredible
so so let me ask you this we have all
this evidence of symbolic behavior does
this affect how we view the demise of
the Neanderthals in any way in and
perhaps transitional stone industries or
our relationship with them how how does
this affect our view of that well I
guess there's there's two aspects to
that one is the transitional industries
which we don't really have time to talk
about they are actually I would say even
more contentious than the issue of
symbolism and the question of who made
what is still very much very much argued
over and that would be something that
would cause the biggest you know
shouting matches where that doesn't
happen if people were going to get into
big debates at conferences it would be
that and because the problem with those
what they are basically is at the very
end of the time that we see Neanderthals
the very youngest fossils seem to be
followed by stone tool cultures that
appear to be presaging the Upper
Paleolithic and
very blady vilasa blades generally
that's the main thing and they also have
objects associated with them that we
don't really see in the and tell Sonia
Charles might have engraved bone put
lines on them and things but they we
haven't seen any like carved forms that
are obviously not just changing the
shape of your bone tool you know this
there's no sort of pendants or anything
whereas in the French case the shuttle
Peron Ian there are apparently pierced
teeth other carved bone things ivory and
so that's just one of them so there's
multiple of these weird what people call
transitional because the assumption
became that this was some kind of
transition between Neanderthals and the
incoming modern well I say Homo sapiens
we shouldn't really say modern human
because it's terrible too
and that slipped out but yeah the
question is those layers are often quite
thin they're covering a very short
period of time so dating them is
difficult and in the sites where it
appears that there may be in the
anti-material as in fossil material with
them bones or teeth
they don't have the best contexts there
is either uncertainty as to whether
those layers are we're actually in the
original position or whether there's
been an ocean and for example some of
the most quoted sites nobody's ever done
full refitting so that's where you get
all your stuff out across different
layers and you check to see if anything
is broken that is between two different
layers if that is the case that that was
one object that has now is now in two
layers that tells you that that material
has moved and that those things are not
100% reliable you know you can't be sure
whether the pendant that is in that
layer really wasn't that Leone so the
sites where which have most of the very
impressive stuff that also seems to have
Neanderthal fossils also remain to be
proven to be
completely well we can't ever say
completely but very confidently
undisturbed basically so that's the
problem with the transitional industries
especially the classical ones in France
and elsewhere so I would say for me I
don't think there's great evidence then
the anti tales made those whereas other
people's public you the opposite but for
me I like to be very cautious and I
would like to see them already have
refitting studies and I would like to
only look at sites where we have very
solid dating and then our old sites dug
along time ago things like that so if
you removal of those it doesn't leave a
lot of great evidence than the ant
atolls made that stuff so if we say okay
we're not going to talk about the
transitional industries if we're only
going to talk about what we know which
is that there certainly was some late
interbreeding between the anti tiles and
Homo sapiens looks like there was a lot
of stuff going on much earlier but we
know there was some some late
interbreeding because there is a one
human jaw from Eastern Europe that dates
to about 39,000 and that individuals had
a Neanderthal ancestor somewhere between
four I think to six or seven generations
before so that is very very close in
time to when that interbreeding happened
whether that was in Eastern Europe or
not you know how much space could a
group move over six or seven generations
probably quite a lot but it's still the
point is still there that we know that
there was definitely interbreeding going
on at a late period in time when we
therefore have a big history of
Neanderthals having aesthetic
interesting things that they were doing
whether it's with pigments or whatever
the question there for me is what does
that mean in terms of this symbolic
capacity well it just adds to the
reasons why we would want to make babies
with each other
that I don't I don't really buy the
explanation that everything was some
sort of territorial argument with you
know forced intercourse between you know
groups that got I don't know cut off and
you can look at chimpanzee cases
they sometimes do that but it's very
rare as I understand it I'm not DNA
specialist at all and but as I
understand it the amount of material
genetic material that is in living
people is high enough that these can't
have been sort of one-off
encounters like a handful of them over
5060 hundred thousand years there's
multiple phases of when it happened but
we're probably looking at contexts where
interactions were happening in
reasonable numbers not for the case on
that but but it wasn't an isolated
incident so you have to talk about you
know who is raising the babies and then
you start you stop talking about sort of
like physical encounters and you say
well a baby that is brought into a group
whether it was going into a Neandertal
group or to a homo sapiens to group or
whether they merge groups we have no
idea if that was happening there had to
have been enough of a comparable I guess
broad cultural worldview that that those
children would not sort of you know just
be be left or abandoned or sort of grow
up unable to function and you know they
had two hybrids had to be able to
function in whichever societies they
were brought up in and therefore they
had to have been they couldn't have been
a massive Gulf is what I'm trying to say
even if there were groups with different
traditions or different aesthetic or
symbolic understandings I think there
had to have been some common ground in
terms of there being more than simply
they were hunting you know they could
recognize that they were both hunters or
something like that and you know that
they were peoples that hunted and that
would be a common ground I think there
probably was something beyond that that
would explain why you would have so many
hybridizations that were successful
basically and you know that those
hybrids then
went on to have their own children and
stuff otherwise we wouldn't have that
material in us today it's been able to
fit in with their society for people to
want yeah reproduce with them and
continue having families it had to be a
level of communication there had to have
been yeah all those things so that's not
necessarily I don't want to say they
were the same because I don't think
they're there are clear differences
still in in the record I mean I think
the way that Homo sapiens were living I
think they were probably hunting
differently I think they were organizing
themselves in the landscape differently
I think they they probably were and had
more extensive social networks I think
that's pretty well supported and the the
the key difference by 40,000 is that as
I said that's when you have the earliest
dates for cave art that's
representational images animals
basically and handprints there is very
new research that suggests that there
may be handprint one handprint in Spain
that much old and that sort of maybe
50,000 but at the moment that's those
sites for me I would like to see a more
extensive analysis of the of the caves
where those are and to see if there's
more of those and hand prints with the
same similar ages before I want to sort
of be sure about what those actually are
but in terms of what we accept as was
there anybody around that was Homo
sapiens in Europe where these paintings
on on walls and this potential hand and
maybe it's not a print actually it's a
negative it's so it's probably had the
pigment blown around and they take your
hand away
yeah those those could be Neanderthal
stuff or they could be odd little very
brief incursions of Homo sapiens and
that is possible because there is also a
transitional industry before the
transitioned
if you want to call it that in France in
southern France southeast France and
called the Neronian which has some
aspects that look similar to what the
anti tells do but also not some of the
stone tool technology there is it's
comparable to what neon tells to you but
it is much smaller and it has very
definite similarities to the earliest
transitional industries in Eastern
Europe which are only about five to ten
thousand years younger which okay I'm
saying only five to ten thousand years
younger but that's that's how we talk
when we talk about the very thing yeah
all the time that stands out that's a
strange thing the Neronian so I think
basically the red lines that we used to
have that everything where I was saying
earlier everything before forty thousand
or we can be sure it's neanderthal in
some cases it is a little bit uncertain
but certainly and atolls were still
around until 40,000 but there may be
brief movements of people into Europe
and before that that didn't go anywhere
because that's also something we should
remember that wasn't just Neanderthals
that went extinct although technically
they're not extinct because their
material is still in US and John Hawkes
who I guess some of your listeners might
know his website he's had a great
calculation he did worse like there's
there's more genetic material in living
people now than ever walked around you
know in the Pleistocene named in terms
of what's around now so they they're not
actually as them by themselves walking
around here but but they're still here
in that sense and but there certainly
are very early Homo sapiens in Eurasia
where we can tell from the DNA that they
have no living relatives so there were
waves of people coming and going
possibly coming and going backwards
again through Eurasia we've only at the
very beginning of trying to actually map
out what the genetics means in terms of
the
sites that we have but some of those
individual fossils that we have which we
know are Homo sapiens then they went
extinct more than the Neanderthals
there's nobody life that has their
material in now so in terms that yeah
this this idea that we we succeeded and
you know we were the victors and the
upper panic marks you know is some kind
of great victory you know it's it's not
as simple as that at all that sounds
extremely complicated but let's really
changed my perspective on the
Neanderthals because I am a very
cautious guy as well I didn't want to
sensationalize my view of the tales of
Neanderthal art but that all sounds
really very convincing and very
interesting I know everyone who's
listened to this has found it
fascinating so I'd really like to thank
you for coming on my channel and the
help explaining that to me and the and
the viewers I know we appreciate it a
great deal so thank you it's difficult
to explain because the stuff that has
the headlines is often really exciting
but it's kind of having that context
around it and understanding the breadth
of what we have it can really change you
know what one site might mean and and
that's what doesn't always sort of get
communicated and in in the press or you
know on TV or whatever like that so then
yeah I mean that's that is what I I'm
trying to do with with my book is is
give people a deep dive into the data
that will make more sense of why people
you know why there's headlines coming
out all the time that can seem
contradictory like only on details when
it's a stupid or oh that's why they died
out you know that's that's a very
contradictory for people to hear those
two different narratives that they
weren't so stupid but here's why they
were rubbish and you know actually
they're the symbolism and the aesthetics
is is a really key
area where it's not often explained well
enough to people yeah and when is your
book coming out um summer next year 2020
summer next year look out for it
everyone dr. rag Sykes she's going to
set the record straight on the other
context is key okay thank you so much
you
