[Music]
thank you thank you it is a delight to
be here at Tec Mecca talking with you
all about this very important question a
question that is simple huge soulful
strictly scientific techy meaning of
life size it's a question that we ignore
shirk skirt ridicule and pretend we've
answered when we haven't followed family
friend and I were catching up with each
other and he asked me what I've been up
to and I described the question to him
and he walked in a telling way he said
it sounds like you got way too much time
on your hands it's way over my pay scale
it's a question that can never be
answered and it was answered last week
in a Facebook post about quantum
consciousness so I got all four of them
from him at once it is a simple question
much simpler than any of the things that
you deal with and yet it is a fairly
unfamiliar question people do tend to
balk at this question so the way I'm
going to do this is I'm going to frame
the question and then pause for
challenges kick the tires on this thing
really try to get clear on the question
challenges questions all of that and
then give you a new proposed answer
which is unlike anything I've seen from
other sources the question is what our
striving selves I strived therefore I am
you know Descartes said I think
therefore I am I'm gonna go much deeper
than that I strive I try I make effort
this doesn't make effort computers don't
actually make effort they do work they
do very useful work but they don't make
effort they are not striving and I'll be
more specific about that in a minute but
you can call us any number of things
an agent organism living being and I'm
just going to call ourselves and I'm
gonna cross all selves that every one of
these organisms is striving it is doing
work for its own benefit striving means
not going with the flow
you can see that here in this self going
upstream and it's it's more than this
it's more than just going upstream
because really what's going on is we are
going against the flow towards a
degeneration everything falling towards
entropy randomness disorder falling
apart and petering out so very simple
straightforward question we don't we run
to stay in place like the Red Queen in
Alice Through the Looking Glass and it's
happening right now unconsciously and
unfelt striving like what our bodies are
doing right now right now my body is
regenerating itself faster than it
degenerates and it's doing it without me
understanding what it's doing any
awareness of it just like it does in
bacteria that is they don't have
consciousness they don't have feelings
and yet they are striving against the
tendency to degenerate so really we can
distinguish between two kinds of things
the things that exist lasting as they
degenerate depending on their durability
and selves which persists striving to
regenerate very big difference as yet
unexplained by the sciences that's the
question and as I said machines are not
striving selves we engineer them for
durability computers aren't striving
selves and striving selves are not
computers
I adore computers I live on them and
spend most of my time on them this is
not a Luddite talking I'm not protesting
against the use of computers as though
they are heartless no I think they're
full of heart the way I use them but
they are not striving so the question
comes down to this there's no magic
added and yet selves our means to end
striving not just cause and effect
mechanism there's something different
about us from nothing but chemistry so I
rule out from the start the idea that
there's some magic NAM thing thingy that
gets deposited into matter that makes us
come alive a soul a spirit a vital force
or any of that none of that will work
nor will the arguments that there's
something about all interactions all
material interactions all cause effect
that's actually a little bit means to
ends and you collect enough of that up
together and suddenly poof
poof it's a suddenly are striving self
no I'm ruling all of that out and also
I'm ruling out the argument that all we
are is cause and effect mechanism which
really does corner with us with a
challenge what are striving selves
there's a fundamental gap in our
research scientific research striving
selves are inadmissible in the physical
sciences if you had a physics professor
who told you that the moon strives to
pull on the tides for someone's benefit
you'd think there's something wrong but
down the hall you've got a spy ologist
or a social scientist who can talk while
they want about striving selves so
there's this fundamental rift take these
three terms absolutely essential in
biology you cannot do biology without
functional basically function fitted 'no
sand striving that's about selves
that's about selves engaging in what
I'll call self-directed work effort by
selves for themselves responsive to
their circumstances now the way it works
for continuity in the science is that
the lower level scientists have to
explain what the higher Sciences assume
and we got a huge gap here as chemistry
does not explain functional fitted
striving and yet we totally rely on it
in the life and social sciences so
approach I'm going to promote is that
you start with strivings patient zero
the very first striving self you have to
explain how mattering could ever emerge
from matter how you ever get from
chemistry to even the most basic
striving self and if you do that you get
to reveal the bare essentials without
all of the best bells and whistles that
accumulate through evolutionary history
you start simple and it's not how we
tend to do it we tend to do it through
cognitive science which starts way too
high up it's like trying to explain hair
from quills porcupine quills they are
hair consciousness is very it's it's
very much a striving selfs property just
like quills are like hair but it's very
specialized and it's highly evolved and
it's also a little bit cognitive science
like trying to explain strive
starting with wigs which is an artifact
a computer as an artifact by which we
can try to determine what it is about us
that is striving you've probably heard
of the hard problem in consciousness
studies which is how do you ever get
qualia the experience the feeling the
sensation of things but cognitive
science works from a computational model
for what living is so I consider it the
main harder problem if you're gonna try
to go from computation which is not
striving to do anything and go straight
to qualia you're gonna have problems
that's why I suggest we start with
patient zero that is with the very first
possible striving self and I'll say this
is a question behind our biggest
questions to reckon with consciousness
mind quality a free will
morality mortality spirituality
astrobiology etc start by explaining how
the first striving self could emerge
from chemistry so here's a mystery laid
out we've got names we've got names for
what selves are for their properties for
their behaviors we've got nouns and
adjectives and verbs and they all remain
as yet unexplained by these terms from
the physical sciences so you can call us
organisms subjects agents individuals
living beings creatures you can even
call spirits or Souls it doesn't
actually matter what we call them these
are names that flag what has yet to be
explained they just are markers that we
use to say this is something we have yet
to explain and you've got all of these
properties and all these behaviors as
yet unexplained in the physical sciences
saying that you're striving self is no
more scientific explanation than saying
you have a soul both of them are just
markers so naming is not explaining here
are some solutions that we often move
towards since we have this gap and it
goes unexplained and I'm gonna suggest
that they don't work natural selection
just an idea out there that there's the
universe was rolling along with its
natural laws and then suddenly a new one
enter is called natural selection and
suddenly it gives rise to
organism's doesn't work natural
selection is actually natural
degeneration it selves failing to self
regenerate it explains the honing nots
what not what's honed to say that
natural selection explains life is like
saying that erosion explains mountains
yeah it explains how they're sculpted
but not what they are so I want to say
natural selection doesn't start like
life starts natural selection you
actually have to have striving selves
before you have evolution as we think of
it another idea is molecular
verification in particular RNA molecules
because they are so important to us
organisms now but the idea is that you
would get molecular replication what
you've got here our examples of
molecules not being created from scratch
its conservation of matter it's
transforming of molecules so you get
these molecules going through their
chemical reactions but the chemical
reactions can appear to strive but then
so can anything a river can look like
it's striving to get to the sea and
actually chemical reactions like that
are just going with the flow so this
idea that molecular replication somehow
solves the problem will not do and
energy gradients degenerates first they
paid her out you saw that in these two
examples I just gave you but the
material order can remain de generating
more slowly
still not striving selves how about
jeans jeans sometimes is used for the
molecules themselves as if a DNA
molecule is a gene but mostly what we
mean by it is the sequences within the
jeans sequences are not striving selves
but interpreted by them DNA if you lay
it on a table is is lifeless so to argue
that it's the secret of life seems to be
missing something it's not this magical
molecule as it's sometimes depicted the
secret to life so little like saying the
text which is also a sequence is
striving to tell you something
another striving self is telling you
something with their text but the text
itself is not actually striving to tell
you anything
or the alternative which is that it's
just cause and effect relationships as
if the sequence the genetic code which
yields a one-to-one correspondence a Co
is a material cause-and-effect process
is somehow all there is which is another
popular notion about it want to be clear
on this one of the places where we get
messed up on this in in the sciences and
also in philosophy is to treat it all as
causality interpretation is not
causality a stop sign doesn't cause you
to stop unless you crash into it we
stopped because we interpreted
given our strivings that's about traffic
for our benefit so interpretation is
radically different from cause and
effect complexity reason I have a frog
on the cover of my book is that in the
book I posed the question which is more
complex a frog or a frog smoothie now
technically a frog smoothie is more
complex there's poor correlation there's
almost no correlation between the
molecules once they're all shaken up
once they've degenerated with a blender
but also they would degenerate anyway
that's actually more complex than the
frog the frog has more regularities it
would be easier to describe which is the
metric for complexity so we often get
ambiguous with this is it more complex
are just harder to explain the Frog is
harder to explain and yet less complex
it's its regularization it's the order
lytic orderliness within a frog that is
so impressive and so hard to explain how
about AI not striving but engineer
trained to aid our striving if you
connected a jillion AI supercomputers on
a sterile planet what do you get you get
a sterile planet that is no quantity if
AI by itself is going to yield you
striving cells quantum mechanics quantum
phenomenon doesn't strive striving cells
persist at the classical non quantum
level like jilted lovers many
researchers would rather not discuss it
they dance around the gap by
equivocation basically talking out both
sides of their mouth I read these
glorious books by your neighbor for
example Robert Sapolsky who wrote this
wonderful book called behave all about
the biochemistry of motivation I love
these books and yet they are still
dodging the question they'll talk about
how a molecule
causes a motivation it's not clear how
that happens and he doesn't seem to be
addressing it you get a book like
information a theory what is it a a
history a theory of flood by James
Gleick wonderful book which by the end
of it claims that there's information
everywhere and has always been by the
men end of the middle section and then
he goes into the last section about how
we're now experiencing a flood of
information which is it is it always
everywhere or is it something we can
experience a flood of if we experience a
flood of it then apparently we are
interpreting it in a different way than
we used to but the claim that it's all
information is a kind of equivocation so
the information could be treat talked
about it so it's just shannon reductions
and possibilities or as a difference
that makes a difference for a self that
is striving to stay alive to regenerate
so that's the question and I want to
hear your challenges to it I want to
hear you really kick the tires on this
really push back if you have trouble
with the question or if I haven't been
clear about the question and then I'll
go on to a new proposed answer no
intentionality would be a subset of
striving the words get really squirrely
in here that is they carry a lot of
baggage I'm in my last presentation are
biosemiotics conference I called it
trying which tends to imply a kind of a
psychological intention a will a
conscious effort so I've ended up
gravitating to striving because for two
reasons one is fairly clean on this
question of ghosts and machine there's a
tendency in this research to I think of
it like walking a tightrope line this
question here because you can fall off
in is into ghosts
basically homunculus is your
anthropomorphizing what goes on or into
machine mechanics cause an effect so how
you ride that is difficult with the
words we've got there are definitions of
intentionality that would be broad
enough that would cover what all living
beings do but that's not the vernacular
use of it and you we usually think of it
as something willed by a conscious
feeling
being but yes it is included in here and
and and by the way I am NOT just
striving to regenerate I'm striving for
example to communicate an idea that is
by now humans have all sorts of headroom
and all sorts of distractions other
kinds of intentions but if you want to
get at patient zero you start with the
most basic which is pushing against this
tendency to fall apart
so you mentioned artificial intelligence
and the limitations thereof that you you
could hook up a large number of
artificial intelligent machines and that
you would still not get a striving self
out of it nicely put one of the ways
that we understand artificial
intelligence today is just a whole bunch
of linear algebra and neural networks
and that is very much a calculator are
you saying by that that artificial
intelligence of today could not be
constructive that or gonna be never no
I'm actually saying of today and this is
an important point it's actually my
takeaway that is once you understand
patient zero you have a new angle on AI
which I wouldn't know about because I'm
not an expert on it but I do think
there's potential for it and there's
someone in the audience who's paying
close attention to that potential Anton
right here there we go yes thank you yes
it's just not yet so are you counting
viruses as striving or not it's a great
question and I would say yes but to do
that I can't just work from impressions
I have to give an argument for that so
it's a difficult argument and debatable
it's not it's not altogether clear the
model I will give you for patient zero
is like a non parasitic virus without
DNA it's really got to be simple and yet
not impressionistic to do it so it's but
but yes there is something about them
that does seem we we talk this back and
forth me and this guy and colleagues
including John and Anthony we explore
this and wonder about whether viruses
count or not but we think they probably
do yes so regarding your slide on genes
yes how would you respond to the idea
that a chicken is an egg's way of making
another egg and that it's not the DNA
that is the striving cell but rather
the couple's system between a ribosome
and the RNA
well even still if you put ribosomes and
our our own a naked on a table they're
not gonna be a striving self so there's
a but but you're on to something one of
the things that life has to do is it has
to replicate and it has to reproduce I
use we produce rather than replicate
because replicate is the kind of thing
you can do without paying attention to
the work involved
you know as chemicals were replicating
in effect over there
no reproducing takes work so we have to
explain the work that selves do you know
we go back and forth between saying I
have this body and I am this body I'm
gonna argue that what I am isn't my body
the body remains there after I'm dead
it's still all right there the energy
the material the organization and yet
I'm gone so I have to be able to explain
that and not resort to phantoms not
resort to ghosts this is the challenge
this is what I'm gonna try to do in this
next a little bit but yes you take a
sequence or you take a coding process
extracted from biology it's not the
striving self either it's just gotta
keep on it's a process of elimination
saying well and that's basically what I
was going through with those solutions
that don't each of those have been
tempting and I'm arguing each of those
don't cut it okay so let's say you have
a very simple organism like a non
parasitic virus that you mentioned which
is striving now if we could simulate
that with sufficient fidelity would
dissimulation then be striving I'm
delighted you bring that up I want to
propose a contrast between simulation
and emulation simulation is done with
cause and effect with formalism
schematics that sort of thing basically
arrows and pointers you know moving from
node to node by my version of it that is
you are modeling the consequences of
some behavior emulating would be
actually showing how the behavior works
and it's different from modeling it and
I'm gonna give you an example the slide
right at two slides after this is going
to be Anton's emulation
of the process I'm describing if you can
emulate it yes you're well along to
being able to understand it but you have
to work with the world as it is and it's
not a bunch of cause a narrow affair of
cause and effect arrows and nodes where
you get to label the node and just talk
about them as pointing this way I'll be
saying a little bit more about this
emulation I'm gonna argue with something
different and totally achievable at
Google so that's one of the reasons why
I'm interested in presenting here okay I
mean well we'll see but I don't
completely buy the difference between
simulation and emulation it's good like
a good and I haven't really delivered on
it yet so let me see what I look forward
to your questions and challenges after
okay okay okay so this is Terrance deke
and I had met him shortly after this had
booked had come out the same box BCC
spent 20 years as a neuroscientist at
Harvard trying to stun understand the
emergence and consequences of us having
language the symbolic species and he had
just moved on to another question which
culminated in this book in 2011 called
incomplete nature how mind emerges from
matter famously a challenging book to
read difficult to read so my effort is
to distill it and some of this into my
book I think of him as a natural
philosopher which is what scientists
were originally called he's a scientist
and yet he's dealing with philosophical
questions questions that scientists
often don't get around to like what is a
striving self or how does language
actually emerge um
he's also a a very easy person to talk
to we have a meeting at his house every
couple of weeks open to whoever is
interested
that's how Anton got involved no Anton
Anton actually read in complete nature
and decided he wanted to model or
emulate the process that he proposes in
here John also joined up through that
through that meeting we just get
together and explore this stuff it's
delightful it's easy it's apolitical the
guy's never pulled rank on me in 21
years we just talk we work
the problems it's a delight so here's
the question as I posed it before
striving selves are something different
from nothing but chemistry
what starting with patient zero and here
I'm gonna give you a grotesquely
simplified solution it's a chain
reaction that generates chain reaction
seeds I'm not sure that Terry would like
that but it gets at it and here is
Anton's beginnings of the emulation of
it that is he's imagining a chain
reaction he's modeling a chain reaction
with all of the stochastic syn volved
and these seeds forming along the way
they are color-coded to represent
they're in effect viability and this is
very early days for this research but he
sees this as a possibility we for how we
can get at the narrowing in on the kinds
of molecules that might have made this
process possible you'll notice that I
said that these were something like non
parasitic viruses but there's no DNA in
these things the reading of sequences in
the service of your striving it's not
the kind of thing you can imagine easily
coming about spontaneously out of
chemistry it's a very complicated
process terry has a model for how we
could get there but we're starting
simpler than that and as I said simple
but not impressionistic okay now let me
back up and tell you how I got there how
we get there to your to don'ts basically
your experience of life you focus rather
than dithering you could have done in
dozens of other things right now during
your hour here but you chose to be here
and you're not just everywhere you're
doing focused work your focus is a
product of self control everything you
prevent yourself from doing consciously
and unconsciously
and above all you focus on preventing
the degeneration of your ability to
focus so I'm going to be arguing that
you are a prevention that prevents
itself from ending it's a process of
elimination logic very different from
the arrow kind of logic we use in
schematics and formalizations and it's
the insight behind a lot of very big
breakthroughs pay attention to what's
eliminated Darwin natural selection to
explain Fitness attend to the non
survival of
the unfit shannon signal theory to
explain signals sent attend to signals
not sent Ashby H Ross Ashby who coined
the term self-organization to explain
increased order attend to emergent
constraint on disorder on the have to
say more about emergent constraint here
are two quotes from him that I like a
lot a self-organizing system
spontaneously reduces the number of its
potential states observe what might have
happened but did not here's an example
an intuitive example of it threading
through a crowd and others threading
around you you'll get these streams of
people who are taking the path of least
resistance that emerged by a process of
path elimination now these are striving
self so it doesn't really count if we
want to look for patient zero but there
are of course plenty of nonliving
self-organization processes now the term
self-organization is problematic we were
talking a minute ago about problematic
terms like intention it suggests a self
trying to organize it and there are
plenty of people who have moved in that
direction talking as though if you just
get self-organization going and it gets
complicated enough then you've got a
striving self um I actually call it
emergent regularization
it's a constraint process and whirlpools
are an example auto assembly like
crystal formation and auto catalysis
about which I'll say more now because
they're essential to our model auto
assembly is basically crystal formation
but all sorts of other processes as well
lipid membranes for example which are
bubbles or capsids which will be crucial
here they're like viral shells they're
not actually constructed deliberately
they're not part of the striving process
they actually fall together just like
crystals do they fall to resting states
and the resting states given their
complementary molecular geometry will
yield you regularize sheets shells and
tubes so these are very exciting
remember we're trying to figure out how
you get how to explain the frog
well the Frog is full of regularity so
we might look to this process auto
assembly as a step towards life towards
striving cells
catalysis is basically a chain reaction
that grows a population of multiple
catalysts that are all in effect
producing each other it's a population
explosion that grows depletes the
resources that it depends upon and then
dissipates so if you imagine you've got
these two molecules x and y and in this
super simplification of it
they are both transforming reactants
they didn't get specific about the
reactants into more of each other an X
transforms an hour into a Y and then Y
transpose and R into an X and you get
this population explosion of X's and Y's
but in the mean time you're depleting
all the R's and you end up with a
dissipation of the molecules and the
thing about this auto catalysis is it's
it's more likely to start if you've got
a cluster of the X's and Y's to start it
yes it could start with 1x producing 1y
they want and then produces another X
but it's way more likely to start if
you've got a cluster of them in close
range and often with byproducts for
example an X might split an hour into a
Y and some other molecule which also be
crucial to this explanation
self-organization so like I said some
people think that self-organization is
enough it's a variation on the
complexity argument if you get enough of
this kind of emergent regularization
self-organization suddenly it becomes a
striving self we don't think so
it goes with the flow towards overall
degeneration and cells don't they strive
to regenerate but still this concept of
emergent constraint that is reduced
possibilities emerging throughout a
dynamic process is of interest to us and
we think there's a way to get at the
origin the patient zero of striving self
through it so just to be clear on the
general principle the whole is less than
the sum of its parts possibilities any
of those people threading their way
through the crowd could have moved in a
whole lot more directions but those
directions are reduced through the
congestion and they end up taking paths
of least resistance and some
probabilities become less likely others
become more likely what's presented is a
product of what's prevented
and so we got that throughout that
Darwin Shannon Ashby are all playing
with this key insight and basically what
we're doing is applying it to this
question what is this driving so if it's
not your body if it's not your DNA and
ribosomes what is it
so we think of self regeneration as
possibly a higher-level emergent
constraint so we've come up with a
testable hypothesis for how coupled
self-organizing processes could prevent
each other from ending and like I've
said it has to be simple and yeah yet
not impressionistic I don't get to say
well it looks like it's striving it
actually has to be doing work on its own
behalf fit to its own environment
requirements for self generation very
basic if you think about okay
everything's degenerating how would you
keep yourself from degenerating you'd
need self repair regenerating whatever
degenerates you need self protection
that is preventing degeneration and you
need self reproduction because
eventually you will degenerate and you
need lineages of self for generating
striving selves that have the capacity
to self repair and self protect and out
of these three you end up with this
interesting challenge what I'll call
selective interaction we all deal with
it but it had to be there at the
beginning of life that is in order to do
any of this generative work you need to
take in energy and resources and put out
waste products and at the same time to
prevent the generation you have to not
do that so you've got this going on from
the origins of life and that's a
challenge for origins of life research
because the kinds of selective membranes
that we all rely on that let in some
stuff and not others pores and orifices
and all that you're not gonna get that
by chance just a lucky chance that lets
in all the right stuff lets out all the
right stuff doesn't let in all the wrong
stuff doesn't let in all the wrong stuff
that is a origins of life theory and
origins of striving cells has to be
striving successfully outpacing the
tendency to degenerate from day one that
it has to be able to do that and this is
a challenge the selective and direction
and by the way you're still doing all of
this obviously self repair you're
striving to keep fit and healthy
sometimes conscious
sometimes not consciously
self-protection
your regenerating skin staying closed
with a roof over your head
self reproduction kids maybe and
selective interaction which has gotten
very elaborate for human beings there's
a little taste of it in this room right
now I'm suggesting something that you
can either absorb or avoid people do all
the time we're always trying to figure
out what to take in and what not to take
in at many levels from you could say the
immune system to our mouths all of this
all of it's still going on
so here finally is that model that we
showed that I mentioned early on and we
got the emulation of it from Anton here
it is the auto gem meaning the self
regenerator imagine you got one of those
chain reaction processes the auto
catalysis but its by-product happens to
be one of those capsid molecules so
while it's chain reacting in the midst
of that chain reaction it's putting out
molecules that will form the equivalent
of virus shells not trying to form them
they just form they fall together
that's the auto assembly so you got a
complementarity between the two where
you get a chain reaction and then you
got these shells that encapsulate what I
called starter kits or seeds that if
they break open in the presence of more
reactants can resume the auto catalysis
the chain reaction and resume producing
seeds okay so take let's take a look at
this you got the reactants you've got a
cluster of these catalysts in here this
the purple molecules are the capsids it
breaks open let's say a big molecule
hits it and it's got spill out into the
reactants which generates a whole lot
more C's X's and Y's that end up by
happenstance captured within more of
these shells
that's the seeds or starter kits very
simple model is their self regeneration
well it's repairing the seeds as they
degenerate and the capsids protect
against the generation it generates
varied and evolvable audio auto auto gen
lineages and their selective interaction
though not quite it's not actually
choosing when to be open and close I'll
explain how we get there in a minute
but at least you have an alternation in
the alternation is crucial given that
one of the things that has to fit is
environments where reactants are only
sometimes present we think of this thing
like a ratchet it grows for a while and
then it locks down while it's locked
down it can survive in environments
where there are no reactants that's why
it's useful to have seeds or starter
kits that are enclosed and basically
static at that point so it's functional
in that it's self repairs when broken
for its own sake remember here's a good
place to not be thinking about
intentionality it's not trying to it
doesn't care it's not conscious it's not
willing all of that and yet we have to
we have to start at that level if we're
really going to understand that the self
repair benefits the lineage of audio
origins it's fitted as I've mentioned
it's striving when seeds are broken
origins respond with auto catalytic work
that regenerates seeds here's an example
of how it might evolve we argue that at
this point you have found a way to
outpace the tendency towards the
degeneration breaks open other molecules
get into it we have discovered a way in
which you can self purge that is it will
get tend to get rid of molecules that
don't facilitate it it breaks open and
the molecules are copy are the X's and
Y's not the other molecules that are
kind of strays that enter into it so
there's a little bit of self purging at
this point but imagine that you end up
not with a Y but a Z and the Z happens
to have a different by-product a
different capsid molecule there it's a
little rougher on the outside and the
ours actually stick to it making the
overall seed rougher more likely to
break open now this is the kind of thing
we can emulate I'm not saying this is
the answer but it does show the kinds of
things that it could evolve and it is B
is an attempt to show how from nothing
but physics and chemistry you could
actually get a striving self that would
then have the capacity to evolve so when
it breaks it you can see that this one
actually begins to have selective
interaction is more likely to open in
the presence of reactants than in the
absence of of reactants and then as I
mentioned earlier we have a model for
how you end
with a template molecule a molecule like
DNA or RNA that has a sequence that is
actually functional for the striving
self but we would argue given the
complexity of making use of a sequence
you really have to start with striving
selves if you're going to get to the
level where you can actually use DNA in
R or RNA okay so what's a striving self
it's not a ghost it's not something
added to chemistry it's not mechanism
it's not the material energy cause and
effect work or organization it's a self
regenerative emergent constraint a
synergistic coupling between two
self-organization processes that prevent
each other's degeneration what is the
self then what is a striving self if you
were to work all the way up to all of us
I would argue that we are a constraint
that channels energy into work that
prevents the constraints degeneration
and that it came about through a synergy
between two self-organizing processes
that prevent each other from ending your
whole is less than the sum of your parts
independent possibilities so I come back
to emergent constraints because I think
it may have the most application in
thinking here about how to move a I and
other technologies beyond where we
already are to really push it observe
what might have happened but did not
emergent regularization as I said
self-organization is go with the flow
local temporary generation of energetic
and material regularities emergent
self-regeneration though is self
striving against the flow to prevent
their own degeneration and it happens
through this synergistic coupling where
both of them stop the other from failing
Auto catalysis remember it it grows and
then dissipates
well the capsids keep it from losing all
of its potential before it dissipates
and capsids will break open and
dissipate as well but the auto general
ah it replenishes the supply of capsid
molecules these molecules that form the
shells in general though there's a
methodological question I a proposition
I want to make life isn't schematic or
formal like our engineering
math simulations it's running gauntlets
selves constraining possibilities to
prevent dying it's somehow figuring out
how any organism does anything like this
running through the constraints because
it is fitted to the constraints it has
internal to itself a an agency that
enables it to avoid all of the risks of
the generation and in general weeks I
find that across the fields in
philosophy in programming or if they
just across the fields we're still using
models that in one way or another apply
a point A to point B kind of a Euclidean
approach that I'm going to say it's not
quite how it works everything is random
at the start and somehow life figures
out how to narrow in on possibilities
its processes of elimination ok so just
these two takeaways to push the tech
envelope
pay attention to how text simulates but
doesn't yet emulate striving selves and
that's the thing we can talk about and
the other is to attempt to emulate pay
attention to emergent constraints not
schematic airway but dynamic narrowing
of possibilities thank you anybody have
any questions and challenges so one of
the interesting consequences of the way
that you've presented this is that is it
you you mentioned it works on multiple
levels that the immune system level or
the organization is there any bias in
this for observing this at any
particular level because you could look
at it from an ant cell to an ant
organism as we understand it to an ant
colony to the super colony that covers
California yes versus humanity's cell or
a person standing here or their
neighborhood community society yes
wonderful great question the people who
are doing this research come at it from
a variety of different angles my
backgrounds in the social sciences and
most of what I write is in the social
sciences and yet it's all under the
influence of this model by now I mean
the thousand articles I've written
they're all based on this the political
work the moral work I do is a psycho
proctologist it's all based on this
in our own research though we keep
focusing on patients zero we are kind of
obsessed at that level and we also have
people who come into the group with some
intuition some gut assumption that they
want to uphold they're kind of tethered
to it and they've come to this work like
it's a Rorschach blot and they start to
say wow this proves that I was right
about this thing I am delighted with how
we managed to keep that from influencing
the work and a lot of this is because
Terry is a nerd he's he's dogged about
this question he wants to get it right
I've seen him change his mind Lots I've
changed his minds about things and he's
way more advanced academically than me
he's not interested in the status
questions he's not interested in I don't
see in him any axe to grind yes he would
like life to continue striving but no I
haven't seen that influence it we've got
some biologists in the group that are
primarily interested in multicellularity
we've got all sorts of people who are
interested in the implications of this
narrowing not arrowing approach to all
levels of living systems we've got a few
guys who are really interested in
whether organizations are organisms and
yeah they can look like it but are they
really so we we have fussed about that a
lot at one point was writing as though
they were that there were these super
organisms and Terry laid out the
challenges to that just cuz it gives
that impression it probably isn't let's
look at what is the criteria by which
you could say that something is actually
a striving self as compared to an
agglomeration of striving selves that
are achieving things so I love the way
we employ the power of neutral thinking
to the best of our abilities and by the
way you cannot work in science without
the possibility that you will have spent
your entire life barking up the wrong
tree so I have no idea whether this is
right but I am enthusiastic about the
way that it addresses a question freshly
framed I feel a little bit like like
like you've reduced kind of the original
question to something which is a lot
more
tractable and I think is a less
satisfying question but for a bigger
question where does consciousness fit
into this well Teri's a neuroscientist
he's got theories about their their
hunches about how you actually get to
qualia and consciousness I just got back
from the biannual Tucson conference on
the science of consciousness and it's
remarkable how much there they are
talking as though everything is
conscious and then there's some kind of
quantum leap it crosses a threshold and
then becomes conscious in ways we
recognize and you got people who are
saying that there's no consciousness and
there's people who are talking about it
coming out at the quantum level all
those are stuff very satisfying
I don't think realistic at all so it's
one of the questions that we deal with
you know teri having spent the first 20
years working on how language affects
consciousness
I have hunches about consciousness being
the really big difference and I'm
especially interested in how it changes
adaptation that his life has been
adapting for 3.8 billion years and now
we're doing it under the distorting
influence of language which makes like
us like these chronically hallucinating
mammals with all sorts of interesting
consequences positive and negative and
how to manage them becomes a it's a
focus of another whole book of mine but
satisfying is a really key word here yes
in many ways this has to be simpler that
you don't get any engineering you don't
have life already existing and you don't
get the delight of the impression that
you have discovered how life as you
experience it works it's it's gonna have
to be a simple solution at this level
and yet I would argue that whether you
buy this solution this proposed answer
to it or not that's the level to work on
it because if you cannot explain
striving selves you are not going to be
able to get beyond explaining hair with
wigs or quills your your way up at the
high levels and assuming or assuming
away all sorts of stuff at the lower
levels is there a point at which
awareness or awareness of awareness
become significant or important to
yeah it's another area where we explore
we think that basically what we're
describing here is what what Terry calls
vegetative sentience I don't like the
word sentience because it implies
feeling
I like responsiveness he and I've been
working on on how to find words that
don't carry a bunch of baggage and yet
nail it so responsiveness there's
responsiveness from the get-go with
these if they break open they respond by
doing work to regenerate themselves to
repair themselves then there's feeling
which is more like sentience and then
there's conceptualizing these are the
three that are of greatest interest to
us and yes there are a bunch of
wonderful articles by teri and
colleagues about how it works at the
higher levels but again for this
presentation I've really wanted to
concentrate on patient serial zero
because if we can't explain them were
groping in the dark I took it to more of
it but where does death fall into that
cycle of regenerating and like this
deathless wonderful question
I I am chrono phobic I am chrono philic
death fascinates me i memorize poems
about her where does it fit into this
model what is dying when one of these
breaks apart or opens in the presence of
reactants what's dying is not the
material form the material form can
actually change over openings and
closings that is several generations
down the line one of these seeds may
have no molecules in continuity with the
original one and it's not the energy the
energy is coming from the outside what
is being lost is the constraint when I
die my molecules are free to do way more
things life is not an add-on to physics
and chemistry it's a subset it's a self
constrained subset that is me reducing
the possibilities as long as I live and
as those the the synergies by now
through evolution accumulated vast
quantities of synergies like the one we
started with the complementarity where
they both prevent each other from ending
we do that all the time in our
at so many different levels it's yeah
it's a marvel it's many PhDs but what
you lose is the constraint and suddenly
the molecules are free I've read
recently then Browns new book on origins
of life and he tries to make that a
pretty picture like as if everything is
moving towards entropy and that means
that they're free and that means that
they're shining their light everywhere
in the world that is not how entropy
works entropy is things falling apart
and if life was about maximizing entropy
which is also a popular notion in this
book Jeremy England brings this up then
let's just explode the sucker I mean
there's a if you if you want maximum
entropy there are faster ways to do it
then we do it we living beings we
actually sequester energy that's one of
the reasons why we've got petrochemicals
so the thing to pay attention to here
who's trying to get to in the last few
slides is that what I am is a constraint
on what happens and when that constraint
starts to fail
I lose my agency and at that point I'm
dead and the molecules are free to be in
a whole lot more of configurations and
often with offspring in fact my fellow
grandfather of my grandchild is right
here
talk about Austin is my first time at
hecka tech Mecca I am delighted to be
here I'm grateful that you were able to
give me your attention for this time and
do feel free to get in touch about any
of this if if questions and challenges
and kickings of the tire come to you
tonight or anytime I'm around ok very
local in Berkeley and thank you very
much
you
