my name is Roger Bissell and I'm
standing in here for our regular host
vun katar today on The Savvy Street show
we have a distinguished guest from the
field of philosophy and also here again
is my co-host Marco daowen Marco is a
well-known libertarian and publisher of
the blog the Jolly libertarian and he's
going to introduce our special guest
welcome to the show Marco oh thank you
Roger uh our special guest on the show
today is Michael ymer Michael is the
professor of philosophy at the
University of Colorado at Boulder and
his fields of expertise include
epistemology ethics meta ethics and
political philosophy uh Michael's the
author a co-author of a dozen books uh
one of them which is not yet published
uh and his books include ethical
intuitionism the problem of political
Authority and his most recent book
understanding knowledge he's also the
author of over 80 academic articles
welcome to the show Michael thanks uh
it's great to be here thanks for having
me okay I have a couple questions to
lead off with about your method of doing
philosophy uh first uh Michael you call
yourself an
intuitionist now uh I haven't read your
book on intuitionism yet but I have read
uh Jonathan ha's book uh The Righteous
Mind in which he also explains uh
intuitionism and why he is he is uh an
intuitionism an
intuitionist uh now um Jonathan ha
suggests that David Yume was right that
the emotions set the course for our
thinking and our conscious reasoning is
often just a rationalization for
justifying our emotions uh we're merely
a slave to our passions uh height
refines yum using intuition as a
substitute for emotions arguing that
there are two different kinds of
cognition and reason uh two different
kinds of cognition intuitionism and uh
intuition and reasoning um do you agree
first of all with Height's assessment of
yum and uh and of what how he defines uh
the concept of
intuition oh yeah well
so um Jonathan Height's use of
intuitionism is different from the use
in
philosophy um it's not completely
unrelated um but is really not it's not
really the same thing so first like he's
talking about a psychological issue and
the philosophers are usually not talking
about a psychological issue so so like
the philosophical uses um the
intuitionists are saying you know first
of all there are objective values and
second the way that we know about them
or the way that the way that you're
justified in believing an evaluative
proposition depends ultimately on a
mental state called an intuition okay
now that that's different from what the
psychologists are saying because the
psychologists are never they're never
addressing a normative issue they're
addressing a they're just making a claim
about how people in fact form
beliefs right so like jonan height is
not making a claim that there are
objective values first and and he's not
also not making a claim about
justification right like he's not saying
you're justified in believing something
okay but also the other thing is like
well we're not exactly using intuition
in the same way it's not totally
unrelated right because we both agree
that you need to have some input that's
um
non-inferential so some of your some of
your value judgments have to be starting
points that you didn't arrive at by
reasoning right but there but these
starting points in the usual
philosophical usage and in my usage
they're not
emotions they're things that when you
think about them you can see to be true
obviously okay so like you know um the
shortest path between any two points is
a straight line I would call that an
intuition and that that's widely that's
like widely used terminology in
epistemology you would say that's
intuitive meaning when you think about
it it's just obvious you don't have to
give an argument for that okay and then
the the claim of the intuitionist in
ethics is that there are some ethical
propositions that are intuitive in that
sense okay and now you know about David
Hume like yeah David Hume is wrong um
because it it appears that David Hume
well first of all that he he wasn't a
realist so he didn't think that there
there were objective evaluative truths
right and you know and it's like like
saying exactly what his view is in
modern terms is a little hard because
he's a little bit ambiguous okay but but
he didn't think there were objective
values right and then so if there are
objective values and then we have
cognitive states that represent them
like okay well then that goes against
hum's view about human motivation you
thought that you could only be motivated
by your desires but I think we could be
motivated by our value
judgments so you could want to do one
thing but you could have the Judgment
that you should do something else and
then you could be motivated to follow
the Judgment so
yeah well definitely gonna have to read
your book to find out more about that
because that sounds like a quite a
different take than uh than haes take
and and I I I like the philosophical
approach
uh in your book the problem of political
Authority you drive an anarcho
capitalist position not by relying on
quote tentative or controversial
intuitions but on clear mainstream
intuitions end quote now this sounds
like you were would TR avoid the
controversial hard cases such as
abortion capital punishment intellectual
prop right property rights or the state
of Israel but wouldn't these be the very
issues that would likely result in a
Clash between the private defense
agencies that you proposed and so
wouldn't it be advisable to dig into
these difficult questions rather than
avoid them right
well so you know when I said that
um like I'm I'm relying on common sense
intuitions that doesn't mean that I'm
not addressing any controversial
issues right so um I'm trying to I'm
trying to address well I'm defending a
highly controversial position right you
know anarchism in the first place is
highly controversial so but the idea is
to try to address a controversial issue
by starting from intuitions or pre just
in general starting from premises that
are less controversial can this be done
well you know read the book and see see
if I succeed it right but the idea is to
try to yeah start from a case that
people don't disagree about right or
there's minimal disagreement about and
then see whether you can somehow use
that to resolve more controversial cases
okay having said that in the book I in
fact did not address the specific things
that you mentioned so I didn't address
abortion because in fact I don't know
the answer to that and you know I didn't
address the thing about Israel
um uh you know also because I I don't
know how to solve that right although by
the way like anarchism wouldn't work for
Israel in the current situation
right basically you have to solve that
problem first you have to to solve that
conflict first before before they could
have anarchism because right now they
have to be protected from the
surrounding states um and then uh see
there there was a third thing that you
mentioned I oh intellectual property
yeah and uh I don't really know the
answer to that either um but I think
that I I I could tell you what I think
would happen in the anarchist society
which is I think they would not protect
intellectual
property um and um
you
know roughly speaking because I I think
that you have to get a lot of agreement
like in order to have something be
reliably protected like there has to be
pretty good agreement about it which
there isn't about intellectual property
and so like you you could have some
communities that think it's legitimate
and a bunch of other communities that
think it isn't and just the nature of it
the nature of this particular issue is
that if half of the people are not
recognizing it then it's
pointless right so like yeah right CU
like if half of the people can take your
patents and then the other half of the
people can't then you might as well not
have
patents well that's a very good point
and uh I I love this particular subject
which unfortunately we're not focusing
on I wanted to follow up on uh the
starting from a widely agreed point and
then basing arguments on that
um I was going to tie my next question
to what Marco asked you uh I was going
to ask you if you see an advantage in
using intuition rather than formal
argument to promote individual liberty
and I guess you're your answer would be
well no that's that's not what I do you
would say that you would start with your
groundwork intuitions and then you would
build on that using arguments and facts
so on uh and and I was going to ask you
uh well there are always going to be
sophists who are going to take they're
going to pluck something out of what you
said like well gee I have an intuition
that uh certain government intervention
programs that control over the economy
or private individual behavior my
intuition says those are Justified so so
how do you deal with uh uh people who
claim to be being intuitionists but they
come up with some conclusion that's
wildly different from yours right well
so you know first first I want to say I
want to sort of clarify like I'm not
doing some weird new
methodology that you know nobody ever
tried before uh as a matter of fact I'm
doing the same thing that everyone else
is doing right because there aren't any
people who present infinitely long
arguments and in the history of the
subject there has never been anyone who
presented an infinite an argument
everyone has starting points and so and
like you know like most objections to
intuitionism are apparently in
objections to having any starting point
right which is kind of like if you think
about it as an incoherent idea okay the
difference is just that I
recognize that fact I recognize I have
starting points I recognize what they
are and I defend what I'm doing
explicitly everyone else just does it
and they don't say that that's what
they're doing yeah but anyway yeah but
okay but you know your main question is
okay so suppose somebody said that they
have very different intuitions from me
what would I do okay so well there's two
possibilities right because it wasn't
clear um are they just lying about what
their intuitions are and so if the
question is how do I stop people from
lying about their intuitions I cannot I
can't stop them okay but what if they
actually do have very different
intuition well so like this is why I I
said well we try to take very widely
shared
intuitions all right so like my
intuitions are that that I would start
with would not be things like um you
know libertarianism is
true you know like welfare programs are
unjust it would not be that it would be
something that Democrats would agree
with right so it' be something like um
well it wouldn't okay it wouldn't be
okay for me in reality right now to go
over to My Neighbor Next Door and demand
that he give me a bunch of money and
like point a gun at him tell him give me
the money because I need to send money
to Oxfam to help the poor right and like
you agree I can't do that right okay so
like that would be the normative
starting point and then I start asking
them what okay you know if somebody
disagrees with that then I don't know
what to do but almost everyone agrees
with that okay and then then I can start
asking them things like well then why
would it be okay for the state what's
special about those guys why do they to
do that right in my experience is in
fact there people do not have a good
answer to that right and I've read the
literature so they're probably not going
to come up with an answer that I haven't
that I don't know about right
philosophers have thought about this and
there are answers to it but they just
are not very good so you're you're
you're basically saying that most people
go in pretty much the same fashion that
you do but they might call them uh
premises or assumptions or axioms but
it's it's whatever it just seems it
seems upon reflection it just seems to
be obvious it seems to be like well how
could you question that and so you find
some some Bedrock place to start and
then you can build a bridge to people
who might have a different policy idea
and then you show them you show them how
well if we agree on this then gee
doesn't it make sense that that uh this
really can't you can't do this i i i r i
I ran for a Schoolboard one time here
locally and I was talking to a very
liberal uh neighborhood group and and
they U they wanted a lot more money for
uh the educational uh system and I was
trying to uh reason from the idea that
well we all want the best education for
our children okay so it's that kind of
thing it's one of those well sure who
doesn't you know that that's obvious so
you start with something obvious and
then you try to show them another way of
thinking about it so I I I do see that
that's that's very much how even
somebody who who thinks reason and
syllogisms you know you think well that
that seems to be a good way to go uh I
came from uh as you may know I came I
cut my teeth on I Ran's philosophy many
many years ago and a lot of our viewers
did and um you wrote a piece which soon
after I got online back in the 90s
whenever that was I saw your piece I
thought okay uh this is cool and uh so I
would uh and it was why I am not an
objectivist or something like that and
if you could just tell us uh it's a long
piece and I loved it but if you could
briefly tell us what you think are the
key shortcomings even that you at this
point today the key shortcomings in
Ran's
philosophy oh yeah so it's it's it's
really hard like I don't think that you
can actually summarize that because
there's like
there's like dozens of objections or
something okay um you know I think like
so I'll say like the most distinctive
thing about Ein Rand as a philosopher is
her theory of the nature of Ethics which
appears in that essay the objectivist
ethics okay that's the most distinctive
of her it's not the only thing and I
don't know might not even be the most
important thing but it's the thing that
she contribute to philosophy
that's most different from what other
people were saying okay but also like
it's just like you know it's just like a
terrible argument right and then you
know if I were like I can't really
summarize everything that's wrong with
it because I just think like everything
about it it's just like you know
mistakes all over the place okay um you
know what like okay there's supposed to
be an argument for ethical
egoism but like it's it's hard to figure
out what the argument and basically I
think when when you figure out what's
going on what's going on is that ethical
ego ISM actually turns out to be a
premise of the argument right or
something really close to that right but
it's just that she uses language in a
way s such that most people don't notice
that that's what's going on you mean a
circular yeah yeah okay yeah begging the
question yeah right and you know so it's
um like here here's an analogy I think
is sort of sort of like that um you know
you meet this Christian and um you know
the Christian says you know human beings
are the only beings um who are capable
of properly worshiping God and so that's
why we need ethics to tell us how to
please God and so now I've given you a
theory of ethics and now I've shown you
that you have to worship
God no you just assumed that okay now
that is analogous to saying well you
know living things are the only things
that can um that that have an
alternative of existing or not existing
and so we need ethics to tell us you
know how to preserve Our
Lives no you didn't give any argument
for that you just assumed that right you
just assumed that life was the ultimate
value you didn't you didn't show that
right like showing like just saying you
know like it could either happen or not
happen and it depends upon your action
doesn't show you what you should do
right like anything anything that could
take as a value you could say that well
we have the alternative of having that
thing or not having that so we need
ethics in order to make sure that we
have that value right but that doesn't
show that that's the value
right well yeah I mean it seems that
there are ambiguities that need to be
teased out and analyzed and see if it
all fits together or if it doesn't and
uh that's one of the the chief uh
challenges that I've had over the years
in in figuring out is it tight
it does it hold together is it coherent
or not uh now that's ethics and and uh I
was just wondering have you studied her
concept Theory such as it is in the
introduction to object objectivist
epistemology do do you think there's
anything uh original or helpful in what
she says there that you might not run
into otherwise yeah I mean that is a
very interesting book the introduction
to objectivist epistemology like I read
that a long time ago when I was in
college and you know um I I think it I
think it's a good thing to read just
because it kind of stretches your mind
you know makes you think about the
issues um now is that is it like a great
contribution to philosophy like I
thought it was quite similar to Lock's
theory about
Concepts um that you know you sort of
start you start from experiences and
when you're forming an abstract concept
you're sort of omitting something from
it like so that is Lock's view that's
also her view although she said
something a little more specific which
is she says you're omitting
measurements okay but I think that I
think that might be overly overly
specific unless you're using the word
measurement in such a broad way that it
just means you're omitting some details
right right um now is that a correct
Theory
um I don't know
exactly I don't know if that's you know
exactly correct but it's sort of you
know
um if you had well okay so like this is
what people like Barkley would say right
and the other empiricists like you know
what are you talking about because like
they thought that sensory experiences
are like images in the mind so imagine
taking an image and there's like you
know a picture of a horse or something
because it's examples of barkly right
and somebody says take that thing omit
the color from
it what
what so yeah there's a picture of a
horse you take away its color what do
you have left well you just took away
the whole image right you can't you
can't take away the specific color and
have anything
left right so like it's sort of if you
if you really just started from the
image it doesn't actually make sense
that you admit the details because
there's nothing that um so it so it
might be that actually you're kind of
assuming that you already had something
abstract there in the first
place right and then okay so like so
well you can't really explain where you
got the abstract idea from it just sort
of had to already be
there well uh there's one other tidbit
here I was wondering if you read any of
the material she's written about art and
Aesthetics and and my question is do you
think that Aesthetics really properly
begins in philosophy any more than say
Philosophy of Law or philosophy of
education
well maybe those things also begin with
philosophy maybe in order to think about
the law you should first think about
philosophy you should you should think
philosophically about why do we have law
and why does it matter if you're
following the law um actually that that
does seem right to me yeah um okay yeah
but what about Aesthetics um it's not
the case that in order to make good art
you have to think about Aesthetics
that's not true but but it might help I
don't know
actually I'm not even sure if it does
help I don't know I have to have to talk
to some artists all right um but yeah
but she W she was very interesting on
that subject um although you know like
ultimately I guess I I do not agree do
not agree with her definition of art um
because I think it only covers
representational art and right you know
like a selective Recreation of reality
according to the author's metaphysical
value judgments okay well so Recreation
of reality sounds like it has to be
representational art right it it does
sound like that yeah thank you
yeah so Michael uh in your essay uh on
irand you argue that ethics is a priori
does this commit you to holding that
there's only one universal true ethics
and if so what do you see as being that
ethics yeah well so like I I think the
answer is it doesn't commit me to that
but that thing is just a trivial truth
so yeah that one true
ethics as far as I understand what that
means that's just that's very truth and
you can put anything in for ethics right
is there one true mathematics is there
one true whatever is there one true
physics just any subject yeah there's
one true that you know why because like
well every truth is part of that so if
you find an ethical truth that's part of
the true ethics right and then you know
and then like if there's an alternative
ethical proposition Well it can't be you
know and it's incompatible with the true
one then it's false because that's what
incompatible means incompatible means
that you know can't both be true so
there can't be two incompatible ethical
truths so there there could be at most
one right and if so if there are any
ethical truths at all then there's one
true ethics right okay that well that's
interesting because I I I've been uh for
quite a few years now I've been
interested in the philosophy of Isaiah
Berlin who of course is well known for
his value pluralism as well as for
phrasing the uh problem of political
Authority very much like you do that
it's a question of obedience and duty to
obey uh anyways regarding uh value
pluralism he says that genuine values
can often be in conflict and uh in any
given situation we have to make a choice
and as an example for example uh are we
going to be brave and risk death to save
a stranger or are we going to be prudent
and avoid such a risk to preserve our
own life so that's a case of two
conflicting value judgments there so how
do you view uh Berlin's uh Isaiah
Berlin's value
pluralism yeah well so I mean I I do
have a pluralistic value system but
so so they when you asked the previous
question about you know the one true
ethics I was thinking like oh well can
there be conflicting ethical systems and
so yeah the answer is no but you know
maybe you just meant well is there more
than one thing that's good that isn't
reducible to other things and then as
far as I can tell there is right so uh
you know there's there's happiness and
there's loyalty and there's honesty and
whatever you know Justice it looks like
there's more than one value I don't see
how to reduce them all there are people
who give like unitary theories where
there's only one value but um they just
wind up having to say very
counterintuitive things right so you
know like the
utilitarians that that's the most common
unitary theory of Ethics where like
everything is just maximizing enjoyment
and minimizing suffering okay um but
then you know then it winds up that they
have to say you know um you have a you
have a healthy patient who's got organs
that could be transplanted into five
other patients you know you you can kill
the healthy patient or just save five
other people like harvesting his organs
you know because yeah that's going to
prevent more pain like and just like
that's just that's obviously wrong right
so and just like nobody's been able to
come up with a theory that has only one
value that also kind of gets the right
results
right that sounds a bit like the example
of the patient who has uh has five
organs that could save five lives you
kill them to save five lives that sounds
a bit like trolley uh the trolley
problem famous trolley problem uh yeah
yeah yeah except that most people think
that you should turn the
trolley right but almost everyone agrees
that you should not kill the healthy
patient
yeah well it's interesting that you said
that you don't know if there are any
unitary theories but I immediately
thought about Aristotle among other
people uh said that you're flourishing
or you're living well your good life
there are subsidiary values that feed
into that and you can have a different
way of slicing up the pie of of health
and and friendship and so on but all of
these are like necessary constituents of
a good life and if you're missing some
of them it's like missing nutrients from
your food intake if you don't have
enough vitamin C you'll get scurvy you
know and so so uh in a way there she
like Aristotle saw these things as kind
of in a hierarchy almost like of
Concepts you know like you have lower
level Concepts and higher level and they
ultimately get up to of the the the the
great uh categories of of attribute or
action or so on and and uh it all kind
of comes up from the from your ground
level observations and so I think uh the
Aristotle might have said the something
similar is true for your values like you
value a good wine or you value I don't
know what they ate then olives or
whatever
so so all together it would be good food
good drink you know good good
nourishment and so it all just kind of
groups together under the like what you
put in your body the ideas that you
learn and so on so um I was wondering uh
when you say a unitary Theory would you
be ruling out something like that or
would you say Well that's not really a
unitary because it's so
complex right yeah yeah the latter so um
you know yeah you can have a single
value if you're allowed to characterize
it in sort of vague evaluative terms
right like say my my value could be the
good and that's all that matters to me
okay but then when I start telling you
what the good is there's like 10
different things okay right so and like
you described it as living well okay so
like that's it's evaluative and it's
super vague and so then when you start
telling me what constitutes living well
then there's multiple different things
right I do have a super vague standard
of value yes that's true all right
um I don't want to
mischaracterize what your position would
be I understand you to have said that
when irand made statements about the
choice to live and I think she did that
rather later in her writings
uh this implied that what goals we
should have and ends we should pursue
are not dictated by facts but instead we
just value certain things we want them
and and so whatever is conducive to
getting those things we want uh that's
what we need to do it's kind of
utilitarian or instrumental like well
this will help me get that so I should
do this and some people and I uh a guy
I've known for a long time a friend
Douglas Ras has pointed out that this
might
imply uh not a rational uh reason
directed Theory but instead what is
called uh voluntarism and the will is
superior to the reason and morality
doesn't hinge on the on your reason but
on your will whatever you want
whatever you want that's what you should
do now do you think that this suggestion
by rasmuson about Ran's
later writing is correct do you think
that she really didn't realize that
implication and that it conflicted with
what she had previously said about
rational self-interest and maybe she was
painting herself into a corner to me
that is a that is a big pivotal issue
and I don't know that it's gotten
successfully resolved so what do you
think about that Gras Mas is probably
basically right so when you when you
talk about like um famous philosophers
of the past and then you try to fit
their views into the taxonomy of views
that we have frequently they're
ambiguous right and so I think that ran
probably had like different strands of
thought which you know she didn't
realize are just conflicting strands of
thought or so didn't yeah didn't
completely separate and decide what her
view was right but like so she wants it
to be that there are objective
evaluative truths but if you wind up
saying that like you know such and such
is only good conditional on your
choosing to Value life and you you know
and then like you didn't have a reason
for that okay well that's a subjectivist
theory that is what everyone else calls
subjectivism in ethics okay but then
like you know maybe maybe the better
view was that life is objectively good
right so like you know the the other way
of interpreting the whole thing is well
actually it's a naturalist Theory it's
that it's just that the good is just is
that which promotes life and you know
and so
then then if you if you don't choose to
live then you're just choosing the bad
okay I like that a lot better than the
theory that it's only good if you chose
it right I mean Plato his euther was
like is it good because I desire it or
do I desire it because it's good you
know that whole conundrum I I agree with
you I agree with you uh one of one of
her uh gambits in general was uh the
nature will take its course Gambit you
know and uh and if you didn't like uh
the law of contradiction well you know
try to get along without it and see what
happens buddy you know the same thing
the same thing well you know if you
don't believe that you should do what
promotes your life and your well-being
then uh you know nature will take its
course you know so uh
I that's that's when you throw up your
hands because you can't get anywhere
into the discussion with someone you say
okay let's agree to disagree and uh God
bless you I hope it turns out better for
you than I think it will well yeah I
mean that that's sort of like departing
from the intellectual issue right yeah
you know yeah like yeah if you if you
found somebody who doesn't value life
then they'll probably die soon yeah okay
but that doesn't answer the issue of how
we in fact know no it's just giving up
yeah yeah markco go ahead uh okay well
um some philosophers have argued that
libertarian ISM encompasses more than
just a non-aggression uh principle for
example rodri long and others promote
what they call left-wing Market
anarchism which Embraces many of the
concerns of the left as well as concern
for the poor and the downtrodden and
this is sometimes called thick
libertarianism under on the other hand
people like G Rand uh say as she said in
a letter from uh from 1947 on subject
that the only shared moral Prem that is
needed for the foundation of for the
legal system of a free society as that
as that people of diverse moralities all
agree that all humans are ends in
themselves uh many many Advocates of
thin libertarianism prefer this minimist
Foundation to the more expansive uh
moral base for Liberty uh do you see
anarcho capitalism um that you argue for
is compatible with either of these two
views and if not what do you think of uh
is the necessary set of principles that
we need as a basis for a free
Society oh yeah so I guess I guess no I
don't agree with either of those um okay
so yeah you know what it all so take the
second thing first like okay the only
thing we need is a principle that all
individuals are ends in themselves no
that's not enough like I agree that
that's a good principle but that's not
enough to just like okay so then do is
their intellectual property people are
ending themselves so should there be
patent law and what should be what
should be the term for the patents if
there are like obviously you cannot
answer that from that right just not
going to answer every question although
it's a good idea so okay and then the
other um oh yeah and what's wrong with
the left libertarian view right and so
basically you know like I gave the the
example earlier where I decide that I'm
going to go over to my neighbor you know
and and demand some money for charity
right because there are poor people in
the world and I I want to donate some
money and I don't have enough money for
the poor so I just like I demand that he
give me money otherwise I'm going to
kidnap him and lock him in a cage like
okay that seems wrong and so um and so
if it's okay for the state to do that
there's there better be some reason why
that's okay but basically I don't I
don't think there is a good answer to
why it would be different for them right
like B basically you know so this this
is why the book is called the problem of
political Authority right because you
have to claim that the government has
some kind of special Authority that
other people don't have which overrides
the rights that that we normally
recognize between
individuals and so then you have to give
an account of why they have
authority and right and basically just
there just isn't a good account right
there isn't a good account of why we
would have you know like the neighbor
would have a right not to be robbed by
me but they wouldn't have any right not
to be robbed by the state
well in defense of rodri long and and
the left uh left libertarian uh man
Market Anarchist view uh I don't think
that they actually Advocate uh using uh
coercion or compulsion uh to achieve
their ends but they do believe that if
you get rid of the State uh uh then and
you don't then you get rid of crony
capitalism or or you know corporations
and other businesses uh and individuals
uh uh
getting an advantage from uh from the
coercion of the government to their own
position so I think their belief to some
extent is that if you get rid of the
state all these problems including
poverty and everything else will sort of
just disappear of the role oh okay good
yeah yeah good so yeah so I was sort of
like maybe addressing a different view
right where where you know you're
libertarian accept that it's okay to
have a welfare state or something but uh
yeah what you know what went wrong with
the left Anarchist view yeah well you
know you're wishfully
thinking like um so so like I think it
is true that the state is doing some
they're doing some that um
promotes big businesses at the expense
of small businesses like that's all true
but um so if we get rid of them like
there there
are um like small businesses would
Prosper more okay and then like you know
and then like maybe there could be
private charity to help the poor but I
don't think it's going to just like fix
everything right like there are still
going to be poor people and by the way
there's going to be inequality just
because why because people differ from
each other in ways that are relevant so
like some people are going to be more
productive and then they're just going
to get more money and like and and in a
modern society as like as technology
advances and so on like the inequality
will probably get
greater because like it's sort of like
um the state of Technology acts like an
amplifier right so you know it can it
can amplify the differences in people's
productivity somebody who's productive
the technology can help them be super
productive and also like just kind of
the interconnectedness of the world
right it's like you know you have
somebody like Jeff Bezos and then and he
can so he starts up this Amazon thing
then he can extend it across the entire
world the 8 billion people and that's
how we can become like a guy with $200
billion dollar which didn't happen
earlier times like that's not it's not
all just because the government is
helping Amazon
right right I haven't figured out how to
do that with my trombone yet so yeah
yeah probably not work probably not
going to probably not going to you know
like if you care about inequality then
yeah capitalism is a problem now I
myself think inequality is okay so you
know so I'm I'm okay with that there's
going to be inequality there was a
discussion on
KO Unbound maybe 14 15 years ago and you
were part of the discussion and U at
that time you said you thought things
were probably getting better in the
world and uh do you still think this is
so and if you do then why and if you
don't then why not and just uh give us a
little hope or just uh tell us how
hopeless things are how however you see
it yeah you know like I'm really not
sure what uh not sure what's going to
happen in the future you know
predictions are difficult especially
with the future yeah um but uh but just
sort of like looking over the past you
like the past history of civilization um
things have gotten better like you know
over time just dramatically right on
almost everything almost every Dimension
that's relevant to human welfare that
you can measure uh it turns out that
it's been getting better and a lot
better so like um you know I I think
like
um throughout the history of the human
species the average life expectancy is
thought to be something like 24 24 years
okay this is not because people were
dropping dead at 24 it's because a lot
of children were dying like a lot of
people would lose their children in the
first five years which is kind of
crappy there's a there's a quotation
from um David Schmid's the you know
libertarian political philosopher in a
recent book where he's you know he's
saying something like um we need need to
think about how we got to the point
where today being poor means wondering
if you can afford a second car from the
point where a few centuries ago being
poor meant wondering whether you can
afford to bury your first child in his
own shirt or whether you have to save
that shirt for his younger
brother you know you that's like you you
have to appreciate like how life used to
be okay when you get upset about things
that are happening today just understand
what things were like in the Middle Ages
okay and then maybe be a little bit more
appreciative um right right now but um
having said that by the way I don't know
that we're not going to all kill
ourselves right like that that remains a
possibility to me that's it's it's not a
far-fetched
possibility yeah okay that's a good
balanced answer and I appreciate that uh
this is the end of our show and uh myel
I want to thank you for your engaging
answers and uh Marco Den outon my
co-host for helping out uh to those who
have been listening or watching thank
you for tuning in to the Savvy Street
show and we encourage you to keep tuning
in and we assure you that if you do so
you'll become more and more savvy so
goodbye for now
