[Music]
so welcome Kevin thank you so so much
for coming along today what a amazing
way to start the week I really
appreciate your time here um so for
those who are not familiar with yourself
or with your work how would you
introduce
yourself well uh I am Kevin AO uh I'm a
professor of philosophy at Florida Gul
Coast
University um I've have been here uh in
Florida since 2004 at at this
University um and I'm also the chair of
the Department of communication and
philosophy at the University right now
um I did uh I had kind of a a a a
convoluted journey through graduate
school I I started out at the new school
for social research in New York City and
then uh moved to University of Utah and
Salt Lake City and then finished up my
PhD at the University of South Florida
in Tampa where I studied with uh a very
important figure in uh existential
philosophy and especially heiger a
fellow named Charles guon who uh sadly
passed away uh this past summer uh but
had a long and and influential career
and taught a lot of
students and um so that's that's the the
brief condensed version of who I am and
I consider myself a uh a specialist in
existential
philosophy uh phenomenology of the body
and uh areas of existential
Psychotherapy and phenomenological
psychotherapy
now phenomenology of the body is not
something that I come across people
saying a lot as their specialities yeah
yeah um yeah it's a it's a it's a
booming field right now um it's largely
indebted to the uh renewed interest in
the work of Maurice
mopan and some important and seminal
feminist figures obviously Simon De bua
uh one and um Iris Marian Young
another uh figure and it's simply a
recognition that the body is not
something we have and that we're only
contingently connected to uh it's who we
are we are our bodies We Exist through
our bodies we live through the the
vehicle of our bodies and so it's an
attempt to undermine that classic
cartisian dualism that the human being
is composed of two distinct substances
and and immaterial mind and a causely
determined body and
phenomenology undoes that dualism in in
a helpful
ways so you spoke slightly about your
your kind of academic journey into this
amazing field of philosophy and of
existentialism but what Drew you to want
to specialize in existentialism in the
first place how did you stumble upon
this this particular yeah it's a good
question um I came from a family of
intellectuals um my father was a
professor of uh sociology but mostly
kind of German social theory and uh was
raised uh came of age during the
counterculture revolution in the 60s and
early 70s when existentialism was all
the rage and everyone was carrying
around uh tattered copies of of chem Mo
and and sart and and
bouis and um and my parents met in
graduate school and so I was uh
surrounded by books growing up and I I
uh in my second semester of college I
was actually an engineering major in
college believe it or not and uh the
second semester of college I I read uh
doss's the brothers Kaza uh during the
winter break
and the book had a a
transformative uh impact on me and it
raised all of these deep existential
questions about the meaning of life the
existence of God the problems of
nalism um the experiences of anxiety in
the face of death and uh it it awakened
me to the fact that I've had these
experiences I feel this in my everyday
life
and uh I changed my major to philosophy
and never looked back and uh many other
aspects of philosophy I find
uninteresting and boring uh metaphysics
and
epistemology even much of Ethics uh
moral philosophy I find boring and
turgid but uh existentialism always uh
uh inspired me and shaped me and um it
it has stayed with me
since I was 18 or 19 years old and I had
uh powerful experiences in my early
adulthood and and laid adolescence of
hanging out with my high school friends
you know getting high and having a few
beers under the stars and talking about
the meaning of life and what is it all
about and who are we and why are we here
and I realized that those were the
questions of the existentialists right
those were deep and important
existential
questions and unfortunately as we move
into adulthood and and find our way into
careers and and family life we
oftentimes lose touch with those
important questions and we kind of drift
along in our existence until there's a
crisis or a breakdown and suddenly we
wake up again to how important
existential thinking is and so uh that
has kind of been the the arc of my life
it's always been shaped and informed by
uh an existential attitude or an
existential
orientation it sounds like you genuinely
connected with the kind of existential
questions and and and never were able to
kind of shake shake them away rather
than stumbling across a textbook in a in
an formalized module and saying okay I
better learn this Theory you helps the
questions within you yeah it was a
visceral experience it's I would it
wasn't about a vocation it wasn't about
even getting a job as a philosophy
Professor it was about a way of existing
and so I would be doing existentialism
if I was a managing a restaurant or
working in middle management somewhere
for a company I would still be watching
existential films listening to
existential music uh reading existential
poet
and and all of the things that that move
me as you say viscerally or in a mooded
way um because they speak they speak to
the concerns at the core of our
condition these are these are the the
ultimate concerns of our lives and uh so
so yeah they they they've had a powerful
orienting uh impact on
me you you bring out something for me
which is the fact that you know you
you're you're going through that phase
of life when you're younger and you're
chatting with your friends and you're
you're you're asking these massive
massive questions these really deep
questions and then you fade into a life
where you're not what you're not
supposed to be asking these questions I
remember for me I don't know about you
but it was kind of almost stigmatized to
ask why rather than to just follow to to
question these deep meanings rather than
to just pick a career and follow it I
don't know if you can relate to that oh
certainly I can and it's you know just
because we are kind of sucked into the
shallows of social convention and and go
with the flow of everyday life the
existentialists make it clear that
that's not a moral failing it's not as
if you're doing something wrong it's
just part of the inertia of Being Human
that we're we're always going to be
uh heiger has this this language of
Temptation we're tempted by the they or
the public world because it's
comfortable it's predictable it's it's
well ordered and it covers over the
anxiety that that kind of quivering
unease that all human beings experience
uh an unease that that reminds us that
there's something wrong with us that
there's something discon connected or
out of sync with us and the world and
it's because we're conscious it's
because we're self-aware that we we're
aware that we're going to die we're
aware that uh God is dead and there are
no moral
absolutes and so um I think
existentialists are just deeply attuned
to the the fragility and weakness of
human beings that we we drift to
religion we drift to comfort we we drift
to social norms because it it shelters
us and it protects us it's not a bad
thing it's just it's it's it's
structural to The Human Condition but
thankfully in life we have breakdown
experiences where that comfortable facad
collapses and we're forced to confront
ourselves and face who we are and that's
why anxiety conditions whether you call
it anxiety if you're KAG guard or nausea
if you're sart or absurdity if you're
Camu uh or or the horror of the nothing
if you're n all of these experiences are
edifying experiences because they jolt
us out of our routinized drift and force
us to face ourselves and to face our
existence and so the existentialists do
something
counterintuitive and and that is they
tell us that anxiety is a good thing
it's a teacher it's not something that
should be medicated necessarily it's not
something that should be controlled with
cognitive behavioral therapy necessarily
that's not to say that those things
shouldn't be included in a in a
treatment plan but we should listen and
attend to those experiences because
they're teaching us valuable lessons
about who we
are because I always have heard that
existentialism gets a bad rep for being
too focused on the negative to focused
on the dark but I similarly to what
you've just said have never experienced
like that there's always been a
sensation that it acknowledges and
explores the darker side that is
inevitably going to be there whether
you're facing it or not and actually if
you're able to explore these different
philosophies these different
perspectives on the dark and really
confront and really explore what that
means for you you are empowering
yourself in a way that nothing
not no denial or no putting it to the
side will ever ever do and that's one of
the recurring misconceptions about
existentialism it's a dark brooding
Naval gazing
philosophy uh it's it's not at all the
idea is when you confront death and face
death you you awaken to the fact that
life is not a dress rehearsal that this
is the only life you have and and
confronting finitude facing anxiety
injects a measure of intensity and
urgency and vitality into our existence
that otherwise it wouldn't have and this
is why nche calls his philosophy a gay
science it's a happy philosophy it's not
a morbid philosophy it's it's a joyful
philosophy and kirkgard will say the
same thing right that that when you
confront death it it it uh opens us up
to how precious and poignant and fragile
every moment is because it can be
snatched away from us at any time and so
in in many ways existentialism at least
for me is the most life affirming of all
philosophies it's not a death focused
philosophy at all it's it's it's
reminding us of how precious each moment
is and that we can't take any day for
granted now I jumped straight into
existential philosophies and I'm not as
familiar with other philosophies so
how would you distinguish between what
differentiates existential philosophies
from other
philosophies well I mean just in terms
of academic
Specialties in anglo-american philosophy
existentialism is completely
marginalized uh because it doesn't focus
on the core issues of Truth and
knowledge and the nature of reality and
and what is the what is Good Conduct
what ought we to do existentialism
doesn't care about any of that generally
because uh the concern is not on
philosophical abstractions what is the
nature of beauty truth justice the good
life well actually that's not true
they're concerned with the good life the
existen is concerned with what does it
mean to be human what is existence and
so what the existentialists do is they
shift the philosophical orientation away
from theoretical Detachment where we
theorize about abstract forms and turn
our attention to the concrete Flesh and
Blood particulars of everyday life which
is what existence engages or invol is
involved in and so
uh it's a complete it's a complete
reversal of the traditional
philosophical orientation that we
inherit from Plato and Aristotle and
that that gets uh refined and
Consolidated with figures like decart
and Kant it it it's not a it's not a a a
philosophy rooted in theoretical
reflection it's a philosophy rooted in
attentiveness to the concreteness of our
existence of our being and that means it
focuses on uh the way we live every day
the moods we feel the affective
experiences that shape us and and shock
us into awareness like those anxiety
moves or nausea moves and so um uh it's
always been a kind of peripheral Fringe
philosophy in uh the UK and the United
States obviously less so in uh the
Golden Age of uh French philosophy and
German philosophy in the 20s and 30s and
and teens but um thankfully that's
starting to change and one of the
drivers of this change is a recognition
that because existentialism focuses on
concrete existence it can expand the
philosophical uh perspective to include
voices that have been traditionally
marginalized in the philosophical
mainstream so feminist philosophy of
course was was in many ways inaugurated
by Simone deir a critical race Theory
had a was deeply impacted by France
fenan who was a student of of sarts and
and and BVO and was influenced by
Maurice meroon and so these these other
forms of uh philosophical
approach uh that have never had a voice
at the table are finally being seen as
Bonafide philosophical perspectives that
in my view are in many ways indebted to
existential ISM by focusing on the
conrete and the particular instead of
abstract Universal forms or
Essences I know this is me speaking from
a completely biased perspective but I
hearing you say that it makes me find it
hard to imagine why other philosophies
have the ability to matter if we haven't
understood who it what it is to be
ourselves if we haven't understood the
kind of existential aspect of existence
why does any why does it matter what's
right or wrong if we don't know what we
are I yeah I totally agree I mean I find
most of uh anglophone philosophy quite
boring and uninteresting because of that
and as a teacher the classes that excite
the students and engage the students and
Inspire the students are existentially
themed courses because they're at that
stage in life where they're asking those
questions what am I doing what is it
about why I why am I majoring in this
and not in that and how is this going to
shape the the future of my life and so
when we start talking about Fredrick
nche or Martin heiger Jean Paul sard the
students resonate to these questions
because they're feeling them right now
at age 18 19
2021 and they're going to have to
confront those really serious concerns
they're not not so uh passionate about
abstract metaphysical speculation those
are interesting and curious thought
puzzles um but they're curious in the
same way that I'm curious about getting
good at chess or or or figuring out the
New York Times crossword puzzle
those thought experiments or
philosophical Curiosities don't keep me
up at night they don't wake me up at 3:
a.m. where I'm jolted awake and I think
what's the meaning of my life that
existentialism you see that's more
important yeah there's a difference
between
intellectual Fascination intellectual
curiosity and kind of an inherent
questioning that you're saying kind of
innately surfaces at at certain time
times of life you're saying and in
certain experiences for example this are
really life shattering or life
questioning
experiences yeah exactly
and we have been obviously discussing
the phenomenon but we have not been
defining the phenomenon if that is
possible how would you define it well
existentialism as a as a technical term
is almost um Beyond a clear definition
and it's an ism as I as I write in my
book that really uh is misleading it's
not like rationalism or
empiricism or or scientism or naturalism
um it doesn't refer to a unified
philosophical
school um and the word wasn't introduced
until n in the until the 1940s right by
Gabriel Marcel and Marcel used that word
to refer to the philosophies of of sart
and buou but you know existentialism as
a word didn't exist in the 19th century
so kirkgard and n and doeski and Tolstoy
the word didn't even exist but I think
to to get a sense of the overall
Contours of what the word refers
to it it it it refers to a philosophical
focus on what it means to be human what
does it mean for a human being to exist
and the idea is that we exist in a way
that's fundamentally different from the
way this water bottle exists or this
cell phone exists
we are not substances we're not static
things that are objectively present to
be studied we are activities or
processes or happenings so existence is
an event for uh humans it's a it's an
event of self making or
self-fashioning we make ourselves who we
are through the meaning giving choices
that we undertake
as our lives unfold and this is what s
means when he says existence precedes
essence right there is no pregiven
Essence that determines who we are we
make ourselves Who We Are by choices by
actions and those actions are always
constrained by our embodiment our social
historical situation our gendered or
sexual uh uh situation so so it's not as
if our uh
self-created uh our our the activity of
self-creation is completely unhinged
it's not uh completely undetermined it's
situated and
constrained by what the existentialist
call facticity the facticity of who we
are and so what we do as humans is we
are in a struggle or a tension between
the Givens of our situation
and our capacity to interpret and give
meaning to those given and the
existentialists call that Transcendence
so we're always in this tension between
Transcendence and facticity and that
struggle is existence itself right I'm
I'm I'm giving meaning to the fact that
I'm a man in the 21st century who's
white and middle class and for the time
being ambulatory and able-bodied and I'm
going to have to interpret and give
meaning to that factical determination
as it changes and shifts and and uh is
modified throughout the course of my
life and of course what that means is
that the process of self-making is
finite it's temporal it comes to an end
in other words we make ourselves who we
are with the recognition that that
process of self-making is finite that we
are beings on the way towards death and
uh we don't like that that scares us so
often times we live in a way that is in
denial or flight from our own finitude
from our own mortality and that's why
most of our lives are inauthentic or in
the words of SAR and buir in bad faith
we live in a state of self-deception
most of our lives and we think in the
course of Our Lives that there's
something real and enduring and Lasting
about our existence but the
existentialists want to remind us that
there is nothing real enduring or
lasting about our existence our
existence is finite and that's not a bad
thing it's just it's just part of what
it means to be human and we need to kind
of own up to that and so Central to that
process of authentic
self-creation is a kind of honesty that
we need to be honest with ourselves and
cut away all of the layers of
self-deception that we carry with
ourselves to protect us from the the
horror of of our finitude the horror of
our
contingency so so one of the things that
the existentialists say is that you know
we exist but we don't have to exist
there's no reason for us to exist we
just happen to be thrown into existence
and against the backdrop of our thress
we now have to ourselves into who we are
and that's a huge burden that's the
burden of Freedom it's dizzying and
anxiety provoking and we don't like to
accept that either and that's why we
like to be told what to do we like our
priests to tell us what to do our
therapist to tell us what to do our pop
psychologist to tell us how to live our
lives we don't want to do it on our own
uh and of course what the existentialist
want to say is it doesn't M you're
always on your own anyway right you're
you've got to be honest with
yourself so that's that's the the the
the the cliffnotes version of
existentialist existentialism hard to
Define but there are kind of central
features built into it Freedom
authenticity uh
temporality all of these things kind of
undergird all of the existentialist
philosophers the problem unfortunately
is that there some of the most
significant uh voices in existentialism
aren't philosophers at all they're
novelists like Doki and Tolstoy their
poets like uh rhina Maria rilka their
filmmakers like KIRO
kurasawa their playwrights like like
sart and novelists like
BVO and so um
existentialism expands far beyond the
academic world it's not it's not uh EX
exclusive to
philosophers it's it's open to anyone
who's sincerely concerned about the
human condition and is anxious about
what it means to be human and is trying
to articulate and express that anxiety
or that
concern and there are also religious
existentialists and atheistic
existentialists right and so not all
existentialists uh are are you know
following nich's uh Maxim that God has
Dead uh many of the most important
existentialists were theistic
existentialists like dosi like Paul till
like Martin bber and there are some
existentialists that don't believe in
free will like n he thinks Free Will is
a fiction it's an illusion uh but most
existentialists have some conception of
freedom of Free Will and so this is why
it's so difficult to uh demarcate the
boundaries of what existentialism is
yet there are these familiar names that
are going to generally speak coming
across when you're studying it
especially from an academic point of
view and it's making me think what you
know who how how did these particular
names get selected and and put into the
into the textbooks and why are they the
ones kind of being regurgitated and and
shared not that there's anything not
completely marvelous about what they're
sharing and that they shouldn't be
shared but why them why
not anyone else because they're the ones
that do it they're the ones that that
Engage The Human Condition in the the
most powerful and accessible and
visceral way and so other novelists may
talk about the human condition in
certain ways but very few do it the way
dosi does it in crime and punishment or
in the Brothers car Maza very few
articulate the experience of confronting
death like Tolstoy does and the death of
Ivon ilc very few capture the the
despair in the face of of uh the
dizzying abyss of existence like s and
kirar does in sickness unto death so
these These are the figures that Engage
The Human Condition in the in the most
powerful way but but but other there are
other marginal figures or figures on the
periphery that that do it in different
ways but uh in my view they may not do
it as well uh and or some may not have
been discovered yet who who knows but um
when it comes to the major figures
they're they're major for a reason
because their legacy is enduring and
Lasting because they they tend to do it
better than anyone
else and it being they speak to that
humanness within you to that
unspeakable part of you which is just
craving stimulation craving questions
craving answers and they allow this kind
of internal communication with that
being and that's why there well it's
it's I mean um I don't know if it's
craving stimulation or craving answers I
mean one of the things that the
existentialist will say is that craving
for stimulation is actually a form of
denial we want to be stimulated and
distracted from our human condition and
there are no answers to The Human
Condition the the what the
existentialist want to do is put us in a
state of questionability that there is
no answer to the question what it means
to be human you have to find that for
yourself you have to give your life
meaning so there are no uh it is not as
if the existentialist lays out a guide
book to being who you are that's the
scary part about existentials up to you
to find out what this means this is why
nche for instance is so famous for
cautioning his readers don't become nans
don't follow me follow yourself you need
to you need to carve out your existence
and give meaning to your existence in
the way that matters to you n did it for
himself but you're not Nicha you have to
do it in your own way and kard calls
this subjective truth it's a truth that
no else has access to It's Your Truth it
belongs to you and and um it's going to
be incoherent and unintelligible to
anyone else and that's why it's it's
precious to who you are so so one of the
tricky things about existentialism as a
philosophy and actually this is kind of
true to philosophy in
general uh answers aren't part of the
project the the project is to immerse
yourself in the questions or as as reala
says live the questions exist the
questions and be comfortable in the
mystery and the ambiguity of The Human
Condition the more we try to find
reasons or grounds for our existence the
further away from authenticity we we
drift does that make sense and that is
my observation of what is causing people
the deepest pain is when they are
needing that that answer to what
ultimately can't be answered because it
is just life it is just your decision
you wake up each day and either do the
very much similar thing that you did
yesterday or you be a completely
different version of yourself doing a
completely different thing that there is
just infinite ambiguity if you're
willing to experience it yeah and so one
of I think one of the the measures of of
authenticity or or uh being true to
ourselves is to learn how to be
comfortable with or to dwell in
uncertainty to dwell in in mystery and
ambiguity and and don't recoil from it
or don't try to control it and master it
uh but to to immerse yourself in it and
that is The Human Condition it is it is
it is a fundamentally ambiguous and
uncertain predicament and the more we
try to control it and manipulate it and
master it the the more anxious we become
and this is why this is this is one of
the the key features of it in
existential Psychotherapy the more you
try to control your anxiety the more
your anxiety takes control of you uh the
more you befriend your anxiety and and
welcome your anxiety and dwell in it the
less control it has over you the less
power it has over
you for someone that might be watching
this and really sitting there struggling
with their their mental well-being or
with their experience of life and they
were hoping that existential ideas might
might alleviate some of that what would
you recommend for them in terms of
either just exploration or or particular
sources
well it's hard for me to say because I'm
not a clinician and I'm not a mental
health counselor and I think it's a
caseby casee situation I think um one of
this one of the stereotypes of
existentialism is that it's anti-
Psychiatry um and this is a this is a an
orientation that was really pioneered by
figures like Ry
Lang uh who was deeply inspired by
existentialism and especially the work
of Jean Paul SAR and the idea is that
any medical intervention that blunts or
or covers over our freedom or our
confrontation with uh our condition is
uh dehumanizing and and uh
problematic I don't think that's true at
all I think some people need uh
pharmaceutical assistance medication I
think some people need uh instrumental
psychotherapies like cognitive and
behavioral therapy and so my my approach
to this from a mental health perspective
is very much in a IC approach you use
what works I think someone in the grips
of full-blown panic and
anxiety nich is not going to help that
person KAG guard's not going to help
that person in fact it could inflame the
situation and amplify it however if the
anxiety is controlled or or mediated in
some sense with uh an anti-depressant or
with some form of cognitive behavioral
therapy that may allow that suffer to
begin the hard work of existential
Psychotherapy and so uh I would
certainly not uh employ existential
Psychotherapy as a first line of
treatment in every situation by any
means but I think existential
Psychotherapy has to be employed for
lasting change to occur for lasting and
significant transformation to happen and
growth to happen
um and so
uh um yeah I think that's kind of the
way I would go about
it which could almost be summarized as
saying work
out on a kind of on an individual basis
on a unique basis and also I would argue
in in a in unique to each moment because
so I do work um as a practitioner and
and I'm obviously highly influenced by
existential philosophies in my work but
what I'm going to do with a client one
day or how we will be together in a
session one day is going to be
fundamentally different perhaps than the
previous week or the next week and I
feel that from my perspective at least
there's something about having these
philosophical ideas having these
Concepts having these key themes almost
within myself as lenses or perspectives
to have as an alternative way to look
and
especially a a lot of it's rooted in not
being able to change not being able to
make a change um I think that's right
and I I think one of the the great
insights of existentialism is the
recognition that anxiety and despair are
not medical conditions they shouldn't be
medicalized as discreet medical entities
they are structural to The Human
Condition they're inescapable everyone
is going to going to have powerful and
and life shattering anxiety moments and
and many most of us will have them over
and over again throughout our lives as
we get through go through a divorce or
our parents die or we lose our job or we
suffer a a serious illness all of those
experiences are going to shatter us and
um we're going to have to confront
ourselves but to say that that
experience of of uh existential
shattering or anxiety in the face of our
own finitude is a medical condition is
really problematic in my view because
what the that doesn't mean they
shouldn't be treated and and assisted
with with Pharmaceuticals or or or CBT
or something like this what the
existentialists want to remind us is
that these are instructive edifying
opportunities for personal growth and
transformation right they Awakenings
and um if we just blunt these Awakenings
with with
tranquilizers or or are trained to not
attend to them and and and avoid them
you're never going to have those those
uh transformative opportunities that
that anxiety can bring to
us do you feel that there have been
moments in your own life when this is
applied oh
God countless times in my life every
major breakdown every
crisis existentialism has helped me um
three years ago I had a massive heart
attack uh while on a 60 mile bike ride
something I did regularly I was a kind
of a fitness Advocate and and a health
nut and I had a massive heart attack and
my whole world collaps uh my identity as
a professor my identity as a as a
physically fit middle aged man my
identity as a as a partner or uh uh in
terms of my
relationships and
existentialism helped me work through
that trauma and and uh come through the
other side I think as a better human
being uh with a deeper perspective about
life's Frailty and and
precariousness and oh woke me up to uh
living with a sense of urgency and
vitality and intensity that it's you
inevitably get sucked away from in the
drift of professional life or or family
obligations and work obligations and so
on so existentialism has through
throughout my life from from 18 years
old on uh numerous breakdowns divorce
you know sicknesses losses of friends to
cancer and
illness um has has pulled me
through and and deepened my life and and
opened up opportunities for growth and
transformation and so it has been uh
whether it's it's through existential
literature or reading haiger again or
teaching n and John Paul sard in the
classroom it's always been uh
therapeutic for
me I appreciate you sharing and I
suppose because I'm socialized to think
it I'm almost instinctively when you
hear someone's experience of trauma you
want to instinctively say I'm so sorry
that you had that experience but I'm
learning more and more and especially
with you sharing this This brilliant
this growth
Beyond and these new insights that you
gain from it there's almost a sense that
well I'm I'm not sorry that you had that
experience in a in a way you're saying
that it contributed beautifully to your
life and that's actually the the great
gift of of existential philosophy is
that these
these traumas and crisis I mean you
don't want you don't want to romanticize
them you don't want to romanticize
suffering and that's always a Temptation
in existential philosophy that he or she
who suffers the most is the deepest and
the most authentic that's just nonsense
and I don't think that's a right an
accurate depiction of what the
existentialists are trying to do but the
recognition that that that trauma and
suffering and
breakdowns uh awaken us to Life's
Frailty and its poignancy
and remind us not to take our
relationships for granted or our our our
day for granted that it could be snuffed
out at any time um are are tremendously
valuable life lessons and they improve
and enhance Our Lives they don't
diminish it at all they make us in my
view better people more compassionate
more understanding more sympathetic to
the suffering of others and um so so I I
think you're right that that cliche I'm
so sorry this happened I'm so sorry for
your loss those losses are opportunities
for growth those those those deaths are
are opportunities for transformation and
and kirkgard is great with this I mean
kard goes so far as to say God wants you
to die God wants you to die to the world
because when you die to the world the
world comes back to you in a way that's
more vibrant and intense and urgent than
it was before so so the idea is to die
over and over throughout your life and
every time you die the world comes back
with more vibrancy and tensity and
poignancy and and during that process
you you prepare for your actual death in
rila's words you learn how to die which
is the the most important lesson that a
philosopher can teach how can you learn
how to
die I'm I'm aware that it could be
really really easy for someone to for
someone to sit here and hear this and
think well it's so easy for you guys to
speak theoretically about embracing the
opportunities that suffering provides
but hey I'm sitting here with a real
life experience of suffering and I have
no idea how to how how do we do that
especially when we haven't had you know
the advantage of years of actual
philosophical
engagement yeah it's a it's a very
difficult question I mean some people
won't most people most people will live
uh uh lives of deep suffering and
meaninglessness and that's just the part
of the predicament of Being Human many
people live sad ordinary lives that are
bereft of deep meaning and significance
Tolstoy says it great in the in the
death of Ivon ilc he says Ivon ilak
lived an ordinary simple life and
therefore it was a life that was most
terrible and that's the life that most
of us will live and
this is why I think Natalie projects
like the ones that you're doing which
are trying to give voice to this the
importance of existentialism are so
important um education is important good
liberal arts Humanities education is
important reading great literature
watching good film listening to good
music those are all important edifying
experiences that speak to The Human
Condition in so far as those those
movies and and pieces of literature and
and and pieces of music speak to The
Human Condition and so
um again you know
sadly most of us are going to suffer and
and not have the wisdom that the
existential tradition can open open us
up to and one of the things that I do in
my work is I try to popularize
existentialism by writing about it and
by giving talks on it and by giving uh
uh going to conferences and being a pi
Piper to my students about how important
these these questions and ideas are and
so I try to incorporate that wisdom into
everything that I do in my conversations
with my friends with my partner with my
colleagues reminding them that this this
Petty squabble about academic
bureaucracy doesn't really matter don't
get hung up on it because you're going
to die and you're going to die at any
time and so put yourself put things in
perspect perspective what really matters
in the grand scheme of things and Irvin
yum the great existential
psychotherapist refers to this as
trivializing the
trivial re realize that these things
that we worry about most of the time in
our lives are trivial stupid wastes of
time that there are much bigger more
significant issues on the table like
living a meaningful life and and being a
decent human being see
and how generally does that go down for
you when you're engaging with people who
are are living in the trivial who are
embracing the trivial conversations and
you're like hold up you know that is
Trivial let's let's talk about something
you have to be it's a really good
question I mean you have to be careful
because it's not going to register for
most people I mean most people like
Kevin he's so dramatic I mean he's such
an intellectual he's always talking
about these heavy things but um if
you're if you're sensitive in mind to
the speaking position of other people
you can do it in ways that are
thoughtful and and um sensitive and so
you don't want to bludgeon someone with
existential philosophy and say wake up
wake up you can be thoughtful by asking
questions like what does that mean for
you why is this worrying you why is this
concerning to you uh with my students
it's a little bit different I can be a
little bit more blunt because I'm a
teacher and they're learning this
material so I can shove down their
throats whether they like it or not but
with my friends and my family and my
colleagues you have to be a little bit
more indirect and and thoughtful and
recognize that these ideas are quite
scary and can be terrifying if you've
never dipped your toe into existential
philosophy before and that most of our
culture is built in such a way is to
deny these concerns right that that most
of our cultural inst institutions are
set up in a way that we don't have to
face the the the existential given right
we don't have to face death we don't
have to face absurdity we don't have to
confront anxiety and and
um and so so you you want to be cautious
in terms of how you bring this up but
but oftentimes it means that I just cut
some people out of my life if they're
not willing to engage so I I don't have
uh a lot of friends maybe for that
reason but it's the same reason why I
don't have friends who are Donald Trump
supporters I just there's no reason for
me to waste my time with someone who is
a dogmatic follower of dog Donald Trump
I I have nothing really to say to them
in the same way that it'd be very hard
for me to try to uh gently broach the
idea that maybe God is an invention to
someone who is deeply ins sconed in uh a
religious uh faith and their identity h
es on the idea that God has to exist
it'd be very hard for me to disentangle
that person from those deeply held
convictions I could suggest some
literature uh maybe some books but it
wouldn't be a conversation that I'd be
interested in
having I remember really early on in my
training one of the lecturers must have
just supervised some students because it
was obviously quite fresh for her but
she was saying that they had conducted
their entire thesis on the potentially
damaging and and ending result that
engaging in existential philosophy can
have on inter relationships be that with
Partners intimate relationships with
friends with family members because it
you know we speak about you you spoke
there about choosing to move away but it
almost becomes and I've spoken with
colleagues it almost becomes intolerable
not to think deeply not to see as
trivial when they are trivial yeah I
agree and I and I think and I I don't
want to be harsh about this but
um it's okay to cut people out of your
life that have no that that that aren't
that aren't bringing meaning and value
to your existence and and with family
members it's much more difficult because
there are are longstanding connections
of
intimacy um but I I don't have much
problem um disconnecting from friends
that don't really uh see the relevance
of these kinds of questions or concerns
and I I also uh have a very hard time
with small talk and gossip it makes me
very uncomfortable so so going to
cocktail parties or where people are
just talking about trivial
things that makes me quite anxious and
unnerved and and uh I don't like that
but if a conversation at a party is
involving real serious existential
questions I'll be there all night and
and I'll be passionate about the
conversation and so so um uh it for me
it's a temperamental orientation
temperamentally I I I I I'm very
uncomfortable with with with surface
conversation it makes me it makes me
quite anxious and it's the same thing at
faculty meetings or department meetings
I'm a department chair so I have to deal
with a lot of bureaucracy and deal with
upper Administration those meetings I I
can't stand I have a very difficult time
sitting through them uh because I see
the the the vast waste of time that
these meetings suck up in a life and I
think okay there's another two hours of
my life that I'll never get back that
that didn't contribute anything to my to
my uh sense of who I am and so I think
some people maybe you're like this uh
Natalie that that temperamentally you're
just drawn to these ideas it's not
something that you can really help it's
just it's it's it's it's part of your
your
Constitution and I can confidently say
that you have just validated so many of
my peers experiences there too when you
say you struggle with small talk and and
gossip and and I had wondered if that's
just because everyone's just coming to
the end of this huge huge doctorate
Journey which is exhausting and
overwhelming in itself but perhaps it is
part of this it might be part of a
deeper uh uh existential orientation and
you know again if if if a group of
friends are sitting
around talking about really important
life
issues I I'm drawn to that like a laser
beam and and I will listen and and Nod
my head and contribute where I can but
the conversation is about politics or
sports or redecorating a house or
installing a backyard
gazebo I or or what restaurant is good
or or who's coming to town in terms of a
band or something I could care less I I
just my eyes glaze over I mean I can
play the game and put on the mask of
sociability as good as anyone but um uh
when I go home I'll feel uh deflated and
upset that I lost a few more hours of my
life you
see and I'm not sure if you noticed it
but I want to reflect back that you said
it's those conversations and those
meetings which don't contribute to who I
am and that is what is antagonizing and
frustrating about them yeah and that's
not to say that I don't willfully do it
and I know it's important work to keep a
university going and I know that we have
to put on masks to keep the Machinery of
society uh lubricated and well oiled um
and and and it's also not a judgmental
thing I I'm not I it may come off like
I'm being judgmental it's a it's it's
it's who I am it's I can't help it and I
I I think some people love small talk
and they love gossip and they love
cocktail party conversations it's just
something that I can't bear it's very
difficult for me it takes a tremendous
amount of energy to maintain myself at a
three or 4 hour long dinner party where
the conversation is just idle chatter uh
it's I I mean I have to have two or
three glasses of wine just to take the
edge off and and cope and that may that
may be revealing more about me than I
want to suggest but uh it's it's who I
am yeah I don't think it's it's
judgmental that it came across I feel
like it was very honest but it makes me
realize we don't perhaps often get the
opportunity to express in a safe space
honestly what does and doesn't work for
us in life we are often involved with
situations that are just part of the
pattern of existence and we we we
tolerate them and we put our masks on
and we we navigate them because we we
feel that we have to and I think that's
a great Point Natalie I think my a my my
personal view is that everyone deep down
is craving for these conversations these
deep serious conversations about the
meaning of life but they're scary
they're they're frightening
conversations because they expose so
much that we want to keep hidden but I
think all of us it's I think it's it's
it's it's built into The Human Condition
we we we are thirsting for these
encounters these deep intimate
relational encounters what what Martin
bber calls the IU relation uh where
we're open and exposed to the other
person and this is what draws people to
therapy this is why people go into to
therapy because they want to be heard
they want have to have someone listen to
them in a way that's sincere and open
and um they feel safe in that space in
that therapeutic encounter and and that
safety oftentimes isn't there at a at a
at a social Gathering or at a party but
the more intimate that that social
Gathering gets and and the more
close-nit that community of friends and
and relations is the greater the
opportunity for deeper convers ations
and and and more penetrating uh
discourse and I wonder where it is in
life that we do become so scared of
confronting these questions because if
you think about children children are
constantly just exploring all of many
facets of thems all the many potentials
of what life has to offer and they do it
with such just innate fearlessness
yeah I think we we it gets socialized
out of us I think you're right I think
children are always the best
philosophers they're always
philosophically inquisitive and and even
inquisitive about the deepest and
scariest questions about death you know
what happened to our dog what happened
to Grandma where do they go after they
die why why why and um as as as young
children get socialized in in in school
and in educational institutions in in
peer relations they're kind of told you
don't ask ask those questions anymore
you do what good boys and girls do and
um and that's a that's sad that's
unfortunate and and so we we lose touch
with that wide eyed uh openness to the
questionability of life that all
children have and it gets beaten out of
us and then there's moments in I think
late adolescence early adulthood when it
wake when we're W woken up again and
that's often is happens when you go off
to co when you leave home for the first
time right either going to college or go
off and and and practice a trade at 18
or 19 and you leave the home and
suddenly those questions come up again
who am I what's the meaning of my
life and um and and and then we we get
our degree and we get our job and we
start start our career and we forget
those questions until we get our divorce
or we we lose our job or we get a
critical illness and then we're woken up
again and um so I think that that the
experience of questionability that
children have uh comes back to us at
different points in our lives I also
think it comes back to us in at the end
of life that the older we get the more
humble we get the more open we get
toward mystery and and questionability
and I'm actually finishing a book right
now on existentialism and aging and
argue that the aging
process and the intimacy that aging
brings us with grief and loss actually
makes us into existentialists I think
Elder the elderly folk tend to be more
receptive to these ideas uh and there's
a lot of interesting uh evidence to
suggest this that we we actually become
EX existentialist the the closer we get
to death and the more our future
contracts and we realize that we are
temporal beings and life is coming to an
end you've set my mind off in a thousand
different but I need to to keep it
straight yeah and and you're speaking
about different literature we've got you
know we've got theoretical literature
we've got philosophical perhaps novels
and and you've mentioned poetry and film
what about for the person who's sitting
there and is like yeah these these
Russian or Phil French and Western
philosophers um that they're not my
style there's no way I could engage with
those kind of texts I'm not interested
in classical music I'm not a deep person
I'm not hugely academic or
intellectual yeah it's a it's a good
question I think yeah some people just
aren't readers some people aren't
intellectually inclined I think one of
the great Entry Way way into existential
thinking if you're not a literary type
is through film I think there's a lot of
really great accessible films that uh
capture the core ideas of existential
philosophy and and some of them are
Blockbusters with some of the great
stars in Hollywood and so what what film
can do is it can
demystify the alienating and
intimidating jargon of the
existentialists the German terms and the
French terms and the technical language
that maybe a sart or a BVO or a heiger
would
employ um and uh I'm thinking of of
movies like um American Beauty this the
movie by Sam
Mendes um the Tree of Life by Terrence
Malik um there's a great uh Nan themed
science fiction film called
arrival um that was directed by villanu
um Akira kurasawa the great Japanese
director of course has done so many
great existential films the greatest is
probably
uru um about a a man who's who's
diagnosed with terminal cancer and he's
forced to confront uh a life that has
been largely bereft of meaning and now
he's kind of Awakened to the urgency of
the limited time that he has left and so
I think film is a great way to introduce
and and these films are cross-cultural
it's not as if these are just Western
filmmakers I mean uru had I mean I'm
sorry uh kurasawa had such a massive
impact on Western filmmakers that in
manyways he was the Pioneer not not not
Hollywood or or French or or American
filmmakers and uh ingar Bergman films of
course uh anything that Bergman does
some Woody Allen films uh are good
although he has demonstrated himself to
be a loathsome human
being um so that's one way to do it uh
is is through indirectly through
film and I think that's hugely
reassuring and partly what this project
is aspiring to do because there isn't
for me an obvious go-to place to say
I've heard this word this ISM as you
were speaking about it doesn't it's
coming up a lot it seems that it could
be something curious but I am not able
to read these huge huge TOS I I I don't
know where to start I don't know where
to go and it feels that there's there's
it there's not just that kind of
stepping stone that opens the door that
says actually you know yes okay we there
are so many ways to be it highly
academic about this and explore it from
a highly academic position and and
encourage that to be incorporated into
different professions and different
disciplines but actually we don't have
to be so so formal about it too we can
sit back at at the cinema we can have a
conversation with friends we can just
look at oursel and say hey who am
I and and you could show this interview
right I mean this I mean hopefully we're
not using too much High futin language
we're talking in a way that I think
everyone could understand and I think
even those that aren't that are
intimidated by the big no the crime and
punishment the brothers Karam maaza um
many of the most powerful and visceral
pieces of existential literature are
very short stories uh the short stories
of the the death of yan ilc is you know
50-page story uh camuz The Stranger is a
very short story um Doki has a bunch of
short stories that are that are powerful
and accessible uh the plays of of Jean
Paul sart uh are accessible and and
pretty pretty easy to follow and so it's
not as if you have to to sit down with a
thousand page piece of Russian
literature to absorb the core ideas you
can Breeze through uh you know uh camuz
The Stranger at the beach in an
afternoon and be jolted into an
awareness of of who we are you know and
uh and so there's no reason to be scared
of it it's it's accessible in so many
different kinds of ways I like how you
set the setting there like you can just
read a read a nice novel on the beach
because you make me realize that it
there's almost this sense that
philosophy must be done in in a in a
dark room with a with a cigar or a
brand out in the dark or in the woods or
in a classroom but actually I I live in
Florida I do most of my work at the
beach right or or outside in the
sunshine and uh and so uh absolutely
yeah we don't have to play that that
stereotype of the the serious French
intellectual with the Beret and the
black sweater and smoking a cigarette at
the coffee shop and uh it's it's a it
can be much more relaxed and and uh I
think it's very
accessible and I reckon it was at the
time for them as well if half of them
were writing at cafes and coffee shops
and bars and having these chats and just
writing it down scribbling it down and I
believe to an ex exactly I mean in in
the golden age in the in the 1940s and
50s in France it was everywhere I mean
existentialism was in the air and it was
in the coffee shops in the in the in the
cafe Society on the sidewalks but it was
also in the air in the United States and
that it was a big driver of the
counterculture Revolution and and um you
know kamu uh and and sart and and buir
were such important political voices and
in speaking to uh the Vietnam War to to
the Civil Rights Movement to the women's
movement it was an important part of the
new left in in Great Britain and so um
it was uh it was in the air it wasn't it
wasn't uh isolated in in academic
settings it wasn't uh uh there in
seminar Halls it was it was out in the
streets is where existentialism had it
had its high point and uh it'd be
wonderful to see that come back in some
ways and there are some glimmers of hope
that that's the case I mean there's
there's aspects of uh the black lives
matter movement in the United States the
MEO movement um um the Greta Greta
thunberg's climate strike uh movement
that have real resonances to to
existential
philosophy uh in ter terms of conveying
the urgency of our situation and so my
sense is that existentialism is at a is
is is coming back it's coming back uh in
and uh being received in ways that it
that it hasn't in the past coming back
from textbooks and Academia into kind of
common dialogue and discourse and yeah
and also I think coming back from from
uh a complacency in the face of
neoliberal politics and um uh crass
materialism I think that that there's
nothing like the recognition that the
planet may be uninhabitable in 40 years
to jolt us into an Awakening and I see
this a lot with my students I'm not GNA
I'm 51 years old so the the urgency of
the climate change isn't going to hit me
as viscerally but for my 20-year-old
students they may be living in a planet
that is radically different than the one
I'm living in when they're my age and so
when we talk about nalism or the death
of God and the search for meaning um the
climate change crisis can can uh jolt us
into an awareness of those kinds of
questions and you're bringing us here
nicely back into this discussion that
existentialism isn't just theoretical
it's not just within our mind but it's
within our embodied world as well it's
in the physical world as well well and
yeah what this leads back into is what
you were sharing about your own your own
uh specialities for one of them yeah
absolutely and my and my own life I mean
it's it's it shaped me in deep ways in
my own life it's pulled me through
profound catastrophic events in my life
uh near-death events and and uh if
anything my relationship to this kind of
philosophy is more intimate
and profound than it's ever been and
it's very much different from the the
place that I was when I was in 18 or
20-year-old uh philosopher enamored by n
and the radical ideas because I hadn't
lived them I hadn't lived these ideas I
hadn't experienced them in the visceral
way that uh you know 30 years of life
experience teaches you and so the wisdom
of these thinkers has has become even
more pronounced as I gotten older and I
don't think that's going to change much
I think it's it's going to become more
pronounced as I move into my 60s and 70s
if I get there if I make it to tomorrow
you see it does feel like an endless
absolutely endless uh Journey this the
the discovery and exploration of the
existential field I I don't I I I was
going to say I don't know if I love it
or I hate it but I think it's definitely
that I love it and it's just any person
that you speak to it has the potential
and quite often does add a whole another
Open Door after door after door and you
look through and you think wow there's
so much more and I think even the
language of love and hate as you know uh
is is so is a little bit
misleading it's it's not that you love
it or hate it it's that it matters to
you it it matters to you deeply and so
those simple binaries of good and evil
or love and hate they it doesn't capture
the ambiguity
of of what this field
discloses and um all that you can say
with sincerity is that this this
material means something to me in a deep
way uh even if articulating that meaning
is always going to be in coate and
unclear to the point that people like
ourselves are just so inspired that we
dedicate a significant amount of our
life to trying to share that or at least
invite or as I would say offering we're
offering other people the opportunity to
to explore these IDE I really like
Natalie this idea of existential
offering I think there's such a
wonderful uh openness about that that
phrase what can I offer you and and how
can I open you up to the relevance and
significance of these ideas I think
that's a a really neat part of the
project thank
you I I thought of that when I was when
I was sitting during my training and I
was just being exposed to all of these
different ideas and I was trying to
establish which one I'm supposed to
resonate with which particular Theory
and how I'm supposed to take it all on
board and it suddenly dawned on me that
that's not at least for me that's not
what existential philosophies are about
they're so magnificently vast and
complex and they will have completely
different meanings to each person in
each moment depending depending on where
they're
situated and it each one offer an
opportunity and offer a different angle
and it's up to us whether we take it or
or leave it or put it aside for later I
agree I agree on that note how would you
describe your existential offering as it
were um I guess my existential offering
would in the in the bluntest possible
way recognize that this life is not a
dress rehearsal this is the only life
you have this day is the only day that
is exist that exists right now and
um uh remind yourself or be vigilant to
the idea that this this is this
existence is precarious and it's
unstable and it's uncertain and that you
can't take things for granted you can't
you can't take these relationships for
granted you can't take the beauty of a
sunset or a rainy afternoon for granted
a good meal for granted or a good cup of
coffee treasure those moments because
they can be snatched away from you at
any time and I think recognizing that
life is not a dress rehearsal will will
bring a measure of intensity and urgency
to aspects of our life that we all too
often take for
granted and why is that intensity and
urgency so so
important well because it reminds us of
how beautiful and precious this life is
and and mysterious uh and gracious this
life is and um if if you're happy with
your an existence where you're just
pulled Along by the shallows of everyday
life um so much the better for you but
my sense is that most of us don't want
to live that way we want to live with uh
a sense that this is a life worth living
that this is a life that can have deep
meaning if we so choose regardless of
the career path that we take it can be
embodied in our relationships in the
care that we have for our our our sick
and dying parents uh the the way that we
love and take care of our children uh or
the environment or the natural world uh
and so um my sense is without that
measure of intensity and urgency it's
not as much of a life worth living
unfortunately I pick up on how you're
saying I sense I sense I sense and is
this what you were referring to in in
your in your work earlier when you were
saying that this embodied we're embodied
beings as well we're
phenomenological beings as well we're
not just these yeah yeah I mean one of
the thing one of the great insights of
the existentialists is that The Human
Condition is disclosed to us not through
theoretical reflection it's disclosed to
us through feelings through moods
through affective
experience and um we the the the
argument or the suggestion is that we we
feel when we're inauthentic and that
feeling is knowledge we know when we're
not being true to ourselves we know when
we're we we're we we we ing masks and
and being self-deceptive how do we know
it feels a certain way you see and we
feeling authenticity also feels a
certain way uh it we feel uh a
particular kind of mood that's
atmospheric and it colors our our our
entire
life you see it's making me think of how
many times we can have this feeling and
one that we're not find find Pleasant
and one that we're wanting to change and
we're finding uncomfortable when but
we're we're staying we're living with it
we can do that for for hours or weeks or
months or years we can live with this
sense that we our life is not is not
being lived and experienced in the way
that perhaps it should be but yet we're
not changing it and that is that
embodied sense of
discomfort and I think that you know one
of the one of the the underlying themes
I think in in almost all existential
philosophy is is courage that you have
to have the courage or or
steadiness uh to be true to who you are
and and whenever you feel yourself get
sucked back into a life of
self-deception which is always going to
happen it's inevitable it's again it's
structural to The Human Condition uh in
authenticity to have the courage to to
question that Temptation uh to challenge
it to remind yourself what is at stake
in life to remind yourself that this is
a day that you may not get that that the
future is an illusion you don't get it
tomorrow a tomorrow's not guaranteed and
so why are you GNA go to that cocktail
party why are you going to join that
committee why are you GNA waste that
time in a in a conversation that's going
to have no bearing on your existence is
there is there are there better ways to
live better ways to spend the very
limited time that you have on
Earth how in those situations do you
have the courage to keep
going
um it's a good question
uh I
I remind myself every day I try to
remind myself with a mantra every day
life is short life is short be grateful
life is short be grateful I'll say that
actually in my car when I'm driving to
work and when I'm walking on the campus
I'll be remind I'll remind be grateful
this day this day this is the only day
and it's hard sometimes you know you get
sucked into the things that sucked into
everydayness and and you lose touch with
that but I try to
uh develop a kind of practice this is
what what Aristotle calls frenesis it's
a practical wisdom that becomes habit it
becomes part of who you are so that you
don't have to try anymore to be grateful
you don't have to try anymore to to uh
uh be aware of your own temporality or
your own finitude it it's it just
becomes who you are and so you see the
sunsets in Florida differently you see
the Blue Sky in a different way you see
the trees on campus in a different way
and um uh that's that's practical
wisdom and I hugely appreciate your
honesty with that with that question
because I think confronting confronting
truth confronting life confronting
existence can be exhausting and
overwhelming and there are moments that
we don't just innately have that courage
flaring up within us to keep going and
to keep exploring but what you're
sharing here is that this is not just a
passive process this is an active
engagement that's right and that's again
a central theme in in existentialist
philosophy I mean U the the uh sart and
bvar actually call it engage literature
that the the the writing has to be
engaged with the concrete realities of
existence and we have to bring that
engagement into our own lives so that
it's not just something that we scribble
down on a page it's something that we
embody uh in in our everyday lives and
and it's hard work it's very difficult
because self-deception is very easy it's
easy to be inauthentic and it's nice
it's comforting and and and
tranquilizing as heiger
says and also that it you know we we go
through that phase where it was
respectful to be to tranquilize oursel
it was respectful to switch off our
questioning brain and to queue up in the
playground and and sit down in the
classroom and study something that isn't
connecting with you we we're trained to
do that and you're you're told off if
you're not and you're being respectful
if you do and then suddenly it all
changes again
and yeah I agree I
agree but thank you so much uh for
sharing today Kevin I'm I'm wondering
was there I pleasure Natalie it was a
real pleasure to have this H
conversation and I hope that uh whoever
sees it um appreciates it as well and it
was really uh uh fun for me to have this
talk and May hopefully our paths will
cross sometime in real life uh in the
future I'm sure we'll make that happen
and I'm sure it will inspire I hope so
too thank you so much Kevin it's my
pleasure okay we'll talk soon bye bye
bye bye
