[Music]
welcome everybody to science technology
and the future welcome Robin welcome
Adam well Robin of course is the author
of some pretty big Ideas uh the great
filter burning the cosmic
Commons um grabby aliens and more
recently he's been writing about
cultural drift where it could go wrong
um and potential ways to fix it so Robin
I'll quickly give you the opportunity to
describe what you mean by cultural
drift so I feel like I should first
acknowledge that this feels a little
weird in terms of the kind of topic it
is compared to what I've done for most
of my life so you call your thing
science and technology and usually in
the futurism world for decades we would
focus on Technologies and how they would
change society and change the world and
that's natural place to sit in and it
fits very naturally with a stem
background and you know and in that
world you would hear people talk about
culture and how important culture was
and it wouldn't make that much sense to
you and it sounds sort of fuzzy and
think well that's all nice for you know
if you want to you know enjoy your
leisure time doing culture things but
we're talking about important stuff
here and you know I would tend to
dismiss that sort of discussion so I
feel somewhat embarrassed and awkward to
have to come around and say oh well this
is really important actually this is um
Central so it's interesting yeah my my
uh channel name is science technology in
the future but often I end up talking
about philosophy ethics and and other
things that people wouldn't normally
associate with science technology in the
future so maybe there's been a bit of a
drift right or just maybe everything's
connected and if you're going to talk
about interesting stuff you can't that
much predict where it'll go you just
have to leave yourself open to where
your reasoning will take you so um 8
months or so ago I started to think
about
fertility because I realized that if
population were to
fall um we wouldn't have the same per
capita growth because Innovation would
slow down and grind to a halt and I just
think of so many things in our society
is driven by Innovation that that's a
really radical scenario to think about
it's really disturbing to imagine
Innovation grinding for halt and then
staying that way for several centuries
that basically puts off many of my
technology
Futures uh the age of M or even cryic uh
basically cryic I'd have to wait for
several centuries to be revived if
wasn't revived before this fall and
that's a pretty disturbing scenario and
so I started to think a lot more about
fertility and what was driving
that and I think we can at least
Identify some policies there that might
reverse the problem they're may be hard
to get people to adopt but I think we
can figure out some things that could
work um but if you think about the
approximate causes of fertility fall
they end up being cultural
Trends um trends like longer career
Paths of Education uh moving from
Cornerstone to Capstone marriage higher
standards for how much parents should
pay to kids less involvement of
grandparents you know um a lot of uh
social trends who who end up pushing for
lower fertility and these Trends are
different all around the world but
nevertheless the overall fertility
decline is much more consistent around
the world and so something suggests that
uh cultures around the world aren't as
different as you might think because
they have some variations but they end
up with this relative ly consistent
overall
trend and that culture is approximate
cause of fertility Decline and that
makes you wonder well uh gee why why are
cultures pushing this way and or even
why are they changing so much as they
are um and so I switched to thinking
about cultural Evolution uh how culture
works and there's a whole field of
culture Evolution that's relatively sort
of mathematical even and scientific
trying to model itself on biological
evolution as as a variation on
traditional biological evolution and it
seems to be pretty solid uh say the F
recent book uh the secret of our success
by Hinrich uh is a book about that
topic and if you think about cultural
Evolution um you realize that it can go
wrong in some
ways and that it might in fact be going
wrong in our world today and that that
might plausibly be behind fertility fall
and therefore this problem I was focused
on which is pretty serious and hard to
fix but at least we can think of some
ways to fix
it and there's an underlying problem
plausibly causing that which is deeper
and harder to fix and so I've been
thinking about that for the last three
months um what is it and how to how
could we fix it and how can we
understand it so that's this isn't
explaining it yet I'm sort of setting up
the context for why we would care about
this and why we want to think about it a
little better okay
so um the key idea of cult Revolution is
that humans had the superpower that
other animals didn't have which is the
power to copy each other's
Behavior horizontal
transfer say again horizontal transfer
of right that is yes so um and
there are analog models to biological
evolution which are cultural Evolution
which include ways culture moves from
not just your parents but from your
parents Associates and from your
Associates and um you slightly different
models for how this works um and this
allows change to be much faster and has
allowed humans to speed up our change in
growth compared to other animals it's
the source of our
superpower even more so than our
intelligence pla
the what we needed intelligence for was
to allow culture but once we had culture
we could go zooming fast so uh it's
really important to understand what it
is and how it works to understand how it
is we're doing so
well is innovation you've mentioned that
um fertility brings Innovation or
there's a connection there so um I guess
once we reached a certain level of
intelligence you're saying that we could
just um have more intelligence by sheer
numbers of people and therefore the
numbers of people would increase overall
cognitive
power so other animals you know do work
for other animals to get to have better
Behavior they have to encode it in their
DNA and then Express their DNA when they
grow up which is a very slow process for
selecting for different DNA that encodes
behavior whereas for humans we could you
know invent a behavior or stumble into a
behavior see that it works and then
other people could copy our Behavior
because it was working for us and then
we could accumulate a library of good
behaviors much more quickly than we
could by encoding them in DNA that's the
key idea of culture is that uh we can
grow much faster because we no longer
have to wait for you know random DNA
mutations to encode a behavior and then
for those descendants to slowly grow
number because they have that behavior
more that's very slow laborious process
whereas if we can just copy other
people's behavior that seems to work
then we can quickly accumulate a package
of behaviors that
work and yeah so in in some sense our
intelligence isn't so much our sort of
raw brain structure it's all the things
we fill that brain with all the rules of
thumb and habits and things we learn
that we can fill our brains with that
let us be powerful and capable
so that's Humanity
superpower um but it's a new system and
it's crude and not as reliable as DNA
Evolution it's only been around for a
few hundred thousand years hundreds of
millions of years right only been around
for a couple of hundred thousand years
yeah and so only in a few M you know
billions of copies of humans over this
time so vastly smaller history than all
history of life on Earth um
so you should expect problems with it
it's not going to be elegant and all the
little you know rough edges smoothed off
and everything it's going to be crud
okay but it's powerful it's like a
sports car or something it breaks down a
lot um or like maybe compare the first
airplanes that we had which were
spectacular in fly but crashed a lot to
airplanes today which almost never
crashed at least for commercial flights
um
so the key Concept in culture evolution
is if you just randomly copied other
people's behaviors that wouldn't
help just having some people copy other
people's behaviors at
random just leaves the same pool of
average behaviors and we don't get a
better pool of behaviors the the key
thing for cultural Evolution to work is
to be able to distinguish success from
failure and copy
success so for example if you want to be
able better Fisher and you can go look
at a bunch of people fishing and you can
see who catches the most fish at least
per hour of effort or something and you
want to copy their fishing
behavior and then you could be the
better Fisher and if everybody does that
we'll all slowly get better at fishing
if we all copy the best Fishers Behavior
at any one time uh then if somebody
manages to change how they fish and that
works better for them we can see that it
works better then we copy them so you
know a cultural Evolution doesn't work
without being able to see success uccess
somehow and not just see success see
roughly what kinds of behaviors are
related to that success you know if you
copy everything about the best Fisher
how they dress how they sleep blah blah
blah right it won't be as smart as if
you know fishing behavior when they're
next to the water fishing copi that
stuff not just everything
right so that's cultural Evolution it's
re tied to being able to see
success so it's not just yeah you just
got to find the Salient forms related to
fishing that works and not just how uh
you know the color of the fisherman's
hat you know or the particular brand of
fishing rod that they might have as long
as it works right now but a lot of our
intelligence and ability to reason was
plausibly created by cultural
Evolution uh we have powerful
intellectual abilities but they may not
be so much embodied in our brain
structure they may be things culture
taught us
uh and you know obviously culture taught
us how to say do math how to do writing
and reading but it may have caught us
even taught us just very basic reasoning
other animals don't seem that good at
reasoning at least we can't tell and
even our most basic cognitive capacities
that we're proud of as humans they may
have come from culture may have come
from this process copying each other's
habits um it reminds me of a really
interesting idea do you think like if we
were to take a
baby um you know just give it all a book
with all the information in it would be
a to speedrun its way through to Modern
civilization much faster than we would
get there um if you know that that
history showed compared to somebody who
uh lived in this day and time and if you
put them back you know uh 15,000 years
or even earlier do you think they'd be
able to speedrun much faster to Modern
civiliz
knowing what modern civilization is
today perhaps they would because they
would have had that cultural all that
cultural stockpiling
behind they'd have to find a way to
translate the knowledge they have that
works in our world to this older world
so a lot of what we know doesn't only
works because we're in a modern context
and it was a challenge so certainly you
know King Arthur's you know Connecticut
Yankee and King Arthur's courts those
sort of Stories the characters have to
be very careful to find something from
the modern world actually works in the
old world that they can impress people
with and it's there's a famous uh story
about um the you know the the um oneeyed
man is King in the land of the blind
there's a saying like that and HG Wells
has a story where he tries to show that
not being true Joan vinge came up with
that did she I I don't know but science
fiction books but but HG Wells has a
short story where he shows a man who is
the oneeyed man in the line of the Bland
not succeeding very well because even
though he can see some things he can't
quite figure out how to take advantage
of it in that World um so uh that's the
caution but uh certainly you know that's
one of the ideas of course of say you
know civilized people going to less
civilized places and trying to show them
how to do things often the challenge is
what you know how to do is based on the
materials and equipment and options in
your world and if you don't bring those
with you then it can be harder to make
them valuable but I apologize Joan Vin
said in in the land of the blind the
oneeyed man is stoned to death yes well
that's the story of HD Wells actually he
has a story that basically has that
lesson about it anyway
um so culture requires that we uh can
tell what to copy but initially it
probably was very simple um we just so
most animals have a pecking order like a
status hierarchy most social animals do
and so the simplest version of culture
would be just to copy the high status
people because they're somehow winning
in your world they are doing better than
the others and do whatever the high
status people do would be a very simple
heuristic could that have could have
gotten cultural Evolution going but then
cultural Evolution would want to
accumulate more ways to think about
figuring out who to copy and who not to
copy for what what to make the process
work better but the very beginning of
the process would be just very simple
copy success and success would just be
the simple measure of success that
social animals have always had some
animals are dominant over others right
so so you're defining Innovation as not
something that scientists and Engineers
come up with today it's a whole it's a
whole it's a wider spectrum of things oh
sure a whole thing that that that might
can you explain what you mean by
Innovation so just like a better way to
fish a better way to hunt better way to
build a Hut better way to make a shoe um
you know a better way to handle disputes
um new words in a language um you new
different habits of handling your
children relating to neighbors like
every social practices if they're
different they might be better so
Innovation is substituting some the you
know worst practices for better ones you
know and um that's Innovation as you
accumulate better practices better
habits better ways of doing things
Innovation is the process of swapping
out the worst and swapping in the
better um and by having less people um
we have an innov we might end up at an
innovation bottleneck but I know what a
lot of people who are um maybe thinking
who are watching this and they might be
thinking well why can't we just just um
take the function of innovation the
function what happens when you have lots
of people and just use algorithms and
computers and AI as it's getting more
powerful and um indirectly partially
through tool AI or even like you know
create the sort of transformative AI
that we might be seeing in the next
decades um yeah why can't we just do
that and and have technology replace the
function of innovation that normally
pops out of brains and social practices
so in our economy today it grows it's
you know doubles roughly every 15 or 20
years and the main reason it grows is
innovation that's the consensus of
Economist studying growth and Innovation
is primarily driven by you know new
companies introducing new products and
new technologies and new practices
Distributing through the human world and
we use whatever AIDS we can in all our
techn IES including when we innovate and
innovation has been helped somewhat by
say having the internet and having you
know computer communication and uh being
able to do experiments online and you
know all of the technology we've
accumulated has been used in general to
try to improve our Innovation um but
it's slow and hard uh we aren't having
enormous burst in our rate of innovation
lately we've had a pretty steady rate of
innovation over the last half century
say even been slowing a bit if
anything uh even though we've had a lot
more computers so computers are you know
so far not a easy answer for improving
Innovation it's still hard to innovate
uh but we're doing the best we can and
hopefully uh when say AI actually starts
being more productive then it will
actually help us innovate more we we'll
just have to see or we could augment
humans cytic relationship to advancing
technology um or create
right so so there's obviously lots of
potential in the future for doing
Innovation faster better um but the
problem is so far uh you know it's
people who do the
Innovation and if you just have a lot
fewer people you're just going to have a
lot less Innovation uh of the sort that
we've had for the last century so we we
haven't found ways to make Capital that
much more productive in Innovation
compared to people that are standard
models of the value of capital and labor
is that if the population declines
Innovation will in fact decline now if
we can produce say human level
artificial intelligence then that would
that could completely substitute for
people then the game's over then then we
you know then it doesn't matter how many
people there are matters how many people
substitutes there are but we're not
there yet and we might not be for a
while and why do you think we're slowing
down Innovation is it the the the easy
problems are solved and the hard ones
are just a little bit
there's a lot of controversy there so
that's one certainly one of the
explanations is you know we run out of
easy answers another is we're over
regulating or we're getting soft and not
willing to let people try as many big
changes a lot of different stories but
it's only a relatively mild slowdown in
Innovation rates so but it is real and
worth pondering but you know the
prospect of fertility decline would
cause a much larger rate of innovation
decline than we've seen over the last
half century uh that could basically
have it grind grind to a halt that is if
the population fell by a factor of 10
then the rate of innovation might fall
by a bit more than a factor of 10 and
now you're talking very large changes in
in the rate of innovation not so you
know basically in the last half century
we might have seen maybe a factor of two
fall in the rate of innovation at most
right from a peak in 1960 and maybe half
as big now or something that's the
magnitude we're talking when we're
asking thinking about a Slowdown over
the last half century or so um but if we
have a population decline Falling by a
factor of 10 or 100 then we'd have that
sort of magnitude of fall and the rate
of innovation which would be very
dramatic and basically mean things slow
to a
Hal and that then you'd have a world of
very little Innovation and I think that
also would make it less Li liberal
because I think a lot of the liberality
in our world has been driven by
Innovation and the need for being
liberal to promote Innovation so that's
another thing you might worry about in
the Dark Ages that could follow a
population Peak and decline is um
Innovation rides to a halt and the world
gets less liberal uh but anyway that the
underlying problem that I'm suggesting
is fertility fertility is culture and
then we haven't explained what sort of
problem there could be with culture and
so the key thing I was trying to not
note here is that the very simplest
cultural mechanism is just to copy the
high status uniformly without much
discrimination that would have been the
very initial mechanism of culture but
over time we've accumulated a lot of
ways that we can you know make that
better by having better sense of what to
copy about who that who is successful in
what ways and what aspects of them to
copy oh right so high status copying
High status might have worked reasonably
well in the past it would be the
simplest thing to just do initially the
simplest thing to copy yes but it might
not exactly be the the best thing so
what we be copying right so the idea is
that we've learned over you know many
hundreds of thousands of years to copy
more specific things in more specific
situations like how to copy someone
fishing or how to copy someone making a
shoe or hunting Etc MH we've we've
developed ways to judge which things to
copy in which context and that's allowed
us to copy things faster and
better but there Still Remains a set of
things that we can't improve that way
that we don't have good ways to tell
like context specific
success and so those are the things that
we're going to still use this ancient
mechanism of just copying the
successful but we are still using that
and the things we're using it at are um
basically our fundamental values or sort
of most basic
habits can we nudge culture to
appreciate trying to discover the
Salient aspects of what to
copy say that again can we nudge culture
to try and appreciate and value the
copying of salient aspects of context
it's been working on that for a long
time but if you just look at the most
basic aspects of a culture
like its attitude toward work or war or
children or Leisure or music or you know
family or hierarchy and all those sorts
of things those sorts of attitudes are
sort of embodied in behaviors and we
just tend to copy those behaviors of the
high status people around us and it's
hard to know how to make those context
dependence right just your most basic
life plans going to college or whatever
you're going to do it's hard you know
grow up you can see okay the high status
people go to college so maybe you should
go to college it's hard to figure out
well you know who is succeeding more in
the basis of
college you know if most people get
married you might want to get married
Etc but it's it's just hard to make
those strategies very context dependent
based on you know who is achieving what
success is from them because you don't
get very good signals of that so for
your basic overall life values and you
know civilization values and and overall
habits we tend to just copy the high
status people on those so we're still
relying on this most basic mechanism for
much of our most fundamental values most
basic cultural
habits uh because I mean we have to pick
something and then we're just following
this ancient habit of just copying the
high status
folks um so that's the place where
culture can most easily go wrong because
it's not using the more refined
you know powerful heuristics about what
to copy how it's just going on this very
simple mechanism of copying the
successful and they're generically
successful well I mean I I don't want to
disport but a lot of people um see a lot
of uh you know copy the status or try
and copy the status of you know
wrestlers or famous footballers or you
know yes basketballers and things like
that and I guess that would have had a
lot of selective Advantage being big and
tough and being able to throw people
around in the ancestral environment
right but it's just a simple right as
long as like if there's a footballer and
they're successful then they just count
as you know copy the successful now you
probably want to be copying some sort of
average behavior of many successful
people not just pick one random
successful person but still this is just
going to be a deep human habit copy the
successful um but this is the part I'm I
think we could be going wrong on so you
know copying the best Fisher people I
don't think we have a problem with that
I think we you know that works fine copy
the best coders if you want to be a
coder the best writers if you want to be
a writer yeah that all works great and
that'll continue the best AI if you want
to be really good at go right for
example if you
can um might not be clear how the AI
does its thing to you might be clear how
somebody does fishing doesn't explain
what it's doing right okay so um this
habit of copying the successful um works
you know is more of a
problem when you don't have good you
know finer indications of what to copy
how you're just copying the generic
successful and another way there could
be problems is some kinds of things we
copy are tied together in shared
behaviors so um some kind of behavior
you can just be different from people
nearby and nobody Minds like you can
like a different TV show or a different
style of music maybe a different way of
decorating your couch and within a
certain range of
variation people don't mind your being
different and then even for things that
it's hard to know how to allocate
success that can still work pretty well
because just a lot of people will do
things different and you know slowly
over time the better ones will tend to
win out and slowly over time the
successful people will be doing those
and that kind of still works so even
without being very subtle about what to
copy if we can just have a lot of
variation in Behavior we still get
pretty good cultural
Evolution but there are some kinds of
things that we share Norms about where
we are going to discourage people from
being different where we're going to
have Conformity Norms especially moral
Norms so for example on murder we're not
very tolerant of varied behaviors on
murder basically anybody who murders
we're going to be down on them and we're
going to discourage that now you know
that makes sense for murder of course
but the point is cultural Evolution
isn't doing much to validate that uh
within a culture because the whole
culture shares the norm against murder
and so if if we had a norm against
something that was not a good thing to
have a norm against like you know um
blinking say we had a norm against
blinking a whole culture that has a norm
against blinking then people are just
going to not blink and even if that
hurts them then the culture isn't going
to figure that out because different
people aren't really allowed to do it
different some people start blinking
well they're going to get
punished and the culture can't figure
out that that was a bad Norm the way the
culture figures out that not you know a
norm against blinking is bad is because
different cultures would compete some
cultures would not have a norm against
blinging and they would succeed so when
we're talking about the evolution of
features that we can't like figure out
exactly context dependent signs of what
to copy and we're talking about features
that are shared across the
culture then the way cultural Evolution
figures out those is through the
competition between
cultures not competition within a
culture right so that's interesting I
want you to to to clearly explain the
difference of the so I want to do it by
analogy so think of
species um the larger species is in
terms of the number of members the more
rapidly it can innovate within the
species because as if any one part of
the species comes up with an innovation
it can spread to the entire species and
there's just more places where anyone
Innovation could start
so some kind of innovation can happen
with spe within a species that is those
are the features that can vary within a
species like if dogs can have bigger
ears or smaller ears then um a large
species of dogs can more quickly figure
out what size ears make sense in its
environment because you know lots of
different ear sizes will be tried and
then the best ones will win
out but species have features that are
common across the species that you can't
vary within the species sort of the
basic structure of the
species and for those basic structures
of a species within species Evolution
doesn't find those answers so for that
you need between species Evolution that
is there are different species that have
different structures and then the ones
with the better structures went out over
the others so biological evolution has
these two levels there's Evolution
within a species and evolution between
species and there's a trade-off the
bigger each species is the more within
species Evolution you can have but the
less between species Evolution you'll
have and that's a trade-off so and for
example in the ocean the habitats tend
to be larger so the species tend to be
larger they have more members in the
ocean but on land the habitats are more
fragmented you know there's forest and
mountain and desert and like that and so
they tend to have smaller species and
more species and on Rivers they're
especially fragmented and and rainforest
also especially fragmented lots of
little tiny niches where uh little you
know habitats where life a species can
be and so there's just a lot more
species and a lot smaller species in
rainforest and rivers and on land to a
lesser extent compared to the ocean so
now we we can compare
who does which of these places does
innovation better that is where do
species evolve faster and then develop
things that then they spread to the
others and in fact the answer is land
has been beating the ocean for a while
and and perhaps you'd argue that the of
the Marine creatures that that have that
seem to have innovated the most once
migrated to land and then migrated back
into the sea like wals and dolphins and
things like that right so a lot of sea
creatures are descended from Land
creatures and more so than vice versa
since there have been lots of land
creatures so the fragmentation of land
and especially rivers and rainforests
has been a fountain of overall
Innovation that has spread to the oceans
and spread to other places so more total
innovation has happened in the
fragmented places than in the larger
integrated places sort of interesting
fact about biological evolution which
suggests that the between species
Innovation actually matters more than
the within species
Innovation and the same thing looks true
of corporate
cultures so corporations have
cultures and the the V cor culture of a
corporation is actually the main thing
that makes it different and valuable
compared to other
corporations and corporations cultures
change over
time and there's the question you know
do they change for the better or for the
worse and
there is then evolution of culture and
Innovation within a comp company and
then there's Evolution between companies
so overall innovation in the economy of
firms is composed of two parts one is
that each firm slowly gets better over
time it invents little things inside and
then spreads them within that
firm and then the other is that
innovation in the entire economy is also
due to some better companies replacing
worse ones analogist to the better
species replacing the worse species see
and in fact also it seems to be true
that the innov the competition and
Innovation between firms matters more
than within
firms that is you know in some
Industries basically the the
improvements you see within a firm are
less than half of all the improvements
because the rest of the improvements are
coming from just replacing bad firms
with good
firms so there are these two levels of
innovation within species and within
corporate culture
there's within a unit and there's
between units and it looks like in both
of these case between unit Innovation
matters
more is there any ways in which you'd
think um morph
morphological uh change or morphological
Innovation might be different enough
than uh
cognitive uh Innovation I mean ideas
change a lot quicker and ideas are more
valuable and ideas right so that's why
we look at corporate cultures corporate
cultures are the idea
Innovation so if you doubted the example
of species then corporate culture should
be more com comforting to you as an
example it's much closer so what we're g
to make the question was how are they
different or do you think they're
analoges it's just one's a lot faster
than the other so corporate cultures are
a lot like macr cultures than species
are is is going to be my claim because
I'm what we're mainly what we're going
to be mostly interested here is in sort
macr
cultures um whole societal
cultures and corporate cultures are a
closer analog to that than species
are but I want to point to both of them
as examples that suggest the same thing
they aren't disagreeing in their lesson
which is there's Innovation within
cultures and there's Innovation between
cultures and so just like we said the
the the norm against blinking say
if a culture has that
Norm and it just punishes anybody within
the culture who deviates from that Norm
that culture isn't going to find out
that that's a bad Norm the way the world
will find that out is some other culture
that doesn't have that Norm will win
out and because it doesn't have the
stupid Norm against
Blinky um so that's the between culture
Innovation as compared to the within
culture Innovation so the thing like
copying the fishing you see that's
easily handled within a culture because
different people in a culture are
allowed to fish different
ways and as long as different people can
try different ways and people can see
what works then within culture Evolution
works great or things like
that but there is also the between
culture Innovation that is there are
these features that whole cultures share
including values for children and light
and death and work and family and you
know war and all sorts of things and
those sorts of values tend to be shared
across a culture and then individuals
within cultures tend to be punished from
deviating from those shared cultural
values so in order for those to be set
well we need more between culture
competition where different cultures
have different attitudes towards
children and marriage and work
etc um and plausibly if the anal works
that stuff could be even more important
than the within culture
Innovation because it seems more
important in the case of species and
corporate
cultures so then we want to turn our
attention and say okay how healthy is
our between
culture Innovation process the process
that would
produce you know better choices
there and so for that we want to look at
three key
parameters there is diversity how many
different macr cultures do we
have then there's selection how strong
is the selection pressure to you know
pick the better ones and delete the
worst
ones and then there's third which is how
much do these things just change
internally uh you know move away from
whatever they are to somewhere
else and all three of those parameters
are actually a bit
disturbing so a couple centuries ago say
three centuries ago most of the world
was full of hundreds of thousands of
little peasant
cultures each group of a thousand or few
thousand people was actually a
relatively isolated culture who could do
things different and often did things
different and didn't actually depend
that much on the rest of the world and
was pretty near the edge of survival
they suffered pandemics and famines and
invading armies and so there was pretty
strong cultural
selection IE if a peasant culture went
off the rails and just started being
weird about say
blinking then if that made them suffer
enough then they would just be deleted
and replaced by other local
cultures
sounds I we wouldn't want to delete
whole cultures today they did I mean
they just I know
they they just went away but nobody was
recording them or caring much but yes
and there was so there's lots of variety
hundreds of thousands of them and great
selection pressures
so presumably these were pretty close
too functional right they were if we
think of the space of all possible
cultures if they think there are sort of
functional adaptive corners of that
space they most of these peasant
cultures were probably near those
adaptive Corners they worked because if
they didn't they got out competed by the
other
ones okay now in the last few centuries
we made two big changes from that the
first is we replaced little peasant
cultures with national
cultures uh so the famous book peasants
into Frenchmen describes how this
happened in France but of course it
happened all over the world these little
peasant cultures were forced to adopt
national languages they had National
schools national ways of organizing
their Town National become part of
national trading networks National
Employment systems they became
Frenchmen and were no longer isolated
peasants and that's part of the modern
world a world of people who are part of
national
cultures which dramatically reduced the
number of cultures in the world from
hundreds of thousands down to a few
hundred so that was a huge
cut and then in the last century half
century or so the world has also
been
converging among these National cultures
to more of a global
culture so this is especially strong
among Elites Elites all around the world
they tend to sort of go to the same
conferences have gone to the went to the
same schools when they were young and
when when I meet Elites from around the
world they tell me two things one is
that the place they come from has
distinctive Styles and cultures that the
world should value where they say you
know I'm from Brazil and Brazilians you
know they're different in these ways and
the world should value these ways
they're different but then they'll also
tell you that they personally don't
embody any differences that would be a
problem they would personally work just
fine in any Global organization
Corporation committee anything so they
embody World culture of Elites
so and you know I think you can see many
ways in which the world differs on the
surface but when you get down to deeper
values there's much less variety so for
example on policy only one country in
the world allows organ sales which is
Iran and the rest of the world is always
constantly trying to figure out how
they're going to get them to stop
nuclear energy Airline regulation
electromatic regulation and lots of
different kinds of regulations and
practices the world is pretty convergent
we saw that in Co definitely
um very quickly the world Elites
discussed what to do they agreed and
then the whole world basically did it
the same way that the world Elites had
agreed on uh so these are evidences that
the world's been converging on culture
and I think the convergent fertility
decline is dramatic evidence that the
world's cultures don't really vary as
much as you might
think uh because a world of you know
actually very different cultures some of
them would have much higher fertility
and they would maintain that but um you
know so far the only places that have
high fertility are the ones that are
still poor and you know there's this
long trajectory where poor nations were
high high fertility and then they got
lower fertility as it got rich and so it
looks like the few remaining poor places
mostly in Africa will probably fall in
fertility as they get rich and you know
if you go there and visit they are
trying desperately to integrate in the
world economy and culture they you know
they want to be like other places and
they are trying to integrate as best
they can with other
places so these two things that happened
are greatly reducing the variety in
World macroc
cultures so that's one concern is the
variety's weigh down now this reduction
of variety definitely had advantages by
promoting within culture Innovation by
merging all these cultures together into
a single World economy Etc we have
enormously more powerful economic growth
inov you know uh innovation of business
practices Technologies the world's been
doing great at getting rich peaceful
healthy but all of those things mean
there's less cultural selection you know
people aren't dying in so much of
famines or pandemics or
invasions uh so there's really much
weaker cultural selection of cultures
lately in part because having so many
fewer cultures meant we've really
succeeded at this within culture
Innovation
stuff MH so those two things should be
disturbing they would mean you know by
themselves they would mean what you know
what whatever Innovations we have
achieved before in sort of cultural
values about blinking or whatever we
aren't improving them but you might
think they're maybe they're good enough
so maybe what we had before we're not
improving but we'll still do fine
because you know the things we had were
the result of thousands and hundreds of
thousands of years of evolution
producing these macroc cultures and so
even if we've turned off the engine of
improvement of macroc cultures as long
as they don't get worse maybe that's
okay so you still might be optimistic
you'd say okay you know yeah we can't do
context dependent culture copying you
know the particular aspects because you
know these are overall culture things we
don't know how to judge success for
and um yes it's hard to vary them within
a culture so you know they need between
cultural Innovation but you still might
think if we just keep things that we
used to have that were pretty good then
that'll probably be okay maybe sometime
in the future we should get back to like
working on having more variety in
selection to do to to learn better about
how to improve our macroc cultures but
things would be
okay now unfortunately it seems like we
are not willing to just leave them
alone we also have this surprisingly
High rate at which we are changing our
macroc
cultures and in large
ways and ways that aren't plausibly you
know disciplined by
selection so you could you know we
talked before if you look in my lifetime
we've just seen large value changes
large culture
changes that have are just well-known
and not only known but just eagerly
pushed
for in fact in our world today people
are people get a lot of status out of
being the people who caused cultural
change and the winners of cultural
fights are gain High status for being
the winners and so there's a lot of
enormous amount of energy for people
seeking to figure out what cultural
changes they would like to push for and
cause and fighting over cultural change
and then being high status for being the
people who cause change and there
doesn't seem to be a place where that
stops that is we didn't just like fix
some problems and then stop we we keep
changing and changing and changing for a
long
time
and from the internal point of view of a
culture that feels great
like people really love the feeling of
status they get from feeling like I've
always thought culture should be this
way and when it was that way I think
that was just wrong and thankfully
people like me stood up for ourselves
and advocated for a certain change and
and it happened and we're so proud of
the world having followed our advice to
change culture this way and we want to
push for even more changes in those
Direction and we're hopeful we might but
there's these other people opposing us
and they're evil we're going to fight
them and there's just huge emotional
energy wanting to do that within our
cultures it's one of the favorite thing
many people like to do is to join
culture wars and to push for culture
change of the sort that feels like it's
right to
them there's a lot of um conferences
which are um as Builders being
disruptive events you know this sort of
disruptive culture is something that
really is is is attractive to the
younger crowd right now if you just
disrupting technology if you're just
disrupting like how you fish or
something so we said there's whole areas
of culture that work fine because we
have good metrics of what counts for
Success so we can just copy success so I
don't want to be D denigrating at all
you know attempts to disrupt fishing or
other technology practices where we have
a good outcome measure that will lead us
well toward figuring out what's better
you know for for example if you want to
make cheaper faster computer chips and
the whole world wants cheaper faster
computer chips then disrupting how
computer chips are made would be great
if the way if by doing so you give us
better cheaper faster computer chips
right because we all know we want
computer chips and we want them cheaper
faster so if we don't have any doubts
about wanting them to be cheaper faster
well then sure that's great
disruption yeah well there's top- down
manufacturing which at some stage is
going to get really really slow at
innovating because there's only so much
you can do withing with life we might
need bottom up right and that's also
right which is all could be great so the
the doubts I have aren't about those
things because those are well
disciplined by you know knowing what
success looks like how to see how to
measure success right what I'm worried
about is when we're trying to change
cultural things regarding children or
family or you know Health versus fun or
psychedelic drugs or uh Authority War
conflict you know law police you just
there's a lot of eagerness to change our
cultural stances toward those
things where we don't have an outside
objective metric for what would be
better we just have people feeling like
the way we're doing the way people think
about us now is wrong and I feel like
this is right and I want to push for a
different attitude about
that that's the more risky part from the
point of view of cultural
ution because then the macroc cultures
won't just retain whatever wisdom they
had from centuries ago when we had
strong selection that selected for
functional
cultures we will intend drift away from
that into unknown directions and if in
the space of all possible cultures most
places aren't very good
we will go to those not very good
places uh in general in evolution the
usual idea is that there's a vast space
of possibilities most of which is bad
and the whole point of evolution is to
search in that space for the for the
better the small volume subsets that are
high value and try to find those and
refine them to get especially high
value that's the usual concept of
evolution um but if you just start
throwing random changes
from something that worked you have to
kind of expect it won't work so
well do you think that um okay drift and
selection AR mutually exclusive right
they often happen together right so they
right exactly and they they do typically
happen together and then there's a
relative magnitude it so if you have a
modest amount of drift but more
selection then it won't drift so when
you're driving a car basically
you know that you're trying to keep the
car in the middle of the lane or the
middle of the road and there's random
things that will disturb that and if you
weren't watching the road then the car
would just typically drift off the road
causing severe problems typically right
so but you have a selection process a
correction process whereby you notice
deviations and you push it back toward
the middle so that you can keep on track
on the road so you know when selection
is strong enough relative to drift then
it doesn't get very far away because
selection pulls it
back can you think of any rare cases
where drift has actually uh drifted a
species or um culture in a beneficial
Direction and why well I mean there's
just idea of you know getting to another
Hilltop so the idea that you know the
evolutionary landscape isn't just single
peaked there are mult Peaks so you need
to find ways to go downhill for a while
before you can go uphill again and so
there's a lot of ways we understand
Evolution to give slack and Randomness
so that in fact you don't get stuck in
local Maxima but can search around and
find other ones so certainly some degree
of Randomness and variation is needed
for that degree of larger
search um and certainly you know that's
why you need some variation
uh not just Randomness and exploration
to a degree but not so much that it
kills you right but you want to combine
some variation with
selection if you have variation without
selection you just drift off
into random bad places you want
variation and selection together so
that uh you can explore a range of
options and then pick the best
ones yeah kind of
disturbing that in order to keep um
Innovation going on one
strategy is to keep just just to keep
the birth rate up I mean creating more
con uh people who sit around and consume
uh not necessarily contribute to
Innovation directly uh they they might
not even go to work um The Hope is that
extra human brain power um and extra
humans to to fill the I guess the the
gaps to keep the the
the uh the system going the the
civilization going so that we can have
the people sitting in Labs doing all the
experimentation coming up with better
ways to create computer chips or better
algs for better AI or better ways of
governance it's it can't be just around
just uh population growth of course it's
not uh so we could elaborate a more
complicated model of innovation in the
world the question is the things that
are causing population to decline
um can they be overcome by some other
variations in order to keep Innovation
high that that's the challenge you're
trying to imagine um you might say well
if we accept that population will
decline then maybe we should be
searching for ways to adjust other
parameters so that we could retain high
levels of innovation in the face of
falling
population that's not crazy but it is
hard so so one thing to realize is um
economists for a long time have
understood that Innovation is the most
important thing in the economy by far
and if we should be figuring out how to
promote Innovation as best we can
because that's overwhelmingly important
and we have studied different ways to
promote Innovation for a long time and
what we found is the ways people have to
try to promote inovation is just really
hard to make them
work we we have consistently failed to
find ways to do very much promotion of
innovation we we found some like so for
example one of the best things is
research tax
credits you give companies tax credits
for doing research and development that
tends to promote more research and
development which is good for the
overall
economy um other things we try to
promote like with patents and copyright
and funding government government funded
research and things like that they don't
tend to work that well and so we don't
really know very well how to promote
Innovation another way to think about
this is Silicon Valley say is famously
Innovative and lots of other nations and
regions around the world have said
themselves we want to be the Silicon
Valley of X Silicon Valley of Australia
Silicon Valley of South Africa whatever
right lots of say how can we copy how
can we be like these Innovative places
and lots and lots of regional
governments have tried to copy whatever
they saw as the successes of Silicon
Valley and other Innovative places to be
Innovative themselves and have over
whelmingly
failed people just don't apparently know
how to be the next Silicon Valley uh
they try and they fail so these are
warnings that yes we know we would like
to promote Innovation but when we've
tried to promote Innovation we haven't
succeeded very well one of the best
things we might think to promot
Innovation is just do less regulation
and the world's just said no we don't
want that but you know one of the most
consistent sorts of recommendations for
having more Innovation is is less
regulation um and most of the world is
just not willing to do that basically
for that
purpose so mostly Innovation happens
more in the places that happen to allow
it where regulation happens to be weak
but so the point
is it'll be
hard as population declines to adopt
policies that correct for that because
we already have enormous incentives out
there to be the place the Fountain of
innovation everybody wants to be the
next Silicon Valley and they keep trying
and failing to do that so it's just
obviously not that easy to
do well I mean I worry that in some
regard types of deregulating May lean to
lead to more chaos and the types of
chaos that we may end up and may be very
dangerous because of the um I guess the
technology technological capability we
have today there could be spikes in
dangerousness that could be um uh
discovered quite early if we deregulated
in certain ways um you know I I wouldn't
want to see a deregulation of control of
biotechnology labs for instance we don't
backyard experiments going hey
why United States was unusually
Innovative in part because the United
States was unusually low regul a and
then a lot of disruption did happen
because the United States went pretty
wild so for example the automobile was
not something most of the world was very
eager to let go wild but the US sort of
let the automobile just go wild and then
other places were pressured to copy um
the auto us went wild with say oil and
uh drilling for oil and using oil for
various things the rest of the world
ended up copying that because the US
went wild with that
um if you look at you know when the US
was going wild with Innovation the rest
of the world was hanging back exactly
because they were afraid about
disruption correctly so a lot of these
things were quite disruptive and a lot
of things went wrong when people just
went wild building oil wells everywh
like a lot of damage happened when
people went wild driving new cars
everywhere putting them everywhere there
was a lot of accidents and things going
wrong a lot you know certainly like the
early days of TV we just went wild like
making TVs everybody watch it and we
weren't afraid of all the cultural
consequences that might happen and even
with social media we went wild just
adopting social media and now
everybody's worried GE should we have
done that but uh yes of
course Innovation risks
disruption and unexpected harms and
downsides absolutely in some case
Innovation might uh dis um cause
disruption uh to such a degree that it
reduces our ability to innovate or
styles
we don't want to blow ourselves back
into the Stone Age by going
wild right I mean plausibly you might
say
television reduced people's attention to
reading and to ideas and was a hindrance
for Innovation overall in society that's
a plausible claim I would think
television and radio before it were
entertaining and fun but hindered many
kinds of Innovation we lost our
attention for the physical world and for
gadgets and making things uh honestly I
think you can make a distinction between
engineering and
design and the pretty good arguments
that engineering is a stronger and
underlying Fountain of long-term
Innovation but the world has actually
switched from more engineering to More
Design over the last century there used
to be there were a lot more Engineers
than designers and now there's a lot
more designers than
engineers and design is by its nature
less Innovative because the Innovations
it finds are more context dependent so
engineering Innovations tend to be able
to be applied quite widely whereas
design Innovations are pretty narrow
like if you're designing a menu system
for some app which things you put where
on the menu That's design it's important
it matters but when you figure out an
innovation there it's in the context of
a particular system whereas if you
invent a new material or a new engine or
a new you know kind of Transport or a
new way to make computer chips or things
like that those Innovations have much
wider implications they because they are
much more General so you could just say
allowing our world to focus more in
design is a has been a hindrance to
Innovation and in a sense it
has but the world is just not very
interested in our regulating on that
basis
actually um so I'm not sure if we really
can change that but certainly I'm been
happy to support any way we could
promote Innovation more Innovation is
overwhelmingly important and um there's
lots of ways we could
try right so so um would you say uh okay
so some of the real strong forms of
innovation some of the real bones we've
had recently um in in technological
development I mean the internet um with
some forms of social media I guess
beneficial artificial intelligence of
course and and just you know algorithm
design um maybe there's some Burns to be
gained in um the way that we Harvest
energy uh get better at photo voltes get
better at battery storage and all that
sort of thing are you worried that um
you know uh bad Innovation might disrupt
some of these type these uh really
powerful um Avenues of innovation
just overall just allowing pretty much
all innovation has gone pretty well for
several
centuries so I might think you could do
even better if you were really good at
figuring out which Innovations to
support and which to hold back but I
might think I'm not sure I trust people
to make that judgment well so I think we
do okay with just allowing pretty much
all of it so in this discussion I'm
focused on the problem that we've been
neglecting macroculture
Innovation and that that can take down
all the rest that is macroculture
innovation because it's not being
constrained Lately by much selection and
it doesn't have much variety and it has
this huge drift rate that it's just
going to be going bad that's a
predictable thing we can guess from the
structure of the situation and we can
also seem to verify that say in Falling
fertility that seems a very concrete
evidence that exactly this sort of going
off the rails is happening and um you
know we can even walk through
mechanically how it might be in fact you
know we we can have a more detailed
causal story of that if you want to get
into that of how particularly you know
cultural selection has plausibly been
causing some of these Trends but the
more fundamental fact is just that
plausibly if you have macroc cultures
without go off the rails then you will
just get less adaptive less functional
and a lot of things will go wrong and
that's a key problem we have and then we
might want to think well what the heck
can we do about that um and it's much
harder to fix than merely fixing safe
fertility which we have some actual ways
we could do
that let's just say okay just briefly in
the event we have an overall cultural
fail um
and all we have is smaller cultures
around but we want to get back to this
modern civilization culture maybe or
some something like it what metrics do
you hope
successor civilizations would be able to
use to keep alive the good aspects of
the failed civilizations or the the
failed
cultures um of can we learn from failed
cultures because I'm I'm sure not
everything they do is bad right is there
is there is there anything that any
signatures that we can sort of derive
from the graveyard of fails cultures of
the good aspects of their culture we can
use to feed into cows if if we were
choosing our
culture and consciously for the purpose
of winning at cultural
Evolution then we can certainly learn a
lot from not only history but just the
nature of cultural Evolution and figure
out things that would work there the
problem is no one's in charge of culture
so no one gets to set
culture and even if you could set it it
just keeps changing so that's the more
fundamental problem
here if you if the problem was only how
could we design a culture that was would
work well that's a much easier problem
actually than the problem we face
because we Face a pro situation where
cultures whatever you set them to anyhow
they won't stay there they keep drifting
away that's the problem of cultural
drift is we're in a world where cultures
just won't stay
put how can you prevent them from
drifting is the most fundamental
problem now I you you've written about
this right solutions to um the problems
of cultural Thrift right so I can I can
at this moment
I I think I've sort of brought it down
to two basic
categories so one category is to try to
just promote a lot more
variety of culture
in the hope that with enough variety
even the weak selection we have might be
enough and with enough variety The Drift
doesn't matter so much because they just
drift off in different directions and
maintain the overall
variety
um to do that I think we would need
something like a deep multiculturalism
so in the world today and in the past
there have been people who celebrated
the idea of multiculturalism the idea of
encompassing a range of cultures within
a society and liking that variety and
promoting it but in fact what people
mostly seem to like is what's been
called a boutique
multiculturalism where we have a variety
of foods and clothes and holidays and
hairstyles and songs and languages and
you know ways to decorate
houses but we don't have so much Variety
in the Deep values
that are the key things for macr
cultures uh and so I
actually so a guy like Robert nosik is a
philosopher who's thought of as a
Libertarian but his book Anarchy state
in ucopia is really trying to describe a
world of different cultures that could
be very different but still share a
larger governments and a larger market
um
and that vision is actually not very
appealing to most people so I I did a
set of poll
on Twitter where I asked about 12
different kinds of variety in the world
and which kinds people wanted more or
less of that variety and fundamental
values was the one people least wanted
more variety of that they Most Wanted
less variety of that people don't like
the idea that we would share a culture
with a governance and a society and
markets with people who had very
different values about say gender
equality or how to treat children or
things like that people hate the idea of
that kind of
variety and in fact um there's a guy
named stunts who was a Harvard law
professor who wrote a book around the
year 2000 about law the history of law
in the US and he said initially in the
US the legal system basically allowed
enormous variety the law could just be
different in every little County every
state could be different and States
could allow every County to be different
and then over over the decades and
centuries the law became much more
constraining of this variety through a
series of moral campaigns where people
just really wanted to make the whole
nation agree with their position on each
new moral campaign like prohibition or
um prostitution or polygamy or alcohol
or you know a bunch of things like that
in these situations people felt very
strongly that the whole nation had to
agree with their position on that moral
issue and that the Supreme Court made
rulings to allow everybody to be forced
to follow the majority's opinion on that
and that's and now the US law is much
less open to such variety each local
County can't so much have whatever laws
it wants because it's constrained more
to follow the moral opinions of the
country's majority but that's just what
you expect given that people really
like to be in moral Crusades where they
push for their moral View and want to
push for everybody to adopt it and
that's been the driving force of
cultural change and Corp cultural
conformity so but that would be one
solution if we could get people behind
just tolerating and even encouraging
more cultural variety of deep values
more Cults basically get everybody say
Cults are great let's just have more
Cults uh let's let Cults do weird things
with their kids and weird things with
their work and weird you know weird
things with their bodies
Cults life that one approach that
plausibly could work right I mean people
have spoken about like Bubble Worlds
before and Bubble Worlds with chorus
membranes and you know Cosmic seads
where people could drift at one you know
from one culture to the other and they
didn't like it they could try out other
cultures right but remember only one
country in the world allows organ sales
right and the rest of the country keep
world keeps trying to pressure them to
switch and that's true for a lot of
different policies there's not that much
appetite for wanting to allow
experimentation and Variety in the world
there's enormous appetite for enforcing
Conformity for making sure that
everybody does it the right
way so I mean like we do have um organ
transmission though but it's highly
regulated um regulated
swide right sorry regulated similarly
worldwide that's the key thing so a lot
of say challenge trials well there's a
there's that might maybe one of the
issues is it's it's it's opt in uh for
people who die uh rather than kned out
maybe the default should be opt out so
there be more organs to be
transferred because that's the B right
is just not enough organs sure but again
the usual conversation like like these
is this sort of conversation where we
ask what's the right answer not how much
variety should we allow or even
encourage people especially with medical
ethics are not very eager to talk about
what variety we should allow or
encourage they want us to talk about
what's the right answer that we should
force on
everybody so that's the I mean obstacle
it's true I mean like there's a lot at
stake um in in experimentation here if
you have a market for organs you could
end up like you know someplace in South
America waking up in a in a in a you
know a bath of ice with a phone saying
you're in a kidney right right that
that's the risk of variety yes and so if
we allow people around the world in
different multicultures to have
different ways they raise their children
maybe they won't send them to
school right uh maybe they won't have
the same attitudes towards violence uh
there's people feel strongly about their
shared values and disliking deviants who
have different
values but again this is one possibility
that we get people to swallow and accept
and celebrate even more deep cultural
variety not shallow stuff that's one
approach I mean if if you let a thousand
Cults Bloom would you want some sort of
governance of the Cults some sort of
super sort of um overseer to make sure
some of the Cult Don't spin out of
control very minimum what you would like
is a world that could trade and even
have some you know peace among diverse
cultures right if they were just
constantly at war with each other then
you know that would be pretty sad so you
might like them to be able to trade with
each other and to keep some sort of
military peace between them so you'd
have to like nudge them all to be
friendly um but you know things could go
pretty pearshaped if just one of them
thought that hey let's go doomsday and
our cult but the risk is that Oblivion
like you think well we want a lot of
cultural variety but and then you're
going to have a list of exceptions where
you're not going to allow variety on
those exceptions now you have to realize
that for each of those exceptions you're
not going to have cultural Evolution on
them and maybe for a couple of them you
can G gamble pretty solidly yeah we
don't need variations on those we're
pretty sure those are right but the more
you add to the list the more you are
risking failing to have cultural
Evolution on those things but also drift
right the problem is they won't to stay
where they are our shared World
attitudes towards those things will
drift and they could just go off the
rails drifting from wh where they are so
that's the risk but yeah that's that
approach you you probably will tolerate
a couple of ways that the world shares
something so that it can share peace and
share trade
but the you don't want to risk very many
of those because each one is a way in
which we don't have cultural selection
and we could have drift
okay let's let's drill down into that
with the
specific like you know um weapons of
mass destruction or weapons of potential
Mass disruption right um yeah so so how
do we regulate that such that we don't
see drift and uh we don't the point is
you can't regulate against drift of
cultural values so you know we'll have
to Define what is a weapon of mass
destruction and then the World culture
will drift in what it defines as such
things it might initially start out its
nukes and bioweapons but later it
decides its Ai and then it adds
misinformation and libraries and
libraries become Weapons of Mass
destructions and then they get to
regulate those and you know that's where
drift could go
um or how would that
work that is knowledge is power and
therefore you know power on the WR hand
to
translate that is one person with a very
persuasive message could destroy the
world by getting everybody to believe
they very persuasive message and we
would we can't risk a persuasive
demagogue having a voice to let
everybody hear them and therefore we
must regulate
against uh potential persuasive
demagogues right sounds about a sweeping
regulation right there I mean it's not
it's not it's not what initially but the
point is you can't constrain where the
future will go with
that that's a key problem of because the
world doesn't want to constrain it like
so the question is how could you get the
world to want to constrain itself from
changing so but my second alternative
solution is in the direction of this so
maybe we should switch to that so my my
second alternative solution is to say
let's let's have these large shared
cultur
try to
constrain themselves in terms of their
future cultural
Evolution how could we get them to do
that well we'd have to get them to sign
on to something that they were so
devoted to that they saw as so sacred
that they were willing to let it
constrain them when they were otherwise
tempted to change their values to to let
culture
drift that's the challenge so
so as you know I have this form of
government design called
futarchy where you pick a
metric and then betting markets would
decide which policies would most likely
achieve that metric and by repeatedly
adopting whatever policies this the
betting Market say would achieve the
metric you would in fact tend to achieve
the metric over
time so if you adopted a few tkey about
some long-term simple values like the
size of the world economy or the amount
of energy we use or the population or
something then the betting Market
speculators would know that certain
sorts of cultural changes would tend to
get in the way of that maybe causing a
population decline economic Decline and
then they would adopt policies to try to
resist those but then the problem is
people could just change the metric when
they didn't like its
consequences if it didn't feel a very
compelling metric to them because all
these cultural value changes tend to
feel very compelling at the time and
people feel very devoted to them so the
question is how can you have something
they feel as devoted to as that to get
them to resist those sorts of drift
changes
so here's an example that might work we
can at least think it through imagine we
had a few turkey around the metric of
the date we get to the stars and there's
ways to Define that but that's a long
way off okay but maybe we're willing to
treat this date of getting the stars as
a sacred thing because this just isn't
some economic metric or something this
is our cause we we want to get to the
Stars we are the community we are the
society that is going to get to the
stars and we have decided we want to do
that and then the futar will see that if
we allow population to decline or the
economy to collapse then that will put
off the date we get to the
stars and then when it can see policies
that might reduce those threats it would
adopt them and then when people saw that
those policies were pushing against some
of their cultural values they might let
it happen
anyway because they saw this getting to
the Stars date as a sacred thing that
trumped their other
concerns um I don't if you know I know a
year ago the previous year before that I
spent the year thinking about the sacred
and studying the sacred as a as a way to
understand it so here invoking that
stuff right yeah some collective
Essence um as as sacredness that um sort
of guides people's
values and uh yeah well we could go into
it more detail now if you like but for
for the for the purpose of this
discussion the idea is just could we
identify or agree on some sacred
value that we could we would be willing
to enshrine into governance as the value
we were going to pursue together and
then that is resistant to selective
pressure say again that is resistant to
selection well that we are just going to
not
change as a large society that you know
isn't suffering much selection pressure
now so we would just adopt a government
structure as the United States or even
as all of the west or something where we
say this is what we want and this is
what we agree
to and then when it sort of pushes in
some directions that we you know that
feel a little uncomfortable or that
aren't ma well matched to our
self-concept of what our values are we
we tolerate it because all through
history people have been willing to
suffer for their sacred things and
they're often proud of that you know
when when Christianity demands certain
things that they don't feel very natural
to you you often felt well this shows my
devotion to Christianity because I've
been willing to do things that feel
uncomfortable because that proves my
devotion to the
sacred you can get status from it
right now I mean I have to admit like
this is also a long
shot like getting a large world to agree
on some sort of long-term goal goal like
that that they could you know embody in
a concrete metric like the date we get
to the Stars that's a big ask of our
culture our culture isn't that inclined
to pick those things and make them super
sacred um our culture isn't even
inclined to say explicitly what we value
we we mostly tend to implic have
implicit values for things and want to
make choices based on our implicit
values and not have to commit to a
explicit statement of our values at
least not very constraining one we we
don't mind vague descript vague
statements that are slogans uh you know
all we need is love something like that
or everybody counts or children of the
future blah blah blah right I mean you
know but to actually commit to a
concrete
measurable metric that constrains what
we value that's something people are
much less comfortable
with so when they see the sacred up
close they with a magnifying glass they
won't appreciate it as much because
there's you know some people don't like
an aspect of the Sacred you know if you
come too close to the
Cross you might
find you know splinters you might find
parts that you just don't
like but say the date we get to the
stars is nicely
Abra right the date we get to the stars
is nicely
abstract if you are willing to just
embrace the idea yeah we we want to get
to the stars as soon as
possible then you might accept that as
our sacred value and willing to make
other sacrifices for it I think it's
less that the details of that look ugly
than that just it may not be compelling
enough they may not really stand for
what you really are willing to sacrifice
for um now for an intellectual like
myself you might think oh let's let's
make a metric of how much we
know that should be
civilization should be devoted for some
integral over what we know when and
knowing more sooner is the great thing
we all want to
do as an intellectual I can get more
behind that that's more sacred to me but
um I'm not sure how compelling that
would be to most
people but the point is this is the kind
of thing you're sort of torn to so this
is this is awkward for me like not only
am I more of a stem person who doesn't
want to think about culture I'm also
more a Libertarian who doesn't want to
think about empowering a government to
you know push everybody in a Direction
they don't feel
like oh that's what we're talking about
here empowering some government to adopt
policies that push us all in a stated
direction that may be at odds with what
each of us feels like
doing I mean besides these two
Alternatives the default Alternatives is
just to accept that our civilization
will in fact fall and collapse
until it's replaced by something like
the Amish or heredom who are insular
fertile subcultures who are not so much
suffering from cultural
drift uh and then a new civilization
Rises which then has to go through all
of this over again because it'll also
drift and can't figure out how to fix it
yeah and that they'll be at the same
place we are right right except a little
higher cycle will continue and you know
even if they have the the sacred um
value of just uh you know being just
having a large population and and the
sacred value of
fertility um you know and that and that
is a driver for Innovation they're going
to reach
up hit against resource bottlenecks I
mean there's practical limitations to
fertility sure but if you think about
say the Roman
Empire there was a collapse of
civilization before the Roman Empire
from the Bronze Age uh it was a minimum
there there was a higher point in
Civilization say 3,000 years ago or
4,000 years ago and then there was a
collapse and then there was a rise again
of the Roman Empire and then there was a
collapse but the low that the Roman
Empire fell to at the end was still
higher than the low before the Roman
Empire
began uh there were a lot of specific
technologies that the world had in the
poor Middle Ages that they did not have
in 3000
BC so if our civilization Rises and then
collapses again it won't collapse to the
same place it was in
1600 I think we'll still have
electricity running Water
Sanitation even and you know electronic
communications I think the world would
have those things still even if we lost
much of AI or other large
infrastructures so the rise and fall of
civilization can still take us higher in
the long
run it would just it just be kind of sad
in the sense of might hope not to have
to go through all these crashes and
Rises and it becomes harder to imagine
influencing wherever they end up right
culturally especially like if AR you
could if you know that you're a
civilization about to collapse but you
do care about the future of General Life
um you may decide to try and uh have
efforts to preserve certain types of
information in non-destructible readable
ways right well the problem is that you
need the next civilization to be willing
to pick that up so say we look at the
Roman Empire the Roman Empire was
eventually replaced by the Christians
who you initially in the year zero say
was only a thousand people or so a
little after that and then doubled every
20 years for three centuries to
eventually take over the Roman Empire
but then when they finally took it over
they did not keep everything from the
Roman Empire there are many things that
were associated with Pagan heathen
practices and attitudes that they
rejected because they didn't want to be
tainted by those things and plausibly
our descendant civilization maybe feel
that way about us for example much of
our music they might feel that it
embodied the wrong sort of values and
they might reject most of our music so
even if even if they went on
archaeological digs and found all these
Stellar um containing useful information
we find valuable today they might just
take a torch to it and earn it so that
nobody ever get to see it
exactly so I think you have to imagine
how you could offer them something that
would not feel threatening to their
different valued
civilization you so as we know the Amish
and the heredom are reluctant to embrace
many Technologies in our world they have
direct access to them it's not like they
have to dig dig them up but they are
explicitly rejecting them because of the
fear of other things that they will get
contaminated with if they use them are
do they burn like evidence of
Technologies existing um in their
cultures so I mean no they don't need to
they just keep them out right right yeah
they just don't use them for example you
know I'm just wondering if an organ like
a like the heral or the Amish if in the
future they might have museums of of uh
different ideas that different
civilizations had that people would go
and look at but they they just didn't
use them in their Society right but it's
also that you know a lot of things that
complely a lot of things that were lost
from the Roman Empire weren't lost so
much because of Christian hostility but
because they were integrated into a
larger society and weren't very sensible
or understandable outside that context a
lot of technology is like that uh it you
know only works in a context and
separated from that it's not very
understandable or useful so that is a
basic problem of the collapse of
civilizations is how to to preserve
something and need to make it less
dependent on the rest of the
civilization Factor it out pull it out
from other things and the kind of
technologies that people continued to
use at the end of the Roman Empire were
simpler more separable technologies that
you could recreate with very low Tech
Etc um so in the scenario where you
accept the collapse of our
civilization yes if you want to think
about the future the main question is
what can we do today that
would be the sort of thing they would
want to
keep to you know make them speed up so
that they don't have to ReDiscover
things that we could they could just
inherit what we figured out and one one
issue would be like keep it low Tech and
simple like modern AI technology at
least of the form it is today is not a
good candidate here it requires enormous
large infrastructure and systems to do
um right and then methodologies like the
scientific method might be very useful
if they they completely forgot that then
rediscovered
it I think you'll want to separate those
things from our
ideologies so I think for example a lot
of social science or even hum's science
will be at risk if they think they are
infected with atheistic attitudes or you
know attitudes that
are pleasure oriented or you know heat
decadent Etc
they might wholesale
reject aspects of our intellectual world
that seem to be infected by values they
disliked and you know we we can know
what those are maybe for today's rhom
and Amish but what they will be in two
centuries or three is much harder to
predict and that makes it much harder to
figure out how you can pass something on
to them that they would not fear being
infected
by do you think can you imagine
a future civilization be scared by
something like science or the scientific
method would be frightening I think if
it had been clearly applied to something
they disliked and it was seen as the
justification for something they
disliked they might
well um so for they'd need to like then
that would need to be preserved they
need to say the reason for the previous
civilizational collapse was because of
Science and here's why and so the the um
the encoding of the why would need then
to be preserved wouldn't it I mean at
the moment they don't have to give very
elaborate justifications when the Hors
decide which Technologies use they don't
have to do long white papers justifying
it they just have to have a sense that
that would be risky and they want to
keep it away so I mean in our world
today they you know in their small
businesses they are happy to use
machines that um you know they Bu from
elsewhere as long as they don't need
much training to learn how to use those
machines because they don't have to want
to send people off to be trained and
then mix up with other people that's why
they don't want them to use the Internet
or you know email so much because
they're afraid of the mixing in the
larger culture cell phones or even cars
the main reason they don't use cars is
because with cars you can go farther and
mix with more people um so uh they are
very attentive to worrying about that
mixing and same for the heredom um and
so very ins fertile subcultures are
going to be in this long-term habit of
having resisted outside influence and
keeping themselves insular and then it
matters how they Define that in their
minds like what is the package of things
in their minds that's the risky package
that they want to stay away from and
things you think might be valuable could
be mixed up in that package but they
can't see it and they're just gonna keep
a whole package away because the package
looks
scary h
I mean do you think that okay so is
there any been been any
um I mean it seems as though even the
Amish like you you may say that the
Amish are insul but a lot of people
drift out of the Amish culture into um
they lose about 7% per generation yeah
right that's a lot well they I mean okay
but they keep 93% so they're they're
growing rapidly on the basis of that um
they aren't very interested in
recruiting Outsiders to join themselves
same for RM um but this is again this is
a long-term problem to think about but
there aren't very many good answers here
so that's the main thing to say this is
kind of discouraging not only is it
discouraging to have to admit that all
those culture people were right and
there is important things to think about
in culture it's discouraging to not have
a solution very easy the solution none
of the solutions look very attractive
here
and it's even hard to get people
motivated to see this as a problem
honestly people love their cultures
people feel very attached to them they
feel very motivated by wanting to join
cultural fights and to push for their
cultural drift of favored directions
um well okay so of the Salient functions
of culture that we can
see um do do we see them all do you
think
we're aware of all all the selent
function of culture um that that is
useful for Innovation that is useful for
preser U
preservation if we don't and uh okay so
how do we find out what they are so I
think if you look at corporate cultures
it's a great microcosm because it's just
a lot easier to study corporate cultures
we have a lot of data on them you can go
into them and see how they work and I
think it's a good microcosm to help you
understand
agricultures
um corporate social worlds are
complicated
worlds and managers of these worlds have
a limited set of tools they can use to
influence these worlds but it's pretty
powerful they can fire anybody and put
anybody in any job they can change
budgets they can move around functions
managers have a lot of power over
corporations but nevertheless there's
this whole set of other things that are
happen is a complicated social
equilibrium that they find it hard to
see and understand and control and
sometimes I just call that culture
culture is all the stuff that the
managers can't very easily see
understand or control and in that sense
yeah there's lots of stuff that you
don't understand there because it's our
name for all the stuff you don't
understand and all the stuff you don't
understand is something they in fact
can't control very well so managers are
con very quite often trying to initiate
corporate culture culture change
initiatives they see some problems with
their culture and they want to change it
and most of those initiatives
fail and in fact on average corporate
cultures just drift into dysfunction and
it's selection that mly fix that that's
why corporations just tend to die over
time their cultures drift into
dysfunction into
maladaption um and even with all the
powers and incentives that CEOs have
they can't typically fix that that
should be a warning about our macroc
cultures how supposed to understand and
control our macr cultures when we have
less visibility into them less control
over them less Powers over them in
whoever we give Powers has less
incentives it's just a much harder
problem to understand and control our
macro
cultures compared to a corporate culture
and with corporate cultures we usually
can't control them and they usually
drift into dysfunction and selection is
what fixes
them so that suggests that you really
want selection I should mention that
with the with the uh deep
multiculturalism you want more variety
but what you want is a combination of
variety more variety and less drift so
we could also help that scenario by
discouraging drift we might be able to
perhaps get a culture to see drift as
risky and not so because many ancient
cultures revered their cultures and were
wary of changing their culture our
culture today celebrates changing our
culture so could we somehow adopt a more
literally conservative view wherein we
were less eager to change our cultures
and more wary of changing them and maybe
even more idealized keeping cultures
from
changing that isn't enough by itself but
it could be work with more variety
together to produce more
selection and of of course the third
element is more selection what if we
just had more Wars
MH or other disasters that cause
selection I mean who want I don't want
to wish more Wars on people but honestly
if you had a high enough rate of Wars
going on that would in fact be strong
selection that was probably the
strongest selection factor for the last
10,000 years was
war
cultur oh I mean it certainly drives a
lot of funding for technological
innovation um in some ways right it's
right but it's still you know a minority
of the economy I mean even in the US
defense fending is like more more than
5% of the economy maybe 3% so that's
limits how much funding it it can be
giving for Innovation because it's only
a tiny fraction in the
economy but and it's less funding for an
military it's more actual it's the
actual selection of war that is the
would be the mechanism that would
prevent cultural drift but that means
some cultures have to lose
by losing
Wars which would do you think there's
any hope in trying to um understand the
the landscape of cultural possibility
and try and etch out what it what it
looks like in in in a way um and try to
uh understand what it is the function of
culture that is useful um and and the
stuff that isn't I mean it could help I
mean there's certainly no reason not to
understand it but I guess my best bet
would be if you could understand the
process of cultural change enough to
make that Vivid to the people who are
pushing to change it so that you could
get them to back off from trying to
cause such rapid change so often uh that
would be my best hope is to make that
Vivid of course you'd also like to make
Vivid where is the Deep variety and
where is the shallow variety and let
people really see you know it's the Deep
variety that matters more but people
tend to focus when they think about
cultures in Shallow cultural variey so
people say look how could how could we
have a world monoculture look at all the
different kinds of music look at all the
different TV shows look at all the
different Hobbies people have look at
this enormous variety and there is
enormous variety there it's just not
variety of
the kind that cultures share across the
culture like the blinking Norms right
that's the problem
things that we're allowed to vary on
where we don't have strong Norms to
enforce Conformity well yeah we have a
lot of variety on those and those aren't
a
problem um so if we could get people to
just see that they do have a bunch of
these cultural norms that they do share
and that there is low variety of it
maybe people could be more Disturbed to
see how little variety we
have but even then often they're just
they love that fact so many people love
the fact that century ago the world all
these different conflicting cultures who
had world wars and didn't understand
each other and didn't think well of each
other and now the world together we have
mutual understanding and mutual peace
and trade and we get together at
conferences and we respect each other
and we all agree about the value of
education and the value of paying
enormous attention to each child all the
time and all and the value of art like
we like the fact that we share a
culture and many deep cultural values
are shared people like that so the hard
thing is to get them to see that as as a
risk as something that has a problem
with
it if we did develop like a super
powerful AI that would be able to
simulate
culture um without actually destroying
our own in the process um maybe we could
do some form of indirect normativity
where we have an oracle AI that says hey
here are all sorts of permutations on
cultural value that that could Sprout
off from here um and I'm simulating all
these cultures um and I have such a such
a huge amount of Co computational power
I can do that I don't but I think the
key lessons don't need very
complicated simulations it's fine to do
simulations more realistic simulations
are better in some sense but the the key
lesson so imagine somebody who's really
passionate about say transgenderism
right they they think in the past people
didn't care about this they had the
wrong values about this today more
people have the values I treasure but
not enough and I'm really want to push
for more valuing you know agreeing with
my values on
transgender um the question is can you
get that person to see that that process
that they're involved in is attaching
themselves to a value that trying to
change culture is the thing that's
causing drift in the long run get them
to imagine what happens if 100 other
groups like that happened over the next
Century each with its own New Concept of
vales each pushing in a New Direction
what's the net effect of that on the
world over that time that's the thing to
get them to see is to be able to imagine
that I don't know you need that
complicated a situ simulation to convey
that but even to get people to engage to
see that simulations in their head not
everybody's willing to do that so
offloading the the head simulations we
do in our little skull Brown brains to a
supercomputer that might be you know
smarter than this in many ways and and
can sort of do a deep sort of simulation
across many different varieties
of growth and cultural change then um
maybe we'd be in a bit better position
to be able to I certainly don't object
but you know I'm a I'm an economist I'm
a social scientist in a world where
people sometimes do simulations and it's
actually honestly hard for social
scientists to do simulations to get the
attention of other social scientist much
less the
public because there's just so many ways
to interpret a simulation so many
different choices you might have made so
many different ways to frame it it's
hard to convince somebody that this was
a robust simulation it wasn't just the
outcomes weren't as a result of all the
particular choices you made in the
search to get the answer you wanted
that's hard to do among social
scientists who are willing to look at a
lot of the details of these so there's a
much bigger challenge to get Ordinary
People to believe and be persuaded by
the results of computer simulations of
society I'm just going to tell you that
it's even hard to get Ordinary People to
by a simple Game Theory argument about
yeah society and it's just much way more
ways to be skeptical about a computer
simulation because most social SCI
people don't disagree with the
simulation theorists the social
scientists and the game theorists or
maybe that's a cultural change we
need get people to social scientists or
game theorists and but then you also
have to make those people actually tell
the truth as opposed to tell whatever is
in the interest of so honestly much of
social science is in the service of
various activist groups that are trying
to push for various cultural changes
rather than trying to check those people
in discipline or often see themselves
literally in the service that is they
see their highest goal as trying to push
for some kinds of social change many
social scientists are in that mode
that's what they're trying to do so
getting even social scientists to be
wary of that and to understand this risk
of cultural drift is a big challenge
right I mean a lot of social science
probably can't be really tested in um in
the real world unless the experiments
are played out but what aspects of
social science do you think could be
more aable to empirical testing such
that they they would have to be believed
if they could be proven and replicated
obviously the the academic literature
and the concepts I'm most drawing on
here for the discussion I'm talking to
is the literature of culture Revolution
culture Revolution is still a relatively
small part of social science it doesn't
have its own discipline for example you
know and the first simplest step would
be to get the specialists in the field
of cultural Evolution to to be the one
saying what I'm saying instead of me to
use their Authority as a specialty field
who knows the most about cultural
Evolution to say to the world yeah we
have a problem with maladaptive cultural
change and to be willing to say that and
explain it to people and to then they
can use all of their evidence that
they've been persuaded by internally to
convince themselves of all the
particular views they have on cultural
Evolution then to try to persuade other
social scientists and then the rest of
the world about this key problem so I've
talked to some relatively Elite people
in cultural Evolution and read them and
they seem to know that this is an issue
and agree with it that is what I'm
telling you isn't some radical view that
isn't roughly known by cultural L they
know that cultural evoltion can go wrong
they know that there are in fact signs
that cultural evoltion has been going
wrong lately they do get that less
variety and selection pressure is a
problem with Evolution but they've just
been shy about saying this to the public
that is this is still a small field
they're trying to they crave respect
they don't want to be you know saying
things that might get pushed back that
might get people complaining about
them which makes sense so I understand
yeah they've all got a livelihood to
protect and they've all got you know
their um peers that they want to appeal
to and they don't want to lose friends
and things like that
sure don't want up against sacred values
because that could you end up um hurting
them but I mean I think you know as a
futurist you can see that to the extent
this is right a lot of analysis of the
future is kind of missing the point if
this is actually a key Dynamic that's
likely to play out then it's going to
delay or Sidetrack many other futurist
visions of you know what we will be
doing and accomplish in The Next Century
or
so there's an aspect of this this just
sit right with me and that is this this
sort of big unknown this big cloud this
obscurity this you know you must try
selection pressures um for things that
you just don't understand but my default
sort of means of sort of solving that is
to try and understand what you don't
understand do you think there's just a a
sort of um like a just aspects of all
this that will never ever be able to
understand like this here's dynamics of
cultural drift and dynamics of cultural
change you think there's just pieces of
it it just will never understand we
always have to trust to selection
pressure
I think we might well understand enough
details of culture to talk sensibly
about how you might design culture if
you were allowed to to be functional
that's not
crazy but the question is who will ever
let you do that design culture that is
so one view of history is that humans
first evolved reason and then we evolved
culture and under that
view culture is something we only ever
do when it makes sense because we use
reason to figure out when to say copy
somebody else's
Behavior under that view culture
couldn't be going off the rails because
cultural changes are all produced by
reason applied to some complicated
context where we then figure out who to
copy how and what to change so if our
major world cultural changes were
primarily due to reason because reason
was the underlying mechanis people had
and culture was just a way reason was
expressed then we wouldn't be having a
problem here if the view of the cultural
Evolution people is not that the view is
that reason was developed after culture
culture made
reason we first have this underlying
mechanism for copying and doing behavior
and then we we figured out that reason
was a nice behavior to copy and we
figured out ways to use it and when but
we didn't let it replace all of culture
and take it over it was something we
used in certain times and places and as
you may not that we often use reason to
justify things but not to choose things
so it shows that reason actually has a
relatively limited application in our
world uh although we try to pretend like
we apply it that with like empirical
studies I mean if some it's something to
bad study we have metascience and like
right but that's all using reason I'm
including all of that in reason looking
at data and analyzing data and drawing
conclusions is all reason but I mean
there's been junk science which just
been subsequently thrown out sure
because the methodology was bad right
but look so I am a economist who has
specialized say in the topic of
governance and I I know that and
mechanisms I know many ways in which you
know economics seems to support ways we
should change our institutions but the
world isn't interested in these ideas
because the world really isn't
interested in believing what economists
say about how to change institutions
that is the world in many ways just
isn't that interested in listening to
pointy head talkers about their abstract
ideas and changing behavior on that
basis that they tolerate them to teach
their kids to be impressive and get
selected by companies but they don't
actually want to do what they say so
even if we can get a detailed analysis
of culture and its structure and what it
causes the question is Could you
actually get people to change their
process of cultural change on the basis
of that analysis that's analogist to
sort of changing our government from
what we have now to futarchy on the
basis of listening to analysis of people
like me saying yeah that would work
better but nobody wants to do that
nobody is at all interested in listening
to academics tell them how to change the
structure of government because nobody
wants to change the structure of
government on the basis of abstract
ideas that's not something anybody's
interested in really really really I
have a bit more Faith than you perhaps I
think people do listen to reasoned
arguments and change based on them but
not everybody it's a slow maybe it's a
slower process than I'd like maybe it's
a much slower process than you'd like
for example you know the specialists in
the field of Economics of medicine have
known for a long time since the you know
at least for 50 years now basically that
on the margin medic medicine has very
little health
benefit uh and so we don't need to be
spending as much as we do on medicine
because the marginal effect of medicine
is very low we've known that for a long
time and the world just doesn't want to
change its Behavior about spending a lot
on medicine on the basis of that
abstract academic
analysis um so that's a pretty simple
direct thing um but so that's my
experience you see embedding myself in
the world of ideas and Analysis and
realizing that you have pretty solid
Arguments for ways the world should
change and the world just doesn't listen
that doesn't care and people are much
less sensitive about that than they're
going to be about culture people are
going to be maximally sensitive about
culture when they have a moral campaign
they're on and they want to change the
world on the basis of that moral
campaign I don't see what sort of
abstract analysis they might listen to
to back off on that moral campaign
because they really love that and they
think it's the most important thing and
they think it trumps everything else and
that there is no possible argument
against it that's how people feel about
moral campaigns
yeah I guess because people don't ground
morals in real world phenomena they just
assume that what they are is what they
are well they have some way they came to
them but they aren't very aware of
exactly how that happened but once they
have this in their mind it feels very
compelling that it's just
obvious yeah well that's the start point
of your analysis here it's like you you
believe very strongly um the values that
your cult the culture that you're
embedded in
tells you and if you don't you may be
selected out right the culture will
punish you for not embracing its values
and they just seem obvious right I mean
but the thing is what you did is you
copied the values of the prestigious
people in your culture the high status
people that's the most fundamental thing
and then when high status people said it
should change then you copied them too
you didn't I mean it's it's amaz you
don't just stick with the culture you
were taught when you were young you're
willing to change the culture you taught
when you were young on the basis of the
prestigious people in your in your
culture telling you it should
change unusually is prestigious people
are telling you to change because it's
in their
interest or they're just doing the same
thing they're following the same
cultural strategy as as you are right
because there were some at some point
there was somebody else who was
prestigious and They're copying them
again the fundamental mechanism of
culture is copying success and the
simplest unconditional strategy is just
whoever is high status you copy them and
yeah I mean like is it I mean it's
becoming more High status to be able to
change based on new evidence and change
based on you know scientific findings
and all those sorts of things and that's
a good sign in a sense that like part of
part of what's popular is the ability to
change based on evidence but people
almost never want to change their values
on the basis of that evidence they only
want to change their beliefs and facts
and what what actions have what
consequences well I hope
not oh we'll hope that gets better right
I I hope that question do we actually
have an argument for so there's look I
can give you real I'd say yes so I mean
the key thing is this cultural analysis
and by evolutionary analysis will
basically tell you what will survive and
what will exist in the future and then
people often say but I value this and I
don't care if we exist in the future so
many people when they see the conflict
between our current cultural values and
the fact that our civilization might
Decline and be replaced by the others
they say fine let's be
replaced uh that it's more important
that we stay true to our values than
that we prevent our civilization
declining and being
replaced right and they take the rest of
civilization down with them okay that
would be
scary that is very that is the most
common stance here within within the
culture select out that kind of way of
thinking we
don't many Ed out because of that way of
thinking I think you more have to
convince people that um there's a modest
amount of u they don't have to give up
that much of their culture that it uh is
only a bit that they have to give up
true um is it almost time for you to
have din y it's about time for me to go
home yes I quite got that impression but
yes it's uh well I guess we're above 2
hours now but um it like is there any
you'd like to um sum up with is there
any like conclusion or or um you know I
think I've definitely gotten to say
plenty of things here I don't feel
gotten to say have my say uh so I just
say look this is only something I've
been thinking about for three months now
so I've got to admit a lack not on the
expertise of somebody who's been at this
for 30 years uh and so I am a little bit
puzzled why the other people who are
experts in cultural Evolution haven't
been saying this before me there are
people who have been doing this for many
decades um although maybe they think
they have said it it's just hard to get
the word out um it's doesn't look easy
to
fix um and all the plausible fixes just
look pretty hard and but
nevertheless it's a problem we face and
so you know I feel
like what else do you do would figure
out what are the biggest problems and
bang your head against them as best you
can so that's what to do
here well P wonderful having you again
and it's certainly a very interesting
topic and I really hope that could be
more achieved here where more progress
can be made on on this front and I look
forward to uh hearing more of what you
have to say once you've had a lot more
time and um a lot more people get to
weigh in on this for sure um I hope
we'll talk again about it I guess yeah
all right well thanks um yes and you
have a wonderful
dinner all right bye
[Music]
