this episode is brought to you by ground
news hi welcome to another episode of
Cold Fusion Samsung's management has
stated that the company is in crisis but
Samsung is more than just a company it's
a dynasty where leadership is handed
down through the generations Samsung
basically runs Korea they alone account
for 20% of South Korea's entire GDP few
companies anywhere in the world have
such a dominant impact on their home
country's economy it's so influential
that some jokingly refer to South Korea
as the Republic of Samsung consumers in
the US and other parts of the world may
just view Samsung as a phone or
electronics brand but in South Korea
Samsung is on a whole different level
the company is everywhere with its hand
in nearly every industry you can think
of they have 80 subsidiaries the
flagship is Samsung Electronics but they
dominate construction real estate food
production Finance life insurance and
healthare but they also build armored
vehicles oil tankers have a clothing and
entertainment branch and even run
hospitals when I was in Korea last year
I even saw Samsung branded cars it's
hard to believe that such a company
started by selling vegetables and dried
noodles at the start of 2024 Samsung
Electronics the Crown Jewel of the
empire was valued at 400 billion then
starting in July of 2024 a sudden Panic
hit the company's stock and foreign
investors frantically began selling off
their Samsung shares they lost $122
billion in value in just a few months
almost half the company's market cap was
wiped out this kind of drastic drop is
concerning for any company yet alone one
that's tied so heavily to the GDP of an
entire nation so what's behind the Panic
while we all know that stock markets can
be fickle these days and even a rumor
can start a selling process there is
more behind the scenes Samsung itself
has reshuffled some of its management
and forced a 6-day working week for
executives to get their house in order
and that brings about a major question
here are there major problems with
Samsung or is this just overblowing
Market sentiment in today's episode we
investigate what's going on with Samsung
the management changes and what this all
means for one of the world's most
influential
companies you are watching T Fusion
[Music]
TV before diving in we should remember
that Samsung is run differently to
companies in the west Samsung is what's
called a Cho ball or family-owned
conglomerate that has passed down
through generations that's like if
Zuckerberg was to hand over his Empire
to one of his children the Samsung
family are the most powerful in Korea in
fact Mickey Lee the producer of the
Korean movie parasite was a Samsung airs
she was also instrumental in pushing
Korean culture into the mainstream but
back to Samsung being a Chao company
means that a lot of control stays within
the Lee family the company's Founders
this concentration of power has created
its own set of challenges over the years
there have been a number of corruption
scandals in legal battles that have
tainted Samsung's image as Jeffrey Kane
author of Samsung Rising puts it quote
every leader of Samsung has been in and
out of court so far they have been
either accused or convicted or jailed
for either tax evasion or bribery or
embezzlement or perjury one of the
largest scandals happened in 2017 the
company's Heir Lee Jong became embroiled
in bribery scandals Lee was charged with
offering $38 million in bribes to four
companies run by a friend of the
president at the time interestingly one
of the companies was in Germany and
provided horse riding training to one of
the daughters of the president's friends
in return Lee was to get government help
for a corporate merger that would give
him more control within Samsung this
Scandal shook both public and investor
confidence but by 2022 he was out of
jail and back as Samsung Electronics
executive chairman so why was this well
the Korean government basically stated
that Samsung was too important for the
government to mess with South Korea's
most powerful business leader JY Lee
emerged from a Detention Center just
outside Soul a free man a judge ruling
it was hard to see the reason
appropriateness and necessity of
arresting him at this time later that
year Lee was convicted on a drug charge
so the leadership of Samsung has a bit
of a question mark on it but that's not
all Samsung is also known for its rigid
hierarchy when things are good this
works well but insiders say it's a
culture that stifles Innovation and
makes it hard to adapt to rapidly
changing Market demands a factor that
would soon come into
play when we talk about Samsung's $122
billion market value loss we're really
talking about Samsung Electronics it's
important to make that distinction
because Samsung operates a massive
conglomerate as discussed it has a range
of Divisions under its belt at the core
of Samsung Electronics businesses are
two divisions one is the device
experience division which includes
smartphones TVs refrigerators and other
Home Appliances the other one is the
device Solutions division which Focus on
semiconductors and display panels
Samsung Electronics specifically its
semiconductor and consumer electronics
divisions play the biggest roles in the
company's market performance so when
Samsung Electronics fell 32% from its
high this seemed to be more than just
the CEO fluffing about so what gives
well it comes down to three big factors
number one missed opportunities in AI
number two a chipm disadvantage and
number three some chaotic leadership
changes let's break these down beginning
with missed opportunities in
AI if you look online most media outlets
Point to Samsung's inability to keep up
with AI they tout this as a major factor
behind the stock crash so is there any
truth to this allegation well the short
answer is yes when generative AI took
off there was an AI Gold Rush basically
everyone on the internet hates
generative AI but the fact of the matter
is it can make a lot of money for those
companies who position themselves right
right Microsoft Google and especially
Nvidia went all in Nvidia who supplies
the gpus that powered AI Ventures had
their value Skyrocket past $1 trillion
so where does Samsung fit into this
picture unfortunately nowhere they've
been on the
sidelines as a major semiconductor
player Samsung has lagged behind in its
high bandwidth memory production high
bandwidth memory or hbm are special
chips that are used in high-end graphic
systems like the Nvidia h100 very same
graphic systems that power AI the latest
generation of high bandwidth chip is
called the hbm 3E offering transfer
speeds in the range of terabytes per
second in an extremely high-profile deal
Samsung was supposed to make these
special memory chips for NVIDIA chips
crucial for nvidia's AI efforts but in
one of the biggest blunders of the Year
reports indicate that Samsung completely
fell flat their chips couldn't reach the
strict requirements for heat and power
efficiency that Nvidia required and it
was a tough blow falling short of a
major client like this comes with
consequences and for Samsung this was
costly meanwhile competitors like SK HX
have sweeped in to take advantage and
now hold a strong lead in the high
bandwidth memory market and now they're
currently the exclusive supplier of
these chips to Nvidia if you take a look
at this graph for the high bandwidth
memory Market just at a glance we can
see that Samsung's flat white line is
consistently at the very bottom trailing
well behind its smaller competitors in
the high bandwidth memory space Samsung
knows they're falling short so they
published a recent apology acknowledging
M targets and struggles in high
performance AI memory investors were
further disappointed with Samsung's
latest quarterly profit it was 900
million below expectations they still
did make 6.78 billion and that's nothing
to sneeze at but Falling short by nearly
a billion doesn't exactly make investors
jump for joy Samsung was in panic mode
and vice chairman juny hians recent
statement blatantly admitted that their
failure to meet Market expectations has
fueled concerns over Samsung's
technological competitiveness and future
Direction this quote unquote crisis as
Samsung management calls it even led the
company to enforce a Six-Day work week
for its Executives in an attempt to
regain lost ground in short Samsung who
manufactures chips were caught napping
as AI chip Hardware took off and
investors aren't
happy beyond AI Samsung's chip business
is also facing critical challenges in
the smartphone chip space the exos chips
are a thorn in the side of the flesh for
Samsung for years exos processors have
been criticized for issues like
overheating poor battery efficiency and
subpar performance when compared to
Snapdragon Qualcomm chips in fact
Samsung has lost so much faith in their
exos chips that they often choose
Snapdragon over exos when it comes to
their own Flagship Galaxy series devices
sold in crucial markets especially in
North America the big comp competition
for Samsung is of course tsmc the
Taiwanese giant that's absolutely
mastered chipm Samsung's semiconductor
business is a massive operation with
sales totaling almost $60 billion in
2024 alone but they've consistently
found themselves one step behind tsmc
their Taiwanese competition has an
ability to produce chips with greater
efficiency more power and fewer defects
their pedigree has allowed them to
secure bigname contracts with apple
Nvidia and AMD in contrast Samsung has
grappled with lower yields and
production delays as time passes the Gap
in technical ability between the two
companies keeps growing in q1 2024 alone
the top 10 semiconductor foundaries
generated a collective 29.2 billion in
revenue and tsmc dominated the market
with a staggering 61.7% market share
meanwhile Samsung had a meager 11%
pretty concerning in comparison and if
Samsung can't close this Gap soon they
risk losing even more ground to tsmc and
with it billions of in potential revenue
and to make matters worse tsmc is no
longer the only competitor Samsung is
also facing heat from fast rising
Chinese competitors Chinese firms are
catching up quickly in sectors outside
of the US sanctions these are Legacy
chips used in Cars airplanes home
appliances and consumer electronics by
the third quarter of 2024 Samsung's
performance was already taking aeit
memory chip demand was coming in weaker
than expected and all of this was the
complete nightmare scenario that Samsung
had been
dreading as the challenges ped up on all
sides behind the scenes Samsung has been
scrambling to address its internal
issues by reshuffling leadership in May
2024 they announced the removal of kiang
Kian as chip head and brought on junyong
Hong to head the core semiconductor
business and steer the ship in a New
Direction this decision came well before
the stock sell-off by investors that
started in July so it indicates that
management knew that the company was
struggling and needed to change but this
reshuffle in leadership isn't just about
some fresh perspective it's a response
to mounting pressure to fix a
long-standing history of internal
mismanagement the company has been
through multiple leadership revamps over
the years with three new CEOs appointed
in 2021 across its major divisions the
frequency of leadership changes signals
instability and it may suggest that
there's a lack of a clear long-term
strategy according to zet the recent
Shuffle is just the latest attempt to
revamp leadership but without clear
results this internal chaos may only add
to Samsung's perception of instability
all of these issues AI stagnation chip
struggles and corporate chaos over the
years created a perfect storm that
slashed Samsung stock into a bare
market so what can Samsung do to turn
things
around for starters as already mentioned
they brought in junyang hyan to lead the
semiconductor division Jun previously
headed Samsung's battery and Energy
Solutions arm and played a big role in
the memory business he now has the task
of navigating the semiconductor crisis
the hope is that his background will
help stabilize this vital division
especially as Global demand fluctuates
they're also making some tough cost
cutting decisions there's layoffs
planned across southeast Asia and
Australia that could impact 10% of jobs
in the region it's a harsh move but they
see it as necessary to stabilize the
ship I would like to see their bonuses
though well there1 15 ,000 staff
overseas and that's more than half of
Samsung's entire Workforce the markets
though where job losses are occurring
this time we're hearing are Australia
New Zealand and also southeast Asia and
about 10% of the market or the workforce
in those markets could end up being
affected though the numbers are likely
to vary among each subsidiary as well
Samsung's device Solutions division
which handles memory and systems
recently reported a 40% profit drop from
the previous quarter in response Samsung
plans to scale down its found operations
by up to 50% by Year's End and this is
to adapt to weaker demand from Key
clients in the US and China meanwhile
they're reshaping their investment
strategy tripping non-core projects to
focus on core areas like semiconductors
and display technology they've also
hinted that more actions could follow
though the specifics are still under
wraps now let's take a step back and
assess whether the stock market collapse
is overblown or is it just a panic yes
they've lost 122 2 billion in market
value and upper management is absolutely
panicking but is it all doom and gloom
Samsung's core strength lies in its
diverse portfolio one sector can be
negatively affected over time but other
sectors can keep the ship afloat as a
whole in this case the most affected
business sector is Samsung electronics
and looking at their recent earnings
it's a mixed bag Revenue came in at 59.3
billion up 7% from the previous quarter
but operating profit fell 6.9 billion
due to one-off costs including
incentives in the semiconductor Division
and their earnings do have some other
bright spots like their smartphone sales
and display technology in short while
Samsung Electronics has had its
challenges particularly in memory chips
and semiconductors it's not all bad news
the stock selloff is more a vote of no
confidence when it comes to the
leadership and the direction of the
company the stock market is looking to
the Future not exactly what's going on
right
now so it's been a roller coaster for
Samsung lately currently it may not be
an extinction level event but losing
$122 billion in such a short time is a
huge blow and as mentioned if their
leadership doesn't steer the ship right
they might risk more Panic once again
let's not forget that stock markets are
fickle they're driven by many factors
including global economic shifts
sentiment shifts and even short-term
events still the whole too big to fail
mindset doesn't always hold up I'm not
saying that Samsung is the Nock here of
2013 but clearly there's some work to do
ultimately we have to wait and see what
happened getting informed on the top
news stories is more complicated than
ever that's exactly where today's
sponsor ground news comes in ground news
is a website and app developed by a
former NASA engineer she was on a
mission to give readers an easy
datadriven objective way to read the
news using the story of space X's
Starship completing at six the test
flight as an example their biased
distribution chart shows me the
political leanings of the news outlets
if we compare the news headlines about
the event we can see that the left
frames it as a technical failure while
the right focuses on the growing
relationship between Elon and Trump
scrolling down I can compare every
single article on the topic with
convenient tags showing me context about
the source like how factual it is and
who owns it ground news's blind spot
feed is also great this shows you
stories that are underreported by one
side of the political Spectrum for
example if you were on the left you
probably didn't catch the story about
how Biden missed the G20 photo so ground
news as a fantastic tool for getting
International views sifting through
misinformation and identifying media
bias they provide all the tools you need
to be a critical thinker and right now
for Black Friday I'm offering 50% off
their Vantage subscription that's what I
use for unlimited access to all of their
great features it's their biggest sale
of the year so go to ground. news/
coldfusion use the QR code or click the
link in the description to subscribe for
under $5 a month so what's your take on
this would love to hear your thoughts in
the comments section below so anyway
that's about it from me if you did like
this episode feel free to check out
anything else on Cold Fusion there's
plenty of interesting stuff here on
science technology business and also if
you've made it this far and you're one
of those OG subscribers to Cold Fusion
you would have remembered my Samsung
video about 10 years ago so if you were
there for that video thanks for sticking
around really really appreciate it all
right my name is toogo and I will see
you again soon for the next episode
cheers guys have a good one
[Music]
cold fusion it's
