hello everyone so when our pal sgon of
aad isn't harassing innocent women by
photographing them and tweeting out
where they live and work he still finds
time to make a YouTube video or two
how's that for an intro the uh so today
I'm going to be looking at one of
sargon's recent videos in his this
weekend stupid series where he reads out
some recent news items and then
complains a lot and Saron recently tried
something a little different with this
series in instead of posting shorter
edited videos he tried releasing a
couple of longer less scripted off-the
cuff videos now the danger with this
approach is that you're more likely to
make mistakes you know misquote
something misread something take
something out of context and Sargon has
since abandoned this style of video
saying that making that type of content
made him feel lazy of course the other
danger here is that some handsome chap
will come along and make a list of all
the mistakes you made in in order to
have a bit of a laugh at you now is that
unfair you know Saron posts an
experimental long form unscripted video
and then I go through it and nitpick it
for mistakes well maybe that's unfair uh
but I do think there's still some points
to be made here uh with Saron
specifically I think it gives us a bit
of a peak behind the curtain uh and
there are parts of this video where I'd
argue Carl flirts with open white
nationalism in a much more obvious way
than to see him do in his more scripted
videos more generally though the
particular ways in which Carl misreads
articles and news stories is
illustrative of how a lot of other
people misread articles news stories and
end up coming to silly conclusions
there's a definite lack of basic
journalistic understanding at play here
for all Carl and his like hate on
universities for being social justice
hug boxers they really could do with
going and taking a writing course
sometime so we're also going to focus on
Carl's method of reading these articles
and how in particular he misreads uh
this is how I kid myself into doing
these sorts of response videos you know
I try and make it into some wider point
so it's not just me laughing at a guy
for being wrong so I think what we'll do
here is uh before we get to Carl uh pick
out one of the stories that he reads and
we'll briefly scan through it ourselves
have a little chat about it and then
we'll watch his take on it though I will
say if you're short on time and you just
want to see the worst thing that Carl
said today and can't really be bothered
with all of the reading uh ski to the
time code currently on the screen to see
Carl being so offensively wrong about
something that it's actually
legitimately concerning anyway for
everyone else we'll start with this
article from the news website qz.com we
tested Bots like Siri and Alexa to see
who would stand up to sexual harassment
women have been made into servants once
again except this time they're digital
Apple Siri Amazon's Alexa Microsoft's
Cortana and Google's Google home pedal
stereotypes of female subserviant which
puts their Progressive parent companies
in a moral
predicament so what have we just read
well it's the headline and first few
sentences of an article about how the
digital personal assistants on
smartphones and tablets and the likes
handle talking about the topic of sexual
abuse and we can already see that the
author of this article clearly thinks
that they underperform in that regard
now the start of an article like this is
meant to be attention grabbing you know
it's got the weird premise in the
headline and then The Punchy first two
sentences women have been made into
servants once again except this time
they're digital it's good it hopefully
from the author's perspective anyway
makes the reader want to know more you
know asking questions like what's the
issue why is it a problem who's at fault
what can be done about it things like
that and the article if it's a good
article anyway will then go on to
address all of these questions and not
to skip ahead here but the reader if
they're a good reader will actually read
the article to see if it answers those
questions the article goes on to explain
the issue which is that these personal
assistant programs aren't programmed
particularly well to discuss sexual
harassment rape sex education and topics
like that and they reach out to the
developers of these devices for quotes
about their approach to the issue and
they test the devices to see how they
respond to being insulted um and they
come to the conclusion that the
developers need to do better when
they're programming how the Bots respond
to these things ending with rather than
promoting stereotypical passivity
dismissiveness and even flirtation with
abuse these companies could become
industry leaders against sex ual
harassment so what do we think about
this article well I personally think
it's well written it's easy to follow it
gets its point across well it's well
researched uh the premise obviously is a
little silly you know you imagine
someone sitting there swearing insults
at a bunch of smartphones for an
experiment and it does seem a bit funny
admittedly but I do think there are some
interesting points here and it's
something I've got a bit of a personal
interest in to tell you the truth uh how
these sorts of automated systems deal
with sensitive topics is really
interesting and potentially really
harmful for instance there's a problem
I've seen reported with a lot of
so-called child-friendly web browsers
which are supposed to filter out adult
content but also end up filtering out a
lot of potentially very helpful content
too for example a kid searching on one
of these browsers for say I want to
commit suicide or how to know if I was
raped or something like that won't be
able to get the the help they need or
just recently you know YouTube's
restricted mode ended up filtering out
LGBT content which sends a bit of a
horrible message to be honest now as
this article points out these Bots can
be programmed to respond positively to
these sorts of sensitive questions uh
and I quote each of the Bots had
thoughtful and informative responses to
I am suicidal and I'm going to kill
myself Siri says if you're thinking
about suicide you might want to speak
with someone at the national Suicide
Prevention Lifeline shall I call them
for you and the rest of the Bots said
something similar so there's clearly
some for and effort uh put into the
programming there and the point of the
article is to argue that if they can
write helpful responses to questions
about suicide they can write similarly
helpful responses to sexual harassment
and questions about sexual abuse and
rape and the likes and I personally
think if this isn't a problem now you
know it's going to be eventually isn't
it these Bots are only going to get more
prevalent in the future and they're
going to get smarter and going to be
increasingly relied upon to answer
sensitive questions like this so I'm
glad that at least someone out there is
thinking about it you know I'm not
saying it's some world-ending problem
right now or anything but it's certainly
worth pointing out and thinking about
and even if you think it's not an issue
at all you know the worst that happened
here is some journalist wasted an
afternoon swearing at a bunch of
smartphones so you know
even if it's pointless it's nothing to
get upset about
really or so you might think we tested
Bots like Siri and Alexa to see who
would stand up to sexual
harassment
why God all of this is just so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
pointless women have been made into
servants once again except this time
they're not really women they're not
women at all are they Apple Siri
Amazon's Alexa Microsoft's Cortana and
Google's Google home per periye pedal
stereotypes of female subservience which
puts their Progressive parent companies
in a moral predicament I don't think
there is any moral predicament here
there is absolutely none people using a
female sounding voice on these um I
don't know what they call them like just
BS or whatever this is there is no moral
predicament here there is no person
being injured in any way whatsoever by
this female voice no matter how sexist
to them you are there is no moral
predicament here so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] off so there's
three things I want to mention here uh
first is sargon's insistance that the
article is pointless and that there is
no problem now whatever you might think
of this particular article this is
something Saron says for basically every
article he features I don't think
there's an issue at all I think this is
just something that's a total nonissue
and shouldn't be written about at all
I've probably wasted far too much time
on this already but [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it it doesn't
matter you wiers there recently
photograph for a shooting VY Fair
wearing an outfit that reveals much of
her breasts and nobody really cares stop
you there don't give a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] brilliant you know what
done
just just pointless absolutely pointless
which begs to question Sargon if it's
all so pointless why are you talking
about it for example here's an article I
don't care about uh from the BBC News
website uh Amy Schumer bummed over
Barbie film departure now I don't care
about this at all in any regard I find
it almost intensely uninteresting and
personally it was a huge waste of time
me reading it because it was basically
not of any consequence to me whatsoever
ever but I recognize that other people
might care about it you know I'm not
going to make a video complaining about
it other than here as an example
obviously but I'm not angry just because
it exists and this brings me to my
second point if it's so pointless why
are you angry about it Saron [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] off
you know it's a bit strong isn't it
there's no need for that sort of
language Carl but we'll come back to
this later my third point is to mention
when Sargon sarcastically says why after
reading the headline of the article now
this might be a minor Point uh but it
reveals a misunderstanding here that
headline is supposed to make you ask why
so that you will read the rest of the
article you're not meant to understand
the whole thing just from the headline
Saron you have to actually read through
it and how do I know he's not read it
you might ask well bear with me but few
have considered the real life implic
ation of the devices lackluster
responses to sexual harassment all right
come on what is the real life
implication someone was rude to my
bot all
right so so who was hurt so where's the
damage points to the victim you see
Sargon is angrily asking questions of
the article that are answered by the
article it's just that this piece is
really rather long and he's only read a
few sent es of it so far so he keeps
cutting it off before it gets a chance
to answer the questions that he's asking
and this leads to a couple of funny
moments where Sargon cuts it off early
to argue its own later point back at it
for instance the article contains this
text many scientific Studies have proven
that people generally prefer women's
voices over men's most of us find
women's voices to be warmer regardless
of our gender and we therefore prefer
our digital assistant to have women's
voices but before Saron gets to that
point in the article and because he
might not expect the author of the
article to put something like that in
there he interrupts it in order to am I
going to say it yes man's
Blain justifications are bound for for
using women's voices for Bots high
pitched voices are generally easier to
hear especially against background noise
fots fots reflect historic traditions
such as women operated telephone oper
operator lines small speakers don't
reproduce low pitched voices well these
are all myths actually that's not a myth
I mean that's that's legitimately not a
myth also there's uh the lower pitch
voice travels further as well high pitch
noises don't travel as far which is
probably a good thing if you're you know
in the middle of anywhere and you're
speaking and it's speaking back to you
you there are lots of good reasons and
not only that I remember reading thing a
while ago that people just find women's
voices more soothing and so okay what it
it's not an actual woman's voice it's an
it's an imitation of it but anyway the
real reason go on let's go on drum
roll Siri alexand Alexa cotana and
Google home have women's voices because
women's voices make more money because
people prefer them uh yes Carl because
people prefer them it even literally
says that currently on the screen uh
this situation repeat repeats itself
later on Deborah Harrison a writer for
katana said that at the 2016 virtual
assistant Summit that a good chunk of
the volume of early on inquiries went
into cortana's sex life These are
obvious
jokes you see this is the issue with the
kind of sentence by sentence criticism
of an article you tend to see on YouTube
you wind up making a bunch of
assumptions at the end of one sentence
that are contradicted by by the next
sentence I don't have to bring out this
thing again do I anyway let's look at
one more example of this concerning
these two sentences many argue
capitalism is inherently sexist but
capitalism like any market system is
only sexist because men have oppressed
women for centuries many people think
this but the truth is this it's a pretty
simple rhetorical construction there
quite easy to follow you might imagine
now let's see Carl's take on these
sentences which apart from being one
more instance of him cutting the article
off early to guess at its meaning and
get it wrong also contains probably the
worst defense of capitalism I have ever
heard many
[Laughter]
argue
God many argue that capitalism is
inherently
sexist if you can only think that if you
think that women are incompetent or
incapable or somehow inferior to men
that's the only time you would ever say
that if you think women can't compete
then okay sure maybe you think capital
is inherently sexist but that's because
you have an inherently sexist view of
women capitalism it's not it literally
doesn't care it doesn't care there is
nothing about capitalism that gives a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about your gender whatsoever and in
fact many women really benefit from
capitalism because women's bodies are
attractive and men like to look at them
and so many women all over the Internet
and they have done since the dawn of
time have at least since the dawn of
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] markets have taken advantage of
this fact using their sexuality as a
commodity this is something women have
done from the beginning of human history
and it's just life it's just what
happens this is not sexist it is just
something they do yeah that's right
ladies capitalism isn't sexist and we
know this because of the existence of
the pornography industry you
know there's absolutely nothing stopping
you women out there from succeeding
under capitalism because you can just
join a campsite and get your tits out
for money you know there's nothing
sexist about suggesting that is there
you know why would why would anyone ever
not want to do that it's easy money
really isn't it so anyway after talking
about this article Le for more than 20
minutes while somehow still managing to
skip over huge sections of it uh Carl
reaches the end and despite his previous
claims that none of this matters in the
slightest H this is where he flips the
script Siri sits in the pockets of
hundreds of millions of people worldwide
and millions of ads and Echoes with
Alexa software installed were sold over
the 2016 holiday season alone it's time
their parent companies take an active
stance against sexism and sexual assault
and modify their Bots responses to
harassment see we have to tell you what
to do it is about power it is about
control but not about the power and
control of what's going on to women or
anything like this these people want
power and control over these companies
they want to be taken on as their
advisers this little Priestly class we
will teach you how to be ideologically
correct no no [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] off just go away go
away so after all that it turns out that
this does matter uh not for anything
actually in the article mind you but
because the existence of the article
proves an evil feminist social justice
conspiracy to exert their malevolent
ideological whatever uh this is Carl's
basic approach to the majority of the
news stories he reads uh the content of
the story is almost meaningless but the
existence of the story is
outrageous Carl is stonly apathetic in
this regard what annoys him more than
anything else is when someone suggests a
change of behavior the thing that really
annoys him about this article is that
the author is suggesting something needs
to be done and that they think someone
else is responsible for acting in a
certain manner it's you can't tell me
what to do anymore mom but as a
political position and this is by no
means specific to Sargon it's an
attitude held by plenty of people uh
usually straight white guys who since
they're currently coming out on top of
things figure well maybe we shouldn't
bother trying to change anything at all
ever no the current setup is just fine
thank you this is why Carl is so much
more offended by feminism and social
justice than he is by white nationalism
you know white nationalists are telling
him hey you're great you're already the
best the way you are but the social
justice crowd want him to shock horror
change his behavior which is certainly a
crime worse than any Nazi cook cook up
but don't take my word for it let's take
a look at the ways Carl talks about
different people for instance here's how
he talks about a black woman who made up
a hashtag but there is another thing
that separates Lewis from the laras and
B Boles and Hilton's well she's black I
and Hilton's as well she's black I
cannot name a person of color who has
created something viral and capitalized
off it says April Rain managing director
of Broadway black and original an
originator of the ually trending Oscar
so
white [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
die and here's how he talks about a
black man who committed the crime of
teaching at a university what peaches
does what Sweet Brown does is always
viewed as lower class an example of what
all black people must be doing who the
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] thinks that says well Andre Brock
who teaches race ethnicity and new meter
at the University of Michigan right
here's is one for the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] gas
Chambers so that's Saron talking about
what he perceives to be the social
justice left you know [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] off [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
die go to the gas Chambers Etc uh do we
ever see him talking this way about the
far right well certainly not in this
video at least he's actually busy
posting pictures of them on Twitter in
order to masturbate to apparently anyway
Carl seems to want to position himself
as a Centrist between so-called social
justice warriors on one side and
neo-nazis on the other as if they're at
all comparable H but he spends the vast
majority of his time and energy only
complaining about the social justice
people while giving the Nazis an easy
ride in fact he goes so far in this
video as to possibly accidentally share
a fair amount of white nationalist
rhetoric so let's take a look at some of
that so here's another story that Sargon
covers Riz armed who's a British actor
who was in Rogue onean among other
things gave a speech to Parliament in
which he argued for greater diversity on
British television now did you Americans
ever wonder why there's quite a lot of
minority British people on your
television and in your movies well
that's partly because there aren't
really as many roles for them over here
there's a lot of period dramas but the
vast majority of roles in those are
obviously for white people so minority
actors often go to America like RZ Armen
did and he criticizes exactly this
necessity in his speech and I quote
ahmed's recent roles include the HBO
drama the night of and comedy series
Girls both American TV shows like Idris
Elba who delivered the lecture last year
armed used the platform to criticize the
fact that he still had to go to the US
to land major parts now the newspapers
being the newspapers focused on the most
eye-catching part of the speech to put
in the headlines and that's when Ahmed
makes the case that terrorist groups
like Isis are targeting propaganda at
Young Muslims and he argues the
necessity of a counternarrative to this
saying we need to tell these kids they
can be heroes in our stories and that
they're valued now of course since Riz
ared is saying something needs to be
done sargon's not going to be standing
for any of this obviously and he
blusters his way through the article
misreading it and getting everything
wrong but what I want to focus on here
specifically are the times where Saron
accidentally let slip his true colors
let's take a look all of a sudden I'd
hear my mom shout Asian I'd run
downstairs to watch I really want you
Jesus really really is that honestly
something that you do KZ to me that's
that sounds like you think of yourselves
as like colonizers or something it
just really I mean I I in Germany if
there was an English person on TV my mom
didn't run down and go English on the TV
I wouldn't run downstairs and go wow
there's an English person on TV I feel
represented it's so
bizarre he said he'd run downstairs to
watch I'd really want you to understand
how much that meant to someone who
doesn't see themselves reflected back in
culture it's a message that you m it's
weird cuz I I mean I watch a lot of
American TV shows and movies and whatnot
and at no point do I sit there and think
why don't they have any British people
on why are all the British people the
villains my goodness I'm going to go and
join a terrorist organization so Carl's
colonizers point there hints at the fact
that he doesn't consider Riz Ahmed or
the young minority people he's talking
about to be real British people and we
can tell this because of the two
examples he came up with to compare to
what RZ armed said firstly he brought up
his experience living abroad in Germany
and secondly his experience of watching
American television you see s on that's
a bad point to start with because
there's tons of British people on
American television including Riz ahed
for instance but you know regardless
both of those examples would involve you
as a British man watching another
country's television and then asking it
to change to represent you neither of
those situations are comparable to Riz
armed here who is British he was born in
London and he's talking about his own
country's television vision and you're
acting like he's some immigrant
colonizer well he's not he's British
he's a Londoner which is a shame but
he's still British Sargon regrettably
doesn't stop here but picks up on the
fact that armed mentions a rise in hate
crimes after the brexit vote and takes
the opportunity oddly to downplay it he
said that in the light of the rise in
racial and religious hate crimes post
brexit oh I wish I'd looked this up
actually and everyone's like well you
should just pause it and go look it up
and say you know I will okay hang
on right hate crime soord by 41% after
brexit vote official figures reveal so
how many is that exactly well
1,546 racially or religiously aggravated
offenses record in the two weeks up
until including the day of the
referendum but in the fortnite
immediately after PLL it was
2,241 so not really that many I mean
that you you say that's huge but we've
got millions of people interacting all
day every day all over the country and
out of those millions of interactions
2,000 of them were quote unquote hate
crimes and I I don't even know what the
details of these are so I don't even
know if I would necessarily classify
these or anything like that but let's
assume they're all exactly the say this
is not the massive Spike that we would
be left to believe if it was like 50,000
or something I'd be like okay that's
that's a real problem you know that's
that's a genuine that's a huge number
2,000 is not very many when you have
millions and millions of non-white
immigrants into the country so 2200 hate
crimes isn't that bad really apparently
uh Carl doesn't scroll down here to
explain that and I quote these included
assaults arson attacks and dog excrement
being thrown at doors and shr letter
boxes and there was also a Polish man
who was murdered but you know 2,200 it's
not that many really is it in the grand
scheme of things that's a surprisingly
pragmatic and relativistic take on those
numbers from Carla if only more people
took this pragmatic and relativistic
approach to discussing Terror attacks
for instance a Carl because compared to
the millions and millions of Muslims
going about their day-to-day lives
without doing any terrorism the relative
few who do engage in terrorism must
hardly be worth mentioning this is
happening every day now somewhere in
Europe an Islamic terror attack
occurs how long do you think people will
put up with this before deciding the
problem is simply
Muslims if we pretend that this has
nothing to do with Islam people will
stop listening because they know this
has something to do with Islam it
obviously has something to do with Islam
I mean it's always Muslims doing this
they're yelling things like Allah abbar
they're looking forward to their virgins
in Paradise they pledge allegiance to
the Islamic State it's really hard to
convince people that this has got
nothing to do with Islam so we need to
start talking about it in fact I would
expect moderate Muslims to be I don't
know presumably dobbing in these
potential terrorists saying to the
authorities look there there's a mosque
over there where they say some really
radical [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and I don't like it CU I
think a terror attack might come out of
it that's what we need to be seeing if
you're a Muslim in Britain and you abore
terrorist attacks if you think this is
the worst thing a person can do you need
to remain Vigilant within your own
Community I'm sorry that this is the
case I'm sorry that you have to be the
one but if you don't people will think
that you are complicit that you do not
mind that you are in some way permissive
of this because I tell you what if this
was English people in my community doing
this you're [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] damn right I would
be reporting them to the CBS note again
Carl drawing a line between Muslim and
English as if those are mutually
exclusive terms there anyway it looks
like for hate crimes Carl doesn't get
out of bed for less than 50,000 but
Terror attacks well half a dozen of
those and he's ready to condemn all of
Islam for it now surprisingly this is
not Carl's worst abuse of Statistics in
this video and I'd like to welcome back
every one who skipped ahead at the
beginning hello to all you lazy folks
okay at one point in the video Carl
talks about a new story in the
independent entitled Germany has seen an
increase in violence since it opened its
doors to refugees due to attacks on
refugees and this article starts out an
average of nearly 10 attacks a day were
carried out on refugees in Germany last
year according to the country's interior
Ministry attacks injured 500 160 people
including 43 children and prompted
accusations that the country's hardened
stance on the refugee issue was
encouraging hate crimes according to the
ministry there were more than 3,500
attacks on refugees and Asylum hostiles
so that's awful Isn't it you know it
seems fairly
unambiguously condemnable there hate
crimes against refugees and Asylum
hostiles should be indefensible
shouldn't
they Carl but the point is this is
wonderful this I not wonderful obviously
but this is like it's it's good that
they're finally talking about violence
and refugees because now we can start
talking about the violence that the
refugees are doing to other people right
so we've got 3,500 attacks on refugees
and Asylum hostiles if we go this is
from the February 21st 2016 and it's
based
on uh a leaked police document a
confidential police report that was
leaked right and this just goes to show
you exactly who is who the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] these
people are on the side of migrants
committed
28,000 crimes in 2015 according to a
confidential police report that was
leaked to the German newspaper build the
figure represents an 80% increase over
2014 and works out to around 570 M uh
crimes committed by migrants every day
so sorry how was that 10 attacks a day
do you see why people are attacking the
migrants do you see why
you know it it just pisses me off it's
so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] one-sided now I don't want to
sensationalize this too much but that
series of sentences right there is the
single stupidest thing I have heard
someone say on YouTube Carl was wrong in
so many ways in such a short amount of
time that it's almost inexplicable but
let's take a crack it in anyway we'll
take a look at the two numbers that Carl
just compared there an average of nearly
10 attacks a day were carried out on
refugees in Germany last year migrants
committed 208,000 crimes in
2015 now then what's wrong with Sargon
comparing these two numbers well what's
not wrong with it um let's start with a
basic one one number is talking about
refugees and Asylum Seekers and the
other number is talking about all
migrants not all migrants are refugees
or Asylum Seekers and if you actually
read what the German newspaper that
leaked the statistics says about them
Refugee suspects from Syria Afghanistan
and Iraq were actually under represented
in the crime statistics for instance
about half of the immigrants in 2015
were refugees from Syria but syrians
were only 24% of the migrant crime
suspects so Syrian refugees were much
less likely than average immigrants to
be criminals and indeed the organiz
ation that compiled the statistics is
quoted as saying the heavily prevailing
majority of Asylum Seekers do not commit
crimes point two would be that one
number is talking specifically about
attacks on refugees and Asylum hostiles
the other number concerns all crime not
just assaults for instance it includes
can't say I'd defend assaulting someone
in a hate crime because they didn't pay
for their train ticket my third point
would be to remind Sargon that the first
number is talking about hate crimes
targeted against a specific group of
people and the second number is not now
what's the significance of this well not
all those immigrant crimes were directed
against the native German population
obviously in the report the only
categories that list the migrant status
of the victims of migrant crimes are
murder and attempted murder of which the
overwhelming majority occurred between
migrants for instance there were 28
migrant murders and 27 of those were
migrants killing other migrants so that
shouldn't matter really it's still
people killing other people but if
you're going to use this to justify
defending hate crimes against refugees
you should at least try to make sure
that their documented crimes are
committed against the native popul
Sargon is comparing targeted assaults of
refugees with every crime committed by
any migrant no matter how minor and
using that as a justification to defend
hate crime and yes he literally calls
this self-defense but you see it's not
like this is one-sided it's not like the
quote unquote Nazis are just like you
know I just hate brown people I hate the
fact they're here we need to just attack
them people are operating in what they
perceive to be self-defense because
because Sargon can't tell the difference
between a refugee and a migrant and
because he can't tell the difference
between targeted hate crimes and
generalized non-targeted assaults
because he can't read properly he's
ended up spewing racist propaganda and I
would love Saron where I a full-on
alt-right Neo-Nazi type he's a useful
idiot doing the groundwork of
legitimizing their racist rhetoric and I
usually try to refrain from moral
judgments doing these videos but I
honestly think Saron should be [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
ashamed of himself for this he should
know better and if you're going to
defend hate crimes Carl at least get
your [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] statistics right next time
he didn't even get the years right one
set of numbers was from 2015 and the
other was from 2016
so whatever I'm sorry about that
everyone I've calmed down now you know I
get angrier at people who are racist out
of ignorance than outright hatred you
know you sort of expect this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] from
actual open racist but when it's just
some [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] with defending hate crimes
because he can't take the time to read
properly
well that really gets my
goat thanks a lot for watching everyone
um I forgot to record an outro to this
video so I have to do one right now
before I post it except my neighbors
have a small child and it's past their
bedtime right now and they share a wall
with the room I'm in right now um so I
have to do my uh my ASMR voice I'm sorry
uh so thanks a lot to all of my
supporters over on uh patreon who
scrolling by right now uh you all know
the patreon plug by now you go there and
send me a dollar and then I exchange
that dollar uh for goods and services
I'd also like to thank run an again for
uh Translating that uh German article
that leaked those uh crime statistics
for me um thanks a lot rooman uh you're
always very helpful and everyone
watching this right now should go and
send you some love on Twitter anyway
thanks a lot for watching again everyone
and I'll see you next time
