John Stewart beautiful to have you here
this is a salon in in the series of
catalon Center for Applied dialectics
this is the first part of a series where
we are talking about scaffolding metas
systemic or maybe dialectic thinking so
John Stewart we are very eager to hear
you and your presentation my background
that's relevant to this is that had
published numerous papers and
international science journals on
Evolution particularly big picture
perspectives of evolution and their and
their implications for Humanity um part
of the
uh the material I've been developing on
Evolution uh focuses on the trajectory
of evolution and there's two broad
trajectories during the evolution of
life on Earth one is towards uh uh the
formation and emergence of Cooperative
organizations of increasing scale and
the other is towards increasing
evolvability and evolvability is the
ability to adapt effectively so
initially Evolution uh had a very simple
uh method of evolvability trial and
error genetic mutations and so on but
evolution The evolutionary mechanism has
itself evolved uh and now as it
manifests in humans it's our
intelligence and our culture that um
drives our Evolution no longer trial and
error um and a significant part of that
in human beings is the emergence of a
capacity to develop mental models uh of
our environment and of our interactions
with our
environment uh and the the stage that
humanity is at is that it has not yet
developed comprehensively a capacity to
form mental models of complex
phenomenon um we're good at at
uh uh developing mechanistic models um
so parts of reality that are mechanistic
uh our science is able to deal with
those uh and develop a body of knowledge
but in relation to complex phenomenon
which unfortunately is the majority of
the reality that we interact with um
current um model building capacities
current thinking um is not adequate to
the task so I'll be talking here today
about um the development of that
capacity to model complex reality and
I'll be dealing specifically with how it
might be scaffolded in oneself and in
other individuals and in groups I'm
talking about scaffolding medic systemic
cognition uh that's some details about
myself I'm a melbourne-based member of
the evolution complexity and cognition
research group of the fre University of
Brussels and just a quick overview of
what I'll be covering first of all I'll
be uh outlining what I mean by metas
systemic
cognition then why is metas systemic
cognition critically
important uh where is metas systemic
cognition Superior to analytical
rational thinking then I'll be dealing
with how can metas systemic cognition be
scaffolded and basically I'll cover that
in two components it's the recursive
practicing of model building skills and
then practices that develop the capacity
to to see one's thought and feeling as
an
object then I'll be dealing with how can
metas systemic cognition be spread
quickly and then I'll have a slide of
the um resources that give more detail
and background to what I'll be
covering what do I mean by metas
systemic
cognition um
basically metas systemic cognition as I
use the term is the development of the
capacity um to form mental models of
complex
phenomenon as they change through time
so it develops it it entails the
capacity to build mental models of
complex systems of those systems in
evolution and those systems interacting
and
interpenetrating through time uh it's
the what I mean by metas systemic
cognition is therefore very similar to
A's uh dialectical thinking um his uh
moments of dialectic or quadrants and
thought forms Define uh a wide range of
the movements in thought that are
necessary to build models of complex
reality um I point out that the the
reason why I use the term metas systemic
cognition and not dialectical thinking
is because dialectical thinking means
many different things to many different
people um the as far as I'm aware the
the use of it in the extremely Broad and
comprehensive form that aotto uh uses it
uh is you hasn't been used historically
by thinkers for example uh hegel's uh
dialectical thinking and Marx's
dialectical thinking is far more limited
than what's captured by by the thought
forms uh and therefore it isn't as
effective as developing models of
complex
reality why is medic systemic cognition
critically
important um well first of all it's by
definition it's essential for
understanding complex phenomenon more
importantly it's critically important
for
um uh using those models to to identify
interventions in reality and what their
consequences will be so if you have a
complex if you have a mental model of
complex phenomenon then you can change
elements of that model follow through
the consequences of that so it's
essential for
strategizing uh when one is facing
complex
phenomenon uh
the uh the the existential threats that
face
Humanity um at present such as global
Waring nuclear war General in uh
overshooting of our of the carrying
capacity of the planet and so on uh
they're complex
issues uh and
to understand and develop strategies for
dealing with those issues for solving
those problems for avoiding ex the
existential threats one must also have
mental models of complex social
political and economic systems because
it's through those systems um
uh that uh we will need to through those
systems that we will have to implement
measures that that uh avoid those
problems
um so the the survival of human
civilization depends on the spread of
metas systemic cognition it's that
significant um and it's more significant
because of the fact that very few have
that capacity at
present uh systemic cognition is a very
rare capacity amongst human beings um
it's in know
science um and in the
humanities uh there are very few uh
metas systemic thinkers most most
science is underpin by analytical
rational thinking so our current
cognition can't do complexity and when I
refer to our current cognition I I use
various terms first Enlightenment
thinking
so the current cognition arose and
spread uh to significant numbers of
human beings only about 3 or 400 years
ago um with the First with the first en
the European Enlightenment it also what
I mean by analytical rational cognition
also broadly equates to formal
operations thinking in P Pagan terms and
as I've indicated it underpins current
sides
um where is metas systemic cognition
Superior to analytical rational thinking
uh it's worth um understanding this in
some detail because it indicates and
forms a basis for um what's missing from
analytic rational cognition that needs
to be included in metas systemic
cognition if meta systemic cognition um
is to develop and be able to model
complex uh
phenomenon um analytical rational Co
cognition is largely limited to building
mechanistic
models uh so and this is evidenced in uh
first Enlightenment thinking first
Enlightenment science our current
science which focuses on uh you know
models such as billiard balls
interacting with one another um seeing
how they interact
and in how they unfold
um but if you have too many bilard balls
or they form systems then analytical
rational cognition is quickly
overwhelmed by that
complexity uh and it has to simplify
things uh in order to build models so
analytical rational cognition uh builds
models that Focus down on isolated
phenomenon so largely ignores context
most of the discoveries of of science
particularly physics um um ignore
discover laws that apply um and can be
applied by with ignoring context where
context does not change those laws
they're context
independent um
secondly um analytical rational
cognition builds models that comprise
objects or abstractions with fixed
attributes um it largely ignores process
it ignores the fact that all objects are
in fact processes uh even mountain
ranges for example are processes they
they're not objects so it leaves it
leaves it it
reifies um
processes thirdly um in analytical
rational models OB objects interact
according to
laws uh and they're unchanged by those
interactions so it largely ignores how
the how the objects or abstractions
interrelate to
produce um whole
systems uh and interrelate including by
Co evolving they both change in
relationship to one
another uh finally it represents systems
mechanistically when it puts these
components together um it doesn't have
models that that are dynamical and
evolving uh it has mechanistic
models
um in it produces models that can be
thought through by analytical rational
thinking so this is linear logic and so
on it comes up with models that
analyzable as a consequence analytical
rational thinking works for only a very
small proportion of
reality um because most of reality is
um uh is complex it's not mechanistic
Alfred North Whitehead said about a 100
years ago that um current science uh and
science hasn't changed a lot since then
100 years ago in terms of its
methodology current science uh can only
uh lead to the understanding of about
10% of the of the things that are really
important to
humanity um a manifestation of of the
limitations of analytical rational
thinking is that Sciences has failed
miserably um to uh
understand um and develop effective
models of political science social
systems and so on in other words the
content of the humanities the reason why
the
humanities uh are on a different planet
as CP snow indicated uh to science is
because the subject matter of the
humanities is too complex to be dealt
with by the scientific method um
ironically um uh science criticizes the
humanities for its lack of scientific
rigor and so on um
but uh a better perspective is to see
that the scientific method doesn't work
for the Humanities for organic systems
and so
on uh nonetheless first Enlightenment
science underpinned by analytical
rational thinking has been very
effective and limited
areas um it's produced our mechanistic
technology um it's changed the planet
it's changed life on this planet
sometimes for the
better um now one one way of
illustrating uh and experiencing the
difference
between uh analytical rational thinking
and metas systemic Cog cognition and the
models that that both of them develop is
to compare our built environment with an
ecosystem so presumably you're all in
rooms at the moment and those room rooms
have flat surfaces meet at right angles
they're boxlike uh and there's lots of
uh books and and so on in in your rooms
that um that can be thought through they
are the product of analytical rational
thinking our built the the built
environment of
humanity uh is an illustration of what
analytical rational thinking can do and
its limitations and you see its
limitations when you go out into to a
natural
ecosystem uh and compare what's in the
human built environment with what's in
that
ecosystem um one can be understood by
analytical rational cognition and has
been produced by analytical rational
cognition uh while the ecosystems are
far more complex and need metas systemic
cognition if they're to be
understood uh how can metas systemic con
cognition be scaffolded
the goal of scaffolding is to uh help
individuals to develop the thought
processes that are needed to generate um
complex models and operate those complex
models simulate them in one's head and
so on um and use them to to identify the
consequences of changing elements of
those models uh and this is particularly
useful in strategizing so
the great breakthrough uh in
understanding how to develop metas
systemic cognition and how to SC
scaffold it was ay's four
quadrants uh and his 28 thought
forms basically the the quadrants cover
what analytical rational thinking leaves
out of its mechanistic
models um because it leaves out um it
identifies what's left out uh it's it's
directly useful for indicating to other
individuals and for ourselves where our
attention has to go in order to
remediate those absences in order to in
include in our mental models those
things that are left out by analytical
rational thinking and therefore produce
uh metas systemic models that are
capable of representing and
understanding complex reality
um I'll be outlining here that metas
systemic cognition can be
scaffolded permanently by two categories
of
training um one is by practicing an
individual practicing whether coached or
doing it themselves themselves the
implementation of the movements in
thought and quadrants to build
models
um to do this as of indicated the aided
by the declarative knowledge contained
in the quadrants and thought forms and
most
importantly
uh the process must involve the
recursive Improvement of the resulting
emerging procedural knowledge that they
acquire as they practice the building of
models uh and using the declarative
knowledge contained in the quadrants and
thought forms so that's one major
component of scaffolding the other is uh
practicing the disembedding from
thinking
and that requires disembedding from both
analytical rational thinking and metas
systemic
thinking the crucial capacity that has
been developed from this is to be able
to see one's thinking as
object um and therefore being able to
manipulate it consciously and
secondly uh it it enables escaping
slavery to Lal rational thinking and
feelings as
well uh the the end result of those
those two components of scaffolding is
to internalize the interlocutory process
within in the
individual and by interlocutory process
I mean the kind of process that utos
develop for uh uh an
interviewer um uh helping to
scaffold uh to well to identify another
person's use of thought forms and
scaffold
improvements uh this process uh
internalized that an
individual and most importantly it
enables ongoing self- scaffolding so it
enables the conscious uh scaffolding of
one's thinking to the metas systemic
level throughout one's life uh it
becomes a
lifelong uh
exercise so the first of the uh
categories of scaffolding that I was
going to cover was the recursive
practicing of model building
skills the first thing I need to
emphasize and this is very important is
that practice the actual practice of
model building is essential for
developing procedural
skills uh memorizing the thought forms
won't do it being able to pass an exam
get 100% on the thought forms and
quadrants doesn't necessarily develop
any procedural skills in an individual
therefore it doesn't necessarily enable
uh metas systemic thinking so procedure
ual skills uh have to be learned by
practice they can't be learned by
reading a book and classic examples are
learning a serve in tennis or learning
how to ride a bicycle you can't learn
how to ride a bicycle or do a tennis
serve by reading a book they might give
you pointers but then you have to
develop the procedural skills by
actually actually practicing the
activity so the the first step in the um
uh this practice of recursively building
model building skills is to uh build
from of a particular complex phenomenon
that's of of the interest of a person
who is developing the medicine
skills uh and they while and they that
model in that model building they draw
on the quadrants and thought
forms they attempt to be conscious of
the process that they're going to build
those to build that model of the complex
phenomenon
um
the that's the first step and and it's
important that the person does this
without first uh studying the field and
examining the body of knowledge that
exists about that particular complex
phenomenon it's important they do it
from scratch um and that they do it
without reference to that knowledge
because in the Second Step they assess
their model in the light of the feedback
from others and from the expert body of
knowledge where they find deficiencies
uh in their model they do two things
they amend the content of their model in
other words they make their model better
but but the most important step in the
scaffolding process is not that it's to
actually modify the thought processes
that they use to generate the model so
they need to reflect on the thought
processes that were used um and amend
their thought processes so that their
metamodeling capacity their ability to
build models now would uh would be would
be more
successful um than their first
attempt
um so they they
identify how they have to change their
model building skills in order to not uh
leave out the thing that they found that
they've left out from their
model now this process is then repeated
recursively drawing on thought forms
each time so there's a sequence of
testing the model in effect against
existing knowledge um and and
uh testing against reality and so on and
each time
identifying uh where the model has to be
amended and then go to the meta model uh
in order to change the meta model the
goal is to develop a metal model and
skills that enable better metas systemic
cognition the second major component
that I mentioned in scaffolding is the
practice of seen um thought and feeling
as object the this capacity is
critically important
for uh the recurs of
self-improvement uh approach that I have
just
outlined it enables the conscious use of
thought forms and model building skills
uh and the rec recursive improvement
process because it enables you to see as
object uh what the actual thought
processes are that you're using to build
your complex
models
um when one first begins to do
this uh one W in my experience you won't
see much at all
um the so this the development of this
capacity for seeing your thinking as
object uh will develop the
ability uh progressively to see more and
more
um uh and it'll be further
built by the recursive self-improvement
process so the the so that's seen being
able to see your thinking as
object uh secondly being able to do that
uh provides access to right right brain
resources for model
building um so analytical rational
cognition is all in the head it's all in
conscious thinking and declarative
knowledge um but the model building
capacity uh if it's to capture complex
reality must draw on additional
resources that those that are draw than
those that are drawn on B analytical
rational cognition such as
intuition uh patent
recognition and this enables integration
of the right and left brain of The Head
and the Heart anima and animus and the
marriage of the bride and groom uh which
comes from Alchemy these These are
metaphors um for accessing these
nonlinear logical resources that are
essential if a model is to represent
complex reality as as it ceasing LLY
changes through
time um it's worth quickly noting that
being able to access those
resources uh have a similar
effect uh to walking in nature showering
and napping and so on in other words
they uh those activities that that many
creative artists and scientists have
indicated promote um uh
insights um are are basically achieved
by accessing right brain resources and
these These are accessed by um uh
activities that quieten the thinking
mind so that brings us to the third you
know importance of of seeing thought as
object which is it enables disembedding
from slave slavery to analytical
rational
thinking um disembedding from the
slavery to analytical rational thinking
is no simple thing um as is evidenced by
the fact that uh that the interaction
between science Humanity so
uh researchers in the humanities um need
complex thinking and complex models in
order to uh attempt to understand what's
going on in Social systems and so on
they're continually criticized by
science for not been scientifically
rigorous um the what doesn't happen
generally is that that people uh who are
mainstream scientists uh see the
limitations of their analytical rational
thinking in complex phenomenon like
those dealt within the
humanities um because they're embedded
in their analytical rational thinking
they're embedded in the methodologies of
current science and it's no small thing
to move between developmental levels
um
the uh so disembedding From slav Slavery
to analytic rational thinking is to
avoid the obligate use of uh is is also
important to to uh for analytical
rational thinkers because if if one
points out to them using the thought
forms and quadrants what's missing from
their
thinking they will they can move
attention to those things that are left
out but they'll tend to develop
analytical
rational uh models of what they've left
out not the the uh fluid complex
processes context and
relationship uh that that um are needed
to represent those
phenomenon
uh the seen thought and filling this
object is also important
for disembedding From Slavery to
emotions so to use Keegan's terms one
has to move from emotions having you to
you having
emotions um that's what disembedding
from emotions
involves uh it's important for being
able to implement complex cognitive
strategies because to do so can often
conflict and be undermined by uh
emotional responses and so on um
the uh and this enables one to let those
emotionals emotions go through uh to
dissipate to not control one's behavior
and therefore to it gives one the
capacity to actually Implement complex
strategies ultimately this disembedding
process produces
Awakening um and
presence the so what what is the process
that can train this
disembedding
uh
capacity um it's meditation like
practices so the essence of meditation
of nearly all practices of meditation is
the practice of disengaging from being
embedded in thought and feeling and
doing this
repeatedly so the mindfulness meditation
instructions for example involve resting
attention on sensations of the breath
and then one F when one finds oneself
um embedded in thinking and emotion and
no longer uh uh giving attention to the
sensations of the breath one moves one's
attention away from uh the
disembeddedness and moves it back to the
sensations of the breath so one is
practicing
disengaging uh and this Stills the
mind now it's really important that to
to uh use a meditation like practice
like this
um in order to scaffold one's thinking
then one must be able to do it not just
on the meditation cushion you know in a
dark and groom absence all abstractions
one must develop the ability to do it in
the midst of ordinary
life um finally the recursive practice
of model building that I outlined will
also help to develop disembedding
because it involves giving attention to
one's thoughts turning attention inwards
giving attention to one's thoughts and
being able to see them as
object um so how
can metas systemic cognition be spread
quickly given its critical importance
for uh humanity and our survival in the
face of existential threats and so on we
can take advantage of the capacity of
the economic system to spread anything
that increases profits so the other
saying is that
um build a better mous trrap in the
world will beat a path to your door um
medic systemic cognition is far better
than uh than building a better Mass trap
because building a better Mass trap um
creates profit opportunities for a
limited number of
businesses um metas systemic cognition
basically is far more significant
because most businesses now are embedded
in environments that are far for far too
complex for them to cognize effectively
they're embedded in Social systems
competitive markets government systems
and so on and they have to strategize
within that environment and you can't do
it with analytical rational cognition so
most Executives in most businesses are
currently in over their heads as are
their equivalents in governmental bodies
and so on so if if the scaffolding of
meta systemic cognition can be packaged
in a way that uh improves profit
um uh cap capacities for business uh
profit opportunities for business um
then it will spread very quickly so one
way um one form of packaging is uh using
the scaffolding to
temporarily um
scaffold groups of Executives to enable
them to strategize more effectively in
uh complex environments and this can be
done by a facilitator who is adapted
using the thought forms and the
quadrants and who in real time uh can
facilitate the
group uh to see what their analytical
rational thinking leaves out and
facilitate the groups building in real
time of a shared uh model of complex
phenomenon that need to be understood
and dealt with for the business um to
maximize its its
profits um and the second way of doing
it is to scaffold meta systemic
cognition permanently in
Executives um because if if it's done by
a facilitator with a group when the
scaffolding is removed in other words
when the facilitator leaves then um
there'll be no uh permanent vertical
movement um the individuals will uh in
the group will fall back to their
analytical rational cognition that
they're uh typically embedded in um the
competition in a uh
Market um of course drives this process
because
once uh once a competitor in a
particular industry sector develops the
capacity to strategize using metas
systemic cognition um then all its
competitors must follow uh and
eventually educational institutions will
do so also so then the resources
um
uh the this my review of utos primer
which is an eight-page sort of overview
of um analytical rational cognition its
limitations and how these can be
overcome by metas systemic
cognitions um there's a p a page on my
website with numerous links to materials
about the escalator program that was
originally developed by myself and
Victoria Wilding um there's a report
from someone who's uh undertaken the
escalator program so you get a
perspective from the scaffold e um and
that's eight pages or so so it's short
then the PowerPoint slides link and
then uh the Amazon link um to Auto's
three volume set which I understand is
going to be out in early
November development is a
process um ongoing
process um but as many many thinkers and
theoreticians have have
concluded there are discernable levels
that a that a person goes through um
none of those levels are stable in an
equilibrium sense that you know they're
not narrow
equilibria um that people are locked
into um so the term in
complexity uh science
for this the these levels is metastable
so their
processes uh far from
equilibrium uh in thermodynamic terms
but they um but they have a dynamical
stability they're dynamical
attractors so that's that's the reason
why I use the term atast stable uh it's
its
significance is that uh they're like an
equilibrium to the extent that uh the
individual experiences them as
working as as doing what they want to do
cognitively so someone is in the
analytical rational
level basically thinks that all
questions uh that can be answered can be
answered by their analytical rational
cognition they they can't see outside
their analytical rational cognition to
see what's missing they can't see it
from a higher level so they're locked
into it um by me but not locked into it
in a mechanistic sense but in a
metastable sense to give another quick
example
um you know we've probably many of us
have had the experience of when we get
angry at our dog it can run and hide its
head underneath a couch so it can't see
uh you getting angry at it it thinks or
experiences because it's it's got
slavery to its um visual field it thinks
that you can't see it um and this this
it's very difficult to get the dog out
of that it's got slavery to its visual
field that's a votan
um uh you know
terminology so Keegan I think used the
term that stages ATT
trues um so they're Dynamic so yes so
many most people hopefully have seen a
uh an you know a diagram of an attractor
in Chaos Theory yeah um and and that
that is not a stable point the attractor
is a like a Bas of Attraction
yeah people
who have what I call metas systemic
cognition and use that in a particular
domain so like for example Gregory baton
uh in his great book steps to an Ecology
of mind you know it evidences metas
systemic uh thinking
um Bas basker as well um so that you
know there there are a number of people
not many um but who use metas systemic
thinking does their use of metas
systemic thinking tend to produce it in
others uh and no no it doesn't um in
fact there's a wonderful little anecdote
uh that occurred in New York back in I
think it was in the 30s where there was
a uh
reuniting of um bertr and Russell and
Alfred North Whitehead and they had both
in the early part of the 20th century
tried tried to develop a uh a
rationalization of mathematics and work
together and produced principia
Mathematica a famous book however they
went their different ways after that
Alfred North White had developed met
systemic
cognition uh Burton Russell was a genius
at the analytical rational level but
never developed met systemic cognition
when they met on on a stage reun United
after many years in New York um Alfred
northw whad said told the audience he
said uh ber he thinks that I'm
muddle-headed and I think he's
simpleminded so to a metas systemic
thinker analytical rational thinkers are
simple-minded mechanistically minded and
so on while on analytical rational think
thinker a metas systemic thinker is
muddled heaven so an analytical rational
thinker reading metas systemic the
products of metas systemic thinking will
not be impressed by it in general they
won't be able because to understand it
they will have to they would have to be
able to build in their own mind the met
the metas systemic kind of model that
the metas systemic thinker um used to
come up with the you know breakthrough
science or the Breakthrough in the
humanities or whatever so so that's the
problem with spreading it it it won't
spread simply by writing books about it
or books that apply it uh this is what
I'm getting at about procedural
knowledge what has to be installed to
use mechanistic language in the mind of
a person is the actual ability to use
the thought forms in real time to build
build a model and that's procedural
knowledge and you know and writing a A
Treatise about doing that or a diary
about doing that won't produce it in
another person either they've actually
got to be embedded in an environment uh
where they're required to build their
own models reflect on the the actual
model building process and that's the
critical part of it reflect on their
model building process then when when
they uh see that their model is lacking
in some respect then they need to adjust
not only their model but their meta
model their model bu their model of
model
building um and if they do that
recursively and you need to do it
throughout your life I mean to me it's a
great day when I find that uh my model
my mental model of some complex area of
reality such as an area in evolutionary
theory which I spend my days and nights
thinking
about uh when when I find that it's
flawed and Limited in some way uh that's
a wonderful day because it means that I
can I've identified I can go in identify
somewhat an aspect of my model building
process that's inadequate and I can then
correct it uh and then you know correct
it in in the actual models I build of
complex
reality um so yeah it's all about
procedural knowledge and how to develop
that and
Scaffolding
yeah I think I've
emphasized um in my presentation that
that what was what was a key in my own
life and I think it's a key in the
develop in anyone's development of meta
systemic cognition is yeah the Genius of
your moments of dialectic and thought
forms because that's it's critically
important for making
object uh you know the actual thought
processes that are needed to
instantiate um metas systemic thinking
um so i'
i' learned at a young age through
accidents um you not through any uh you
know capacity of my own but accidents of
circumstance to treat analytical
rational thinking as object and to treat
my problem
solving uh capacities using analytical
rational cognition as object and using
that capacity to be able to improve my
problem problem solving strategies and
so on rather than just solving problems
I knew
uh what approaches I was using and I
could improve them enhance them and so
on uh recursively as I developed um so
the significant but however I developed
an intuitive capacity over the years um
to do metas systemic thinking but I
couldn't see it as object um and it's
your thought forms and and uh moments in
of dialectic that enabled me
to scaffold my ability to see it as
object and go to a metacognitive level
in relation to meta systemic thinking
and it's that meta metacognitive level
which is essential for teaching it in my
view um scaffolding it in others and so
on so um yeah uh thanks for those
foundations AO thank you John um I want
to summarize two things that I um am
especially grateful to you
for opening new doors in my thinking so
the first aspect is the the metaphor of
dis embedding so there is a bed where
our thoughts flow and um how can we
disembed and even if
we think we are thinking in a metas
systemic fashion or maybe even if we do
it could even still be a bad so how can
we again and again this bed from from
these flows of thoughts that are that we
have been used to so that's the first
aspect the metaphor of disembedding and
the second one is the aspect that you
put on the question of
meditation on a special form of I don't
know cognitive awareness meditation or
something like this um and also linking
it to
phenomenon that we phenomena that we are
experiencing I think you shared walking
showering and napping so I think a lot
of people can relate to these
experiences where they have thoughts and
images and they can make connections and
see things in a larger context Etc um
capacities that I do not have in normal
waking time and I think if we can relate
people's experience and and and memories
of of these small short phases of I
don't know why
cognition if with this practice and
training then maybe people uh could also
be attracted and get an get a h get a
hint or get a a flavor of where we are
aiming
at um at the same time I think you
shared started with the challenge of the
global Wicked problems Etc of these big
questions climate crisis Etc and of
course my question is how can can we
scale how can we do this in a fashion
that is not aiming for the next 100
years but for the next I don't know
three years uh where we have still
something um some things to to change so
these are the the questions I'm holding
I'm very much looking forward to the
next Salon with Oto and then the salon
after that with the both of you in
dialogue so I'm really hoping that um we
we open new doors in our own thinking
and then and
hopefully get the snowball rolling and
running thank you so much for taking the
time for participating all the best good
night good evening good morning bye-bye
