hello everyone today we have another
important guest he is a philosopher he
is a scientist and he has very
interesting book as well so he is from
UK and most importantly his book like
many many big university they follow and
they do research on his book from let's
say example Oxford University can be the
University MIT and many big University
actually following his book and he's a
very big scientist and philosopher he
has a lot of contributions in global
arena so hello mr. Anthony how are you
greetings arm honor to be here thank you
very much indeed
yes very good so can you please
introduce yourself how about you I shall
add to your wonderful introduction thank
you so much yes I'm a philosopher and a
science fiction and science science
writer essentially and a theistic
evolutionist and so today I'll be
introduced in some of my concepts in
terms of theistic evolution and why the
whole notion of God is so important to
science we are led to believe that
science and God are diametrically
opposed you have to believe in one or
the other but actually they can work
together symbiotically
in fact theology philosophy and science
can work together as one if you like as
a Trinity in a sense they become one in
essence and they they live together
symbiotically this is a very important
concert which I speak about what in my
work so yeah ok very interesting so so
you I know you are in debaters and you
have a strong argument ok one
metaphysics and you are a believer
assessment and this is very interesting
for another as I said I writes a lot
about I write a lot about artificial
intelligence the universe motto
terraforming Mars and so forth but today
obviously I'm going to concentrate
gravitate to one around one essential
point which is science and theology as I
said how philosophy science and theology
can actually work as one so you don't
have three but in essence you have one
Universal overthought where science
philosophy and theology sit together
symbiotically and that you have one
giant Universal all of thought and
they're one and they work together so
they're not diametrically opposed as
many scientists are led to to say like
Richard Dawkins and so forth very nice
things yes like like we want to know
about or all of your arguments and how
obviously this is a very extensive thing
in the sense that it's extremely
multi-dimensional there are so many key
points so I will just briefly touch on
certain things now the first thing I
want to touch on is what is man what man
is essentially a bundle of particles
okay we're a bundle of particles but we
are made up of a neutron essentially
we're made up of a neutron we're made up
of many particles but the particle that
we are made up of predominantly is a
neutron now the interesting thing about
a neutron is this that a neutron is not
only radioactive but it also decays
within ten minutes so the interesting
thing here is what gives how is it that
we are here if we lead up of something
that is a radioactive and B decays
within ten minutes incidentally this is
known as weak decay this is known as
weak decay because within the world of
particle physics within particle physics
units ten minutes is actually a very
long time so it's known as weak decays
so ten minutes within the world of
particle physics lot of particle physics
units ten minutes is a very very long
time
but within our world a fascicle world
ten minutes is a very short time so here
you actually you have the relativity the
relativity of time at play not to
mention that when a neutron decays once
a neutron decays becomes unstable and in
quotes dies it comes its energy is never
lost because of the first law of
thermodynamics the conservation of
energy because of the first law of
thermodynamics its energy is never lost
even though it becomes unstable and
decays so it becomes a proton electron
and a neutrino so you have the first law
of thermodynamics their proton electron
and neutrino so once it a neutron decays
it becomes proton electron and a
neutrino so going back to my original
point how is it that we exist if we have
made up with
something that is a radioactive and be
decay so quickly well the interesting
thing here is this an atheist will say
this as an accident I say this is
orchestrated because it's far too
complex once you place a neutron into a
nucleus it becomes bound and in other
words it requires energy to release
itself from it becomes bound in the
nucleus as it lose as as it becomes
bound it loses energy so becomes found
it loses energy so if we apply e equals
mc-squared
if we apply e equals MC squared we know
that it loses energy it will also lose
maths it lived is so much mass that it
stabilizes within the nucleus and it can
no longer decay into a proper an
electron proton plus de neutrino now
this is an incredible thing and we exist
because of this process in fact all the
heavy elements carbon nitrogen oxygen
and iron all those nuclei exist because
of this everything exists because of
this process that once you place a
neutron into an idiot it becomes bound
it loses energy e equals MC squared so
it loses anything also lose mass it
loses so math so much mass that it can
no longer decay into a proton electron
and a neutrino and so it's badly decayed
and that's the reason why we are here
now my argument is this an atheist will
say this is nothing but an accident just
a complete accident of nature I say this
is far too complex to be an accident
this is to me orchestrated there's
thought process in this it's it's far
too complex it's the same in fact many
people will say well okay fine but who
created God well that's an oxymoron
by definition God is an eternal being
that transcends time and space into the
any time and space is an electromagnetic
field
it's zero-point electromagnetic quanta
it's an electromagnetic field we who are
bound by time and space past present
future that live in a Trinitarian
perception of reality cannot perceive
something there is eternal in nature but
God
wolves outside the sphere of time and
space and he is the mechanism involved
with what I just explained otherwise to
say that this is just an accident is for
me impossible it's far too complex
it's far too complex the whole thing
about the neutrons I have described to
you is orchestrated by a power by a
higher power by lit by a mechanism and
this mechanism is an infinite eternal
being that exists independent of both
time and space so that's my first point
in fact to elaborate on this I could say
that this is essentially order out of
chaos through chaos God established his
order through chaos God establishes
order in fact we see this with the Big
Bang in fact we see this with the
formation of molecules let me explain
how does life arise lot life arises as a
result of an imperfection at an atomic
level the stable atom the stable atom
doesn't do anything it's the atom that
lacks an electron it's the atom that
lacks an electron the lady abnormal atom
that seeks to merge with other atoms
forming covalent bonds DNA RNA and then
life starts as a result of an
imperfection at an atomic level order
out of chaos incidentally this proves
that the whole concept of perfection is
nothing but a construct of the mind the
whole concept of perfection is nothing
but a construct of the mind because it's
the atom that lacks an electron the
abnormal axon the axon that is needy
that says wait a second
I need atomic equilibrium I need balance
here it then binds to other atoms to
make up for that missing electron and
through this process we have in physics
covalent bonds RNA DNA and so forth
event produced molecules are produced
and in life and the evolutionary process
begins with a deficiency at an atomic
level life starts at an at a order out
of chaos essentially so this is the
first point I'd like to make and it's a
very interesting point my next point is
actually this what is the universe well
I'm going to break this down into two
the fur
part of this is basically that the
universe coming from a cosmological
perspective is actually a Trinity what
do I mean the universe is a space time
matter continuum the universe is
actually three-in-one it's a spacetime
Matic continuum
it's a Trinitarian perception of the
universe if we break these down if we
break these down let's take for example
time what is time
time is past present and potential
future because the future only exists as
a potential past present and potential
future the future only exists as a
potential within the three segments of
time it represents the totality of time
you have a Trinitarian perception of
reality in fact man's automating
consciousness is integrated within three
perceptions of time past present and
potential future that represents the
totality of time we live in a
Trinitarian perception of reality our
oscillating consciousness exists within
this Trinitarian perception of reality
our soul which is our mind will and
emotions is a nexus of electromagnetic
forces that cannot be destroyed because
of the first law of thermodynamics our
soul is integrated within this
Trinitarian perception of reality
there's a Trinity within time itself
space barring of barring earth
time-space is three-dimensional and
within each dimension of space it
permeates all of space to latarian
perception of space and matter
and when I say matter light and sound
matter light and sound is the unseen
omnipresent energy that manifests itself
in various forms of measurable motion
corresponding with natural phenomena
light produces light energy that
produces the light that is seen light
produces light energy that produces the
light that is C and the same
mathematical formula for sound
we live in a Trinitarian universe space
time and matter as I've said space the
three dimensions of space try and past
president potential future and obviously
lights and matter as I've just described
now to you so it's a very interesting
concept now B is the universe a
mechanical universe or a dynamic
universe the
verse as Isaac Newton that was literally
is actually a mechanical universe
it's a mechanistic universe mechanistic
universe requires a mechanism we can see
how it's evolving the so forth this is
not a dynamic universe a dynamic
universe is a living system it gathers
information as it goes along and so you
get a basically random evolution it
becomes unpredictable nonlinear pattern
yeah and dynamic processes sorry dynamic
processes are systems with information
feedback operations ie a fractal but we
don't have this picture of the universe
we don't have a dynamic universe we have
a mechanistic universe so mechanical
universe requires a mechanism again this
again proving that there has to be a
greater being that transcends time and
space infinite in both time and space as
I said space and time is an
electromagnetic field zero-point
electromagnetic quanta and we are bound
by time in space therefore we cannot
perceive something that is beyond time
and space so perceive God is something
beyond us because God is eternal we are
beings that have a past present and
future that live within a Trinitarian
perception of reality okay excuse me
right my next point is this what was
responsible what was responsible for
pumping energy into the open system the
universe in the very beginning first law
of thermodynamics the conservation of
energy energy cannot be destroyed but
will transform from one form into
another and so forth what was
responsible for pumping energy into the
into the open system again this
mechanism is infinite being that
transcends time and space what my next
point is this and I'm gonna sort of do a
little bit of a jump here but bear with
me sorry boss you know what it is I've
got so much to share I've had to make
certain points and I'm sort of
gravitating but my mind is exploding
with ideas so I'm trying to sort of
narrow it down and give little bits
without going overboard right there are
two kinds of things there are things
that exist necessarily excuse me and
there are things that exist contingently
things that exist necessarily exist out
of the necessity of their own nature in
other words they have to exist okay
things that exist as necessarily have to
exist they exist out of the necessity of
their own nature what do I mean
mathematical objects exist in this way
the number-5 exists in this way numbers
exist in this way abstract things like
this the number four the number three
exists in this way they exist
necessarily under the necessity of their
own nature but things that exist
contingently by contrast don't exist
necessarily they exist because something
has caused them to exist
ie man animals the universe now a clever
atheist will come along and say this
actually we don't leave that you know
why the universe is eternal we have an
eternal universe the Eternity of matter
theory most pantheists believe in the
Eternity of matter theory in other words
we don't need to explain the universe
because the universe has always existed
therefore we don't need God we don't
need an eternal being the university
tournaments always existed thus we can
push God aside no need for God but does
this work
eh there is no mathematics to actually
back this concept of the Eternity of
matter theory not to mention that there
are four things that can dismantle this
argument very quickly the first is this
if the universe was eternal it would
have reached a point where all usable
energy was exhausted we don't have a
belief we don't the universe is full of
cosmic energy so if the universe was
eternal it would have reached the point
where all usable energy was exhausted
but it's not like that it's full of
cosmic energy the second one is this
background cosmic radiation background
cosmic radiation heat remnants left over
from the Big Bang which we have detected
in the universe we know that an
explosion took place relativity the
third point we know that the universe is
expanding as a result of dark energy
seventy percent of the universe is
predominately dark energy and this and
our universe is expanding which implies
that the universe at one point was a
cluster it had a point Genesis it's not
eternal not at all now the most
beautiful point is this the second law
of thermodynamics entropy the
beautiful metaphysical or on the
universe entropy means erosion and decay
death is a manifestation of this law
it's the immutable metaphysical
metaphysical law of the universe
do we see entropy our play within the
cosmos yes we do take a star a star will
succumb to gravitational collapse as its
elements grow heavy and lose energy and
eventually die and in it distorts the
fabric of time and space in the form of
a black hole so we see stellar death
within the cosmos as I said star will
lose energy its elements will grow heavy
eventually will decay and decay decay
and eventually distort in the fabric of
time and space in the form of a black
hole singularity and so forth that's
another topic there is death within the
cosmos which implies there's a point
Genesis to the universe so the
eternality of matter the Eternity of
matter theory is very easily dismissed
and is is left for science fiction books
which I write many about many stories
are about this but it's nothing about
science fiction the universe had a point
Genesis and these four arguments destroy
this argument completely right my next
point is something from nothing Richard
Dawkins and the Lawrence Krauss
discussed this extensively something
from nothing now what do I mean well due
to the laws of quantum mechanics and
relativity we now know that empty space
is actually not empty that every single
point in space actually contains
information I repeat every single point
of space contains information the
universe is a giant cosmic
superconductor there's an invisible
field everywhere in the universe we know
this through the hikin collider
I accept that no problem so basically
what we have is virtual particles
virtual particles are bubbling brew of
virtual particles that are popping in
and out of existence within space every
point in space contains information so
empty space is not empty virtual
particles that are popping in and out of
existence perpetually continually within
the console world empty space is not
empty
virtual particles popping in and out
of existence perpetually this can only
happen within the quantum world my Lake
it couldn't happen within a classical
world our world because he would violate
the laws of energy you can't produce
masks we didn't have mass in the first
place so this is only reserved for the
quantum world so what are what are you a
physicist or a scientist like Richard
Dawkins would say because of this if you
wait long enough you are guaranteed by
the laws of quantum mechanics alone to
produce something from seemingly
seemingly quotes cause empty space is
not empty you're about to produce
something from seemingly nothing ie
particles and matter because gravity
allows sorry gravity allows negative and
energy and positive energy
configurations okay right in fact in
fact once you apply the laws of quantum
mechanics to gravity itself space itself
becomes a quantum mechanical variable
and literally fluctuates in and out of
existence and so just via the laws of
quantum mechanics themselves you can
literally produce universes spaces and
times where there was no space and time
before there's a problem here Richard
Dawkins laws do not create matter the
laws of quantum mechanics can not create
matter laws do not create matter if
you'll send the laws of quantum
mechanics over time create matter you're
ascribing creative power to laws
physical laws do not create physical
realities when we look at a cell take a
cell cell operates under certain laws ok
DNA RNA and so forth ok but those laws
that govern that cell didn't bring the
solute to existence so we need to
separate agency sorry we need to
separate agency from this whole notion
of shall we say a cell being created by
a lot by Moore's laws do not create
realities and this is a very important
point laws do not create physical
reality so there's a problem here for
atheists the laws of quantum the laws of
quantum mechanics alone cannot create
physical realities my friend no more
scam laws only describe how certain
things work under certain conditions as
I said you take a cell a cell operate
under certain MOS and those laws were
not responsible for bringing the cell
into existence laws are one thing agency
is another laws are one thing agency is
another the question is who created
those laws that's key only God that his
infan in both time and space could have
ordained those laws could have created
those laws in fact our universe operates
under certain mathematical laws nature
operand operates under mathematics so
anything's is basically saying that
these mathematical laws are nothing but
a coincidence no they these laws were
inscribed and it takes and mind to have
formulated them for the universe to
operate as it does so there we have it
my friend my next my next point
is entropy and evolution back to entropy
entropy is the second law of
thermodynamics sorry entropy is a second
aura thermodynamics as I said it's the
immutable metaphysical or of the
universe everything over time decays
everything over time decays proteins
molecules and so forth death is a
manifestation of this law so ha oh sure
proteins and molecules have become far
more complex over time
in light of what we know about the
second law of thermodynamics that tells
us actually it's the inverse over time
things become corrupted and disintegrate
and die
many scientists will use the open system
notion as a way out of this but to me
there is no way out of this the fact of
the matter is if proteins and molecules
are becoming far more complex over time
there has to be a force that governs
there has to be an energy there has to
be a mind that is doing this process in
other words evolution
only works theistic alee to say that
this universe started via evolution
atheistic Lee is saying that proteins
are molecules over time become far more
complex and then suddenly life appears
but that's impossible because entropy
entropy tells us the inverse over time
stains die so how could things you need
a mechanism God is this eternal
mechanism he is the mechanism behind the
mechanical universe
he's the mechanism behind evolution you
need God this is why I said science and
God and theology work together
symbiotically instead of having three
you have one giant universal orb of
thought and God controls all the
mechanisms of life now I'm saying this
from a non-religious point of view I'm
just saying that God is the great
architect the great mind behind
evolution behind the mechanical universe
because otherwise we have a problem we
have a mechanical universe we don't have
a design dynamic universe as I've been
interviewed but not so mention as I've
said entropy tells us that over time
things become corrupted and over time
things disintegrate and die proteins are
molecules over time die and disintegrate
but we don't have that for evolution we
have the inverse so how did evolution
work you need a mechanism for this
process to continue and that's why we're
here because God is working through
evolution as he's working through the
mechanical universe okay our next point
is this our planet is approximately four
and a half billion years old props I
mean four and a half billion years old
okay after about half a billion years
excuse me we had the first formation of
life so you say we had bacteria and
microorganisms after about half a
billion years yeah so that's pretty much
what happened after that then things
become far more complex bigger and more
interesting now my point here is this
and I want to be very brief here is this
within evolution we transition from
physics to biology and then to chemistry
but I'm going to set biology once we've
reached biology biological processes as
I mentioned we had microorganisms and
bacteria we transition from biology to
chemistry we have this sudden quantum
leap from biology to chemistry
biological processes to chemical
processes but now a theistic evolution
is including Richard Dawkins himself can
explain this sudden transition he
doesn't know because incidentally as a
result of this quantum leap if you like
in quotes
we had the formation of genetics
genetics started as a result of this
sudden transition from biological
processes to chemical processes okay and
then we had the formation of genetics
the first high-tech genetic molecule a
precursor to DNA and then suddenly life
he calls this a gap this is not a gap
this is a colossal gap you know why if
you can't explain how genetics started
you can't explain evolution because
evolution sits on the pillar of genetics
so if you can't explain how we went from
biological processes to chemical
processes okay this sudden transition
and in the formation of the high-tech
genetic molecule as I've mentioned yeah
and then DNA if you can't explain that
you can't really explain genetics you so
you can't really explain evolution
because all of evolution sits on the
pillar of genetics he says this is a
missing gap that we're trying to film
but he can't fill it because the only
thing that can fill it is a divine spark
a divine spark is the only think and
fill that transition ie what created
genetics was this eternal infinite being
that transcends time and space exists
outside of the sphere of time and space
independent of both time and space as I
said space and time is an
electromagnetic field zero-point
electromagnetic quanta
it's an electromagnetic form Lord warden
eternality he is the spark in that gap
to explain how genetics started
Richard Dawkins says this is a gap we
don't know how it started which we're
working on it we're gonna find out one
day hopefully they're never gonna find
out because of his atheistic attack he
doesn't want to admit that there is
something far too complex here for him
to deal with the fact of the matter is
we transitioned from biology to
chemistry then we get genetics evolution
sits on genetics the pillar of genetics
if you can't explain how genetics
started you really can't explain
evolution God is the mechanism behind
genetics he is the gap that fills that
gap that he says as a gap and all life
started with this eternal being that
transcends time and space evolution
needs God the mechanical universes needs
God as I've explained through entropy
the first law of thermodynamics and so
forth right I'll end with this last
point here the reason why people
struggle with the whole concept of God
as I have said is because they're bound
by time and space they're bound by time
as I've already explained we live in a
Trinitarian perception of reality we
live in past present and potential
future because the future audiences are
the potential we're leaving this
Trinitarian perception of reality okay
we are bound by time so we live in these
three set different segments of time
past present potential future and beyond
that we could not perceive something
that is actually eternal in nature so
the problem is something within the
nature of man we don't have them
cognitive faculties to understand
something that dwells in eternality it's
something that transcends time and space
it's something beyond the mind yet at
the same time
we have the ability within our
intelligence to understand that we could
not have come here as I've discussed
from just a mindless explosion as I've
destroyed the eternality of matter
theory as I've told you that's
impossible so you just have to say this
is just a mindless explosion suddenly
we're here no it couldn't be
there has to be a mechanism at work
there has to be in fact epistemology if
in a fossa fees ought to do with
knowledge where there's all this
knowledge come from it all stems from
the eternal source
if you remove this infinite being if you
remove him from the equation even
knowledge Co everything collapses
including knowledge and so forth all
things including knowledge stem from the
eternal source weed Ward's outside of
time and space I leave it with you thank
you for your nice discussions and a very
good debatable strategy but I have some
unsub perceptions and I just want to
know and there are very good audience I
come to the audience response as well
first thing first you are discussing
about like present the world of how the
world is running and how it works and
how God has relationship with every
aspect of this world my first thing is
that there are many Philosopher's like
you but those who are not believers my
first point is that why you become
believers my second point is that at
present we are in challenging situations
with Kovac 90 and a living and many more
things how you want to explain and
present particular situations with your
analysis of God why these things happen
right right okay firstly it's very
important that I mentioned this the
sheer fact that there is suffering in
the world doesn't disprove God's
existence
it just means you to change your
philosophy your theology you understand
excuse me of the universe
people use suffering to say well we all
suffer there's terrible things happening
within the universe we're sorry within
our planet terrible things happen even
up every single day God couldn't exist
suffering does not disprove God's
existence even if you have to come to
the analogy the point to say well God is
evil so be it but it doesn't disprove
this mechanism God exists whether he's
good or evil or both
you know Judaism what I'm trying to say
is suffering does not disprove his
existence it just means we have to
understand things and
a bit clearer a little bit more clearer
for example the whole notion of evil
evil doesn't exist outside of man let me
explain what is evil is a lightning
storm evil
no it's an atmospheric discharge when a
snake bites is that evil no it's it's a
defense mechanism the same with a shark
and so forth an earthquake is to do with
tectonic activity seismic shifts
releasing of energy and so forth all
these natural things that we call that
Lee disasters it's just nature it's not
evil there's no evil involved the only
thing that is evil is what lies within
the soul of man as a potential think
evil only exists within the soul of man
as a acting potential within the
reptilian complex there's a region of
the brain known as the reptilian complex
I know hello mr. Anthony deer are deer
hunting mr. Anthony has some of the
issues with internet so hopefully soon
he gonna come up with his analysis and
he will analyze all of the things in a
professional way and most important
pointed point of view is dead mr.
Anthony actually trying to explain the
present system of chords and by which we
can analyze our present situations by
which we can understand that how we can
sustain in this world mr. Anthony cannon
can you join with us
okay so the audience I already discussed
with mr. Anthony and he is actually
facing some problems an issue with
internet connections he will come back
soon and by this time we based on his
discussions like how different audience
come with their questions you can ask
OSHA so when he joined with us I gonna
ask him questions about this method
metaphysics and existence of gods and
biological economy and more interesting
things and yes mr. yes sorry mr. Anthony
has a few of the issue with the internet
connection so he is solving his internet
connections and he is joining with us
and he has actually lot of contributions
in in metaphysics at us and his books he
has many many interesting books all of
his books now student from Oxford
University student from Cambridge
University student from MIT and the many
more many many big universities they are
following his concept they when he
attending and different different
debating and many more activities so a
lot of already yes yes yes already
joining with us Anthony I can I can sir
as I was saying if you are talking about
the whole notion of suffering as I said
suffering does not disprove the
existence of an eternal creator even if
you have to come to the conclusion that
the creator is not of good nature
it doesn't disprove that God is the
mechanism behind evolution the Meccan
the mechanical universe and the universe
as we know it it doesn't disprove that
at all even if you have to come to that
point the point that I was saying to you
is this the whole notion of evil evil
does not exist outside of man as I said
natural disasters like earthquakes and
so forth we should do with tectonic
activity seismic shifts and so forth go
an integer physics and geology and so on
yeah seismic shifts raising stress the
same way the thunder and lightning at
most
discharges these are natural things they
have to occur a shark is an evil but
when it goes to eat that's all it knows
it's a predator same with a snake and so
forth so outside of man there is no such
thing as evil these are just I think mr.
Anthony has the same issues again so he
need to he did to solve this thing this
is very interesting discussions I do not
want to miss his interesting discussions
and definitely he ganas solve his
internet related problem and he will
come back soon so sorry about sorry
about the internet problems so I think
that mr. Anthony actually facing some of
the Internet related problems from his
sides and definitely he's gonna come
back again yes can you please join me
okay so we are communicating my team's
and I am also complicating with him in
between one and two minutes he gonna
join with us so what I am discussing
about some of his contributions so
[Music]
so you know at the present situations he
live in UK so in UK and hehe facing some
of the challenge and problem with
Internet's and other things so hopefully
hopefully he's gonna solve this thing
soon and you know he will join with us
so basically I just want to share some
of the his biography and some of his
internal in international contributions
specifically he born in England in 1975
and he is a philosopher and science
fiction writers author on quantum chromo
chronics and quantum electronics true
imperial planet saturn are and the
martin project his book deal primarily
with philosophy science artificial
intelligence and theology and antony
books and held at various universities
artists such as of such university
Imperial College London and highly
diverse by some of the world leading
scientists so this is this is actually
very interesting discussions when even
personally I attended Oxford Union and
in the campus Union you know Thursday
night they have a debate they have a
debate on existence of God and many
interesting topic so this kind of
discussions actually help us to
understand how we have to play in that
present situations and how we can play
and Mayor solve these issues in the
present situations then there are a lot
more confusions in the present science
and the present situations and and we
have to we have to solve these specific
issues and when we are we are the
scientific believers when when we are
real believers of the God and with the
proper knowledge
and with the proper analysis that time
we can solve our all of the problem even
in prison and
situations we read that there are many
things we cannot solve by ourselves that
our existence of God and God will solve
the specific problems and if we can
solve this problem then example we can
make our life more perfect we can
survive more effectively and there
audiance you can wait for this our
honorable speakers and you will come
back soon
so we are trying to communicating with
hints so definitely gonna join with us
and he gonna discuss with all of the
specific issues about the goddess and
about the his analyzes and everything oh
sorry to worry about the white guy in
the scanner please explain some of the
issues because ordeals are observing
your show and there are some sort of
interruption for your internet
connection sorry oh yes unfortunately
with all my brilliance that's beyond my
power okay go ahead
yes just let me finish this point as I
said evil only exists within the within
the soul of man as an acting potential
here meow evil utterly exists within the
soul of man as an acting potential
within the reptilian complex within the
reptilian complex is a region of the
brain when you have too much activity
electrical and chemical activity within
that region of the brain it brings out
the worst in man and then they do evil
acts but outside of man there's no such
thing as evil as I have described to you
hmm this is just nature taking its
course as I have mentioned please go
ahead
I just want to know about your book
because I know that your book I've
written six books so which one you can
you can describe like any of your
peasant wounds and most importantly I
want to know relations in between your
boots and also universities and MIT and
cambree's Imperial College how they use
your books how the research okay yeah
well basically even though I'm a science
fiction writer as I said I do write hard
science fiction one of my books was the
Mars time project for example in that
particular book I write extensively
about terraforming Mars colonizing Mars
the science involved in so forth and
that's just one particular book that's
enough Ella which I published actually
last year some of my other work deals
with robotics artificial intelligence I
deal with the whole notion of AI in fact
my last book that I published a few
months ago is called androids in the
gods in quotes Do Androids Dream of the
gods and within the book what I have is
robots androids that start to develop
some theological concepts about God how
can a robot develop a sense of God so
what I write about within this book if
is this that if a machine a robot can
somehow develop in itself a sense of God
we have to redefine metaphysics we have
to redefine the nature of the mind we
have to redefine everything in fact even
the nature of God
so do Androids Dream of the Gods
Androids in the gods so if a machine can
somehow develop within itself an
understanding of who God is that God
exists we have to redefine metaphysics
we have to redefine the nature of the
mind and then we creates a new
philosophy completely and itself a sense
of God we have to reach we have to do we
have to change everything in terms of
what is man redefined metaphysics we
define the nature of the mind and so
forth in fact interestingly with AI the
cells within the nervous system
the cells within the nervous system are
the closest things in the universe to
the transistors and gates of a computer
so there's an incredible thing here
obviously the human brain operates on
neurons a symbiotic connection of
neurons and a machine operates on
mathematical algorithms bits of
programming logic that govern the
mathematical pathways of a robotic mind
but there's an incredible parallel there
as I said the closest thing in the
universe as I mentioned the cells within
the nervous system within a human being
the souls in another system are the
closest thing in the universe to the
transistors and gates of a computer
there are very interesting here as
sessions about your metaphysics and all
things is moving let's the animal sleep
I mean practicing Muslims so I know that
you have a knowledge on sodium Bukhari
you have a knowledge on Quran and you
have you know many interesting things
about Islam so how do you want to define
Islam and how do you want to make a
relation between this so they are Buhari
and all of the all of your analyzes even
present science and technology
improvements okay well what I will say
what I will say is this and I'll start
with a very good book I start with a
magnificent compliment actually about
Islamic culture firstly is this I will
say this the the Islamic world the
Muslim world I mean I lived in Qatar
Doha for example and the generosity that
I that I that I had there was second to
none
not to mention that they built the first
library in Cordoba in Andalusia you know
during the walls and the Crusades when
Spain was under the Islamic empire and
so actually the Middle East the Arab
world has actually contributed
magnificently to science but we're going
back some time so they they were if you
like back in the time they were they
contributed magnificently to algebra as
we know algebra and so forth
for me so now start to inter combine
because I think you're asking me now to
inter combine my knowledge of science
and philosophy and metaphysics and so
forth with Islam I'm not in the position
to do so I'm gonna be honest because I
don't know enough about Islam to do that
mm-hmm
what I do know is as I said I have
researched a little bit about Southey Al
Bukhari sorry Muslim al tabari
I am aware of the hadith the narrations
and so forth
I know a little bit about the Quran
Islamic culture and so forth so for me
to give you a concise precise answer I
would have to know a little bit more
about Islam I don't know enough about
Islam to give you that answer all I know
is this irrespective of any religion God
exists he is eternal he is the mechanism
behind quantum mechanics as I told you
he's the mechanism behind the mechanical
universe as I told you he is the
mechanism behind evolution because of
entropy as I told you over time things
become less complex and disintegrate
proteins and molecules over time decay
and die they don't become more complex
but evolution says that over time
proteins and molecules became far more
complex and suddenly life came into
being but we couldn't have that because
entropy ii or thermodynamics tells us
the inverse that over time all things
become corrupted most systems become
corrupted and things decay and die so
how could evolution be it requires a
mechanism God is this mechanism whoever
he is God is this mechanism behind
evolution behind the mechanical
University choir behind quantum
mechanics as I told you before
scientists sorry the Richard Dawkins and
Lawrence Krauss they'll tell you hey
look you know the laws of quantum
mechanics over time just based on the
laws of quantum mechanics you could
produce something out of seemingly
nothing but that's impossible because
the laws laws do not create physical
realities laws only describe are certain
things work under certain conditions
they don't create physical realities you
something more that's where God comes
into the equation as I said every point
into space contains information virtual
particles that are popping in and out of
existence perpetually we live in a
cosmic superconductor of course I know
that the hikin Chi desper has proved
that we live in a cosmic superconductor
there's an invisible field everywhere in
the universe is an invisible thought
everywhere in the universe we live in a
cosmic superconductor every point in
space contains information space is not
empty in fact there's no such thing as
nothing even nothing is something
there's no such thing as nothing even
nothing is something so every single
point in space contains information we
know that there's an invisible field
everywhere in the universe and this
invisible field Israel is actually
responsible for all of reality because
all of reality can be described by
quantum mechanics but this doesn't
disprove God's existence God placed the
quantum world into being he placed the
classical world into being he operates
through the laws of quantum mechanics
so yes everything is made up of quantum
mechanics everything is made up of
quantum mechanics everything is to do
with subatomic particles streams of
light that oscillates everything in the
universe oscillates strings of light
that oscillates we live in a quantum
world everything is based on quantum
mechanics the universe is a cosmic
superconductor virtual particles that
popping in and out of existence
perpetually as I said this can't happen
in our Lord a classical world because it
violates the laws of energy you can't
produce mass we didn't have mass in the
first place so this is reserved for the
quantum world so all of reality can be
described by this invisible field but
that doesn't mean that God doesn't exist
God placed that invisible field he
created that invisible field God is the
god of quantum mechanics he created that
particle and that particle represents
all of reality was all of realities
explained in quantum mechanics in fact
yeah if if you amplify amplify frequency
you change the structure of matter
everything is based on quantum mechanics
all of reality is based on two mechanics
but the doesn't get got to exist
God is the god of quantum mechanics he
operates through quantum mechanics which
is why I said to you before you know
atheists will say that with the laws of
quantum mechanics combined to gravity
itself then space it stuff becomes a
quantum mechanical variable literally
fluctuating it out in and out of
existence and you can by the laws of
quantum mechanics alone create universes
spaces and times where there was no
space in time before but that's
impossible
because you still need a mechanism
because physical realities do not come
into being as a result of laws laws only
describe how things work under certain
conditions they cannot create physical
realities which is why physical laws are
one thing agencies another God is the
creator of those laws and the universe
operates under the certain laws in
quantum physics
I changed or Kings I challenged the very
best nobody will beat me in this
[Music]
response gary is actually please finish
them all
she said informative session thank you
sir I have met nice and really
informative discussions entities from
India and IBM TV he said - Hamid Ronon
Anthony what's chemistry behind
biological economists and gee sorrows
let me stop you there sir I thought that
you were gonna give me a bit more
information on carries message let me
mention the carry officer Gary's
actually might my best friend and a dear
brother
so hello Gary Gary is a is actually a
musician and aside from being a musician
he's actually the guy that is behind all
my artwork he's he's the artist behind
all the book covers so they use bridges
so yes so a big hello to Gary Gary as I
said is is a brilliant artist and we
have we're brothers and so there you go
so yes yes so there are many good
response
specifically on kid has questions what
chemistry behind biological economy
sorry
he asked what chemistry behind
biological economy what chemistry behind
biological economy yes
by me that's a half of eight questions
so okay no problem so I'm kidding if you
have a specific ocean you can ask again
you will give you answer okay I have
this specific oceans well let me let me
mention this let me mention this because
sorry whoever's asked that question has
has formulated the question in such a in
such a manner that it's sort of
half-baked in the sense that as I
mentioned whether you go into biology
chemistry physics quantum mechanics as I
have mentioned extensively reality
metaphysics and so forth because I'm a
universal mind I on every dimension of
philosophy in science when you look at
biology in chemistry as I said going
back to that transition in evolution
where I told you that we go we
transition from physics to biological
processes and instant we have that
sudden quantum leap into chemical
processes you remember I told you
earlier we have this sudden transition
in evolution in the sense that we go
from biology to chemistry as a result of
this transition from biology to
chemistry we have the formation of
genetics the high-tech genetic molecule
and then DNA and so forth and in all
life you know atheistic evolutionist
including Richard Dawkins has been able
to explain how this transition has
occurred they can explain vast amounts
regarding evolution I told you our
planets about four-and-a-half billion
years old
after about half a billion years we had
micro organisms and bacteria and then
from then things became far more complex
over time and lot larger and so forth
and then the whole evolutionary process
began but what I'm saying is this
nobody can know atheistic evolutionist
can just understand how we had this
sudden transition from biological
processes to chemical processes as a
result we had the formation of Gen
metics the high-tech genetic molecule
from there we had DNA and so forth and
then the hottie Lelouch repurposes
commences what I'm saying is with this
gap this is not a gap this is a this is
a colossal gap in the sense that if you
can't explain how genetics started
you can't explain evolution because all
of evolution sits on the pillar of
genetics or evolution sits on genetics
they can't understand no Dawkins does
not understand how genetics started but
I do in the sense that the only thing
that of could of kick-started genetics
is an eternal spark that transcends time
and space that exists beyond time and
space as I said time and space is an
electromagnetic field zero-point
electromagnetic quanta it's an
electromagnetic field God laws in
eternality he's the spark that created
genetics he's that gap that they call a
gap that spark genetics thus eeveelution
thus life he's that spot behind the
mechanical universe he's that spot
behind evolution he's that spark behind
the atom which I had mentioned earlier
behind the atom that lacks an electron
the abnormal unstable atom that lacks an
electron all life starts as a result of
an imperfection at an atomic level the
atom that lacks an electron seeks to
merge with other atoms forming covalent
bonds RNA DNA and the whole process of
life starts as a result of an atomic
deficiency order out of chaos God works
operates through chaos he establishes
order as I have mentioned the stable
atom with eight electrons stable the
stable atom with eight electrons doesn't
do any well it's in quotes perfect but
doesn't do anything it's the abnormal
and stable atom that creates life as I
mentioned to you before this is a
perfect example to say that the whole
notion the whole notion of perfection is
nothing but a construct of the mind
doesn't exist a concept of the mind the
abnormal atom
it's life perfection is a construct of
the mind so mentioning back to what I
had discussed earlier with you this and
obviously the whole notion of the
chemical shall we say the biological
transition from biology to chemistry and
the formation of genetics and so forth
okay
I have a specific questions for my
audience but we we know that a small
amount of things about the black hole
and the process with your meta meta
physics idea and everything can explain
the black hole issues and so yeah I mean
as I told you I mean black holes occur
as a result of stellar death as a star
loses energy succumbs to gravitational
collapse because a star essentially
resists gravitational collapse all its
life as its elements grow heavier the
second law of thermodynamics is at work
the immutable metaphysical or of the
universe death as I said there is death
within the cosmos so basically the
immutable metaphysical or of the
universe entropy the second law of
thermodynamics is at work within the
cosmos as we see a star eventually
succumbs to gravitational collapse it
resists gravitational collapse all its
life as it comes to entropy it loses
energy and it distorts the fabric of
time and space in the formation of a
black hole singularity and so forth and
then of course we have the whole thing
of supernovae neutron star and all the
rest but I think we're sort of D
gravitating away from the issue here a
little bit but I'm pretty happy to
discuss these matters as as well as no
problem they know ok present but so we
have a competitions in between news
machine and human so we are developing
artificial intelligence as well as we
are humans there are many more
challenging issues right now so my
question is that like how you explain
these competitions the competition
between machines and human how we can
analyze the AI and beautiful level
things inside a is
and how we connect the dots between
humans and I'm messing okay well I start
with this I start with this I write a
lot about androids and and robots
extensively if at my last book androids
in the garden was all to do with
androids robots and robotics and so
forth and I go from the very beginning
and I expand my work to the point of
where I told you I wrote about androids
in the gods do Android stream of the
gods if an Android can develop a sense
of God within itself then we have to
redefine metaphysics we have to redefine
the nature of the mind the nature of God
and so forth which is a colossal
philosophical concept but I mean in
short I writes extensively about AI in
terms of robots Androids for example how
do you give a machine a goal it needs a
description of a future situation how do
you give a machine an active goal which
is very different it needs the
description of a future situation a
present situation and then a process
that the speeds to make them disclaims
were change the present situation so I
go into the philosophy of AI as well
I speak extensively about robotics in my
last book as I said I inter combined
theology I inter combine theology with
with robotics that is my essential key
here I how can I say this I actually go
beyond maybe we have science fiction
books that deal with robotics doing the
basic tasks that we expect robots to do
but I take a robot and it actually has
the capacity to interconnect with God to
develop a sense of God which is why I
said I take metaphysics and robotics to
another level with all due respect a lot
of science fiction writers I've taken it
to another dimension we have the foot
that the the four law of robotics which
are fantastic I've created my own law of
robotics in my new book an Android will
be programmed to acknowledge the one
world government sorry an Android will
be programmed to acknowledge the one
world government as its only God the
first law of robotics I mean I could go
into that but we'll save that for
another day because there's a lot to do
this particular topic and so I connect
AI
with theology and metaphysics so if a
machine can develop in itself a sense of
God an understanding that God exists
then we need to redefine metaphysics we
need to define the nature of man the
nature of the mind and the universe got
all and so forth so I take look Oh
buttocks to another dimensional to go
yes can you give me look yeah can you
hear me I could hear okay so thank you
thank you can we extend a few minutes
because okay thank you for attending
reserve situations we have a lot of
tensions and we have a lot of shoes in
between believers and non-believers as
well as we are we are facing in
tremendous economical challenges do you
have any solutions at present right now
do you find any any things in your mind
or in your ideology how we can overcome
from these situations what you thought
what you believe how we can make this
world bidders how do I believe we can
make this world better yes like example
worse your thoughts
how are you breaking okay maybe maybe
yes sorry you're breaking you look
breaking up a little bit okay how did
you make the world better yes how we can
make better make this world better and
most importantly how we can overcome
from present situations like in
planetary situations do you do you have
any specific thoughts well in terms in
terms of making the world better I think
that all comes to do with the moral
philosophy and understanding that there
is a greater being beyond time and space
and that in fact our morality is etched
into laws that God has given us and this
is the anthropological argument the
anthropological argument is that within
our soul we have an understanding of
what is right and wrong so I think
really to make the world a better place
is to have higher moral values and to
hold on to those higher moral values
which have been inscribed within our
soul as I said our soul is a nexus of
electromagnetic forces our soul is our
mind will and emotions
it's a nexus of electromagnetic forces
that cannot be destroyed as I said for
the the first law of thermodynamics will
suggest that so our soul our being has
to be morally receptive and
understanding rights and wrong so ethics
morality and having and being very
sensitive to things of this nature I
think you have a better world okay very
interesting I want a this is my last
pushes from your perspective for
believers and non-believers what's the
best advice from from your side how we
can do more research on that how
University Education's
can more involvement with their
particular points like and do more
research on that particular point son
beavers and non-believers of course they
want the issue how we can solve these
things and how we can create more
logical society i sebacean what you're
saying in essence how can we bring
atheists to really understand that their
rib is actually something that
transcends time and space that there is
a greater reality beyond this
three-dimensional space is that what
you're asking me in essence yes whoa
I would say the only way you can do that
is to do what I'm doing the only way you
can actually get a theist to think is to
have people like me on your show right
in the books that I write and
challenging their arguments as I said
I'm willing to challenge the very best
dorking so ever it may be the very best
are challenged no problem because I know
that my arguments are too strong too
tight when you really analyze science
when you as I told you I'm going to go
back now to the very beginning of our
discussion when you look at the neutron
as I told you man is made up of many
particles many particles but the
particle that we're made up of mostly is
a neutron it's radioactive and it decays
within ten minutes so how do we exist as
I explained when a neutron decays it
decays into three particles product on a
neutrino and proton Neutron and electron
yeah I mentioned that so you have the
first law of thermodynamics
then when also mention the fact that
it's known as weak decay within the
world of particle physics is known as
weak decayed because it takes so long to
decay right but in the classical world
this is a very short period of time so
you have the relativity of time so going
back to my point why why is it that we
exist if we're made up of something that
is radioactive yeah and the case so
quickly within ten minutes well I told
you this incredible order out of chaos
once you place a neutron into a nucleus
it becomes bound once it becomes bound
it loses energy
now we applied the foot that the formula
of relativity e equals MC squared we
know that if it loses energy will lose
mass it loses so much mass it stabilizes
within the nucleus and it doesn't decay
and that's why we exist as I said this
is not an accident it's far too complex
this is orchestrated by a higher power
this is not an accident impossible
mathematically impossible okay this is
very nice discussion for a while L&amp;T
gonna be forums and features we want to
arrange different kind of
and I know you are a professional
debaters and you acted in Oxford and I
haven't actually debated Oxford I've
I've I've challenged the atheistic
society here in London many design
streets who is behind Richard Dawkins
sort of should we say society and so
forth so I've tried to initiate a debate
I'm still waiting for that debate I
can't wait I hope it does happen but but
I have been on on television
revelation TV six years ago as I said
I'm a philosopher an author of six books
quantum chronicles one and two Imperial
planets silent earth the last time
project is which is all about Mars a
completely different model together and
my last book androids and the gods and
now I've started a new project called
beyond Earth's horizon which is about
parallel dimensions so I'm very
multi-dimensional as I said people ask
me you know what do you write about the
truth of the matter is I'm a polymath I
write about everything science
philosophy theology space just an
explosion of everything really
and that basically summarizes me and my
work and I look forward to being on your
show in the future and debating some
atheists please let me know when yes
definitely we will Aaron's part of
debate and we invite you and hopefully
by this way with the debating with
scientific arguments with scientific
dialogues we will make a meaningful
contributions and we will build a better
society and here we try to give
opportunity all of the brilliant people
in 110-degree forums and hopefully we
will achieve our goal with the brilliant
effort and with the best effort people
like you
those who will find a solution I will
sum I will just conclude with this by
the way here all all the knowledge in
the world you could have all the
knowledge in the world ok but if you
don't have that connection with the
eternal being it means nothing you can
build a computer a supercomputer which I
write about in my books in terms of AI
and robotics mechanical brainwave you
can have a computer that can have all
the answers to life
but if that isn't connected with the
eternal source it collapses epistemology
which in philosophy is to do with
knowledge if you do not connect all that
knowledge that has been given to you
from the eternal source because all
knowledge comes from the eternal source
that transcends time and space all
knowledge otherwise how do you explain
knowledge it all comes from the eternal
source if you remove God from the
equation knowledge perhaps everything
collapses morality everything you have
chaos so after all I have said in terms
of my my explanation have gone into
science philosophy theology I've touched
on many areas I've tried to condense a
lot into a very tight space and so it's
it's been a pleasure but at the end of
the day if that isn't connected to
theology science and philosophy me
nothing it hovers hopelessly in space
with no connection doesn't mean anything
science and philosophy needs to be
connected to God otherwise it's
meaningless
yes this is very interesting discussions
so definitely we will connect with
science philosophy as well as we will
connect with gods and by this way we
will create better communities so
anybody has better argument anybody want
to do a debate with mr. Anthony I think
he's already and more inherent I'm
willing in an hour's time no problem let
me know just want to say a big thank you
to yourself and to my friend Gary Polk
who who's watching this as I said Gary's
a dear friend is a dear brother is a
fantastic musician and and all my
artwork has been done by Gary so a big
hello to Gary and thank you for watching
Gary thank you thank you thank you for
your time and thank you for your passes
so definitely we going to invite you
future
for traffic and debate Thank You Stan
but you get when you when you get the
Atheist make sure you get the very best
they thank you thank you thank you for
your net
