what's up everybody I am the professor
Judy Giro's Swanson and today we are
going to be covering a very detailed
worked example from physics it is a sort
of homework or exam question that you
may find in classical mechanics or in
statics and it is pertaining to static
friction so if you are in one of those
courses you'll probably find it in the
static friction unit of such courses and
if you got this question on an exam it
would probably be a final exam and if a
teacher is being fair he'd probably give
you 40 minutes for it it looks like a
simple question this is actually the
whole thing about this line but it is
actually sort of hard mode and if you
got this question on an exam you
probably would not want to be writing
this many words on it because you
wouldn't have enough time for that
however I decided that I'm gonna write a
whole lot of words on here is in
addition to the equations and diagrams
and such and I'm also going to be
uploading a scanned version of this so
this tutorial does include a little more
discussion than you'll find on these
papers and then you can watch that and
then afterwards you can read the scanned
version to review it and this example
comes from the book called applied
mechanics for engineering technology by
Keith and Walker eighth edition and it
is number 719 in that book there will
also be some discussion of some topics
you'll typically find in courses other
than statics such as formal logic linear
algebra and TI programming but just
enough of those things to be super
useful if you have not studied any of
these courses even better you're gonna
learn a lot today all right let's have a
look here at what we are being asked to
solve we have this diagram here there's
a ramp block B is resting on top of that
ramp block a is resting on top of Block
B we've got angle 10 degrees here 15
degrees here 15 pounds and 5 pounds and
a force P here and it says determine the
minimum force P that will cause
impending motion the coefficient of
static friction for all surfaces is 0.25
so the way to think of this is first
imagine there is no force there at all
and we just leave these things here now
there are angles but there's enough
friction there that
even though this ramp is that a little
angle there and there's an angle here
there's enough friction that
everything's going to be held static no
sliding yet and now we imagine that we
apply the sports very very gradually
start with one little ounce of force
pushing there when it's one ounce of
force it still won't be enough pushing
to cause some stuff to be moving there
will still be enough friction to keep it
static and we imagine we increase that
force a little bit more a little bit
more and how many pounds will we be have
to be pushing there before something
starts to move and the reason why this
is sort of difficult is because there's
two different ways that it might move
and we don't know which of those is the
one yet so let's call them mode 1 and
mode 2 and now just for a second here
let's imagine that the ramp is made of
rubber let's imagine block a is made of
ice and block B is made of a block of
ice stapled rigidly to a block of rubber
and in this situation the coefficient of
static friction between these two
surfaces would be very great the
coefficient of static friction between
these two surfaces would be very slight
and now imagine that we start pushing
block a with a force in this direction
and clearly block a will slide to the
left there while there still remains
enough static friction here to prevent
any movement between B and the ramp now
let's also consider mode 2 suppose our
ramp is made of ice and suppose that
block a is made of rubber and suppose
that block B is native again if a block
of rubber stapled to a block of ice
rigidly that they act as one body but
now that the rubber is on the top and
the ice is on the bottom okay so and now
we apply a force here and clearly what
will happen is these two will move
together thus there will be sliding
along this pair of surfaces here but
there will be enough static friction on
the rubber to rubber contact that those
will stay together now our question said
that the coefficient of friction for all
surfaces is 0.25 so that's what you'd
get if basically all of them were metal
so that was just a little thought
experiment where we add
and mixing up the surface types and here
we have on one page mode 1 and mode 2
mode 1 sliding here no sliding here
direction of motion here mode 2 sliding
here no sliding here direction of motion
that ok ok and these words here
basically is just what I just said
assume it's static when the force is 0
as its applied there's two different
modes it might move with this is just
defining those two modes in words and
this says you can make any variation of
this you want we just tried varying the
coefficients of friction to get a good
sense of the two ways this might start
moving but you could switch up the angle
say that's 20 degrees and that's 35
degrees you could say this one is 20
pounds and this one's 10 pounds infinite
variations on how you might vary this
and in some of those mode one will
happen and in some of those mode two
will happen okay now our solution
strategy you have to start by guessing
one of the modes let's say p1 is the
amount of force that will cause us to
move assuming mode one is the mode that
will happen p2 is the amount of force
that will cause it to move assuming
assuming mode two is what will happen
now the simplest way to solve this is
find P 1 and find B 2
so that's assume mode 1 find P in that
mode assume mode 2 and find P in that
mode and if you do that you just compare
the two and whichever one is less
corresponds to the mode that will
actually happen and whichever one's more
is the mode that won't happen and
there's a little variation on how you
can do this because what you can do if
you have come up with your first guess
and if you're confident in it let's say
we guess mode 1 and let's say we're
confident in that guess what you can do
assume mode 1 find how much force P
there to cause it to move in mode 1 and
then instead of solving for p2 and doing
all the considerations for mode 2 what
you can do is you can then do a check
and now if this check if it passes then
we know that mode 1 is the mode and we
know the force then we'll have our full
solution and we don't even have to start
calculating things in mode 2 now if you
do mode 1 and then you do the check and
now if that check fails then you that
means
honestly wasn't the mode and then you
have to do calculate mode - anyways so
this is a little gamble and it decides
it depends on how confident you are with
your guests now if you're very confident
you take this gamble and you pass the
check this check is a little less work
than solving for P - so if you win that
gamble then you've saved yourself a
little bit of time if you lose the
gamble if you let's say it can confident
that mode 1 is the mode and then you
solve for mode 1 and do that check and
if that check fails then you have to do
mode 2 and you just cost yourself this
much extra time over this one so this
one you could call it hedging your bets
and this one you could call it putting
some poker chips on your on your first
guess okay still page 1 and at this
bottom of page one I've basically
started explaining that so this is
saying you can solve for P 1 and solve
for P 2 and now on page 2 this says the
second part of the thing I just said it
says you can solve for P 1 and do that
check and then if that check passes then
you don't have to solve for P 2 okay so
let's start with the guests that mode 1
is what will happen and to foreshadow
it's not so in this solution I am going
to be actually doing the gamble we'll do
solve for P 1 and mode 1 and then we'll
do the check and then the check will
fail and then we'll have to solve for P
2 anyways so that's why this is a very
detailed solution and what the first
time I actually came across this one and
insulted my guests actually was mode 1
and then it was wrong and that I did do
that check and then I did do p2 ok so
this again in mode 1 there is impending
motion between a and V and no impending
motion between B and the ramp so
therefore in mode 1 force a friction
when I say F subscript F R that's force
of friction when I say F subscript n
that's force normal or normal force and
a B means the force from a on B so this
and then 1 is short for mode 1 so f FR a
b 1 means the force of friction of a on
B in mode 1 mu is the coefficient of
static friction and force F n a B 1 is
the normal force
of a on be in mode one okay so in mode
one force of friction equals new FN
between a and B but and double use wall
but in mode one force of friction does
not equal new FN between the wall and B
well it's actually a ramp but I always
use W for a wall or a ramp so f FR WB
one means the force of friction of the
rap on Block B in mode one FN w v1 is
force the normal force of the ramp on B
in mode one so what do I mean by this
let's recall very simple situation here
let's say this is a very heavy weight
10000 pounds there's a gravity force on
it pulling down normal force pushing up
and because this is a horizontal surface
the normal force and the gravity force
will be equal and now let's say we push
on this to the side with a very very
light force and let's assume nu is 0.25
it's like metal-on-metal if we push it
with a very very very light force here
there will be a friction force here to
counter that but of course if this is a
very light force and this is 10000
pounds so f normal is 10,000 pounds F
friction is a tiny tiny force obviously
force friction over force normal is not
0.25 it's maybe one over a hundred it's
if I were to push this thing so hard
that motion is impending that's when the
friction force is we say maxed and then
that's when the friction force equals mu
times F n okay so mode one in mode one
we're assuming that as we apply this
force there's going to be sliding of a
over B along B between these two
surfaces because we're assuming that
that means that the force friction there
is maxed which means that between these
two surfaces force friction equals mu
times F n but there's no sliding here
which means the friction here is not
maxed which means that there is some
amount of friction force resisting this
motion here but since it's not maxed
force friction is not equal to mu FN
force friction is less than mu times FN
in mode one assuming that's what happens
and you know as I foreshadowed it's not
what happens but since we're calculating
P for mode one we we use all these
assumptions that pertain to mode one
okay let's get to work if we do a free
body diagram of a and then do force
balances and math we can find min P for
mode one but then a check is necessary
okay so this is body a we got four
forces here the gravity force force P is
inclined ten degrees to the horizon that
way and these two are along with this
surface here this surface is inclined
five degrees to the horizon that way
force friction is in line with it force
normal is perpendicular to it and
they're perpendicular to each other
these two now I said here a B and here
I've said ba okay this a B means of a on
B be a means of B on a and because of
Newton's third law we know those are
equal in magnitude and opposite in
direction so whatever the force of
friction of B on a when we consider B
the force of friction will be in the
opposite direction normal force of be on
a is this way normal force of a on B
when we consider B it will be that way
okay
now we know that force friction is mu
times force normal
that's for these two on between a and B
and we know mu is 0.25 so we know
exactly the ratio of this to this that
means whenever this one appears in an
equation as soon as this appears in an
equation we can just sub in 0.25 times
this so we can always eliminate this in
the equation and turn it into one of
these because of that we can consider
these two as one unknown so how many
unknowns are in this system there's this
one effectively here and one more here
that's a total of two unknowns and if we
do two force balances like in X and Y
for example that's two equations in two
unknowns and that means we can solve for
all of those okay when I said a check is
necessary okay so we got two equations
in two unknowns and we can solve for P
and then we'll have P 1 and then we
wouldn't even have to do a Freebody
diagram of B before finding
however like in that two possible
strategies thing if then you're doing
the hedging your bets mode you just go
right into mode two and do whatever you
need to do to solve for p2 if we're
doing the gamble where you do the check
that means we've got to consider Block B
in mode one and we'll will I'll show you
what that is later what that check is
okay so let's call the orthogonal
directions X&amp;Y and let's define an
inclined coordinate system U and V and
let's say that's incline ten degrees to
the horizon this way that's gonna
isolate this it's not gonna isolate
these but let's just look ahead to our
free body diagram of B it's it's also
gonna line up with these so it's gonna
isolate it's this this and this it's not
gonna isolate these but that's how we
get them the most amount of isolating
things with an inclined coordinate
system now after this solution I'm gonna
show you a solution that relies heavily
on solvers for systems of linear
equations however in this first solution
the first time around I'm gonna assume
that our only algebra skills are adding
subtracting multiplying dividing and
calling sign and Coast I'm not gonna
assume we know any more math than that
so that's why I want to use inclined
coordinate systems to isolate things
because I'm assuming that I want to
simplify the algebra as much as possible
okay and the force normal of a on B and
mode one is equal to the force normal of
be on a in mode one if you replace those
both ones with twos that would also be
true and we know that by way of a
Newton's third law because they're equal
in magnitude and opposite in direction
and a little note on notation we could
use F with a hat to refer to a force of
direction and F just a letter to refer
to just the magnitude or we could use F
just a letter to refer a force of
direction and F between vertical bars to
refer to just the magnitude let's just
use the notation F in all cases or
really in a diagram like this we could
say oh the arrow refers to the direction
and the letter F refers to just the
magnitude in an equation or in a diagram
and now we're not using one name to mean
two different things
okay this here is just needlessly
verbose this shouldn't really be here
it's just saying force friction between
a a B of a on B or of beyond a you
mutants force normal of a on B or of B
on a and both of those are equal to 1/4
times force normal just because mu
equals 1/4 this there's no reason for
that to be there okay
next to page let's resolve force a
gravity force normal beyond a and force
friction of B on a into U and V
components and that's what this is here
so there's a force gravity it's straight
down and we're going u component and V
component there's the force normal it's
up at this angle u component V component
and the force of friction it's at this
angle u component and V component now
remember when you are resolving
something in two components you want the
arrowheads to be like saying this arrow
goes from here to here or this pair of
arrows goes from here to here so this
start and the end in the same place I
mean this path and this path will start
here both end here so you want the
arrowheads like that as opposed to when
you're doing a force balance a geometric
one like let's say you have three forces
and you know that they're balanced and
you want to do a geometric solution to
that then you want the arrowheads going
in a cycle like that okay so make sure
you don't get those mixed up okay now if
you don't want to skip any steps you
know you might say oh yeah what it's
sohcahtoa sighs opposite over hypotenuse
and then solve for that component so
kottoor
coast is adjacent over hypotenuse and
then solve for that component if you are
in grade 10 math then your teacher would
probably want you to show all these
steps but we can skip the little step in
such a small step that you could call it
skipping a half step and you can call
that perfectly acceptable not a big fan
of skipping too many steps but just
remember that when you're breaking
something into components like say U and
V components one of those components is
always going to be the original times
the sine of something and one is always
going to be the original times the coast
of something so you're never gonna have
this term divided by
this term divided by this term okay so
this force here this component is the
original times the coast of this angle
and this component is the original times
the sine of this angle and likewise the
component is the original times the
coast of some angle and the component is
the original times the sine of some
angle okay so this gravity force it's
five pounds and I've reported these
components as 5 sine 10 degrees pounds
and 5 coasts 10 degrees pounds so let's
talk about indicating the units this is
what I just did there and this is
perfectly fine notation you could also
say five pounds sine 10 degrees and five
pounds Coast ten degrees this is
perfectly fine notation as well in both
of these cases it's a force it's in
pounds and the rest of the things are
unitless numbers now you can report
these components says oh this components
five sine ten degrees in this component
is five coasts ten degrees as long as
you put a note somewhere that says all
force units are in pounds this is
acceptable I don't prefer it or if you
really wanted you could report them as
five sine ten degrees in five coasts ten
degrees and not include any note on the
units like saying they're all in pounds
this is not acceptable and some people
will tell you it is acceptable they're
wrong my preference is to indicate units
a lot of the times when it's optional
this is from a different course homework
from a very long time ago but I like to
even go as far as including all these
big convolutions of units here and
making sure they resolve into the unit
type that it is expected I think it's a
useful check as as well as just good
practice and it's sort of like grammar
or let's think of it this way the
classic textbook logical argument
premise one all men are mortal premise
to Socrates is a man therefore
conclusion Socrates is mortal this is a
valid argument the truth of the premises
guarantee you the truth of the
conclusion okay let's say premise one
all men are mortal premise two Socrates
therefore conclusion Socrates is mortal
this is not a valid argument there's
something in this study of logic called
it not even wrong well premise two here
this is not even a statement so it's not
even wrong but it turns the whole thing
into an invalid argument just as well as
if you had an in
a statement there you do get to the
right conclusion but since you bungled
that it turns your whole thing into an
invalid argument likewise if you report
that this force is equal to some
unitless number and then just throw the
word pounds in at the end when you go to
your solution you've just turned your
whole solution into an invalid argument
it's not a cool thing to do you could
call that pedantry i call it good
practice and while we're on that topic
let's also mention keeping exact values
here's what I've just done I've reported
these as five signed 10° pounds in five
Coast 10° pounds if you prefer you can
start throwing in numbers this early
into the solution process if that's what
thrills you you can put these little
equations on the side resolve that into
a rounded number this is a rounded
number it will actually go on forever
because it's a sine of an angle and then
this also rounded number here and then
on your triangle you can say this is
five pounds you can say this is a zero
point eight six eight pounds and you can
say this is four point nine two pounds
and then that gives you a reality check
like that's five four point nine - yeah
that's almost as big as this and this is
about a sixth of that okay so that gives
you a little check if you start
introducing numbers in this early
rounded numbers you'll get more roundoff
error in your result if you don't care
about that then yeah go ahead throw
these numbers in as early as you want
okay and at this time or probably
earlier you might have been thinking
hold on how did you get all those angles
on there how do you how are you sure
those are right no are you getting these
numbers from okay now one of my favorite
things about this question is there's
all these finicky small angles so your
geometry game must be on point in order
to get all the solution stuff so let's
look at this diagram here and let's
consider how we got from the original
diagram to this angles on this free body
diagram of a I copied this straight out
of the book and it draws for speed as
perpend it Sperry well to the top
surface of this ramp and it indicates
the ramp is 10 degrees above the horizon
so that's where I get this 10 here
preference preferentially if I were
designing this thing I would have made a
little indicator there that it's
parallel or drawn another 10 degree
indicator there but
anyways that's where I got that it's
drunk parallel to this which is measured
measured to the horizontal
now this five degree angle how did I get
this this this is the sort of informal
way that I think of it this way so this
is top surface of this ramp is ten
degrees to horizontal
now this indicator here is saying that
this angle the angle of this surface to
this surface is 15 degrees so I just
kind of like think of it this way just
put your hands like this and now for
this 10 degree angle incline on both 10
degrees to that and then for this 15
degree angle incline this one 15 degrees
to that so the 10 of these and 15 of
those well these are in opposite
directions so you can say cancel out of
10 of 1 and 10 or the other and this is
5 degrees left
that's the informal way if you want it
to be more formal about it you could
take this diagram here draw this
horizontal line here and now the top
surface so that route to this I'm
exaggerating the angles here now you can
draw this is 10 degrees and now you can
draw another horizon here and then from
that geometry rule that says ok well
these two are parallel and that's 10
degrees to that so that's 10 degrees to
that and now you can draw this angle
here that's the surfaces a and B where
they meet and now 15 degrees that's
indicated from there to there is 15
degrees and now you get likewise 15 of
these minus 10 of these means this one's
5 degrees okay
geometry games not quite over yet but
that's how we got that 10 degree and
that 5 degree there so let's continue
this on and now ok so the force of
gravity here and I've drawn a 10 2
degree angle there well we defined our U
and V coordinates like this U as 10
degrees above the horizon this way and V
is perpendicular to u which means that
if u is 10 degrees above the horizon
this way then V is 10 degrees this way
of vertical so that's where I got
gravity straight down and V ten degrees
to that so that's where I go that 10
degree angle now let's look at this one
and I'm about to show you a diagram of
this one okay so this one this friction
force it's five degrees to the horizon
it's five degrees to the horizon there
and then you component it's ten degrees
above the horizon so we got the five
degrees below and the ten degrees above
those add up to 15 and now the vertical
ones so if this one is five degrees
below the horizon this way and this is
perpendicular to this so they go like
this so this one's five degrees below
that way which means that this one is
five degrees this way of a vertical line
so this one's five degrees this way of a
vertical line like that and now this
component again because U is ten degrees
above the horizon and V is perpendicular
to u the angle between V and vertical is
ten degrees and now I said I'm gonna
show you a diagram of that there we go
so this five degrees because this is
five degrees this way to vertical
ten degrees because this is ten degrees
this way to vertical you add them up and
the angle of the triangle is 15 degrees
so that's where I got this 15 degrees
likewise a 10 and a 5 is 15 degrees
there oh hey
as with many aspects of this there are
different options on how you can proceed
and get to the the correct answer in a
number of different ways for example I
could have measured all the angles to
the U direction and then called sine and
coast on those for example this triangle
instead of saying that this angle is 10
degrees I could have said this angle is
80 degrees and on this triangle instead
of saying oh this angles 15 degrees I
could have said this angle 75 degrees
and this one 15 degrees so that's this
is the U component measuring this angle
to the U this is the U component of
measuring this angle to the U this is
the U component measuring this angle to
the U if I do this then all these are
measured to the U and then I can say
that all the U components
are gonna call on a coast this is your
component u component u component these
are all gonna call coast and none of
them are going to call sign likewise if
I do that the V components this one this
one in this one all of these are gonna
call sign sign sign and none of the V
components are gonna call cosign that's
a neat little gives you a check because
then when you do the algebra and you do
the force balances you're gonna have one
equation where all that trigonometry
terms are coasts and all the trig
another equation where all the
trigonometry calls our sine however if I
had to pick between back and the way
that I actually did do this I prefer it
this way because this is more intuitive
like I just told you how I reckon those
ten and fifteen degree angles that's the
most intuitive way to reckon those
angles and so if you do it this way the
disadvantage of that is that this is not
so intuitive to say this is 75 degrees
and say this is 80 degrees it's not
quite as intuitive as saying that's ten
degrees and that's 15 degrees so there's
little advantage and disadvantage to
each one if you do it this way you get
the little check with all your cosines
in one line and all your signs and the
other line
but the angles are less intuitive if you
do it this way the angles are more
intuitive but then your equations are
going to each have a mix of sines and
cosines in them and that brings us to
the topic of redundancy in ordinary
parlance stored redundancy has a
negative connotation but in the
engineering's the word redundancy has a
positive connotation for example a large
airplane may have three oil pumps that
are all redundant ly connected to the
same inputs and outputs and that way if
one of them fails you can switch on one
of the other ones and if two of them
fails you can switch on the last one and
that's gonna prevent many people from
dying because if the hydraulic oil pump
on an airplane fails then I can't
control the control surfaces and you'll
crash for sure likewise with the
spiderweb so this is a good spiderweb
this one has fewer radial lines but just
as many circumferential lines as the
good one this one has just as many
radial lines but fewer circumferential
lines than the good one and let's say
that there's one spider who built his
web like this and one who built his web
like this and one who built his
like this if a small and slow-moving fly
bumps into this one another one to this
one another one to this one and all
their spiders are gonna have lunch that
day although if a particularly big and
fast-moving fly hits this one and
another one this one and another one
this one it might break through this one
and break through this one and not break
through this one and if all three
spiders happen to be very hungry that
day this is the one who's gonna survive
and the one who built this one the one
who built this one are gonna starve to
death that day so that isn't as an
example of how redundancy is a very good
thing to have and your brain is shaped
very much like a spider web and having
different ways to traverse it is very
much like how thoughts and reasoning
works and an exam is very much like a
ballistic test of a spider web so just
as the airplane designer who builds
redundancy into his oil pumps just as
the spider who builds redundancy into
his design of his web all survived the
student who builds redundancy into his
synapses will prevail on an exam where
others do not and the way I just showed
you there's different ways to reckon
those angles and callsign and coast on
them
those are redundant ly equivalent if you
know both of those ways you get to
choose which one of those you want to do
and speaking of redundancy how did I
draw this friction force this way and
not this way how do I it's because this
is the right way but how did I know that
okay well there's two redundant ly
equivalent ways to deduce that so this
is body a the forces applied forces this
way so there's going to be a tendency
for it to move this way the body that we
are considering a to move this way the
friction force will be in the direction
opposite to the tenant's the direction
of the tendency for this one to move
another way you can figure the same
thing is you can think of B is going to
be moving this way relative to a so you
imagine like I mean B is gonna be a
static to the ramp it is gonna be
sliding over there but if you imagine
you attack
Jahlil camera onto a that always moves
along with a what that camera is going
to see it's going to appear that B is
moving this way relative to a so you can
also say that the friction force is in
the same direction as the way that the
other body is moving relative to this
one so if you understand it in both of
those ways you have that redundancy and
you can just check both of those and
make sure that they agree and by the way
if you got the wires crossed in your
brain and you think that uh oh well a is
B is moving this way relative to a so
the friction force is in the opposite
direction well you just got it all mixed
up but anyways there's a huge number of
those redundancies that go into a
solution like this and if you strive to
have redundancies in the way you
understand things you are going to avoid
a lot of mistakes throughout a solution
like this
okay returning to the page we were on I
mentioned we're gonna do a pair of force
balances and you might be wondering um
we have three balances we can do on each
body like normally it's a balance the
forces in the X direction and the y
direction and moments around some given
point on any given body well in the way
the questions posed we didn't get any
distance units it doesn't tell us how
tall this is or how far anything is from
anything else so if we were to do
moments around any given point on any
given body that's gonna result in a
bunch of unknowns and basically it's
never gonna get us any inferences it's
never gonna give us any clues that help
us combine with anything else so this is
always gonna be a dead end if you take
moments around any point on any given
body in this in this problem so normally
do forces balances in x and y or since
we defined our incline coordinate system
U and V you can do force balance and u
and force balance and B if you do all
four of these than two of those are
gonna equations that result from that
are gonna be redundant ly equivalent to
two of the other equations in that
sentence the word redundant does have a
negative connotation so anyways we're
gonna do these two force balances on a
and that's going to give us two
equations and that's the best we can do
that way and on body B we're going to do
these two force Bal
and in total that's gonna be for
equations from from balances and that's
the most we can do that are gonna be
useful okay
onward now we have U and V components
for this this and this that it's the
gravity the force friction the force
normal between a and B additionally we
have expressed friction force friction
VA and its components in terms of force
normal da oh yes right so there's a few
things I didn't mention here
I did mention all this and all this and
like I said as soon as they see force
friction in an equation we're gonna sub
in 0.25 times force normal as soon as we
can so this u component is V component
one was force friction Coast fifteen one
is force friction sine 15 now right away
we're going to say actually it's zero
point two five times force normal times
Coast fifteen and 0.25 times force
normal times sine 15 so now this this
this and this are all expressed in term
in terms of force normal none none are
expressed in terms of force friction now
okay so we're gonna do a pair of force
balances on a like I said that's two
equations in two unknowns and force P
has no V component because it's already
in line with you at that angle and so
this system is a little easier than a
general two equations two unknowns
system we can do force balance in the V
direction on a and get some results and
then do the force balance in the other
direction and just have one unknown and
solve for that now and here's here we
start to do that so what I've done here
is I've gone general than specific so
I've I've outlined the plan and then
executed it now if your understanding of
this stuff is shaky you would probably
prefer that I show you this specific and
then the general as in do these
equations solve for whatever thing and
then explain like why that approach was
the one that works if your understanding
of this stuff is strong then you
probably prefer that I go general than
specific okay that brings us to this
topic of progress improvement in your
understanding solution by dead reckoning
what does this mean solution bite
reckoning means you get the question and
you just start throwing some drawing
some Freebody diagrams writing the
balanced equations and the equations and
then you see what's up you look at those
equations and you think okay well it
looks like I'd be able to solve for the
thing I'm trying to get by doing this
okay if you want to improve the way to
do that is practice redundancy and
introspection and and if you do these
practices you will be able to do a
solution by planning first now you might
be at this level right now or you might
be at this level right now if you are at
this level right now I would recommend
that you strive to be at this level
sometime soon if you are at this level
now I would be willing to bet that you
started sometime before at this level
and then did these things to achieve
this if you are good enough that you can
do a solution by planning first that's
less waste of time because you know
which things are gonna be dead ends and
then you don't bother indulging in those
dead ends and all the things you do are
things that are getting you toward the
solution so practice there's no
substitute for practice if you're gonna
be able to plan ahead it's because you
have so much practice that you know what
things are gonna turn into redundancy
like I said have multiple ways of
understanding how a thing works then you
can you can pick between them you can
figure out which ones have advantages
you want and then pick which one you
want that's gonna work better
introspection means that as once you get
a solution so you're doing some homework
once you get a solution don't throw that
away and just start doing your next
homework question look at your solution
and ask yourself why which things led to
dead ends which parts of these led to
the steps that got me to those solution
and why okay so this is the direction of
get good and these are necessary but not
sufficient conditions that means if you
want to get good you need to do these
things although there are other things
you need to do such as you know
understanding the concepts in the course
being able to type quickly on a
calculator and all the rest okay
[Applause]
so some of forces in the V Direction
equals zero for body a now in this line
of said the force normal equals the
force gravity V component plus the force
friction V component of the component of
each of those
that's because let's see the V component
this ones down down in a little to the
right this one's down a little to the
right this one's up and a little to the
left and by the way these forces are not
drawn to scale because there's so many
tiny tiny angles I haven't drawn these
to scale if I drew these to scale this
triangle would be exactly a quarter of
the size of this one but you know if
this is about as small as you want to
draw a triangle on this page and I
didn't want to draw this one like what
that'd be like this big so I didn't draw
these two scale components are too
scaled to the diagonals anyways
so on this side of the equation I have
put the one that's up on a little to the
left and on this side of the equation I
have put the two terms that are down and
a little to the right now there's a
redundant ly equivalent way you could
have done this and that is you call the
force balance and then you say this term
minus this term minus this term equals
zero so this one's positive because it's
in this way this one's negative because
it's this this way and this one's
negative cuz it's this way okay now this
is this is sort of better practice
because this this equation does mirror
this equation you've put a sum of a
bunch of things here and a zero on this
side and then you start rearranging them
so this is one of another one of those
things that's sort of like skipping a
half step you could say it's a matter of
preference or you could say that yeah
this one's kind of skipping a half step
so the way I do it is the force is one
way on one side of the equal sign the
force is the other way on the other side
of the equal sign and then start
rearranging again both of those methods
are gonna get you to the same answer you
decide which one's your preference okay
so force is one way on this side equal
forces the other way on that side I want
to isolate for force n be a 1 so I'm
gonna move this friction term to the
left side because now we're gonna
express this V component as
normal times the coast of that angle the
V component of force friction is a
quarter times force normal times the
sine of that angle and fee component two
gravities this
I'm just ripping those all from here
that we've already expressed that way
and now to isolate this we can just
factor out the force NDA x in brackets
the multipliers this from this and this
and this from this equals this and
that's just some number and the unit's
pounds and now finally to isolate this
divide all by this so we got four NBA
equals this stuff over this stuff and
that's what this is these now are all
numbers you can plug these into your
calculator and get five point four six
four pounds and now when we do the force
balance in the U Direction now the P
term is there but we've just solved for
this and we know this is a quarter of
this and this has given all along so now
there's only one equation left and one
unknown left and we got one an unknown
in one equation we can definitely solve
for this now so we got first the balance
p1 was the call in this direction left
in a little down and on the same side of
this equation force gravity U component
left and a little down on this side of
the equal sign force normal U component
right and a little up force friction U
component right and a little up so these
are the ones that are this way and these
are the ones that are this way okay now
isolate p1 by subtracting this at that
side and now express the U components in
terms of these things we've already done
force normal sine 15 quarter or force
normal close 15 is 5 sine 10 degrees
pounds and now factor this out to make
it as clean as possible these are the
multipliers of this and though these are
all numbers this is five point four six
four that we just got from the last
equation and these are all numbers and
sine and cosine of numbers that you can
type into your calculator finally get
the value of p1 and the reason why I'm
doing this with gloves on is because I
have a lot of like scars all over my
hands and arms if you saw me with shorts
leaves and no gloves on you'd think I
look like a drug addict those scars are
because of something I call speed
training a certain type of speed
training called cat kung fu it's a type
of speed training that will make you
very fast it will also make you very
stepped it's also a tip of the hat to my
heart I guess okay we salt 4p1
the amount of force P that will cause
motion assuming mode one is what happens
careful that's the meaning of that we
don't know if mode one will happen
maybe mode two will happen we have not
yet determined whether mode one or mode
two will happen so this is that check
thing now if you're doing the hedge your
bets mode and this is when you'd go
straight to mode to solve for P two and
then just compare P 1 and P 2 so this is
that check that's gonna be a little
quicker we're gonna draw a Freebody
diagram of B and solve for these two
things and then we're gonna compare them
the friction force between the wall and
B and the normal force between the wall
and B if force friction is less than Mew
force normal between the wall and B that
means the friction between the B and the
round is indeed sufficient to keep B
static as a slides over B if we solve
for these and find that force friction
is greater than mu times force normal
that means there never was enough
friction between B and the ramp to hold
that still as mode one happens and mode
one is not what happens okay and so
here's our free body diagram this was
given the weight of B these we just
solved for force friction between a and
B well we solved for of B on a force
normal which was this way now this is
equal in magnitude opposite in direction
we solved for force friction of B on a
which is this way this is equal
magnitude opposite direction so we know
their magnitudes and their directions
this is just our U and V components
again recall in mode one force friction
equals mu times force normal between a
and B but force friction does not equal
mu times force normal between the wall
and B so we do not know the ratio of
this to this this does not equal a
quarter of this so how many unknowns are
here one two these are two unknowns and
we can do to force balances and we'll
get two equations and two unknowns
and even nicer these directions are in
line with these directions so if we do a
force balance in the V Direction this
one won't be present we can solve for
this one do a force balance in the U
direction and this one will be present
and we can solve for this one
okay let's resolve the force gravity and
force normal a b and force friction AV
into U and V components sort of
redundant not really redundant but this
is just this but the other way around
this was this way this comes this way
this is just this but the other way
around so this one's this way whereas
that one was that way and very similar
things here the force gravity on a was
five pounds force gravity on B was 15
pounds components worked very similarly
now force balance in the V Direction so
force normal wall B was that way and
it's all exactly in the V direction
that's why we didn't have to resolve it
and draw triangle that way force
friction AV is this way an equal sign so
the one on this side down and write this
one down and write very similar
rearrangements that we just seen we're
gonna express force friction in terms of
force normal so these are all numbers
and this is the one we just found on the
previous page or two pages ago and you
can plug that into a calculator get this
value for force normal wall be some of
the forces in the y-direction equals
zero force friction wall B again that
was exactly in the U direction so we
didn't draw a triangle for it and that
one was this way that's the only thing
on this side of the equals sign because
this one and this one and this one down
and left left and down left and down
okay very similar rearrangement thing
again and we've now solved for force
friction wall B note these values of
force normal wall B and force friction
will be for mobile and are speculative
as part of our check to determine if
mode one is the right mode
[Applause]
okay I just sent a bunch of this stuff
if it's less than 0.25 then mode 1 is
indeed the mode cuz there's more than
friction there if it's more than 0.25
then there was never enough friction
between the wall and B for mode 2 I
promoted one okay
so force friction wall B / force normal
wall B in mode 1 is it less than 0.25
here's those numbers we just got on the
previous page and we take the quotient
of them and it's zero point two seven so
now we have 0.2 7 is less than 0.25 no
our check has failed so the inequality
0.2 7 is less than 0.25 indicates an
impossibility it means that there was a
false assumption the false assumption
was the assumed premise that mode 1 is
the mode and now as I said we're gonna
learn some formal logic since the
assumed premise of mode 1 has led to an
impossibility we now know the assumed
premise was wrong mode 1 is not the mode
since there are only 2 possible modes
and we just proved it's not mold 1 then
it must be mode 2 I'm also overcome
until now was under the false premise
there is a much work left to find min P
for mode 2 although less diversions in
this discussion of it ok well I said
there's gonna be just enough formal
logic linear algebra and TI programming
discussion to be super useful that might
have been a lie this little formal logic
diversion is mostly just for fun not
particularly useful but I want to show
you we're gonna learn informal logic if
you ever take that course so we had mode
1 now this was an assumed premise
assumed premise was that mode 1 might be
the one that happens and let's just see
what it leads to and then there was led
us to a bunch of things and then from
that we concluded the 0.27 is less than
0.25 this is a contradiction when an
assumed premise leads to a contradiction
you draw a line like that and that means
that whatever your assumed premise was
was wrong because it led to a
contradiction so then we can say it is
not the case that mode 1 happens and
from much earlier we also said that
either mode 1 will happen or mode 2 will
happen and since we proved here that
mode 1 does not happen this is called
well this this part was called a
reductio ad absurdum and
you combine this statement with a
statement a theater was mode one or it
was mode two it was not mode one
therefore its mode to this little
logical argument is called a disjunctive
syllogism and this is what I just said
all this stuff here we've proved that
mode two is the mode if you find this
formal logic stuff arousing then please
take a course on formal logic especially
if you are a student in university for
engineering and a course on formal logic
is not part of the curriculum please
take one anyways and while you're at it
kick your course direct curriculum
designer in the balls for me while
you're at it
okay analysis of mode two begins and
let's recall that in mode two there's
the force there there's sliding here
between B and the ramp no sliding here
between a and B so they're sliding
together like that with no relative
motion between them because the sliding
is here there is the friction force
there will be a mak'st which means the
force friction equals nu times force
normal here between V and the ramp but
because there is no sliding here the
friction force there is not next which
means that the friction force does not
equal meu time sports normal they're
ideally if if everything is gone right
if force friction will be less than mu
times force normal there so in mode 2 we
do know the ratio of the friction force
to the normal force here it's 1/4 we do
not know the ratio of the friction force
to the normal force here in mode 2 and
that's what all this says now on the
next page this is another one of those
things where I'm gonna explain the plan
of attack for how to work out all the
algebra before showing you the algebra
and if your level of proficiency on this
is less than proficient you would
probably prefer that maybe I show you
that algebra first and then explain why
that plan of attack worked let's just
look ahead a little bit so on the next
page we do start that algebra after
explaining that plan of attack on the
next page after that we get to the
answer in a box on the next page after
that page 10 now we do some redundant
checks just to make sure all parts of
that solution are consistent and then on
page 11 and 12 we do an alternate
solution and we're in that alternate
solution we are going
to use a solver for systems of linear
equations and if you don't know what
that is good news you're about to learn
what that is once we get to those those
pages page 11 and 12 okay and also uh
another one of those random student
things skills is if you have an ordered
stack of papers and you move one from
the top to the bottom it first preserves
the order but also if you take any
number of them and move them from the
top to the bottom it still preserves the
order so the whole time I'm doing this
just pick up any number of them move
them from the top to the bottom they're
still in order okay might help you
someday or at least uno eleven you just
go like that
okay page number number Seven's okay
that's plan of attack so let's look at
those Freebody diagrams again there's B
and there's a okay and we're gonna start
using the subscript two because now it's
mode two whereas before we were using
the subscript one to indicate mode one
and here's those two Freebody diagrams
from before these will have ones in the
subscripts because I didn't redraw them
but now if you imagine all these ones in
this subscripts are now two then
basically we have our three Freebody
diagrams for mode two now in mode one we
knew the the ratio of one of these to
the other the friction force and normal
force between a and B so we could treat
these two as one unknown we could treat
these two as one unknown but now in mode
two we do not know the ratio of one to
the other so we've got to treat these as
two different unknowns treat these as
two different unknowns although in mode
2 as in mode one these two are equal in
magnitude and opposite in direction the
forces from a on B and the forces from
be on a equal in magnitude and opposite
in direction these two as well equal
magnitude and opposite in direction so
we can treat these as the same item when
we're dealing with just the magnitudes
tree these two is the same item and mode
one we did not know the ratio of these
two the force friction and the force
normal between the ramp and B in mode
two we do know the ratio of these this
is a quarter of this
so in mode two we can treat these two as
one unknown
now I've been making a lot of use of
this talk of X number of linear
equations and Y number of unknowns if
you haven't heard of this stuff before
great you're gonna learn a lot today but
when x equals y when I'm saying the
number of equations is equal to the
number of unknowns then we can solve for
the values of all the unknowns like all
the times that I said one equation and
one unknown or two equations and two
unknowns we could solve for all of those
values when Y is greater than X in other
words the number of unknowns is more
than the number of equations then we
can't solve for the values of all the
unknowns and in general we can't solve
for any of the values for example if
when I say one equation in two unknowns
or two equations in three unknowns or
five equations in twenty-one unknowns
that means we can't solve for them and
have to do something else if we want to
get those values and there was an
asterisk here when they got equal
numbers of equations two unknowns you'll
be able to solve for all of them unless
you some of your equations are redundant
ly equivalent in which case it's gonna
count as you have fewer of them or if
they're contradictory if you have two
statements that are leading you to
contradictory conclusions then either
you've made a mistake somewhere or the
guy who posed the question to you is
lying or has crafted a his problem wrong
okay and I've assumed where we don't
know how to use a solver for systems of
linear equations and I'm assuming we
have only the most rudimentary of
algebra skills so I've optimized this
solution to be as easy as possible on
the algebra although it does get pretty
intense that way because this is a tough
problem to solve
okay so let's suppose we do two force
balances on this and two force balances
on this how many equations is that for
how many unknowns is that the P two is
one these are two and these two count is
1 so that's one one more and two more
for a total of force we'll have four
equations and four unknowns which means
we can solve for all of those but if we
have only the rudimentary algebra skills
we can't solve a general system of four
equations and four unknowns so we'll
have to have some kind of plan of attack
for isolating one at a time or something
like that so let's consider just a if we
do two force balances on this how many
unknowns one two
three that's two equations three
unknowns so it's not going to be that
easy if we do two force balances on this
how many unknowns is that one two three
that's two equations three unknowns it's
not going to be that easy okay so that's
what all this says now what exactly is
meant by counting two unknowns as one
because we know the ratio of the one to
the other what it means technically is
we have five equations in five unknowns
so those unknowns are one two three four
five and those five equations are a
couple of force balances on body B a
couple of force balances on body a and
the equations force friction wall b2
equals mu times force normal wall b2
with mu being unknown value but this
equation is so simple that as soon as we
see force friction wall d2 in an
equation we're right away just gonna sub
in a quarter of force normal wall d2 so
we know that we can just get this thing
out of any equations as soon as we see
it and then this will be one of the
other unknowns and then we say that um
well ignore this and we got four
equations the two bounces on the two
bodies each in four unknowns counting
these two as one well technically we
have seven equations and seven unknowns
those because we were treating these two
is one thing and these two is one thing
but if you want to treat them as two
different things because they do have
two different names these are two
different names one goes a B one goes ba
and these are two different names oh
then how many unknowns you got one two
three four five six seven unknowns and
our seven equations are the two force
balances ohne the two force balances on
b force friction equals mu times force
normal for between the wall and b and
force normal a b equals force normal ba
and force friction a b equals force
friction ba so really really technically
we've got these seven equations and
seven unknowns but because all these
three equations are so simple we
treating that as four equations and four
unknowns effectively and treating it
that way does work okay okay plan of
attack
and I'm not gonna read you that
paragraph I've got a little point form
version of it here okay so as I said if
we do the pair of force balances on B
we'll have one equation in we'll have
two equations and three unknowns that's
one two and three and what we can do is
we can boil that down to one equation in
two unknowns see if we do the force
balance in the V Direction here that'll
be one two three unknowns and if we do
the force balance in the U direction
that will be one two three unknowns and
then if we take that first equation and
we express it as this is some function
of these two things and then the second
of those we got this we sub it in for
1/4 of these and now we get this in the
form of this equals some other function
of these two things so that's what I'm
saying here one of those is gonna be
this is some function of these two
things that other equation is gonna get
us to the same thing equals some other
function of these two to same unknowns
and then because this equation has just
one of these guys on the left and this
equation has just one of these guys on
the left this equals this so this equals
this we equate these two and that's what
this line is function one of these two
things equals function two of these two
things and these two are these two so
now this is one equation in two unknowns
force normal
a B and force friction a V then we can
do force balance in the V Direction on a
force P will not be present in that one
because it is already in line with you
so the force balance in the V direction
will have one equation and two unknowns
one equation in two unknowns force
normal be a and force friction be a so
our two force balances on be boiled down
to this one equation in these two
unknowns our force balance in the V
direction on a boiled down to one more
equation in these two unknowns and hey
what do you know the same two unknowns
so you combine this equation and this
equation and that is now two equations
in the two unknowns the force normal and
force friction between a and B then we
can solve for those and then we have
only
one force balance left in our arsenal
the force balance in the U Direction for
body a and we just solve for these two
we've got values for them
that leaves one remaining unknown that
balance will become one equation in one
unknown p2 and we can solve for the
value of it and that's what all this
says now do we are going to set up these
equivalency things for the components
and we can just adapt those from before
if we have them be okay
these U and V components for force
gravity are all the same U and V
components for force normal are all the
same only now we're just turning these
subscript ones into subscript twos
that's what all this is I didn't put
subscript ones and twos for the force of
gravity because it's equal in both modes
now up here when we did the force
friction remember in mode one we knew
that force friction equals a quarter of
force normal so we put those values in
right up in this step but now force
friction between a B is not some known a
ratio to force normal and so here in
these components we've stopped short of
that so now we're just saying this but
with a subscript two equals this but
with a subscript two and likewise for
this one okay next force balance is I'm
not going to go through all the
particulars every time but we do force
balance in the V Direction on body B
things in one way on one side of the
equals sign things the other way on the
other side of the equals sign we want to
isolate one of these on this side so
we're gonna subtract this from both
sides to put it there that's what this
is and now sub in all these equivalent
things so this line Express doesn't
express things in terms of components
anymore it expresses it in terms of
unknowns we want x trig functions and we
have now isolated one of these on the
left side force balance in the U
direction on B forces one way on one
side forces the other way on the other
side sub in a quarter of
for normal well b-24 force friction wall
b2 and sub in these equivalent things
four components here and finally gonna
multiply both sides by four in order to
get one of these on the left and that's
what this is these things are all these
multiplied by four and now we got this
equation is one of these things on the
Left equals all this this equation is
one thing this is one thing on the Left
equals all this and these are in terms
of the same unknowns so now because this
is the same as this we can say that all
this must equal all this and that's what
the next line is it says that all this
equals all this now what we have done
we've gotten this far in this plant so
we did the two force balances on B and
what we've just done is boiled that down
to one equation in two unknowns by
saying this one function of these two
unknowns is equal to this function of
these two unknowns now to prepare it for
combining later wanna isolate again so
we've got these two unknowns force
normal a b2 and force friction a v2 I am
going to choose to try to isolate force
normal a b2 onto the left side so
there's force normal a b2 there's these
two terms one on each side of the equal
sign so you're gonna subtract this from
both sides and that's that these two are
these two but this moved over to this
side force friction a p2 we've got one
term on each side of the equal sign as
well we want to put them both on the
right side of the equal sign so we're
gonna subtract this from both sides and
now that's what this is these two are
these two but with this on this side of
the equal sign and finally the constant
terms this one is this and we want to
put this on the right so subtract this
from both sides these two constant terms
become these two constant terms so now
we got force normal a be two terms on
the left everything else on the right
now we're going to factor out force
normal a b2 so this is now force normal
82 times this thing in brackets this
comes from this comes from this comes
from this force friction a b2 we want to
factor that out as well so this force
friction a b2 times this thing in
brackets this comes from this this comes
from this look these the same in this
step and now we can finally express
force normal a b2
the left side of the equal sign by
dividing all terms by this
so this says force normal a b2 equals
this quotient of force friction a b2
this quotient is simply this over this
and this constant term is simply this
over this and now we have force normal a
b2 equals some function or force
friction a b2 and you may have noticed
that I like to keep things in exact form
for perhaps a little longer than ideal
but in the very next step I do around
these so this next line just says all
this stuff equals is approximately and
squiggly equal sign by the way equals
negative fifty nine point four four five
and all this equals approximately sixty
two point seven seven one so now we got
this equals some function of this and
now next thing to do is force balances
on a of course first we'll get these
component equivalences already and like
wise they are adapted from an earlier
page directions are all the same these
all same as these these same as these
just so then the two for the one and
remember we don't equivocate force
friction VA with a quarter of force
normal da in mode 2 so we stop there
that terms that term stop here this term
is this term okay
force balance in the V Direction forces
one way on one side forces the other way
on the other side we want to isolate
force normal be a two on one side which
it already is there so this is just
subbing in the values for components so
we expressing these in terms of the
unknowns we want instead of in terms of
components and to isolate this on one
side we just divide all by this so now
we got this equals this function of this
sub in approximate values now so this is
approximately 0.26 and this is
approximately 5.0 nine and now we have
from our pair of
force balances on B this is some
function of this from our one force
balance on a we got this is some
function of this and what do you know
this equation has force normal a B two
on one side this equation has just force
normal a B two on this side because this
is clearly the same as this that means
all this equals all this and that's what
the next line says is that all this is
equal to all this finally collect like
terms there's one of these on this side
one of these on this side to add this
many to both sides get that on that term
there's a constant on both sides and
subtract this from both sides get that
on that term and then finally divide
both sides by this and we have my value
for force friction be a two and that is
approximately zero point nine six five
eight five pounds and now if we want to
get the value for force NBA two we'll
need that later that is a very simple
matter of taking this value and plug it
into this equation and you will get five
point whatever for this optionally you
could also take the same value plug it
into that equation and we hope as long
as we haven't made any mistakes that
both of these equations will come up
with the same value if you plug this
into this or plug this into this and
that will be this one this many okay now
there's only one force balance left that
we can possibly do I should mention in
the question it should have mentioned
that assume that sliding will occur and
that tipping will not occur and it's
gonna depend on the dimensions of these
boxes like it didn't say they're
dimensions which means that and you know
you never should never scale off the
diagram which means that these boxes
might be very narrow and tall or they
might be very stout and wide if they're
actually very narrow and tall then
you're gonna get tipping if they're very
stout and wide you're gonna get sliding
so they should have said assume sliding
and no tipping anyways final force
balance left we can do you Direction
balance on a forces one way I know one
side forces the other way on the other
side and we just got the values of these
two here
I want to isolate this one file unknown
on the left by subtracting this from
both sides put it on that side and now
Express the components in terms of the
unknowns we want and the trig functions
and would you look at that this is known
this is a number this is known this is
some number this is this and all these
are numbers now type that into your
calculator and you get the value of P 2
equals one point four five pounds and
we're gonna mention the mode here but
you know the question had no mention of
mode 1 and mode 2 of those are some
nomenclature that we made up along the
way so we want to express our answer in
terms of things that make sense given
just the question such as a and B slide
together down the ramp with no relative
motion between a and B which is our
verbal definition of mode 2 and since P
2 is less than P 1 that means P 2 is the
mode that will happen which means that
this is the answer we want and speaking
of keeping exact numbers or introducing
rounded numbers and when you should do
that it's likely that different teachers
will want you to take different
approaches that way and if you've got
different teachers for different courses
that's a good thing because different
approaches that way are appropriate for
different courses for example in
calculus class you probably want to keep
your a numbers in exact form even to the
one you're reporting the solution at the
end like if you're learning how to do
derivatives of trigonometric functions
it wouldn't make sense to start putting
in rounded values or as early as
possible
in a course like this statics or other
physics courses I think it's pretty
typical that a teacher will want you to
report the solution to three sig figs
and then if you're doing that well if
you if you're putting in rounded numbers
early or even in the middle of this game
and you're only reporting them to three
digits and then you're typing them into
your calculator into three digits you're
gonna have a lot of roundoff error and
your solution that your report is
probably only going to be good to two
digits your third digits probably going
to be off whereas when you introduce the
approximated numbers if you keep them to
five sig figs and keep typing them into
your calculator as five sig figs and
then only round down to three once
you've got the solution that you're
reporting right at the end then this is
likely to be good to three sig figs and
I think I had one teacher once who said
report your answer to three sig figs
and then I was doing stuff like this
keeping five and in the intermediate
values and then he was docking mark
saying oh you reported those two too
many sig figs and then instead of
starting to report intermediate values
to three sig figs what I would do is I
put a little note by the solution saying
this solution is reported to three sig
figs whereas more digits are shown in
the intermediate values just in order to
reduce roundoff error and then I would
continue to report these two five in
this two three and because of that note
there he stopped talking marks that is
very stupid but yeah if you teachers
want you to do the one way for calculus
course in another way for the physics
course that makes perfect sense and as
you may have noticed this is not just a
walkthrough on how to do one physics
thing there has also been much
discussion on a requisite skills and
such a set of discussions would not be
complete without some words on
calculator kung-fu and I have not yet
typed anything into the calculator so
what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna show you
how to calculate that in exact form not
because that's there's any good reason
for that but just to give you an idea of
how nimble you want to be on the
calculator and bear with me for just one
second because I'm working with some
awkward angles here with the lamp and
stuff but recall when you call a
trigonometric function on the ti-84
acket or you can just type in sine of
some number a no closing bracket and the
closing bracket is implied but if you
have to type in anything after that
likes let's say for example I want to
say sine of 10 plus cos of 10 I would
you go sine of 10 closing bracket plus
Coast of 10 but then that other second
closing bracket can be implied okay so
let's see this should be an angle okay
negative for coasts 15 closing bracket
minus sine 15 equals / opening bracket
for sine 15 closing bracket minus Coast
15 and that's the right number now I'm
just going to go negative answer I'm
gonna stow that as ages because I want
to stow these those positive values and
now let's continue 15 coasts 10 degrees
closing bracket -6
sighing 10° implied closing bracket
equals answer / open and closing bracket
for sine 15 degrees closing bracket -
coast 15 degrees and that is the right
number I'm going to stow that as beat
and next one is simply signed 15 closing
bracket / Coast 15 implied closing
bracket and then I'm gonna stow that as
sea and then the last term there is five
Coast 10° closing bracket / Coast 15
equals and I'm gonna stow that as D and
I'm gonna cheat here because I have this
written down a plus C and I'm gonna stow
that as E and now B minus D and I'm
gonna stow that as F and finally F / E
oh there it is 0.9 6 5 8 5 and plus
whatever comes after that and now I said
exact form but the calculator isn't
actually storing this in exact form in
terms of actually still remembering that
it's a sine of an angle and a Coast of
an angle but what it does is it keeps
this to at least this many decimal
places it reports 10 and then is keeping
one or two more so what this really is
doing is it's rounding off just like
this is rounding off but this is
rounding it off to approximately twelve
digits whereas this is fine okay and now
onward what this says yeah p2 is less
than p1 so then we know mode two is the
mode and that force is lighter than the
other one so this is the answer we want
that means that as you gradually apply
that force from nothing to a little more
to a little more the thing starts moving
when it's not many and it moves in that
mode okay so that's all this we don't
need to do another check because we
found both p1 and p2 but let's do a page
of redundant checks here and we're gonna
compare force friction with force normal
between a and B that's the ratio that we
don't know yet and let's take those two
numbers that we just found on the
previous page divide them and you get
0.18 which is less than 0.25 which means
that check passes speaking of that check
and that gambit from before of course
there is a perfect mirror image to that
just like every gamblers fallacy has
perfect mirror symmetry this gambit also
does that was a horrible comparison and
completely pointless but let's say if we
did mode 2 first and if we want to hedge
our bets we'd go find P 2 then P 1 and
just compare them but if we want it to
gamble we can do a check after P 2 and
then if that passes then we know the
force 2 and this check tells us that
mode 2 is indeed the mode and if that
check fails then we have to solve for
this one anyways and it cost us that
much extra work although in mode 2 that
check is a tiny amount of work because
we've already solved for those things so
that's that gambit if we had started
with mode 2 found all those things
divided that and found that this is less
than this then that would confirm that
mode 2 is the mode and we wouldn't have
to do any of the calculations of mode 1
we could report our answer and know that
mode 2 is the mode right and what that
means is that the friction between a and
B is not maxed which means that the
surface to surface contact between a and
B is more than friction e enough to keep
prevent a relative motion between a and
B as B slides relative to the ramp next
more redundant checks is I've calculated
the values for our five unknowns we
actually didn't calculate these but we
calculated these three if you just take
these and throw them into earlier
equation equations and crunch those you
get these values that I've kept them to
the 12 digits that this thing stores and
now I've got the force balances here in
their original forms that I had them in
right after calling the balance so now
we can confirm things like D plus a sine
15 is equal to B Coast 15 plus 15 coast
10 these two numbers are exactly equal
to the number of digits shown and you
can do the same for these confirm that
all these are fully consistent another
redundant check that I've done is a a
geometric proof I have drawn all these
forces with their angles and at a scale
of 1 centimeter for 1 pound and now we
can confirm things like a is 5 pounds B
is 15 pounds and this is like three
times that and then the force friction
between wall and B and force normal
between wall and B we think that's
exactly a quarter so they go like this
and like this that's one of these two
one two of these and two a two is four
yeah that's a quarter of that and then
the force friction between a and B and
the force friction between a B and a
equal in magnitude opposite in direction
force normal between a and B force
normal between B na equal in magnitude
and opposite in direction and we'd hope
that this is less than a quarter of this
and if you go yeah one of these two two
and four yeah it's less than four these
two one of these so all these things
check and like I said before if you got
those arrowheads in a cycle like this
arrows pointing this way this arrow
pointing this way in this arrows
pointing this way so it's like a cycle
that means that all these balances all
these forces balanced to equilibrium and
likewise these arrowheads are all on a
cycle so that's a whole bunch of
redundant checks just to make sure that
all parts of the solution are consistent
okay and finally we have an alternate
solution here this one's much quicker
suppose we know how to use a solver for
systems of linear equations and suppose
we had guessed mode to first system of
two equations and two unknowns okay TI
calculator doesn't come with solvers but
it comes with something really close so
you can program them in very easily if I
want to call my solver for systems of
two equations in two unknowns I'll press
the program button I have a very long
list of programs here I could scroll all
the way down to the letter S or I could
just type in letter S and then it will
give me the program starting with ads
and I can scroll down to salt to 2
that's my solver for a system of two
equations and two unknowns a little
quicker is what I've staked a program
called a so I just go program and then
enter in a program is one symbol and a
is one symbol which means you can
overwrite that with the name of
you want so I do is just program enter
left arrow and then I type in Sawle - -
salt - - and that brings up my solver
for system of two equations in two
unknowns let's use an example here
here's a system of two equations in two
unknowns 7x plus 3y equals 1 4 X + 9 y
equals 2 and now if I just go 7 enter 3
enter 1 enter 4 enter 9 enter 2 enter
and then it says these two values and
that's and save them as x + y so now I
can call X or Y and it's the same
numbers now I can confirm 7 x + 3 y
equals 1 4 X + 9 y sorry I'm looking
through the camera lens this time so I'm
very clumsy on the calculator this time
okay so that confirms those that means
that anytime you have a system of two
equations and two unknowns if you just
set them up into this format and you
just programmed that into your
calculator then all you got to do is
call that program and type in the
numbers just like reading them off there
okay a very similar for a system of
three equations and three unknowns it's
it's like okay I've got three equations
with three unknowns I set them up into
this form I know that this many X's and
this many Y's and this may sets equals
this amount and this many X's viola I'll
send them up all nice like that what
values of x and y&amp;z will solve that and
oh yeah this is how I write it when I'm
detailing a solution they'll put a
little star is a three equation three
unknown solution that means I called my
calculator for this and the calculator
is going to give us this I'm assuming we
we know this much and then we want to
find these and that is as simple as
going program oh three three seven and
89 94 or 41 just like you're reading
them right off the thingy 92 and 80 Oh
86
4:21 4637 89 and okay it looks like that
worked and those are saved as x y&amp;z now
I can go 7x what Beck I'm looking
through the lens this time so I'm very
clumsy on the calculator now 7x plus 89
y plus 94 or Zed
likewise confirm the rest of those but
it's told me hey if you got these
equations you want to know what x y&amp;z
are to satisfy all these call that
solver and you get these now let's look
at how I programmed that okay to examine
that program let's press the program
button go over to the Edit tab type in
the first letter and that'll bring us
down close to here and now let's have a
look inside the code so all three three
so these are input means it asks the
user for an input and then it stores it
as this letter so first I'm just getting
all these inputs from the user and
storing them as letters and then all I'm
doing is taking all those letters and
building a matrix of them matrix means
like two-dimensional array of numbers
well it can be in any dimensional array
but on a TI you only got two dimensional
arrays and then so all that was just
getting and setting and then this is the
one line that computes something it says
rref of that matrix and store it as a
new name and then these are just get
urse it just reads some numbers off of
that matrix and then displays them and
it's tells you to save to those so rref
is short for reduced row echelon form
and that is a concept from linear
algebra and i will not be explaining
what a reduced row echelon form means
really theoretically but let's examine
that matrix after it asked us for the
inputs it stored that as C matrix C so
here's our matrix C and would you look
at that this is just those numbers that
we just typed in and read off here so
that these numbers are all the same as
these numbers in the exact same form and
when it did rref the reduced row echelon
for Muncie it's safe that it's matrix D
and now what we have on the main
diagonal is a bunch of ones and we got
four all the columns except for the
rightmost zeros and all the other
entries and what that mean was that none
of the equations were redundant ly
equivalent and none of the equations
were contradictory that's what it means
when you get ones on the main diagonals
and zero for all the other entries for
all the columns except for the last one
and the last column is the values we
want those are these values the ones
that satisfy this equation so that's all
I'm going to tell you about the meaning
of rref what it means is you know if you
have this system and you've set it up
that way and then you load a matrix up
with those numbers just as they're
present it there and then you run rref
on that what you get is a matrix with
some ones and zeros to confirmed it
works and you get the values that
satisfy that system of equations so
that's all we're learning about rref
today and that program is just ask for
inputs sets a matrix up does the one
confucian that's a one computation
that's rref and then gets the values
from that setters and getters and one
computation and then stores those as x
y&amp;z and tells you that i stored them as
x y&amp;z okay now given that crash course
on just what we need to know about
linear algebra let's do a solution
supposing we know how to use a solver
and guest mode to first here's these
five unknowns and I haven't even used
the inclined coordinate system U and V
I've expressed them in terms of x and y
which means that supposing we had done
like a fully detailed solution we
wouldn't even need to make these
triangles to connect the components down
to U and V because we know all the
angles we've measured the angles to the
horizon already so we know these are all
Coase of 10 sine of 10 cosa v sine of 5
and the complements of those 80 and 85
so those that X components of all five
unknowns the Y components of all five
unknowns
and here's our four force balances in X
direction on a Y direction on a X
direction on B y direction on B and
relating force friction while B is a
quarter of force normal wall B that's
five equations and five unknowns the
next thing we would have to do in this
solution is to rearrange them into the
format such that we can type them into
the solver and all you got to do in
order to do that is a little algebraic
reorganizing the terms and now each of
these lines is some number of force P
plus some number of force NBA plus some
number of force friction ba plus some
number of force normal wall B plus some
number of force friction wall B equals
some constant now I don't have
programmed in a solver for five
equations and five unknowns here but we
can just go to matrix button and we can
make a custom matrix by going edit let's
call it matrix B and we're gonna want a
matrix that is five numbers by six
numbers that means five numbers tall six
numbers wide and let's go jump cut and
now I have entered in all those values
for matrix B just read them right off
there and type them all in they round
them all they show them rounded to a few
digits but they're all actually stored
to many digits and now we can simply go
matrix math and call rref on matrix name
b and we get the ones on the main
diagonal and zeros everyone out
everywhere else for all the terms except
for the rightmost column would you look
at that the rightmost column is those
values for the five unknowns as we
computed them before these are the same
ones okay and then next we would report
those numbers we don't even need to
report all of them although in this
fictional story we started by guessing
mode two first and then we used our
solver we have not yet confirmed that
this is the right answer because now
this is p2 now we would either have to
go to mode one and compute the P for
mode one call it p1 if you want or do
that
check so now we would take force
friction be a divided by force normal DA
this divided by this confirm that that's
less than 0.25 and then we would know
that mode 2 is the mode and then we
could report that so that confirms mode
2 is mode that we can report the answer
P equals this many and then the verbal
description of mode 2 so that is our
second way of solving this what we call
the alternate solution and that's the
last page of this also solution the
first time around it was 10 pages lots
of discussion plus all the equations and
diagrams and such again if you're
writing this on an exam you'd probably
go slightly fewer words and then we did
redundant checks and then our alternate
solution just the last two pages that's
a little misleading I'm not saying that
using a system solver is gonna save you
80% of your time comparing two pages to
10 pages because let's say if I had done
the solution the first way around and
let's say I'd guest mode to first on the
first time around and Ben similarly for
both and let's say I did this solver
method way and guest mode to first and
Ben similarly for both for that one too
then it wouldn't exactly be 1 to 5 the
ratio would be still a very decent
savings of about like 40% of your
trouble really so what is this all this
mean because when I was I have to
mention I am very old so that a lot of
these opinions might be outdated but
when I was in high school we started
learning this static friction stuff in
like grade 11 physics but we never had
heard of that X number of equations in Y
number of unknowns stuff so when I
talked about solution by dead reckoning
really all of our solutions had to be by
dead reckoning like you couldn't really
plan your solution with how much they
taught us about the theory of the math
and stuff so I would just start writing
balances start drawing free body
diagrams and stuff and then just see
whether the algebra it pops out is
something that could solve for the
answer for and then let's see in first
year of college we learned all this
stuff again in statics and
it was like yeah first year math and
colleges when they taught us that linear
algebra that was kind of maybe second
year really when they taught us that
linear algebra and what that means in
terms of number equations a number of
unknowns and reduced row-echelon form
and it's only after second year of
college when I would have been able to
use a system solver like this for stuff
physics that I learned in 11th grade so
I would recommend that when you're
training doing homework and stuff use
prefer the system solver use it most of
the time but I would also highly
recommend that some of the time just
solve it in a some other way and make
sure you training all your muscle groups
hit hit all those muscle groups from as
many angles as possible so sometimes you
get the question and you think okay
solver modes gonna be the most quickest
most efficient way to solve it and then
do that sometimes when you get the
question and you can be like Oh solver
mode is gonna be the quickest and then
just decide okay I'm gonna willingly do
this in some way that is not necessarily
the quickest just because I want to make
sure I'm training all those skills as
far as curriculum design you know I
think they should teach you this rref
stuff you know just just in the the
crash course like not even doing all the
theoretical knowledge but just what it
means in terms of building a system
solver into your ti yeah they should be
introducing that in as soon as eleventh
grade but it's been a very very long
time since I've been in a school so like
I don't want to yell too loud about this
or else I'm gonna sound like you're
racist grandfather because I don't know
how things are done these days but um
you know I did hear something once that
seemed to suggest that they are starting
to do it more like that these days so I
don't really know though speaking of
pointless and inefficient solution
methods I've decided that here's another
way you can do this express it as seven
linear equations in seven unknowns and
then the force balances on a don't call
a B they all call ba and the force
balances on B I'll call a B and don't
call ba and then I've got this line here
that says that one of these minus one of
these is zero or in other words this
equals this another
says one of these and negative one of
these is zero or in other words one of
these is one of these so like when I
showed you that seven equation isn't
technically seven equations and seven
unknowns and then I did type those into
a that's what that looks like and then
if we do matrix math rref on matrix name
a hey it works
okay ones on the main diagonal zeros
everywhere else except for in the
rightmost column same values there and
now we have some this line five point
three five six is the same as this line
five point three five six and this line
0.965 is equal to list my eleven point
nine six five so you can get as creative
as you want in terms of which pointless
techniques you want to learn you know as
you might have guessed uh when I'm in
the gym and I'm doing my neck curls and
wrist curls and calf raises I'm treating
those is just as important as the bench
press yo never skip leg day and all that
okay today's document camera
presentation has been brought to you by
welfare and duct tape please help me
financially what's up everybody I hope
you enjoyed that walk through my name
again is Junichi Rose swans son and
unfortunately at the time of this
recording I have not made a huge corpus
of work although I would highly
recommend you watch my video lecture
called the what and why of functional
programming it was a thousand hours of
work to make a two hour lecture video
it's on computer science and subscribe
to both my channels check out the
catalogues of those you might see
something you enjoy that cat kung-fu
videos in there and at the time of this
upload I am also uploading a call for
collabs on my other channel thanks for
stopping by
