hey everybody I'm Rick biato today I
have the pleasure of welcoming back to
the studio Ted Joya a renowned music
historian critic and futurist known for
his deep dives into the evolution of
music and American culture I've been
following Ted substack where he writes
about everything from his predictions on
the future of AI and music to his love
of coffee just like our last
conversation I find that Ted is not only
endlessly fascinating but also has an
incredible sense of humor I think you'll
really enjoy this here's my interview
Ted welcome thank you for having me or
should I say welcome back actually well
it's great to be back we had fun last
time and I'm looking forward to doing it
again so you and I went to dinner last
night and we talked a bit about Ai and
how record labels and Delivery Systems
like Spotify will be using AI in the
future can you talk about this a bit
well AI is everywhere right now and it's
the hot Topic in
music uh but the question is how much is
it being used and the problem is is
there's not a lot of disclosure what we
see about AI is almost a secret and this
is probably the biggest warning sign for
me is if AI is really so wonderful if
it's so exciting if it's so tremendous
why do they have to keep it a secret and
I see this everywhere now I'm going to
talk about music in a second but let me
just look at some of the other fields
like I'm in writing yep and there are
these AI articles everywhere but no
disclosure a few months ago Sports
Illustrated right before it collapsed
had this great idea of saving money by
using AI to write articles and you know
what they did is they actually assigned
the names of people to the Articles well
this article is by Bill Smith or Nancy
Jones or whatever and then they would
have bios and a web page for these
authors that did not exist cuz they were
ashamed unbelievable of using the AI
yeah and this is spread everywhere in
books I had now ai books come out trying
to steal my readers and they attribute
the books to Mr joyya Frank Joya wrote
this book on Jazz and then and basically
they're targeting the readers of my jazz
book but deceptively at no point do they
say is this book is written by AI so I
actually went looked at all the new
music books that were listed on Amazon
and tried to figure out which ones are
by real authors and which ones are by a
and you can't figure it out there's no
there's no honesty there so let's now
look at music and in music my fear of
the same thing is happening on Spotify
one of the users a fellow named Adam
FaZe was listening to Spotify and he
kept hearing the same song over and over
again he said this is interesting he
started paying attention every time the
song came on it was a 41 second song
okay he saw it had a different name and
a different artist now wait a second
this song sounds almost identical to the
one I heard so he compiled a
playlist of 49 songs that were more or
less identical but they had different
names different artists and were
attributed to different
composers now west going on here that
can't be true now it's obvious to
conclude and I can't prove it though is
this is spotify's way of using AI they
have ai songs they attribute them to
people that don't exist like Sports
Illustrated and this allows them to take
royalties that would go to musicians mhm
and keep them for themselves if they can
own the work themselves created by AI
they're going to be able to maximize
their revenues now I can't prove this is
happening in Spotify but it's hard to
think of some other explanation for
what's going on so right so this is the
real story behind ai ai is the hot thing
in music but not because it's great
music I've never met anyone where I say
what's your favorite genre of music oh I
love this AI stuff yeah I just can't
just this AI music is my favorite genre
I've never met maybe that person exists
I've never met them so the AI is
happening not because it's great not
because it has a fan base not because it
allows some improvements over the music
that that lowly folks like you or I
would make it's being used to save cost
in in a deceptive way and that's my fear
is that what's happening with AI is it's
a cost savings measure being forced
duplicitously on the market for the
benefit of the companies and hurting the
fans and hurting the musicians okay what
about Tik Tock and AI well this is the
same question it was very interesting a
few months ago Universal Music pulled
all their songs off of Tik Tok and they
complained bitterly and they complained
about royalties but the other thing they
complained about was AI they said well
we're not going to come back to Tik Tok
till you get rid of AI because we fear
you're using AI to do exactly what I
talked about is you're going to move the
audience to AI music so you don't have
to pay Universal Music and I just a few
days ago Universal Music came back to
Tik Tok they apparently they patched up
their differences but I've seen no
statement from Tik Tock that they're
getting rid of
AI this is they're wetted to that and
one of the things I think you're going
to see is no one will ever spell it out
for you you won't see the head of
Spotify or Tik Tok or any of these
companies say we're going to squeeze the
musicians and the labels with AI they
don't say that but that has to what's
happening isn't the uh reason that you
that Universal Music Group came back one
of the reasons because they can't figure
out how to promote records without Tik
Tock well this is the sad story of our
times right I see this repeatedly is
people go to war against these big Tech
platforms and I always predict that the
tech platform will win the war and I've
been right every time right every time
I've been correct and it's sad you see
Universal Music say well we're going to
go to war with Tik Tok and force them to
give in and if Universal Music can't do
it that what Universal Music controls
what 30 35 32% 32% of of the recordings
out there if they
can't get concessions from Tik Tok who
can and right around that same time Neil
Young came back to Spotify you know he
said I'm never going to be on Spotify
again Joanie Mitchell came back to
Spotify yeah and I don't blame them
because what choice do we have no choice
the platforms the platforms set the
rules
and the rest of us have to follow them
and this would be okay if those people
really knew and love music but look at
the people that run these platforms
they're not music lovers like you and me
or your audience out there these are
people that are techies and they have
completely different goals and
priorities than having a flourishing
music ecosystem they want to benefit
themselves they want to benefit their
companies financially and if the music
suffers well they just are willing to
live with it one of the things that I
find interesting between Spotify and
apple is that Spotify will show you the
streaming numbers of every single song
on an album A lot of people that follow
my channel when I make a video and I
made a video about this song called
blinding Lights by the weekend it's the
most streamed song on Spotify 4.2
billion streams and people say oh that's
all Bots now people I think that write
this stuff first of all Spotify has to
pay these artists for this and the idea
the the number 4.2 billion is a
massively big number I think they're
thinking of a bunch of of cell phones in
a room just on repeat trying to play
this thing 4.2 billion times and just
because they haven't heard it because
people are essentially in
silos because that's how the algorithms
have placed them oh you like this and
you're going to like something else it's
pretty much just like this well there
are Bots out there and I don't want to
minimize the impact people tell me that
PE that there's money laundering going
through Spotify using Bots and that this
is how people they you they
get their dirty money they have the Bots
run up plays for some track and then the
money comes back from Spotify and it's
been laundered now I don't know if
that's true or not but I've heard that
I'm actually more worried about
something else in that trusting that the
numbers are
accurate and people are actually
listening places like Spotify still have
games they can play let me give you a
very amazing example I think uh the
story of Johan RoR from Sweden very
interesting individual Johan RoR because
he has achieved 15 billion streams on
Spotify now that's a large number let me
tell you how large it is that's more
than Michael Jackson right that is more
than Elton John it's more than Abba you
know it's nobody out there with maybe
two or three exceptions in the whole
world can get the kind of streams Johan
rur is nobody knows his name
now why is that well Johan R never uses
his own name in his music he has
656 different aliases sometimes there's
a man or a woman or different National
groups or whatever he never uses his own
name he uses 656 different names and
then shows up on all these playlists he
is on 144 Different official Spotify
cated playlist reaching 62 million
people
sometimes he's 40% or more of a single
playlist but no one knows about it
because the name changes so they're able
to push all this traffic to Johan R now
why is Spotify doing this now I got an
email from somebody I can't say if this
is true they said Ted you didn't hear
this from
me but Spotify owns all the rights of
those songs and they're using this big
surprise he Swedish Spotify I know right
down the street from the Spotify
headquarters now I can't prove that they
are using Johan rur to avoid playing
paying royalties to real
musicians but what other explanation can
they be and let me give you a sort of a
a hint of the disparity here I started
looking at his music and the music is
all just you know banal background music
nothing to get excited about and I found
one of his tracks on Spotify that had
gotten four or five million plays okay
then I found the same track on YouTube
it had a 100 plays
right well wait a second if this is such
a great song exactly if everybody loves
this song Why does it only get 100 plays
on YouTube so what I'm worried about is
there are these games that are being
played there's no disclosure and this is
not good for the music ecosystem again
they're forcing this music on people and
they're only able to do it because the
listening experience has become so
passive in the old days you went and
bought an album you always knew who you
were listening to cuz you had purch this
record with Hard Cash you had to reach
into your pocket to get Spotify has
deliberately tried to turn the listening
experience into something passive now is
that good for the music culture where
people don't know the name of the artist
you see this all the time will be
playing in the radio and and someone
will say I love that song but they don't
know the name of the artist they don't
know the name of the song is this good I
don't think so and I and so I I worry
about all these
ramifications that these corporations
are trying to maximize their income and
God bless them I hope they they have
nice corporate Jets and the yachts and
the whole nine yards but what they're
doing is not good for the music culture
and that's why there's a certain sense
of stagnancy now in the music culture it
doesn't feel like there's anything
vibrant happening and that's by plan I
fear that's by plan that the most
powerful people in the world controlling
music who are the CEO of Spotify CEO of
Apple you know these are the people that
actually control music now they're not
musicians they're not music lovers
they're taking steps that create the
stagnancy wasn't the Spotify business
model flawed right from the beginning
there's there's a certain there's only a
certain number of people that can afford
to pay when you have a subscription
model like that that pretty much all
subscription models eventually run out
of people well I ran the numbers back in
2018 when Spotify listed on the stock
exchange I got the public filing and
this is what I do I analyze all the
numbers I'm I'm sort of a an analytical
nerd and I I did all the math and in
2018 I said this this streaming model
doesn't work there's no way they can
charge
$9.99 cents a month for all the music
you want to listen to and make a profit
right they will never achieve a user
base to do that well it took them 18
years from inception to find out that
I'm right and so finally what you've
seen in the last year Spotify started
raising prices dramatically well that's
all they can do as did Netflix and all
the places because they realized that
the model they had been working
with wasn't going to deliver enough cash
to pay all the stakeholders yeah and so
now we're in a situation where the whole
streaming model is built on cutting
cost raising subscription prices and
then playing these little
games and it's I think it's very ominous
that just a few days ago Netflix
announced that they are not going to
tell shareholders how many sub
subscribers they have anymore well this
is amazing because for years they've
been bragging about subscriber growth
and we're going to get more growth and
this is the whole engine of our business
is adding more subscribers The Last
quarterly report they said you know the
subscriber stuff we don't we're not
going to tell you about that anymore
don't worry about now what does that
mean it means that they have given up
trying to attract the audience and get
the audience excited and build it
they're going to cut costs they're going
to raise prices and they're going to
play all the these crazy games with
their algorithms and whatever and that's
that's sad so it's happening in movies
this is happening in books it's
happening in journalism and it's
happening maybe most of all in music The
Musicians are like the canaries and the
coal mine they're the first ones that
die and topple over and after the
musicians go everyone else would say
wait a second you that's because it's g
whatever your job is now the same kind
of AI stuff is going to happen there
down the line so you should pay
attention even if you're not a musician
uh or you don't depend on the music
business you should care as a fan but
even beyond that you should care because
this is the same thing that's going to
happen throughout culture I'd like to
take a second to talk to you about this
channel Believe It or Not 57% of the
people that watch here regularly are not
subscribed so I would encourage you to
hit the Subscribe button now this will
help me get even more of my dream guests
in the future thank you Ted you were
talking last night about the music
simplifying and that that this is part
of a very long cycle well I wrote a book
oh back in 20072 2008 called the birth
and death of the cool and I was looking
at what it means to be cool this this
was the idea behind the book I was going
to write a history of coolness and I had
this assumption that people always
wanted to be cool and always would want
to be cool this was like a Timeless
quantity and what I saw doing my
research is that in fact this isn't the
case that uh these Cycles last 50 60 70
years and there was a cycle in which
people wanted to be cool which they
didn't want to be during the Great
Depression that was people weren't like
worried about being cool during World
War II people weren't worried about
being cool but after the war Miles Davis
the birth of the cool and the beatnicks
and Jack kowak and Lenny Bruce and the
edgy Comedians and Marlin Brando and
coolness became something important and
then coolness had like a 50 60y year run
started to die probably the first
warning sign was when the word cool
stopped being applied to people like
Marlon Brando or Miles Davis and it was
applied to
merchandise now it was the running shoe
that was cool or this device was cool it
was a
marketing program coolness no longer was
some personal quality you had it was
used to Market a product and then the
whole coolness in
society disappeared a chapter in my book
is called America's lost its cool people
are just angry at each other used to be
I'd get together with with my Bros and
we try to be as cool as possible now
even the word hipster became a term of
abuse a coolness became suspect and sort
of this culture of anger and outrage
emerged it's a 50 60 year cycle
curiously enough I was uh reading a book
by Ray doio the finance expert the super
investor and he says in finance there's
a 50 60 70 year cycle
too and he says the reason people don't
understand this and this gets back to
the point you were mentioning is that
the cycle generally takes a whole human
lifetime so we only live through the
cycle ourselves once now if you live old
enough towards the end of your life you
start seeing a repetition of what
happened when you were starting out
right because the cycle is starting to
repeat now what do we see happening in
culture right now is we have had in
commercial music a lessening in the
complexity of Music decade after decade
after decade right to the point now most
of the hit songs now are these four
chord songs yeah if that if that you're
you're lucky you're lucky to get those
those four chords and a lot of people
think well that's the way it will always
be even you and I at times we get we get
depressed and we say you know where are
the great maximalist songs of the past
where all sorts of surprising things
happened and and chord changes and
unexpected interval leaps where have
they all gone and if I asked you who
were the great people at writing songs
with this sort of maximalist I'm going
to surprise you aesthetic
the names we would come up with would
all be dead people or people 70 or older
so we would mention McCartney or Stevie
Wonder Mitchell barar
sonheim and I know many people think
well that's that day is gone it'll never
come back but I believe these things
come in Cycles there was a period back
in the early 50s when music was getting
very simple and then with the Beatles
and back and all that start getting more
complex again and and so if you there is
a cycle and generally the this is the
very interesting thing I got this from a
book called The Alchemy of Finance by
George Soros who sort of a strange guy
but he had this theory he calls it the
theory of reflexivity and this has been
very useful to me in predicting Trends
what Sor says and he he's actually
became a billionaire using this he
traded currencies and this was his
theory of reflexivity that made him a
billionaire and he said the secret is
the trend always goes on longer than is
sensible
and it will eventually reverse but it
has to get to a ridiculous
extreme before it reverses so even when
you say well the songs couldn't possibly
get simpler you know they can't possibly
get simpler than they do what what Sor
will say eventually it has to push to an
extreme and then it reverses because
people are so tired of it right now does
this happen in culture well let me give
you an example of where it's happening
right now in the culture look at movies
mhm the folks at Disney said well all we
got to do is a Star Wars war movie and a
Marvel movie every 10 weeks and we're
going to get rich right and that worked
and it worked and it worked and at a
certain point it just seemed ridiculous
but even at the point where it got
ridiculous they kept on doing it and
then finally yeah the box office
receipts stopped I've done the analysis
on this and you see the monthly box
office in the movie business is awful
there was a big burst for a few weeks
with Barbie and Oppenheimer that's right
but that's gone yeah now if you go back
before the pandemic the movie business
had more than10 billion in box office
receipts for more than 10 years in a row
the way it looks now it'll never hit
those numbers again and it's because
they push the formula to the ridiculous
extreme and then it will reverse and I
think that's going to happen in movies I
think it will happen in music and so
people always look at me and say Ted
you're full of Doom and Gloom I well no
no I'm actually optimistic but I believe
you've got to get to The Bitter End of
the cycle and then it will reverse think
that the that movies and music are on
the same cycle or does one precede the
other I think they they're on similar
cycles and so I always pay attention to
movies and I ask myself what has
happened in the past when the formula
didn't work and so I look at for example
the
1960s going into the 60s there were two
formulas in Hollywood that always worked
the western movie right and the
musical and so they push these and it
was everywhere when you and I were
growing up there were three TV networks
and everyone at any night of the week
you turn on there would be a Western on
one of those three channels sometimes
there was a Western on two or three of
them just westerns were everywhere yeah
and they pushed it to a ridiculous
extreme to a point where even the most
devoted fans of cowboys even CL would
stop making no even CL that's no that's
great even Clint East would stop naking
the The Westerns and the musical died
out too you had The Sound of Music and
then after that the there were it was
almost impossible to have a hit musical
movie so what happened in the movie
industry then I think it's very
interesting the studios were desperate
and they said well we've got to take
chances now which we hate to do we here
in Hollywood the thing we hate to do is
take chances but we have no other
alternative so when it as the Western
died the musical died the formulas died
they started doing these edgier films
these grittier films these risk-taking
films so you have things like The
Godfather and Chinatown and taxi driver
and some people will tell you these were
the best movies of all time but the fact
is they were edgier they were grittier
and they were full of risk-taking
because Hollywood had no other option
well if you look at the Godfather they
tried to get Copa kicked off the movie
many times the studio hated it theyed
Chino they just a million times that
nothing worked on this movie if you're
going to do a crime movie you got to
have shoot ups every 5 minutes but Copa
understood you needed to do something
different at that stage in cinema
history yeah I believe we're at exactly
that same point now what's the one thing
Hollywood would hate to do right now is
anything edgy that's right don't do
anything edgy or you but that's what the
audience is hungry for so Hollywood is
now in a point where they're going to
have to take risks and do things that
are a little bit different more
ambitious I think music's the same way
mhm I think music is the same way
because you that same period where you
had this risk-taking in movies you had
it in popular music too you know the
Beatles broke all the rules so it was a
period of like five six seven years you
could do anything yeah you could do
anything and if you were a rock or pop
Act and the record labels understood
we've got to give these people some
freedom and it drove them nuts to get
people like Brian Wilson freedom because
he would do crazy things but that worked
once and I know people don't believe
it's possible I hear people say Ted will
they'll never these record labels will
never give people creative freedom the
way they did in the past and I said they
will not have a choice they will not
have a choice because the formula
eventually dies when the music industry
started to collapse
after uh Napster happened 1999 and then
provits started to decrease after the
year 2000 dramatically every year
absolutely 1999 was the peak year for
the music industry so then the label
started saying okay we need to hire
producers that can write songs okay we
need to hire uh we're going to have less
money so we have to get higher producers
that can also mix the songs then it
became these people the max Martin would
would spring up that actually could
write the hit songs for the artist they
could get the they could build the
tracks things like that and they would
have these Superstar producers that was
the era of that now we're in the era
where there are seven writers on every
song and eight producers
nobody can write their own song Anymore
where there is no Joanie Mitchell
there's no Stevie Wonder there's no
people that can literally write a song
themselves or at least no one that's
trusted by the record label it used to
be that they had to have their um if if
a record failed well listen I hired this
producer I hired this mixer and there
are people that have had many hits so
I'm safe with my job nobody wanted to
take a chance to to your point
now we're at this this point
where everything is done by committee
absolutely so it's got to it has to
revert to something else I think I agree
with you on that and there's someone
once told me this said there's never
been a great work of art created by
committee right and there no literary
masterpieces probably the only exception
is the King James version of the Bible
where King James had a committee put
that together and it's it was probably
divine intervention mention is my theory
on that that made sure that that got
through but for the most part when you
get the committee things start falling
apart now the rule of thumb I have is I
look at the song and I count how many
chord changes there are then I count how
many songwriters and if there more than
songwriters than there are chord
changes that's a warning sign that's a
real you know if there are only four
chords in the song and there are eight
composers know something's going wrong
there but what's really going on there
and to me this is part of a larger
problem first of all what what's going
on is economic in that being named one
of the songwriters is to get you a share
of the composing and Publishing
royalties and so this is almost like the
stock options you give somebody you're
hiring a team to run a tech company and
you want to get this person involved and
you give them a little taste of the
action and this person gets to dip their
beak and and so the what's happening is
it's almost like a negotiation over how
you're going to allocate the money and
then that shows up as the songwriting
credits now this now maybe this makes
sense financially but it's ominous from
a creative standpoint and to me it
reflects the larger change in the music
industry that alarms me
tremendously which is record labels are
turning into intellectual property
management companies IP Management in
that they're not trying to get the next
great record they're trying to build a
copyright point portfolio right a
portfolio of songs and the people that
run these things are bankers lawyers and
accountants now God bless them I love
Bankers I love lawyers especially
lawyers working for me I love
accountants but I want people that are
guitarists and piano players and sax
players and basist and drummers these
are the people I want involved in the
creative end of the music business now
here's a fact that you're not going to
hear elsewhere because it's sort of
hidden in the financial statements look
at Universal Music
Group you said before they have 32% of
the songs out there right what people
don't know is they are growing their
publishing business five times as fast
as their recorded music business so
people look at Universal Music so this
is a recording company well not for much
longer because the the only thing they
want to invest in is publishing rights
now what do this mean publishing writs
means you own part of an old song you
might be buying a song that was written
20 years ago 40 years ago 60 years ago
whatever when you do a recording you're
focused on the future I'm going to
create music that never existed before
right I'm going to build an artist I'm
going to build a career it is very
dangerous for the culture to have
companies like Universal Music care more
about the past than about the future
people ask me all the time why is the
music cult culture feel so staging I
said this is by
Design the people running these
companies would rather have you listen
to an old song than a new song and this
gets back to the AI especially if in the
future they fear that these AI songs are
going to steal their
royalties their response is going to be
to Pedal license agreements of their old
songs they're going to try to get them
in TV commercials or whatever and once
again God bless them I hope they make a
lot of money and I hope they have the
nice flight on the corporate Jet and all
the things that these execs want but
this is not healthy for our culture
because somebody should be investing in
the future of music and if all the large
companies want is these old songs we're
in trouble and it's not just Universal
Music Group Sony's doing the same thing
they just cut up $500 million catalog
purchased the other day Concord was
trying to buy this portfolio all the
record companies have lost faith in the
record
business and this can't be a good thing
if you love music the labels now depend
on artists having their own following
before they even get signed and that
that is
a terrible proposition as far as I'm
concerned you know that's it's you have
to have proof of concept before they
will invest any money in what you're
doing it's like but by that time why do
you need the record label no they're
what they're doing fundamentally won't
work for them right in the old days the
the record labels knew how to launch new
stars it's never been easy right but at
least they took care they tried to scout
good talent they would hire a good
producer they would get good songwriters
and then they would take this new artist
and they would invest in marketing maybe
there was some payol or to I don't know
but basically they could take new stars
and develop them which they needed for
their future they had to do this they
had they had no choice what you see
lately is they've either lost the
ability to do that or the interest in
doing it or probably both what I see is
you I actually had an an an anr person
from a label call me up because he
wanted to argue about one of my
articles and I was going back and forth
with this guy and at one point he said
Ted I got to admit you're right we would
never sign a new artist now unless they
already had an audience on Tik Tok right
I basically he was saying we don't have
a clue how to build a career we got to
find someone who's already doing it but
what benefit is there for the record
label at that point because they're
going to have to give away the store to
sign up that people that's already
happened already and you know back in
our day you got a record contract if you
got 10 15% royalties that was the best
you were going to possibly do but
nowadays they have to go to these Tic
Tac stores and say we'll give you 50%
that's right and after five years you go
the Masters and they have to give away
everything to get these people because
the label has no leverage the Tik Tok
star does that's right so they're
fundamentally pursuing a strategy that's
not going to work for the record label
what they should do what they should do
is once again I'm going back to this
movie industry analogy they should be
willing to take risks they should build
up their ability to identify promising
young Talent sign them nurture and
develop that talent and create the next
generation of stars that would be good
for them it would be good for the
musician it would be good for us as
audience members because we have
something exciting something new
something fresh something different and
not just we're going to Pedal the
license deal of a song written 30 years
ago which is you know about as exciting
as day old bread you have a substack
that I subscribe to and I encourage
everyone to subscribe to Ted substack
I'll have the link in the description
thank you so what's the difference
between having a substack that you write
on a really frequent basis as opposed to
writing a book nowadays our books
still as important as they were well
every aspect of our creative culture
feels like it's in crisis right now it
just feels that way and it feels that
opportunities are
disappearing I'm constantly reading
about layoffs at this magazine this
newspaper um and obviously in the music
industry as well Spotify just did
layoffs the record labels did layoffs
everybody's doing layoffs the culture
feels like it's in a state of crisis but
there is some good news there that I
don't think is widely
recognized and I call it the battle
between the macroculture and the
microculture okay okay now the
macroculture I mean the big Legacy
institutions Sony records
CBS Disney or even someone like Spotify
these are big huge Enterprises New York
Times whatever these are
enormous now the micro culture is people
like you and me right we're out there
doing it on our own and and for a long
time we're so small people don't even
notice right what we're doing but the
fact is there are a lot of us now and
we're growing right and some of us are
growing quite rapidly and so I've been
telling people is 2024 is the year when
the microculture is going to
triumph over the
macroculture people don't
recognize that the audience is Shifting
they
want you what you're doing obviously
they want what you're doing I hope they
want what I'm doing or people like us
because we have a little bit more
freedom we have a little bit more flexib
little bit flexibility we're a little
more Frank yeah maybe we are a little
edgier U and so getting back to my own
career I was I'm now working on a
platform called substack which allows
writers to run their own writing career
and substack takes care of all the
details from me they'll send out my
writings to an email list they'll keep
track of the list they'll charge
subscriptions they'll do metrics and and
I get to publish whatever I want yep I
can publish whenever I want I own all
the intellectual property if I leave I
get to keep my email
list everything they do is designed to
empower me and then I'm able to take it
and run with it and so this allows me to
have a successful career in the micro
culture while the macr culture is
collapsing now let's look at at at at
your end of the world so you're doing it
differently you're like on YouTube or
whatever but check out this fact I think
this is very revealing the
total ad revenues on YouTube now are
more than the total revenues of Netflix
oh yeah that switch over happened about
18 months ago but people look at Netflix
as one of the the largest entertainment
companies in the world and when they
think of people watching Video
Entertainment or assimilating things
through a screen the first name they
think of is Netflix but in fact the micr
culture is now larger than that and in
fact if you look at all the big
platforms out there they're all built on
this microculture thing this is how Mark
Zuckerberg gets Rich he's not posting
this stuff on Facebook right he's got a
500 million people doing that what
Google is doing with YouTube they're not
out there putting these videos out
you're putting the videos out or me on
substack yeah and people look at it and
they think it's well the they're just
these large companies out there but
these large companies are based on this
vibrant macro culture we used to call it
a counterculture yeah yeah and uh and I
think that name should come back but I
think there's a lot more happening in
the culture now that is healthy that's
successful that's growing that's buoyant
that's
risk-taking the next step has to be for
the large companies to recognize this
and try to either work with people like
you or me or to try to develop something
like that themselves because they're so
unwilling to take risks right I mean
you'll do a video and you'll come up
with some idea and I'm just going to do
it right I you talked to me last night
about some of the things you're planning
to do and you're I'm just G to do it
right and I do that I just sit down this
is a crazy article I'm just going to
publish it sure but and these large
companies are so they're so scared of
doing that but what they need to
recognize is there's a turn in the
culture it is vibrant there are things
happening at this ma this micro level
this alter alternative level this
alternative culture is out there and
it's actually the success story it's the
healthy story and it's the pathway for
the future even for the large companies
when they finally wake up and start
doing what they're supposed to do people
ask me Rick how do you know when to
publish things why don't you publish
things on the hour and I said I publish
things I publish my videos whenever
they're done doesn't matter when they're
done and my interviews are all different
lengths there is no standard length
interview an interview is as long as it
needs to be absolutely well you know I
was getting on the plane to come here
and I said you know I should publish an
article before I get on the plane and I
said I don't want to get up earlier in
the morning I'll just publish it like
one in the morning you know so I publish
it in the middle of the night everyone
would tell you can't do that Ted you you
can't publish your article in the middle
I don't you know I actually think my
readers
like the unpredictability of what I do
yes because they find it refreshing and
it's in a stagnant culture and I do
believe many aspects of our culture are
stagnant this is what the hunger is for
people people want surprises almost I
mean I tell people I would rather get a
slap in the face than to see a Marvel
movie Just because the slap in the face
would like oh yeah that woke me up a
little bit you know and I think a lot of
people are feeling that way and so in
many ways the best thing you can do at
this stage in the culture for creative
person and I know a lot of your audience
are creative people out there is take
risks and now that you're forced to do
it on your own because the institutions
aren't helping you anymore Universal
Music isn't helping you anymore uh New
York Times isn't helping you anymore you
got to do it on your own well the that's
a burden but there's a Advantage with it
because once you take responsibility for
your own creative Ventures nobody can
stop you from doing that risk-taking and
that's what's going to save us one of
the topics you wrote about recently is H
was called one of your substs how coffee
became a joke now I love to drink coffee
and you love to drink coffee and and uh
this is kind of a not necessarily a
topic that you that you would write
about normally and I found it really
fascinating talk about that for a minute
well I write about almost everything but
mostly M probably half of what I write
about is music but the other half I all
right about almost anything and it has
to be something related to
culture uh and of sometimes movies or
books or whatever but the other day I
was looking Starbucks had announced
their
results and it was abysmal the revenues
were down the profits were down same
store sales were down I like to go
through the numbers but this was just a
horror show from start to finish and I
started asking people I
know how did Starbucks falter they're
selling a addictive substance I mean how
stupid do you have to be not to be and
you know when we went to high school
there was like some guy in the class
that was like the stoner and and all his
brain cells were burned out but even he
could figure out how to deal drugs I
mean even he had enough brain cells
still operating if you're selling an
addictive substance you should be easy
to find a way to make money but substack
uh article on on on this coffee thing it
all came back to to the fact that the
coffee sales were declining so I started
asking people why did uh Starbucks
falter and some people would say well
the prices are high or the economy is
soft but a lot of people said a joke
these drinks the the mermaid Frappuccino
or the and I and I was talking to my my
my son and he's saying well Dad the
worst one is this new coffee they have
mixes coffee and olive oil I said what
do you mean no no no Dad it's
unbelievable it's called the oato and
they mix coffee and olive oil and he
said eventually they're going to have to
get rid of it but they're still in the
store so I just I did this article how
coffee turned into a joke and I started
with my own life story where when I was
a kid they my parents gave me coffee
when I was in the Cradle couldn't
believe that and my dad when I was like
eight years old he would give
me cup of dark Rose before I went to
school and when I was in fourth grade I
decided I was going to launch a
rebellion so I told my dad I said Dad
I'm not going to do this
anymore I'm a kid kid shouldn't drink
coffee and he sort of looked at me and
he
said children need something warm in
their stomach before they go to
school he wasn't talking about oatmeal
or Quaker Oats or like a cup of dark
roast is what I needed and the fact is I
can laugh at this and I don't know if
it's good to give kids coffee I don't
know but I do know I attribute a lot of
My Success to this because I I would go
to like fourth grade and I would just
rip through those multiplication tables
and the spelling be and I'm just all the
other students are like sleepy eyed and
so any anyway I wrote an article on this
and it was a very successful article and
when I put it out I said can I write an
article about coffee I'm a music critic
For Heaven's Sake what am I writing
about coffee but I do think people want
to
hear the honest story and if there's
something that interests you or
interests me the best thing for us to do
is to run with it is is to take the
things that excite us and interest us
and bring it out to the audience well as
soon as I saw that you were writing an
article on coffee I said oh what's Ted
have to say about coffee I to read that
I I went uh my my 11-year-old Lea today
said can we stop at Starbucks on the way
to school and I said why they have some
new drink out it's like a bubble tea
thing so I was like okay I said it's
that blue thing and I said Leela you
should never drink anything blue she's
like okay I want to Blue does not exist
in nature except in the sky your food
products so we so we stop and I get her
this thing and all of a sudden she takes
a few sips she says this is terrible and
she hands it to me to put him in the cup
holder and I said what's bad about it
she said everything and I just laughed
and I thought about your article about
this it was she said it's sweet but it
and it tastes awful well this goes back
to what we're talking about movies and
music I know people think well this
coffee thing is very different but in
fact how did Starbucks falter and they
faltered because they thought they had a
formula figured out they had come out
with this sweet drink called the
Frappuccino yeah that everybody loved
and they said well we got to do more
sweet drinks and then they just it was
like the Marvel movies at Disney we're
going to they just and and they just
kept on churning it out and it got to
the ridiculous point and then it got to
this this the of reflexivity I'm talking
about was more than ridiculous yeah
olive oil and then finally the sales
start going down yeah so they'll have to
they'll have to retrench they'll have to
go back to making more serious drinks it
started with a pumpkin spice latte
though didn't it had no pumpkin in it I
mean that was that was something was
wrong if they call it the pumpkin spice
latte and there's no pumpkin in the
drink but this is It's a lack of gravy
toss it's a lack of seriousness in the
culture and I and I think we all suffer
from that so I think coffee is a sign of
it I think the music is a sign of it I
think the movies is a sign of it uh you
can't reduce things to a formula you
really can't once you start doing
something over and over again you get
called The Go diminishing returns and I
think this is a problem in culture you
know I had this this guy came out to
interview me the other day and this was
funny he flew out to my home and he's
writing for a big magazine and he said
Ted I want to write I want to write this
and I need to talk to you because you're
the best expert in the world on this
subject now what is the subject what
what is the subject I'm the the greatest
expert in I music or jazz or like good
looks or something I'm trying to think
what can I buy how how to pick up women
I what what am I like the greatest
expert in the world on and he said I'm
writing an article about is society in
Decline what is I'm the expert on I
don't know to be to be insulted or
complimented but what I told him and
this is important I said you got to
realize that we look at the long history
of decline where the Roman Empire
collapsed or whatever but in fact the
more common thing in society is not
decline it's stagnation right it's
stagnation where for long period it
seems like nothing new
happens there were long stretches of the
Middle Ages that's right that were like
I know some medievalists are going to
get angry at me oh you know the m and I
hey I love the Medieval Era as much as
anybody you know but still there were
long stretches of the Middle Ages where
nothing
changed and if you have the Roman Empire
in fact the Roman Empire lingered on a
long time that's right you know the
barbarians came to the gate then they
left and they just then just nothing
happened and and so I do think that
there's a risk not that we're in some
sort of situation of collapse although I
don't rule I know people say there got
to be a Civil War I I don't I don't rule
that off but in fact the
more prevalent risk the more dangerous
risk is that as a culture we're entering
a long period of
stagnation in which everything got
reduced to a formula and the formulas
start to feel
boring and so that's what links what's
happening at Disney where the stock
dropped 10% day before yesterday what's
happening at Netflix where they won't
tell you the subscriber numbers what's
happening at Universal Music where they
want to own just old songs what's
happening at Starbucks where the the no
one wants the sickly sweet drinks
anymore uh so that's a risk and so how
do you get rid of stagnation it goes
back to this microculture right people
taking risk and they're going to do work
at the low level because you work for
these big companies heaven forbid they
would they would fire us that's right we
show up theyd fire us before lunch these
big Marvel action movies and the use of
multiple people you can't just it's just
kind of like the multiple songwriters
they can't just have one one person
that's the lead actor actress of a move
movie they need to have five different
ones that are all these characters comic
book characters or whatever they are
same thing as we need eight producers on
a song and seven songwriters that's it's
like the Justice League you know of
songit
but and it goes behind the scenes too
there's too many too many cooks making
the meal now right so you have these
different protagonists and and each of
these Stars wants a certain amount of
screen time and their agents are getting
in into the the mix but then there are
all these decision makers from the
studio too I know some people that work
in the entertainment industry and they
just think it's a Horror Story it's
impossible to have a Creative Vision get
all the way through to the end product
because there's so many bureaucrat rats
interfering at every step along the way
and so this is why the real Vitality is
going to come from from the lower end
you know where people that are willing
to take risks they really they really
are and I think it's actually starting
to happen the problem is is it's not
recognized in the organs of the
mainstream media it won't get written up
in the New York Times it won't get uh
mentioned on CBS News or whatever
because the people people that run those
institutions are sort of locked into the
macroculture right they're all in New
York and they all talk to each other and
they don't understand the
vibrancy happening in the culture at
that Grassroots level because I see what
your subscription base is doing it's
doubled since I was here last that's
right I'm doubling my subscription base
and so clearly there's an audience out
there for us but we're taking risks and
also and don't underestimate the import
of this we're trying to talk honestly
because what what's the big crisis in
society right now what's the biggest
scarcity it's a scarcity of trust right
the surveys show that everywhere uh they
don't people don't trust the media they
don't trust politicians they don't trust
universities they don't trust the
experts there's a a crisis of trust out
there if people go to my substack it's
called The Honest broker right and I
don't pick that name
frivolously and it's a burden if I say
that I'm the honest broker there's a
burden on me to speak frankly and and
not Dodge around things uh and this is I
think the secret sauce right now
probably the secret sauce for you I know
it's a secret sauce for me is I'm trying
to develop a relationship directly with
my reader just like you are you're have
a relationship with your
audience and it's almost like a
one-on-one relationship with each one
individually I have this thing and I
stole it from Kart he always talked
about that individual who is my
reader which is interest he's writing
books and maybe million people read the
books but he views I'm talking to an
individual each one there's a
relationship going there and so I now
try to
write like the way I would talk to you
across a table and even you and I this
is interesting if your viewers at home
don't know this but we were at dinner
last night and the conversation we had
then is pretty darn similar exactly like
this that's right we don't fil we get in
front of the camera we don't we don't
filter it that's right we don't fil not
very much you know we don't filter it
and that's that's the secret sauce now
is to have that Honesty because people
want something they can trust and if you
fool them they will not come back to you
so that's got to be the standard we
aspire to and I know I did this article
about the crisis of trust and I I came
up with a list I asked myself why would
a writer lie in an article say something
they knew wasn't
true and I came up easily with a list of
20 reasons okay more than are some of
those a lie to please my editor okay I
will lie to get clicks on the article
I'll lie to protect a source I'll lie to
help a cause I'll lie to help a
political candidate I will lie to get
tenure at the University I will but I I
easily came up with with more than 20
reasons now I can't
measure how prevalent those are in
society but I have a hunch that this is
happening more than it should right and
so that creates an opportunity for us on
the the micr culture is if we just speak
from the
heart and try to call it the way we see
it doesn't mean we're always right you
know I I'm wrong I will I but I'm not
wrong because I'm trying to mislead
I may be wrong because I didn't figure
out what's going on but I will then own
my mistake and but if I can talk
honestly I think that's that has done
more for my writing career than anything
honestly that my writing career has
benefited from talking directly with the
reader one on-one and trying to speak as
frankly as possible in a very
conversational mode it's interesting
because when I first started my my
channel I I didn't know anything I've
never been in front of a camera before I
never talked to a camera camera but I
thought where do you actually sit do you
sit in the center I like well that's
kind of how people would look at you and
they're you you could use the thirds
Rule and be on one one side documentary
style or whatever I was like no I'm
going to sit in front of the camera
because that's how people would talk and
you just look directly into the camera
and you talk to it like it's a person
because you're talking to the audience
in that way and that's how you build
that that uh that bond between people
and then I thought to myself well I can
I can't take money for I can't be
Shilling products or anything first of
all that's not my
personality um and then who's going to
believe what I say about everything if
I'm trying to sell you on something so I
never did any endorsements or anything
except for my signature guitar from
Gibson which I give all the proceeds to
charity yeah and that was the only way
that I had agreed to do that but I I
think that um people know when they tune
in to my channel that these are my
beliefs I don't temper them to uh I I
get people mad at me for certain things
if I will criticize an artist or
something like that or just give my
honest opinion on it but at least they
know that it's my honest opinion on it
and it's not based on me getting
rewarded for it by some company
absolutely and you and I know there
are we're both critical of the music
industry and we've both said a lot of
critical things just in our conversation
here but there are also people people we
trust yes in the music business and I
look at someone like Manford ier that
runs ECM records or there a handful
people like this that I trust these
people I trust these people and that's
the basis of my financial relationship
with them right so I I will I will buy
the album but I know that Manford ier is
not TR their how do I maximize income
from Ted right if if if what Ted wants
is not what his vision is well screw Ted
yeah because he's committ it yeah and
that's the other thing and people often
ask me this I talk about art and how
important art
is and people say well there's no real
difference between art and entertainment
there how can you really you may think
something's artistic but who are you who
are you to judge I no no no it's very
it's very important is that
entertainment gives you exactly what you
want that's the Entertainer's job is I'm
going to give you exactly what you want
but the artist doesn't operate like that
right the artist makes demands on you
right that's the essence of the artistic
experience yeah and because of those
demands you go into a an artistic
situation it may be different than what
you expected MH and the upside is if it
works it was mind expanding it took me
somewhere I would have never gone on my
own right if I had just demanded
entertainment they would have delivered
something that was going to be up to
formula and abs absolutely expected and
so I'm always a big believer in these
people that make demands on me if I
trust them I want them to make those
demands on me and this gets back to the
issue of the algorithm because the
algorithm is in this entertainment area
where it will just feed people again and
again what they already have consumed
because the algorithm is a
backward-looking mechanism it only can
tell you what
song to listen to today based on what
you listened to last week last month
last year right and I I think algorithms
can be great I think that sometimes
they're useful but we also need some
force in society that Embraces new
things yeah and and so I least have a
chance of having this mind expanding
experience where something new came to
me that was beyond anything I'd heard
before I would not find that on my own I
need the artist to challenge me and so
we need more of that and the people out
there that do that get my respect they
get my support and they'll make money
from me too but the beautiful thing is I
know that's not what drives them I know
that's not what drives them you had an
article recently where you talked about
how culture is changing at warp speed
what do you what do you mean by that Ted
well absolutely what we've got is
um an interesting situation where there
does seem to be this sense of of
stagnancy and um sens everything we've
seen before I even the elections a
reboot I mean we're going election is
going to be a reboot that's right and
wherever you look in society it looks
like things have sort of slowed but I do
think what we're seeing now is uh these
companies are being forced out of their
comfort zone because uh what has
happened hasn't worked before and
they're embracing these technological
solutions in which they want to change
all the rules at once AI is a classic
example of this virtual reality is
another one companies are putting huge
bets on this
and they want to use this to change the
culture immediately into something that
they can
monetize now interestingly enough this
is all part of a shift from what I call
the active culture to the passive
culture okay and so I would say the
active culture is once again in the past
you would go to uh record store and
you'd go through all the records I'm
going to choose this one right and then
you would go listen to it and you would
be fully formed now the passive culture
and it's happening everywhere the
algorithm is the classic example of it
is you don't have to make a choice the
choice is made for
you and so they can shift you wherever
they want that warp speed listen you're
going to listen to ro Johan R today
you're going to listen to to Jenny Jones
tomorrow and Bill Smith the day after
that and the next extension of that is
going to be virtual reality yeah what
what are your thoughts on that well you
truly become a couch potato at at that
point where the whole experience is just
coming at you and you're just you're
totally passive about this now I don't
think this is a terrible thing and I
think it might have some sort of
benefits and uses but when your whole
cultural experience becomes
passive there are risk that come with
that you know and uh example I'll give
is when I go to Spotify now or to any
one of these
platforms they want to send me to these
playlists that don't have even any
artist names it's like uh this
is jazz for studying this is classical
music for relaxing this is Rock for
partying the playlists are all these
generic things and they're embedded in
you situations in your life and I fear
that this is where some of these games
are being played so for example I will
find these Jazz playlist on
Spotify now I think I'm considered I I
don't think I'm being immodest to say
I'm considered one of the world's
greatest experts on Jazz so if I see a
jazz playlist certain are if I see a
jazz playlist and I don't recognize any
of the names of the artist not good
that's not a very good playlist
something something's not right
something is wrong going on here and so
this is this is the the ideal of these
large companies now is they'll use the
AI they'll use the virtual reality and
they'll use these other new technologies
to constantly push us wherever they want
want us to be on that particular day but
this this is this is what leads to uh uh
a sense of of um banality to the whole
experience because I don't know the name
of the musician I don't know the name of
the song uh and it's it's all just
coming at me in a very passive way uh
this can't be good for the culture now
let me give an example of what I think
is positive and people will be surprised
to hear me praise Taylor Swift because
Ted doesn't look like a Swifty but I
think it's very healthy the fact that
the biggest musical event last year or
even ongoing now right now is the erist
tur by Taylor Swift she is doing
152 concerts on five continents and
she's selling them out and this is a
billion dooll business right a typical
fan going to one of these concerts
average is spending
$1,300 that's the average of what
they're spending for this whole
experience
of going to the Taylor Swift concert in
some instances they're spending 5,000
10,000 you when she appears in Singapore
people fly into Singapore that's not a
cheap place to visit let me tell you
they fly into Singapore so there people
are coming from other countries to see
this and this is
revealing because what could be more old
school than a live
concert and so we're supposedly in the
digital age and the most
exciting most financially lucrative
thing happening in music right now isn't
something happening on the
Internet it's not a record sale it's not
somebody streaming God forbid it's not
AI it's a real artist going out there
and connecting with their fans directly
just like that and I think that's great
the only thing is we need more than just
Taylor Swift doing that we need the
whole music culture there because I like
last week somebody told me that Taylor
Swift had the top 14 slots that's right
on the Billboard Chart yeah I'm not
saying she had the top of the 14 all of
the first 14 tracks were Taylor Swift to
me this is like shopping in North Korea
I don't know if you saw this cone and
nobo thing he went to Cuba and he went
to this market and these markets in Cuba
there's one brand of everything there's
only one brand of beer you have to get
that brand there's only one brand of
soup you got to get that soup there's
one brand of tomato sauce and Conan had
this great thing it was so funny he's
going into the store and he asked the
proprietor do you have the the XYZ brand
and it's the only brand there and the
proprietor is such so relieved yes yes
this is the brand I have well Taylor
Swift is like that in music now it's
it's like the only thing on the chart
and I think she's having a positive
impact but we need more like that
because this is the antidote to the sort
of whole passive thing it's an active
experience of the fans connecting with
the star they love well the thing about
Taylor Swift is that it's taken years
for her to develop her career many
records over decade and a half couple
decades now it takes a long time to
develop an artist's career and with the
fast pace of society and how quickly
people Tire of things it's difficult to
do that well this is the hard thing they
call it the sophomore curse where your
first album does well and then the
second album sort of f out used up all
your good songs used up all your good
songs and it's aggravated by the fact
that the record Industries have lost pay
patience in building a
career and I go back to Manford iord ECM
where he's has some of these artists on
ECM label he's been recording since the
70s shett 71 72 but some of the ones
that are obscure that have never had a
hit record that's right but he'll keep
on recording them and he and this is we
need to have producers and record labels
that believe in artists and are willing
to take chances and build the career
because you're not going to get the
Taylor Swift if you give people uh a
little chance and no no we'll go on to
the next you know I was I was telling
you about Bruce lenville who was telling
me that his biggest regret in his career
was he didn't sign Ava Cassidy
tremendous singer died at cancer in her
early 30s and then became Super Famous
after her death yeah but there were so
few recordings and lenville wanted to
sign her but then he asked some advice
from other people at the label and a you
don't want to you don't want to sign Ava
Cass she doesn't have a style she just
sings all sorts of stuff she'll do a
soul song a jazz song she doesn't
everything she did she did amazingly but
they didn't like the fact that she
didn't have some simple formula they
could Market her as and so
lenvil decided not to sign her and then
right when she was dying he
realized he'd made a mistake and he
called her in the hospital but she was
this is like the last days of her life
and he told me he said tell I made a
mistake
my mentor John Hammond wouldn't have
done that you know Hammond discovered
Dylan Springsteen ARA going back to you
know uh Billy Holiday or what I mean
John Hammond was a legend at discovering
talent and what Hammond had told
lenville is if you believe in an artist
you fight for them you fight for them
with your life you put your life on the
line to fight for them and that's what
creates great startom I remember when
I'm old enough to remember when Dylan
came out I was a kid but I remember the
adults mocking him because of his voice
he has this this gritty voice and they
just thought it was so ridiculous but
clearly that didn't deter John Hammond
from from pushing D well he eventually
won the Nobel Prize in literature so
Hammond knew what he was doing but this
we need people like this and we need to
build the careers and you're right
Taylor Swift she built this over the
long hul starting from when she was in
high school that's right she was in high
school uh and I worry that the
infrastructure and the music industry is
not supportive to talents to get them to
that stage P anymore platforms like
YouTube Instagram Tik Tok are places
that people can go and put either parts
of songs or songs out there develop an
audience and do whatever you'd like to
do you know with no editorial board
telling you no you can't write that no
you we have to have a lawyer check this
out of course YouTube has its own law
you know own own rules on the kind of
things you can that you can put out but
for the most part you can make videos on
whatever you'd like and your channel can
be as varied as it like you can write
you can write about whatever topics
you'd like it's just governed on
whatever you decide to do what interests
you what interests you now Ted well I'm
always excited about discovering the
next musician that's doing something
fresh I
devote two or three hours a day
listening to new music I was wondering
about that and I make a priority of
listening to music from artists I've
never heard of before from all over the
world and in all kinds of genres do you
take notes when you're doing that no I
just I just soak up the experience and a
lot of it is not very good you know I I
I'll admit there's a lot of bad music
out there but during the course of a
typical week I'll listen to 2025 albums
and there's always something that that
week that gets me excited and over and I
Tred at the end of the year I publish my
100 best albums of the year on
substack and I always have a hundred
albums there that are just that I get
excited by and so this is what keeps me
fresh and vital is uh listening to music
and finding new things that are
happening out there and there's this
idea that um there's no great music out
there anymore but it is the problem is
it's all it's almost entirely coming
from self-produced in Indie albums
they're not coming from the record
labels the majors the majors are not
coming up with anything interesting to
me it's very rare I hear an album from a
major label that gets me excited and
periodically I do a Roundup I'm going to
publish one in a few days these are nine
10 recent albums I like surprising
number of them are recorded at home
people recording in their bedroom so
that gets me excited in jazz nowadays
and I to do the same thing with ideas I
devote a huge amount of time reading
every day I spend I'm considered a
writer I spend more time reading than I
do writing and people ask me well why do
you do that and I said
any process you have in the world your
output depends on your input and the
problem we have is society doesn't care
about our input and it should your boss
never says what books are you reading
what newspapers are you reading what
movies did you see what music are you
listening the boss doesn't care about
that boss just cares about the output
but the boss should care about the input
that's right because if you're not
learning new things and coming in with
new ideas the output is not going to be
very good so I manage my input I have
very ambitious goals for for input I
spend most of my day reading and
listening to music and then I'll do two
three hours of writing and but I thing
is I need the
input to have the output and so I tell
people all the time is if you want to
increase your creativity level your
productivity level whether you're a
writer or a musician or whatever you
need to pay very close attention to that
input and try to optimize it and so I'm
always trying to invigorate myself I'm
trying to to get something in my head
that's fresh that's new uh and so that
makes every day interesting there's
a thing a fluid intelligence versus what
what would be crystallized intelligence
and people that fluid intelligence I
guess would be people being able to
improvise for example and crystallize is
is people that use their life experience
to come up with ideas if you're John
Williams or something and you're writing
and you're 92 and you have a whole
lifetime of of experiences to write I
tend to like people's improvisations
when they're younger in their career MH
there's some something
about I've always thought that people
that are you know 30 and under maybe
it's maybe it's that because the Beatles
did their 13 records and broke up the
year that lennin and Ringo turned 30 but
before they even turned 30 they were had
broken up and they did all that music
before they turned 30 years old
something about pop songwriting yes that
encourage that that favors people that
are young now you can have the
exceptions people like Tom Petty that
wrote many hit songs in his late 30s and
his 40s and
there there's many artists we can find
find these these examples of but for
some reason to me improvisation favors
people that are younger you have people
like yourself and myself that are in
their 60s that have a whole lifetime of
experience that we're building upon what
advantages does that have over young
people well this is interesting because
you know we're involved in the music
world which is sort of a Young Person's
game um um and I know it's been true for
me that my audience of readers really
didn't begin growing till I was in my
40s and then it grew more in my 50s and
I remember the day day I realized that I
I published this book called The Jazz
standards and I got this glowing
review and I'm in my 50s and and it it
was stting to position me as sort of
like the this tribal Elder Who had who
had withstood the wars and come out the
other end and I thought maybe this is
going to be my destiny and then my my
readership really took off uh in my 60s
I'm in my 60s now now my readership has
taken off uh and your your audience is
growing and I I think this I'd like to
think this
testifies to a life well lived and we've
we've learned things from our
experiences and we're trying to convey
them
it doesn't mean that uh the youth
doesn't have something to contribute as
well because there's some things we need
youth for and I do think a lot of the
creative breakthroughs always come from
young people but we have uh an
opportunity as uh advisers to the
culture or
cators or uh uh being willing to offer
harsh criticisms or words of
encouragement I think in a situation
like that the cumulative experience is
tremendously beneficial because I have
to say I mean I often ask myself why
didn't I have these opportunities when I
was younger you know I wish you weren't
old enough I turned down I I'm not going
to mention names but in the last three
four months I've been approached by a
dozen influential institutions will you
write for us will you come give us a
talk will you and these when I was in my
30s I would have
killed I would have killed to had these
invitations I would have time to do I
have to turn them down I don't have time
uh and I always ask myself why didn't
they come when I was younger but the
fact is I was not prepared for those
opportunities when I was younger what I
needed to do needed the time to develop
and I needed the time to get the input
and the experiences and and to mul
things over so I I do I'm not saying I'm
I don't like living in a gerontocracy
where all old people control everything
I don't think that's healthy and we need
I do believe that there are some things
you get from experience and from putting
yourself into learning situations over a
long period And I try to draw on that as
much as possible every day you might
might have a hypothesis on something and
then you say okay I need to do the
research on this to see if that's true
is that you do that a lot probably right
you can't
believe the I mean for example I had
this
idea and I have been researching this
now for two years okay maybe I'll get an
article out of it I don't but the idea
is that what's happening in society now
is mirroring what happened in 1800 okay
okay and let me walk you through this
1800 in the 1700s you had what's known
as the enlightenment or the Age of
Reason where everybody tried to do
things rationally or
algorithmically and everything is done
by Rules by uh these great systematizer
who were like entrepreneurs or like
these tech companies and so uh in the
enlightenment everything was
rational and then there was a rebellion
and the rationalists never thought it
was coming they never saw it coming
people were saying well wait a second
you say it's rational but you you you
set up these factories and they like
sweat shops uh and eventually there was
a decision that we need more of the
culture driven by artists and creative
people so around 18 00 you have
Beethoven appear he's a celebrity right
he's more famous than the entrepreneurs
or the bankers or the
industrialists just 50 years earlier
check this out 50 years earlier the
leading composer in Europe was heyen he
had to wear servants clothing when he
worked for the estery that's right when
he worked for the esterhazy family he
had to work press like a servant he was
scorned he had to give all his
intellectual property rights to his his
uh boss and now you have Beethoven who's
a celebrity yeah and so all of a sudden
poets become more famous than uh
politicians someone like people can't
imagine how famous Lord Byron and Shelly
and Keats were and this was a reaction
against a society that had gotten too
cold too rationalistic too
algorithmic and then these artists
started creating great benefits for
human beings because they were humanist
so they're the ones it was in the 1820s
finally you get laws against child labor
this is where you finally get laws
against slavery and so you had a shift
from
rationalists and industrialist ruling
the world to creative people so my
theory is we're going through the same
thing right now you have these Tech
Titans they control the world what we
need is more of a creative humanistic
spirit and that because a lot of these
Tech platforms now feel
manipulative I feel the sort of a
command and control things not things I
wanted to do on Facebook I can't do
anymore the search engine results aren't
as good as they once were or Twitter put
this new rule in and it just it feels
like the rationalist algorithmic
society's getting too constraining so
I'm going to get back to your question I
decided 18 months ago that I needed to
to learn what exactly had happened with
the rise of Romanticism in the early
1800s when the culture had shifted from
rationalism to more artistic and
creative Pursuits I I devote at least an
hour or day to studying this you know
and I'm reading through Carl the French
Revolution and all the books by William
Blake The Poet who called the factories
the dark satanic Mills and Mary Shell's
Frankenstein this was like a critique of
of tech you have these scientists they
create a monster right it's you this is
so
appicable but anyway I I have immersed
myself in this sort of historical
question I
have I who knows maybe I'll get an
article out of it I don't know but I
will have things like that where I think
this is a fruitful path of
inquiry and I will devote months and
months to learning about this because I
think it will guide me in what's
happening now see it's not just I'm
interested in history it's no I want to
figure out what's going to happen in our
society in the next 5 10 years that's
what that really excites me I I view
myself as a futurist I have a very good
track record in predicting I'm
surprisingly good track record in
predicting and so I will devote immense
amount of to try to understand how these
situations played out in the past I
think the same thing happened 200 years
earlier where you had you're talking
1600 no yeah no you go where you had the
biggest boost in the economy back in
that period was colonialism right so you
went to the new world your pizaro and
Cortez you bring back all the gold and
you kill a million people or whatever
but over in Italy you had the
Renaissance with like Leonardo and
Michelangelo or whatever and I say who
do you want to be do you want to be on
the side of Cortez and pizaro or do you
want to be with the humanist and the
creative people like Leonardo and
Michelangelo I believe that happened
around 1600 I believe it happened around
1800 and now I believe starting in 2000
there's this new era in which the
rationalist forces in society have
gotten too powerful and the only thing
that can save us are creative artistic
humanistic people I say all the time the
problem with progress is people think
progress is a new technology but you and
I were talking about how bad the
upgrades are my phone is not working or
this or that and what we realize is that
true progress is human beings
flourishing and maybe we've reached a
point that that the people running the
tech companies aren't the right people
to get us to where we need to be for
humans to flourish we need sort of this
humanistic creative artistic belief so
my hypothesis is in 1400 this happened
in 1600 this happened in 1800 this
happened and now in 2000 we've got this
next phase I I haven't written this down
and I may you know I may never write
this down but this is the way I think
and so I'm constantly immersing myself
into these Connecting Threads between
what's happening today in the news
today and these historical and Creative
Studies in what happened in the past how
do people even learn this stuff I mean
you have many degrees talk about your
talk about your your your you started
out as a jazz pianist yeah well I I have
I have probably the best education money
can buy but I have to say it was the
best education student loans could buy I
didn't have I didn't have them I didn't
come from a wealthy family but I did get
into Stanford yep and I got an English
major there then I got a scholarship to
go to Oxford where I studied philosophy
politics and
economics and got got an honors degree
there uh and I will brag that I beat out
12 Road scholars in my exam I I got a
first and the 12 Road Scholars at second
um and then I went to Stanford Business
School to get a marketable degree in MBA
all this time I'm playing the piano I
mean when I was at Oxford I was gigging
every night and I'm studying philosophy
during the day this is like my dream
life this is that's where the coffee
comes in this because what makes me
happy is is is balancing reading and
music and creative stuff and analytical
stuff uh but the fact is most of what I
make my living on I I taught myself
interesting and I think that I never
took a class in jazz mhm I would have
but I never went to an institution that
offered a class in jazz and so I became
a jazz pianist and I started writing
about jazz that's my my main claim to
fame and then all this analytical
futuristic things where I'm able to
forecast the future see this came out of
business school I started working for
people in Silicon Valley that wanted me
to predict the future so they could make
money how is this product launch going
to go or how is how do we solve this
problem and so a lot of what I've done
and I never expected this to happen is I
just took the analytical tools I was
doing to analyze financial and business
situations and applied it to creative
and artistic things so that's why when
Spotify goes public I analyze the
financial reports because I'm good at
this I can I can go through these
Securities Exchange Commission filings
and find the secrets you know when I was
telling you earlier that Universal music
group is growing their publishing
business five times as much as the
recording business because I dig into
the find they don't want us to know
these things but I dig into the the
financial reports but basically I I have
a a life that makes no sense cuz I did
all these different things but somehow
they started to Fus together in sort of
a holistic way and and a lot of that is
just luck but you get luckier if you
force yourself into new situations
outside your comfort zone that increases
your luck over time could you have done
this though without the internet no I
could not what I'm doing now and I think
you probably feel the same the internet
has been curse and a blessing okay it's
a curse uh because it's destroyed a lot
of the institutions that creative people
depended on in the past m in the old
days I would have probably been a jazz
critic for a newspaper those jobs are
all gone right there used to be
everywhere every city had two or three
full-time Jazz critics working the
newspapers I if there are five left in
the country today I'd be amazed um so
the internet took away but all it it
Toth away but giveth give us to us as
well uh what the internet did allow was
direct contact with the audience right
and that turned out to me to
be more than what I gave away because
that's what I always wanted was that
connection with the individual my reader
out there I wanted to have that direct
contact so what I'm doing right now I
could not have
done without the internet so it's a
blessing for me but I'm fully aware of
how disruptive and destructive the
internet has been for many creative
people so I try to prepare them and I
always tell people learn from the
opportunities out there if you're a
musician or writer or whatever try to
connect with people because you can now
with the internet you can connect with
people all over the world maximize that
if you had to give a student advice some
is going to go to college for a degree
next year yeah what are what are the
areas of study people go into well
there's a big push that you should do
stems you should supposed to do science
technology math stuff but as you know
I've got this hypothesis that the next
generation of leaders are going to be
the creative people uh I I agree with
you and I think the AI the first job
this this is the the karma of AI is the
the techies are pushing it on us but the
first jobs that are going to disappear
are going to be the tech jobs
programmers or whatever so I I don't
tell people to do Tech unless they they
really believe in it I I always say you
wait for the career to find you if you
have a mindset that there's a Destiny
for me in this world and you go out each
day looking around you you will see
people are are are needing what you can
give that you if you have blinders on
them or I'm going to be a lawyer a
scientist whatever you can't see it but
if you have a more open mind you you
will see there are places in the world
where you are wanted and it matches your
skill set and your interest and I always
tell people don't be a musician or a
writer or whatever unless that calls to
you and then you it's not like you
choose you never and no I'm sure you
didn't do this there was no point in my
life I put together a piece of paper of
being a jazz musician or music writer or
whatever the pros and the cons if I had
done that I wouldn't I wouldn't have
gone down the path there there weren
enough Pros on the the one side of the
page is empty the other one oh you to
starve you know you know that's not how
you make the decisions you make the
decisions because you feel this I there
was a point in my life I felt I I'm not
choosing this I have to go into the
music path this is calling to me and so
uh I would you know with my my sons I
have two sons I didn't tell them what to
study I said follow your bliss follow
your happiness my oldest son did a major
in
history which doesn't seem very
commercial but then he got a law degree
at Harvard he's getting a PhD in
Columbia right now and he's he's he
could he's passed in the bar in New York
Harvard log we could do whatever we want
but he's decided he's going to be a
professor and I don't give him any
advice his his plan was much better than
anything I could come up with right and
then my my youngest son who loves Bach
is plays Bach all the time but he got a
degree in philosophy and I didn't other
parents would would tell me why did you
let your son steady philosophy this
makes no sense what makes him happy and
then he taught himself Finance he's got
a a successful Finance career going out
and is still playing B and I I told both
my sons is follow your heart listen to
your heart and soul so that that's the
advice I give everybody and if they do
that they will not be leted astray in my
20s I taught Jazz studies for 5 years um
after I finished grad school at n see
but I
was I thought to myself well this can't
be my last career I love teaching people
but not at the college level it was too
political at the time yeah I left that
cuz I got signed to a songwriting
publishing deal as a songwriter and then
moved to Atlanta in
'94 and then I was taught guitar lessons
at a local music store so went from
teaching in a college to teach you in a
local music store I taught 12,000
lessons over the course of from 1994 19
99 and then I started a rock band and I
got signed to a record deal that lasted
for about 3 years or so in that time
period Then I my side job was to start
producing
records and the band has one shot at
making it and then when you don't and
the chances of making it are very slim
and then the band had their one chot and
we didn't make it and then I'm a
producer and then you work with a number
of different artists and yet most of
them have one shot to make it or maybe
they're on their second record but then
I felt like okay well I'm really
dependent in all these situations on
other people either the people you're in
a band with yeah people you're producing
if they have the right song or if you
can or if they don't implode for some
reason or if they're not good performers
or whatever they have a record that that
the label doesn't believe in and they
don't promote it up until 2016 when I
started this YouTube channel this was
the first time that
what I did my success was based on me
alone and that was the most empowering
thing well it took till I was 54 till
that happened but there was never really
an opportunity for me yeah I mean I
could have tried to make it as a jazz
performer but Jazz at that time in the
late 80s early 90s was starting to
become the music of unemployment is
bring app called Jazz is the music of
unemployment but I kept following music
all along
and and trying to and but my whole goal
was just to learn that was it just keep
learning well what you did and and what
I did and and what I always advise
people to do is when you had decisions
to make you took paths that brought you
outside your comfort zone right and I
did this
too and it's scary at times because you
could keep doing what you've already
been doing because you know it yeah and
it's hell but it's the hell you know
right you know and so but we want heaven
and so we took the leaps and so I I'm I
think in both our instances we're
stronger at what we do today because we
had the circuitous path and at many
junctures we went outside our comfort
zone and that is something I ADV that is
one thing I did advise my sons I said do
not be afraid of jumping into something
that just seems far a field from
anything you know you will be grateful
later that you did that and so this is
this is a useful life lesson but also
it's just uh it's it's how you build
your job skills it's absolutely how you
build your job skills and there's
something that's sad but Society wants
to put each of us into a pigeon hole
right it decides very early in our life
you're going to do this and it's a very
it's a very tight constraining
situation and most people are not like
that and particularly talented people
aren't like that because talented people
have an ability to go off into different
directions and to develop different
capacities and so this is a battle each
of us must fight because the system is
never going to give us easy Pathways
right outside of that box right we have
to fight our way outside of the box but
what you'll and you'll see this we were
just talking last night about a a
drummer that can also play the piano or
you'll have uh you know somebody that
that is good in music and then makes a
movie and they're good in movies too and
you're go wow this but that's what
talented talented people are like that
this is
not this is not like lightning striking
if you have people that have that kind
of talent talent is more flexible and so
the the right decision is always the
decision that takes you outside your
comfort zone how long do you see
yourself writing for well that's always
a good question I will I
still feel excited invigorated every day
by what I do uh and I will write as long
as I'm feeling I'm writing at a very
high level so if if I feel that I'm I'm
repeating myself or it doesn't seem
fresh uh then I will I'll I will step
back then um but uh right now I've I'm I
feel that i' I've been given this it's a
privilege I I was telling you about
Jerry Seinfeld who
70 years old I think now somebody asked
Jerry Seinfeld in this interview about
um George Burns yeah who he admired
George Burns what did you learn from
George Burns and what Seinfeld said mve
me he
said George Burns taught me to love this
business love comedy the people are
great the audience is great it's a
privilege to do this and I feel that
about music and writing this is a
amazing privilege so that's as as long
as I feel that I love I love this I and
I've been given this opportunity and it
comes with a responsibility too but that
actually makes it better I feel I have a
responsibility I'm trying to I'm trying
to have a positive contribution to the
culture in my own small way I try every
day to have a positive contribution to
the culture and then we're we're both
mentoring other people in our fields and
all that and so uh some of those things
are going to continue to the duration
even if I stop writing there's a whole
world out there for me to to Mentor
guide advise and and there all sorts of
other things out there and it's possible
I would transition from writing to
something else at some point uh but it I
love the music I love the writing I love
the the interaction I have with the
readers and if if I have my way that
they last a little while longer let's
hope well Ted when you wrote your
article about coffee and talked about
about about drinking it as a kid I I I
always would say to myself man how is
Ted so prolific he has all these
interesting ideas he's putting out
things all the time and then once I saw
your article on coffee I said well that
explains
it well it's like me showing up in
fourth grade and I got that caffeine
running through the system so people
will say I've talk about the Age of
Enlightenment people will say that the
Age of Enlightenment in Europe was based
on coffee being imported into Europe
before that people would go have a beer
in the middle of the day and then they
switched to coffee and economic output
grew and you know books were published
and uh so don't don't minimize the
impact of caffeine that's right don't
underestimate it I I uh I am a huge
lover of coffee and uh that's how how I
get my day
started well Ted I really appreciate you
coming in today it's so wonderful to uh
to sit down talk with you again and uh
look forward to the next time well this
is always fun I had a blast the last
time I was here I was delighted to come
back and yeah let's do it again
excellent I'd like to once again thank
Ted for being my guest today remember
hit the Subscribe button leave a comment
and thanks for watching
