[Music]
hey there welcome back to the futurist
I'm Rob Chik and my co-host Brett King
is traveling once again he is a globe
Trotter he never slows down he never
stops he's in such demand around the
world it's often hard for us to find a
time for us to schedule the show
together so this week we're going to do
something different I'm going to fly
solo No guest instead what I'm going to
do is share with you a presentation that
I use when I work with client companies
now I'm often called upon by companies
to help them reinvent what they're doing
they need to launch a new product or a
new service or perhaps they have to
upgrade an existing uh product or
something that they sell and they want
to change it and to me this is a way to
invent the future because you're going
to get a group of people together in a
room and if you're successful what
you're going to come out with is a world
beating product something that everybody
in the world needs believe it or not
I've actually done that several times in
my career I've designed and launched
services that today are used by hundreds
of millions of people around the world
so I have something to share on that
subject and all kinds of folks have
asked me to share this publicly so here
I'm doing it for you our fans on the
futurists I'm going to teach you today
about collaborative creativity give me
just one second I'm going to load up the
screen and then I'll go through this
with y'all
okay this is all about creative
creativity in groups that sounds easy
but actually it's kind of hard to do
particularly in a corporate setting so
what I've done is devis a set of
Thinking Tools and some visualization
techniques and these are fun ways that
you can work with your colleagues to
design and develop something new so
let's get started collaborative
creativity often this process is called
brainstorming and these days
brainstorming has kind of a bad
reputation uh some people say negative
things about it and that's often because
the way brainstorming is done in
companies I think is completely wrong uh
very often you'll have a group of people
called together by the department leader
maybe a manager an executive in the
company and they say we have to
brainstorm something new well right
there you've got a bad dynamic because
there's somebody in charge that person
has seniority in a hierarchy in an
organization and that's just an uncool
Vibe if you're going to be trying to be
creative you want to get everyone on an
equal footing and so what I try to do
when I work with organizations as a
facilitator is to create that kind of uh
um UNH hierarchical or non-h
hierarchical gathering where everybody's
in an equal footing everybody feels
empowered to talk and I'm going to share
with you some of the techniques that I
use to do that this is much more than a
brainstorming session or a planning
session because it's actually a chance
for you to forge a completely new
relationship with your co-workers it's a
way for you to get in sync with your
co-workers and discover creative talents
that maybe you didn't even know you had
or they didn't know that you had or you
didn't know that they had so it's more
than a planning session it's even more
than a brainstorming session this is a
collaborative creative
process now you might be wondering what
why is this guy telling me this stuff
that's a fair question my name is Rob as
you know you know me as the host of the
futurists with Bret King but in my
career which has been a very long career
I've worked all over the world I've
worked in Asia and in Europe in North
America South America and many other
places and I've worked with some of the
biggest media companies on Earth some of
the biggest technology companies and
telecommunications companies and a bunch
of other organizations as well and my
job has been to help those organizations
figure out how to launch something new
something that never existed before now
these are companies with extraordinarily
high expectations I'm talking about
movie studios like Sony Pictures Warner
Brothers NBC Universal Paramount
Columbia and so on technology companies
like unity and heet Packard AMD Google
Microsoft and gaming companies like
Activision um I've also worked with
telecommunications companies like Nokia
AT&amp;T and a number of others all over the
world for a period of time I was an
executive at Sony Pictures I was the
president of a group at at Oprah Winfrey
company and I also worked at MTV
launching MTV around the world now these
are a bunch of different companies from
a bunch of different Industries but what
they all have in common is
extraordinarily high expectations and
zero margin for error if you're going to
launch a new service for them it has to
be successful it has to work and so in
that process I realized that really the
job that I had was creativity on demand
my job was to come up with ideas and
they had to be good ideas and they had
to work now that's a lot harder to do
than it seems um because you don't have
much margin for errors as I said that's
where I arrived at these
techniques so what you want to do when
you come to a situation like that where
the expectations are very high and
there's not much of a safety net you
really need to hit it you want to Stack
the odds in your favor in fact what
you're not looking for is one good idea
what you want to try to achieve is to
have a lot of ideas if you want to have
a good idea you better start with a lot
of ideas and then you can work your way
to the best idea that's what I'm going
to talk to you about today how to
generate lots of ideas and I want to
make this a fun process and I encourage
you to do this if you're going to do
this with your colleagues as well so you
can actually play AC this almost like a
roleplay game play the part the first
part I want to talk to you about is how
to be an alchemist and the key with an
alchemist is to combine different things
right The Alchemist used to combine base
metals and the their quest to achieve
gold or create gold or something but you
can do that too but you're not going to
combine base medals you're going to
combine people from your organization
you're going to combine uh you're going
to try to find chemistry with the folks
that you work with and get them to
collaborate in a new way so that's a new
kind of alchemy but it can be a very
creative kind of alchemy now the process
of brainstorming typically involves two
steps you probably have heard this
before diverge where you're going to go
out in a lot of directions you're going
to try to generate all kinds of ideas
this is the generative phase and then
there's a second phase called converge
that's where you start to apply filters
and criteria and narrow down the list of
ideas uh very often for instance if I
start a workshop with a company I'll
begin the warm-up exercise I'll ask them
them to each generate 50 ideas with a
blank piece of paper and we do that with
a time limit sometimes five minutes
sometimes 10 minutes depending on how
much coffee the group has had or what
time of the day it is a lot of folks
think they can't generate 50 ideas in
five minutes but actually it's quite
easy to do once you get started and the
great thing about doing it in a room
with other people is that you see other
people writing down stuff you know
they're kind of furiously scribbling
ideas down on their piece of paper so
that kind of encourages you it creates a
little bit of a a competitive dynamic or
at least a g motivation to get started
and so that's the process of diverging
going to generate a lot of
ideas after you get done with diverging
you can start to apply criteria and
filters and critical thinking to narrow
down that list now a lot of people get
this wrong and this is actually where
where brainstorming goes wrong this
first starting point is where people get
it wrong lots of folks want to jump to
converge they don't have the patience to
do the diverge cycle but you've got to
do diverge first and then converge
so the people who are impatient they're
real smart right they typically are
people who get paid a lot of money to
think critically and that's what they're
good at they're very proud of it and so
they want to apply that converging
thinking right away the problem with
that is it kills the energy in the
Divergence process right so if you start
with critical thinking for sure nobody's
going to generate any good ideas you can
almost guarantee you're going to have an
unsuccessful brainstorming session
that's why I think a lot of this process
fails when companies try to do it
themselves so what I'm going to show you
now is how to diverge and how to do it
respectfully with other people and not
preemptively converge and cut them off
so you can be generative which is
creative or you can be evaluative and
that's critical critical thinking but
you can't do both at the same time so
you can do one or the other and you got
to get everybody in the room on the same
page because if you got some people in
one part of the room who are gendering
ideas and people in another part of the
room who are sitting back going that'll
never work and here's why that's
evaluative that's critical thinking
they're going to gun down those ideas
before they've even been fleshed out
again your results are going to be not
very successful if you take that
approach so first thing you want to do
if you're going to be involved in a
collaborative brainstorming session or
collaborative creative process is get
clear I want you to get clear about your
emotional
state again this sounds easy but frankly
lots of people are not honest about how
they feel and how their emotions are
some people feel awkward or defensive
some people feel like they're being
called out or isolated or singled out
other people are angry or frustrated or
they've got they're irritated because
they've got something important to do
and they should be working on that and
so forth look if you can't commit to
this process in an open way with love in
your heart and the idea that you're
going to do something fun with your
colleagues and really commit to that if
you can't do it then you shouldn't
participate in it because you're going
to bring that negative energy in the
room and you're going to kill everybody
else's creativity so just don't do it
one great way to break out of a negative
emotion is to change your physiology I
had the opportunity to work with Tony
Robbins for a period of time a gentleman
I respect greatly and he says this all
the time you want to change your
physiology what he means by that is you
got to get up if you've been sitting
around you've got to stand up um if
you've been standing inside you got to
go outside change your physiology if you
want to change your perspective if you
want to change your mind and that's
especially true if you're in a negative
emotional state if you're in a negative
emotional state and you've been sitting
let's say you've been sitting in front
of your computer or looking at Facebook
or some other social media and it's got
you down and you're feeling bad well get
up out of that chair because you're
going to stay stuck in that motion if
you stay stuck in that chair get up out
of that chair go for a walk go outside
go play with your dog go toss a ball go
for a run go to a yoga class do
something different shift your shift
your body shift your physiology and you
will change your attitude it's essential
that you come into this brainstorming
session free and clear of any emotional
baggage second thing you need to do is
strike a deal with the rest of the
people in the room figure out some
agreements what do we all agree on what
are we agreeing to do today let's strike
a deal about that the first thing you
can do is easy thing to do is agree to
turn off your phone nothing is worse in
a brainstorming session than having a
couple people looking at their phones
and really the thing that kills
brainstorming more than anything is a
telephone call right in the middle of it
oh sorry I was right in the middle of an
idea we're right in the middle of
collaborating a great way and then phone
rings and some people have to peel off
and go deal with the phone just turn it
off trust me you're going to be okay
this is only going to take 90 minutes
max maybe less you can live without your
phone for that period of time so that's
one of the agreements you can strike
there's others as well you can agree
that you're going to have one
conversation at a time and this is more
important the more people that you have
in the room so if you have five people
in the room you definitely want to make
sure that two of them don't break off on
the side and have a side conversation
but as you add more people and some
people like to have a lot of people in a
room for
brainstorming uh then the likelihood of
that is going to increase it's very
difficult to keep people on the same
page with more than three or four people
in one conversation but you got to have
that commitment if you find this is hard
to do break up into smaller groups
that's a great way to handle it the
smaller the group The more likely you're
going to come up with things you can do
great brainstorming with four people you
don't need to have 25 people in the room
if you have 25 break it into five groups
of five but key thing when you're
brainstorming one conversation at a
time and mind what you say mind how you
respond here's a phrase you're not
allowed to use this is one of the other
commitments you can make to your
collaborator so you can say you're not
allowed to say the phrase no
but you you can't imagine how often
people say this it's almost
unconscious uh it's like a knee-jerk
reaction that some people have when
someone's floating an idea they're like
oh I know what we can do we could create
robots that fly through the sky and do
Zone drone delivery or something like
that and immediately someone say no but
you can't do that because okay that's
evaluative that's critical thinking
you're killing the joy in the room
you're going to kill the buzz nobody's
going to come out with an idea so you
must not say you got to banish that
phrase and I might say yeah okay but or
no but I need to respond I need to
respond to that idea because it's so
far-fetched it's so it's so such a wacky
idea the way to handle that is to use a
different phrase everybody knows this
yes and right it's the classic phrase
that you use when you do standup comedy
or any kind of improvisational comedy
and that's what this is meant to be a
fun collaborative improvisational
process so you say yes and yes is great
it's positive it means the other person
feels heard and you confirm their idea
and you're going to build on top of it
so banish no but and go with yes and
here's another thing that you can do and
this is a rule that you can create as
well talk less and listen more everybody
thinks that they're a great listener I
got to tell you folks I find most people
are not great listeners they're not
listening to what's being said instead
what they're doing is they're just
waiting for their chance to say the idea
that they've got in their head so
they're they're just holding back
waiting till they hear a moment when
they can say their idea the problem with
that is you're now moving away from
somebody else's good idea you're not
engaging with it you're not building on
it and that's a missed opportunity so
talk less listen more and if you want to
really do it like a pro do active
listening you'll probably notice if you
look at the show the videos of our show
I'm always writing things down active
listen is important uh you want to you
want to listen with a pen in your hand
and a piece of paper in front of you
because you're going to process what
that person is saying through more motor
centers in your brain and that means
you're going to have much better
retention and that's not
all when they're done talking you can
say hey I was inspired by what you said
I want to test my understanding can I
test my understanding no one's going to
say no to that of course that's okay
right if you test your understanding
you're going to say this is what I heard
and you play back what you just heard
that person say now this is the best way
to build good energy in a brainstorming
session because the person who took the
risk who came up with an idea and shared
it with the group even if it was a
half-baked idea or a fledgling idea
that's a risk and you're confirming that
they did something constructive you're
saying oh here's what I heard and maybe
you're going to reframe it for them in a
way that's even a little bit more
articulate than what they were able to
do the first time around so you're
building on it you're helping them
develop it testing your understanding is
a great thing to do now there's a
secondary benefit here which is that
some people are not going to be
listening as closely as you some of the
other people in the room so you're going
to help them understand what that first
person said and get everybody on the
same wavelength this are very good
practices for getting people in sync
don't forget that not everybody loves to
talk some people prefer to do things
verbally or non and some people prefer
to do things in a non-verbal way and
they like to write down and draw and so
forth
so typically when I'm running a
brainstorming session with a client
company we will do lots of things with
Post-it notes poster boards paper um
sometimes we do things where we don't
even talk we just silently brainstorm
and write things down that helps people
who are not comfortable speaking out
loud in front of a group that could be
very easily could be half the people in
the group it also tends to eliminate a
power Dynamic where the people who do
have the Gift of Gab the people that
love to talk a lot well they're going to
be temporarily silenced and that kind of
creates space for other people to come
up with ideas and fill that void and so
actually non-verbal participation is a
great way to do it it's another rule
that you can create to do
collaboration another rule another
another Baseline commitment that you can
make to the people in the room is to
suspend judgment you can agree that for
the next hour we are not going to be
critical we are not going to evaluate
we're going to just listen to each
other's ideas build on those ideas and
celebrate all the crazy ideas that we
come up with give your inner critic day
off just tell your inner critic to go
fishing I know everybody's listening to
this you're a smart person and you get
paid a lot of money to figure out what's
wrong with something you know anyone
who's a business development executive
or a dealmaker of any sort or an
attorney or in the finance department
these people they are primed to Gun Down
ideas because that is what they're paid
to do they're critical thinkers you got
to send that Persona away you're never
going to be creative if you do that you
cannot indulge that person in a
brainstorming session so give your inter
critic a day off send them fishing and
what you want to do is prevent premature
evaluation only you can prevent this
from happening you got to kind of
restrain yourself from leaping to a
critical statement or an evaluative
statement I cannot tell you how many
times in my career I have been in
sessions brainstorming sessions where
we're planning something new and people
just can't wait to tell you how it's
going to fail I'll give you an example
and I worked for MTV they asked me to go
over to Asia and um I had never been to
Hong Kong before that's where they were
sending me and we got some advice a big
consulting firm came in with some people
from billboard magazine and they were
going to give us advice before we
shipped out to Asia and their advice was
MTV in Asia was going to fail they said
the customers will never go for it and
they had all sorts of data to back
themselves up they had some information
about purchasing behavior and and local
preferences in different parts of Asia
and so with all that evidence they said
look it's not going to work you are on a
suicide mission this is going to fail
now at the moment I had already shipped
my stuff to China it was in a boat it
was literally on a boat to China and so
I figured well I've got nothing to lose
at this point I'm going anyway so I'm
going to just go there let me tell you
that MTV Asia launch was the most
successful launch MTV ever had
internationally and so those those
critics uh those folks who are like
premature evaluators they were just dead
wrong they had a lot of data but they
didn't really understand the nature of
the problem and so that's often the case
don't listen to those critics the same
thing happened for me when I worked at
Sony where I was asked to design and
launch a whole range of new games now at
the time I was doing this in the 90s
there were not a lot of internet games
very few and Network games or
multiplayer games were extraordinarily
difficult to do so those were few and
far between we were launching them and
um the feedback I got from some
Executives was oh we tried that already
and it didn't
work this is another Joy killer phrase
this is a great way to kill the joy in
the room if people are trying to
brainstorm how to launch something and
some smart person walks in the room and
says oh yeah we already tried that
didn't work now what they're not taking
into account when they say this is
they're not considering that maybe they
tried it too early or maybe they didn't
do it the right way or maybe their team
was incompetent or maybe their idea that
they tried to execute on wasn't very
good anyway I didn't have the
flexibility when I worked at Sony to
listen to this because I had a mandate I
had to launch games I had about six
weeks to launch the first game when I
joined that company and I did and you
know what it was an out of the-box
success so was the second game third and
the fourth and so forth we launched
dozens of games successfully and we just
disregarded these critics who tried to
slow us down when we were brainstorming
and the same thing is true when I worked
at packet video there we were putting
video on mobile phones today we take
that for granted but back in the late
1990s early 2000s that was a
Preposterous proposition nobody could
figure out how to put video on a phone
but we did figure it out a packet video
and of course what we were told is that
will never work you will never be able
to put video on on a mobile phone uh
many people told us this I heard this
from Motion Picture companies and TV
studios where I was trying to strike
partnership deals I also heard it from
the people that make mobile phones and
then I actually went to visit vone one
of the biggest mobile operators in the
world and we demonstrated it streaming
we demonstrated video streaming on their
Network in their office on a device that
they
sold and there's Chief technology
officer came in the room and he said
that will never work and we were like
hang on a second you're actually seeing
it work right now in front of you but he
said said no it'll never work because he
had been so conditioned to the belief
that it was impossible to send video
through a mobile phone signal that he
could not conceive of the possibility
now if you let people do this if you let
people start your brainstorming session
with these kinds of statements what
they're doing is they're telling you how
your idea is going to fail and candidly
folks this is not such a work of Genius
it's not very hard to say why a new idea
will fail there's a lot of ways ideas
can fail what's very difficult is to
expl what might make it work and that is
your job at a brainstorming session your
job is not to say how it's going to fail
your job is to figure out what will
work if on the other hand you want to
stop the thought process completely and
kill the brainstorming session well
that's easy to do just say things like
this we tried that before and it failed
or the customer will never go for it or
that will never work and similar terms I
call these things thought terminating
comments because all they do is stop the
creative process they stop the
brainstorming process they stop any
ideas that are in progress completely
dead in their tracks and so if that's
what you're seeking to do if you want to
terminate it use a phrase like that but
my view would be that you should have a
commitment with your collaborators in a
collaborative brainstorming session to
banish all thought terminating
comments and if somebody slips up and
they say they say one you know as you're
pitching an idea you're trying to
formulate an idea they might say
something because some people slip up
sometimes all you have to do to remind
them is to say ouch that
hurts you don't have to call them out
you don't have to make a big stink about
it that they're using a thought
terminating cliche all you have to do is
say ouch that hurts and then they
realize what they're doing is actually
inflicting damage on the creative
process and they'll tend to pull back
they'll correct course okay so that part
was how to be The Alchemist on how to
great great chemistry between the people
you're collaborating with the second
part is how to be the Seeker because of
course we're looking for new ideas and
being a Seeker is the way to do that so
this is another kind of role playing
game episode we're going to go into
Seekers are curious
Seekers want to know they want to know
how things work they want to know where
things are they want to discover the
unknown be curious one way to do that is
to ask better questions if you want
better answers you got to ask better
questions one way to do that is to think
like a journalist if you've ever been a
journalist even a high school newspaper
uh then you'll be familiar with the fact
that journalists ask a certain set of
questions for every story who what when
where how and why these are great great
questions to start with particularly if
you're trying to design a new product or
reinvent a product or service that
already exists who is it for who's going
to provide it where will we sell it or
where will the customer Discover it what
is it exactly that we're proposing how
how will we get it in front of them how
will we create this thing how will we
deliver it and how much will we charge
for it when will it be available when do
they need it when's the right time to
deliver it and why do they need it these
are such powerful questions each of
these questions if you
answer them honestly if you actually
approach them candidly you're going to
uncover so much information that'll help
make your product concept or your new
idea
better another thing to think about is
um is what old thing has to give away
for the new thing to happen there's a
lot to be said about this subject you
know we often use the term killer app in
software when people use that term they
forget that actually a killer app has to
kill something if you're if you're
launching a killer app it means you're
going after something else you're trying
to undo something ker app for instance
uh you know email was the killer app for
uh for postal mail right for paper mail
and it really did succeed and effect in
effect we don't send letters anymore now
we just send attachments and email and
so forth so if you have a good idea of
the thing you're trying to kill it can
actually help you define your
proposition even more
tightly now you can also learn things
from other parts of the
company too often when we do
brainstorming we do it in an isolated
way but I'm a big believer that you want
to get cross- divisional groups together
because you're going to get more
perspectives and more understanding you
know for instance there's often a
marketing team and their job is to
really basically create demand for new
products and they'll want to think about
user scenarios and so forth but it would
make a lot of sense for that marketing
team to have the customer care people
there and some salesp people as well or
some distribution people in the room
because they're going to learn some hard
realities about how customers actually
get to products so it's a good idea to
learn from other parts of the company
now many businesses that I deal with
happen to be regulated and I've
discovered over the years that if a
company is optimized for regulation they
don't really think about customers they
tend to be preoccupied with the
regulator and they design and optimize
their entire business for regulation um
so that's really not the best way to do
Innovation companies like that have a
very difficult time innovating and if
you think of any regulated business
whether it's banking or air travel um
you'll know exactly what I mean these
are not businesses that are very Adept
at launching new services or Innovative
products
why is that the
case well particularly in a regulated
business but really any established
business you can think of that company
as an operator and that company is
optimized for compliance predictability
including Revenue predictability and
reliability customer expect expectations
and so forth those are the things that
they optimize the business for
compliance predictability and
reliability but if you think about the
creative process those are not the
creative values so Creator values or
innovator values are almost the exact
opposite so instead of compliance what
an innovator is going to value is
differentiation instead of
predictability what an innovator wants
is surprise Joy and wonder and instead
of reliability what an innovator is
seeking is novelty something different
and so you can see that these are
running exactly opposite of each other
and so if you're in an organization that
you might say is defined by operator
values particularly an you know long
existing company with a long track
record uh perhaps a company that's
highly regulated it's going to be very
difficult to break away from those
operator values and you want to
consciously strive to embrace innovator
values and again you might talk to your
colleagues about this when you're in the
brainstorming session so that they're
aware that that's what you're seeking to
do operator values are just death to the
creative process if your company's um
optimized for regulation or compliance
or even like a you know kind of a old
school customer expectation it's going
to be very difficult for you to adopt
that innovator mindset but I've got some
ideas to help you so let's proceed what
I always tell people is rethink
everything and that means literally
rethink everything from where you Source
your products to how they're found and
what they cost and how they're delivered
and how customers use them and so forth
and you can often discover some fun
things you can turn your customers into
marketers or you can turn your customers
into colleagues who help you design
products if you rethink
everything how to do it more questions
we're going to ask better questions
because in this section We Are The
Seekers so here's a very powerful
question what if it's one of my favorite
questions because it's open right it's
all about
possibility what if the sky were green
what if we could deliver things by drone
what if we could replace our physical
store with a virtual store and so forth
these are some of the questions people
have asked in the past they're working
on solutions for them now the flip side
of this is why not now usually when you
hear someone say why not not they're
saying it in sort of a flippant way like
oh yeah why not but I actually want you
to say this in a sincere way when I say
why not I mean it quite literally list
all the reasons why you can't do that
thing why is that difficult to do today
that's going to be your road map that's
going to be your your uh challenge that
you have to resolve right so if you can
figure out the answers to the question
why
not you can actually identify all the
challenges you're going to need to sount
that's a very constructive process and
it's going quite quickly if you answer
that question literally so what here's
another question often people say this
and they're sarcastic you know you can
say oh I had the most wonderful day
today and some will say so what that's a
joy killer right I don't mean to use the
phrase that way I want you to use it
quite literally so what you so we've
developed a brand new way to deliver
this service to our customers so what oh
well it's going to give that customer so
much joy and satisfaction because
they're going to get it in a more
convenient way so what well if the
customer likes it more they're going to
talk about it to their friends it's
going to save us marketing money we're
going to get the customers's endorsement
we're to mouth is the best thing going
so what well we're going to
differentiate from customer from other
companies that are out there competing
with us I mean you can start to see what
I mean right you can actually design a
little exercise around this when you
have a concept or an idea and you want
to kind of make it bulletproof you can
go through this process of asking so
what a few times maybe three or four
times and you start to uncover some
hidden benefits or things that are going
to differentiate your product actually
helps you sell it even
better and finally what's stopping you
and again often do you hear this
question asked in a kind of um
rhetorical way maybe it's a sarcastic
way um but not a serious way but I want
you to seriously think about this
question what's stopping you what's
stopping you very often in my life I run
into people who say oh I want to do this
thing or you know I need I need to adopt
a new habit or I need to make more time
to do this and I'll ask them what's
stopping you and sometimes they get
defensive because they think I'm being
sned but I'm not I'm actually genuinely
curious I want to understand what are
the things that are stopping you make a
list again you're going to identify the
road blocks and the hurdles and the
hazards in the way between you and
success this is incredibly useful
information because you can design for
it if you know what you're aiming for
and what you need to design around
that's going to inform your product it's
going to make you much more
successful and here's a technique that
is going to sound so crazy to people who
don't know me but I actually do this
myself and I guarantee it will
work ask yourself a question before you
fall asleep at night so when you lay in
bed before you before you turn off the
before you go to bed take a second and
try to formulate a question now here's
the interesting thing you know when you
go to sleep your brain doesn't turn off
your brain continues working um and your
brain will be free of all those limiting
factors um all those conscious rules
that bind us when the during the hours
when we're awake and that's why we have
such vivid fantasies when we dream
because your mind is
Unbound and if you frame a question the
Mind loves loves a question the Mind
cannot resist a good question it finds
it an irresistible Challenge and so if
you ask yourself a question before you
fall asleep what you're really doing is
programming your un your um your your
Unbound mind your imaginative mind some
people might call it the right brain
that's what we used to call it in the
past you're programming that part of
your brain to continue working on the
puzzle and solve the puzzle and then
here's the trick when you wake up in the
morning take a moment before you jump
out of bed and see if your unconscious
mind actually delivered some solutions
because very often that will be the case
write them down before you forget them
write them down before you jump out of
bed and brush your teeth or take a
shower jot down those ideas because that
might be the germ of a really great
original thought I do this myself I do
it all the time when I'm trying to work
on something new and I recommend it it
works now there's a thing that you'll
notice people tend to do they want to
jump straight to
Solutions uh this is a habit in
particular particular in the technology
and telecommunication space but I think
it's it's kind of widespread these days
I call it
solutionism um and so people want to
jump straight to the solution but this
is a gigantic mistake um if you start
out by jumping to a solution you're
almost certainly solving the wrong
problem so you might come up with a very
elegant solution I'm not going to say
you won't but it's just it's not the
solution to the problem you're trying to
Define you have to take time to do to do
problem definition and I want you to
think like a scientist
here I have a picture of uh of Albert
Einstein um who's a fabulous thinker and
a fabulous articulator of problems and
he could even articulate the proofs that
were necessary to prove that his ideas
were valid uh these are great
disciplines and one one thing Einstein
was in the habit of doing is starting
with problem definition and then going
to solution finding and he would not
proceed to solution finding until he had
a good problem definition uh there's
this apocryphal quot quote attributed to
Albert Einstein that's where a
apparently the anecdote goes like this
there was a radio journalist in the
1920s who came to Albert Einstein when
he was quite famous after his uh general
theory of relativity had been proven in
an experiment that he himself had
designed it was the the the experiment
was conducted by other people in other
parts of the world but he wrote the he
wrote the um experiment himself and he
said if this is this can be demonstrated
that proves the theory so by the 1920s
he was the most famous scient in the
world and a radio journalist came to him
and said Dr Einstein Dr Einstein if you
had only one hour to solve the most
pressing problem that faced the world if
you had one hour to save the world how
would you do it and Einstein paused for
a moment and according to the legend he
looked at the journalist and he said if
I had one hour to save the world I would
spend 55 minutes defining the problem
and five minutes solving it this is the
essence of problem definition if you
spend enough enough time to carefully
Define what problem you're solving the
solutions will present will present
themselves the solutions will be very
easy to find so take your time to do
problem definition and by the way I
should point out that there is no proof
that Einstein said this I've searched
all over and there is actually no
evidence that he said this but it's such
a good story and it fits my narrative so
well I figured I would throw it in there
be like a scientist and start with
problem definition now in the design
thinking world there's a way to do this
of course it's another question the
question is how might we how might we do
this how might we this is another
excellent question you'll notice the
questions I'm framing here often involve
possibilities right they're written in
this sort of subjunctive tense or
conditional tense because what we're
doing is imagining possibilities and
just by Framing the question that way
you're trigging an unconscious part of
your mind to begin to embrace
possibilities how might we and there's a
little formula here it's how might we
verb plus object plus modifier there's a
phrase It's usually an adverb or an
adverb construct um but how might we
verb object modifier and that's how you
build what we call a problem statement
here's an example uh very famously in
the 19 1960s and 70s where Toyota
company was trying to become a
worldclass auto company uh they were
constantly brainstorming new ways to
improve the automotive process and
eventually they figured out just in time
manufacturing and in the process they
changed the world's approach to
manufacturing but along the way they had
a couple misfires and here's a funny
thing they had that happened uh they
started to ask workers in the production
line at the auto Factory how might we
increase productivity and the reaction
they got from the workers was puzzlement
the workers were like uh what increased
productivity I don't know man I'm just
here bolting these bolts on this car
body I got to get back to work so they
didn't get very far when they asked a
question that way but then they C to
them the researchers realized they could
reframe the question and if you reframe
the question in the right way you're to
get great answers so instead of asking
how might we increase productivity and
getting no answers at all they changed
the question to how can we make your job
easier and all of a sudden they got a
torrent of responses because every
person on the factory floor had a bunch
of opinions about how to make the job
easier so if you reframe the question
you can sometimes unlock great
creativity so what I just taught you
about is two things there first is this
idea of how might we that's how we frame
a problem statement but if it's not
working for you if you've written a
problem statement that's too convoluted
or too abstract to come up with a good
answers simplify it reframe the question
how might we make your job easier how
might we repackage our product so people
will buy more of it how might we make
our product more discoverable how might
we offer this as a service instead of a
physical product how might we present
this to more customers how might we make
this product relevant to a customer base
that we've never talked to before all
those questions are going to help you
devise new features and new things that
will make that product more successful
in the marketplace
there are a couple other techniques
around this around problem definition uh
substitution in in math there's a simple
Pro process of substitution here I'm
borrowing that concept um one way to do
substitution is simply say how do we
meet that need right now before we have
a product what's the way we currently do
it and then go a little further and say
okay if we took that product away how
else would people get this need met and
you know the examples are clear right so
let's suppose you're trying to build
like a flying car all right the question
is the substitution question is how do
we get around town before we had flying
cars well the answer is obvious on on
motor vehicles and bicycles okay what if
we took those things away well then
people would probably use a horse or
maybe they'd walk on foot okay what if
we took those things away well then
people wouldn't get very far if you
can't walk okay so we can do that
process of substitution and what that
shows you is first of all that there
were transformative changes that
occurred in the past and each of those
changes each of those changes will help
you they'll inspire you to think about
new substitutions for the current way
those needs get met
another technique is called the
heuristic idea technique this is a high
futin phrase a heuristic is just a rule
uh so we don't really need to get too
fancy with it here um but for product
companies in particular this is a very
useful thing to do you look at all the
products that are in the market they
might be products from your competitors
and you make a list of them and you can
see that if you're looking at the video
you'll see that listed on the left side
product one product two product three
product for and then you make a set of
columns and you make a list of
attributes and so you might say you know
uh convenient packaging is attribute
number one and and you identify which of
the products have convenient packaging
another one might be um that it's h
compatible uh with a lot of different
other products so that kind of
compatibility is another attribute I
mean every product is going to have a
have different attributes but what
you're trying to do here is learn from
the marketplace of ideas that already
exist and you're breaking down here is
attributes by products you're trying to
create a list of all the attributes that
pertain now what you'll find is not
every product has all the same
attributes as the other products this is
interesting here's a place to get
curious if you find a blank spot when
you're doing theistic idea technique so
you've got a list of products and now
you're trying to write down all the
possible attributes that they share but
you might discover there's a couple
places where products don't share
certain
attributes that's the white space for
Innovation that's a really good thing to
do another thing to do is to solve the
opposite problem if you're stumped and
you cannot figure out how to come up
with a solution you you've defined a
problem but you can't find the solution
for it flip it around solve the opposite
problem how might we get people to buy
less of our
product make it more expensive make it
hard to find you can get the idea here
I'm being factious but actually it's
quite useful to think in opposites like
this um if you get stuck and one other
technique that I love uh I was working
with Barbara grth who is a great
innovator recently she reminded me of
this it's a process she calls headlines
from the future you may have heard about
this um here what you're trying to do is
envision your ideal end state so you say
okay we're here today and we've
identified a problem we have an
opportunity to solve that problem tell
me what the press release says tell me
what the newspaper is going to write
about this when that product actually
hits the shelves and do the whole
newspaper give me the date tell me which
newspaper it's in write the headline and
write the story out literally write out
the story about your success it's an
incredibly powerful visualization
technique and you might think I'm being
factious here right because it sounds a
little silly if I say right headlines
from the future but I'm not in fact in
the forecasting and planning industry
there's a technique called backcasting
and it's the exact same thing it's just
a little bit geekier because it's done
by analysts instead of creative people
what they do is they identify the
current state they sort of Define the
current state and then they forecast
several future States possible States
you know if these Trends hold true then
in the future we might arrive at state
number one if other Trends hold true or
other Trends Prevail we'll arrive at
state number two so we can kind of plot
out into the future this kind of
expanding cone of possibilities and we
want to Define each of those future
States and actually attribute a little
bit of probability to each one of those
okay so that's forward planning that's a
that's a kind of trend analysis into the
future but now that we've got those
future States you can ask yourself what
would it take to get the future state
number one or what would it get take to
get to Future state number two I've
talked about this as a cone of
possibility well there's a range of
probabil probable outcomes here some of
them are more desirable than others what
you want to do is get your group to
agree on which is the most preferable
outcome and then say to yourselves all
right what things must be true for us to
achieve that preferable outcome and you
might identify four or five things that
must be true in order for that future
outcome to happen those four or five
things that's your product road map
that's your development road map those
are the tasks that you must do and if
you do all five of them in the right
sequence you're going to arrive that
future state that you
desire okay the last section here part
three I have yet another roleplay
persona for you and this you can do with
your group as well is be the Storyteller
it's one thing to have ideas it's
another thing to convey those ideas to
other people well this is a
collaborative process and so you've got
to master the craft of getting the ideas
out of your head and into someone else's
head and there's always so many tools at
our disposal to do that I'm going to
take you through those right now going
to teach you how to be the Storyteller
the first thing you can do is write it
as a narrative a lots of times I see
people give presentations filled with
data points and charts and diagrams and
so forth those charts and diagrams and
numbers don't speak for themselves they
need a narrative to make them meaningful
to people people don't understand
numbers people can't remember figures
what we remember what we understand is
narratives so you have to turn your
concept Your solution or your idea into
a narrative and notice a narrative with
a beginning and a middle and end almost
always that's going to be some kind of
scenario that could be a product
development scenario but even better how
about a user Journey a customer journey
and talk about where they go and how
they find out about your new offering
your new service or your new product how
are they going to encounter that how are
they going to pay for it how's it
packaged how's it presented to them what
do they do when they get home how do
they use the thing in their lives so if
you write that out as a narrative you'll
notice that I told I'm framing this as a
story and you actually can do it as a
story it might be a very simplistic
story that's okay we're not getting
graded here on how well we write stories
the point is that is a linear sequence
to Discovery to product Discovery and
product understanding there's a linear
sequence to customer Journeys there is a
linear sequence to the decision to
purchase something new and so if you
write it out as a narrative you're going
to Envision that that's a very powerful
envisioning tool but it doesn't feel
intimidating I'm not asking people to
visualize anything I'm just saying tell
me a story anyone can do
it the next step is to get visual this
is really important more than half of
your brain power is devoted to
processing visual images we are visual
creatures we love visuals and yet most
people can't draw very well so there's a
conundrum how can you get a group of
people who are brainstorming to come up
with visual ideas here are a couple
ideas the first thing of course is to
diagram the solution and you might be
wondering what that diagram is if you're
looking at the video it's just something
I generated obviously those are not
English words as they not words in any
language um but the point here is to
simply draw a diagram a process diag
diagram it can be a sequential diagram
it can be a diagram that shows how parts
fit together it can be a diagram that
shows the product it can be a diagram
that shows how all the elements of a
service come together whatever it is
you're trying to develop or design or
launch diagram it it's a great process
most likely what you're going to
discover there's a couple places or a
couple steps in the sequence that you
hadn't thought of so this is a great way
to discover blind spots in your process
another way to handle this is to draw a
storyboard and here we can take a linear
narrative and combine it with that
process diagram and then we come up with
a storyboard the concept of storyboard
was invented by Walt Disney and he was
trying to get animators to work together
to create great grand narratives but it
hadn't really been done before he was
one of the very first people to try to
create featurelength movies with
animation and so they created a
storyboard and a storyboard is simply
the key frame of a key moment the key
idea for each one of those key ideas in
the story they would draw one frame of
animation and that was the storyboard
and so you know literally you'd say this
happens and then Snow White wakes up and
then this happens and then you there's a
reaction and then the evil queen or
whoever it is the villain does this
thing so again it's a linear narrative
and it's like this event occurs next
event occurs next event occurs that's
how we would do it for an animated show
or film but you can actually do a
storyboard for product or service or any
creative thing you're trying to invent
you can literally draw out each step in
the process a Ser a linear narrative
presented as a series of images draw a
storyboard another thing you can do and
I do this all the time when I'm working
with companies that launch products is
we go all the way to designing the store
and designing the package on the store
shelf and you may have noticed that on
the futurist we've had a couple episodes
now where some futurists do this process
as well um one of them actually even
designs an entire catalog he'll make an
entire kind of like Ikea Style catalog
where his product or his New Concept is
embedded in it so it feels like it's in
the context of the future you can do
this design the pl place where people
will make the purchase and then design
your product inside of that and design
that shopping experience again this is
going to tell you so much about what
matters in your product and how to make
it noticeable to people who are going to
buy it you can also draw a mind map if
you haven't done a mind map before
there's tons of resources on the
internet that'll help you figure this
out but mind map is useful and frankly
this is great in the brainstorming
process itself where you can start to
free associate all the attributes around
a single concept uh so for for instance
here we're showing strategies for
plant-based diets and you can see
there's different branches to the tree
this is a mind map that looks like a a
tree one of them is about social events
and finding restaurants another one is
cooking another one is how to stock a
pantry and so forth so those are all
different processes or steps in the
process of Designing a plant-based diet
and and living that lifestyle um but
they're quite different right so you
know going to a restaurant is very
different thing from shopping and so you
want to you want want to kind of
organize those ideas around each other
and so if you find if you draw a mind
map uh what you can do is as more and
more ideas flow into your mind as you
work more and more on that concept or as
you collaborate with your colleagues
more ideas will get generated and you
can find a place for them on this map
and that's a very useful step it's
actually a good preliminary step before
you create a
narrative it's also good to draw the
competitive landscape and if you're
listening to this and you haven't got
the picture in front of you I've got a
picture I generated here with one of
those generative AI apps of a SC
landscape and it's great it's a narrow
path through a dark woods and there's a
nice Village on the other side but first
you have to go past all these creepy
skull things and these kind of haunted
trees and so forth it reminds me of the
woods in The Wizard of O that's a great
way to think about the creative
landscape it's like wow here's a very
perilous landscape that we have to get
through in order to get to the other
side draw it draw it and create kind of
personas a little bit of Personality for
the competitive products it's a great
way to think about them how you position
against them a related idea is called
draw the force field and you don't have
to be a good illustrator to do any of
these things by the way you can do this
with stick figures you can even tear
pictures out of magazines or find them
on the web and print them out now
drawing the force field is an
interesting thing there are forces that
will accelerate your progress and there
are forces that will stop your progress
they're going to oppose your progress
and so in this diagram if you're looking
if if you're not looking if you're
listening uh you you'll see what you
would see in the diagram is that on the
left side in blue I have forces that are
going to propel our progress forward and
you want to identify what those are uh
in the technology World they often call
those the accelerating Trends or the
accelerating Technologies so for
instance these days you've heard me and
Brett talk about this on the show we
would talk about the things that are for
instance accelerating artificial
intelligence um and that is uh that is
great increases in parallel processing
uh from the micro micro processor the
gpus that are created by a company
called Nvidia another thing is the great
growth of data right these are fueling
artificial intelligence and propelling
it forward so right now one of the
reasons you're seeing so much AI is that
there are these great great forces at
work that Propel AI forward they make it
move much faster but for every action
there's an equal and opposite reaction
and that's also true with technology
there are forces opposed forces that are
going to slow you down and you want to
note what those are as well so for
instance in the AI field we might say
regulatory conditions sometimes there
are new laws that are being introduced
customer acceptance might be slow people
might be resisting because they feel AI
is a threat there may be a kind of
consumer sentiment that is working
against you some companies are using
copyright and they're seeking to stop
the progress in artificial intelligence
by leveraging copyright so those are
forces that are opposed anyway the idea
of drawing the force field is simply
help you get aware and visualize the
forces that are going to accelerate your
process and the forces that are going to
be pushing against your progress this is
a really helpful thing and it goes with
the competitive map in the sense of
drawing the landscape in which you're
going to be
operating folks don't hesitate to break
some glass I'm giving you all these
ideas but they're not rules that are
written in stone these are ideas that
you can
change and when you're out there
brainstorming trying to come up with
ideas don't be limited by what's
possible or what you believe is possible
or what somebody else has told you is
possible or something like that
break some glass come up with ideas that
no one's thought of before feel free to
do that this should be a risk-free Zone
and it's okay if you
fail failure is an important part of the
creative
process I'm an artist I'm a writer I
launch new businesses I launch new
products and I fail all the time I fail
frequently probably half the time I'm
going to fail if you do anything
creative in your life even as a hobby
you're going to know that failure is
part of the process and what Jeff B was
famously said at Amazon is failure and
invention are inseparable twins you got
to embrace failure don't hide from it
pay attention to it understand why it
occurred course correct try again fail
again fail more spectacularly keep
trying keep learning from failure you'll
find the PATH forward so now it's your
turn what I would recommend you do is as
a takeaway on this if you're trying to
do something new you're trying to invent
something new start by writing a problem
statement start out by saying what
problem are we solving it could be for
business it could also be for a creative
project or it might be something social
that you're working on I framed all this
as if we're selling products but I know
some of the people are listening are
pursuing other things nonprofit Ventures
artistic Ventures creative ventures of
various sorts all of them are there to
solve some sort of problem so Define the
problem first start by broadly
considering all the opportunities and
threats that affect your field or the
industry you're in or the organization
that you're in to figure out the
opportunities and threats and then maybe
you can identify a need something that
is not currently being addressed in a
company that might be a need for a new
product or to flush out a product line
or new Revenue so uh for an artist it
might be something involving a new
audience segment or perhaps You' got new
materials that you want to apply and
create an artistic statement with and
finally frame your problem statement as
a question in this format how might we
how might we do this differently how
might do it better how might
we all right well that's all for me
today I'm Rob Turk I am the co-host of
the futurist with Brett King I'm the
author of the book
vaporized and I will be back with
another guest next week who'll be
telling us about how they build the
future but now you're equipped to go out
and invent and design your own future
and I sure hope you'll take advantage of
this once again I'd love to give a big
shout out to the people of provoke media
who make this show possible they are
great they're my friends and support
suppers they have been so encouraging to
us thank you to Kevin our our engineer
and to lisabeth our producer and
everybody at provoked media and of
course I thank you the fans who make the
show possible I found lately we've been
getting great things in social media
from people uh I love it I love to hear
from the audience I love it when people
tell us what's working and what they
want more of or who we should interview
next so don't hesitate bring that stuff
we want to hear from you all that's it
for this week and I'll see you in the
future
[Music]
