hello and welcome to factually I'm Adam
Conover thank you so much for joining me
on the show again artificial
intelligence is supposed to
revolutionize the world and our economy
the major platforms are spending tens of
billions of dollars on it just this year
alone to gain an advantage it's one of
the largest infusions of cash into a
specific technology in the history of
Silicon Valley but while we're seeing
all this investment what we're not
seeing yet is anything approaching a
revolution the companies tell us that AI
is about to get massively better that
this is just the beginning and that a
mega powerful artificial general
intelligence that will transform work
and our lives is just around the corner
but there's a big problem large language
models require material written or
generated by humans to train on and a
recent study found that they might
already run out of training data in just
the next couple years which means those
models won't be able to get much better
and in the meantime all of the AI
companies are burning cash chat GPT
loses
$700,000 every day that it's running
open ai's recent release of GPT 4 lets
users interact with audio or video but
the underlying model is the same it's
not actually any smarter than it used to
be is just a little bit Slicker now and
it's not going that much better for the
other companies either Apple just did a
big reveal of their new Apple
intelligence which will let you use AI
to turn a photo of yourself into an
emoji which okay I mean who gives a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
and meanwhile Google has had to deal
with the humiliation of people posting
examples of their AI giving insane
answers to boring normal questions no
Google AI you should not put glue in
your pizza sauce and it's kind of weird
that your brand new product told me that
I should so there's the suspicion
growing that AI is nothing but marketing
hype that it's the same as crypto web 3
and the metaverse just a new way for
these tech companies to prop up their
stock prices because they don't have any
other real ideas so is that the case and
if so what is going to happen when the
bubble bursts well on the show today we
have an absolutely incredible guest to
answer those questions for us but before
we get into it I just want to remind you
that if you want to support this show
and all the conversations we bring you
you can do so on patreon head to
patreon.com adamon over five bucks a
month gets you every episode of the show
ad free we've got a lot of wonderful
Community features as well we'd love to
have you join us and just to remind you
if you want to come see me do stand up
comedy on the road head to Adam con.net
for tickets and tour dates coming up
soon I'm heading to Phoenix Arizona and
Toronto Canada Adam con.net for those
tickets and now let's get to this week's
episode to dissect the waves of AI hype
being pushed by some of the most
powerful companies on Earth my guest
today is Ed zitron he's a writer he's a
PR guy and he's also one of the smartest
fiercest and most influential critics of
tech out there which he puts in his
influential newsletter where's your Ed
at please welcome Ed zitron
Ed thank you so much for being on the
show thanks for having me you have a a
wonderful newsletter called where's your
Ed at correct where you are documenting
more than almost anybody else what
exactly is happening in the economy
especially in Tech uh you use this
phrase the rot economy what do you mean
by that so the rot economy is this
growth at all costs ecosystem that's
kind of eaten all the markets and it's
most prevalent in Tech where it's not
about better it's not even about making
more money per se it's being able to
show that you will grow forever that you
will show 10 20% growth per quarter
forever perpetually and what this means
is you see products like Facebook
especially Facebook's the best example
which are made worse they are harder to
use there are more ads they interrupt
you more they get in your way more they
interrupt you trying to do the thing
that the website is meant to be for
connect with friends for example so that
they can show Wall Street oh we're
growing not only increasing Revenue but
number go up and it really is the number
go up mission Facebook also hilariously
as of last quarter no longer reports
their actual user numbers right they
report daily active family people which
is which is a really confusing metric
you know I often feel walking around oh
I'm a daily active family person yeah
that's how I feel today but what's great
is when you go and look back they've
mentioned this metric before and it's
just completely different to the other
metric it just makes no sense yeah it's
a there it it they're playing with the
numbers it's a fake number yeah it's I
wouldn't say it's Enron level but it's
Enron adjacent yeah but you see it with
other companies like Google you just did
your video on Google Google wanted to
increase the number of queries on Google
which doesn't mean Google is good it
means that more people are searching for
more which usually suggests that Google
is not doing its job right yeah because
if the more you have to search the less
good search results you're getting
you're trying three search results when
previously only need one needed one
exactly and the problem is for the user
there is Google is worse so you use it
more but that's a solution for Google
because you're seeing more ads and also
number of queries goes up yeah great and
this is really the RW economy r large
it's when products have kind of escaped
the pen of utility there was usually it
used to not be quite so obvious a con it
used to be oh this is a free product we
make so much more money like you we
should be paying you as well as this
being free but we're all happy here
because the product does what it's meant
to
not really the case anymore in a lot of
cases at least you make the argument
that Facebook is dying in what way so
traffic to Facebook has been dropping
off for like three or four years I mean
I deleted my Facebook account
totally uh four or five years ago and
I've never once missed it I'm still I'm
an Instagram addict right and I kind of
have to be for my work like as a
comedian literally people ask me to do
shows on there that's where I see other
comedians it's like that is the Town
Square for what I am doing For Better or
Worse Facebook never comes up it just is
has disappeared from the social world I
inhabit so what's insane is billions of
people Alle legitly use Facebook yeah
now you go in there and it is kind of
like Instagram it is thing you followed
Carousel of people you might know add
add Carousel of videos you can't what
that show it's like a 3se second Loop
add person you follow add person you
follow or sponsored content what's also
crazy is it's full of AI content now mhm
just weird like shrimp Jesus is the when
everyone see like it's just a shrimpy AI
Jesus it's Jesus but he's like made made
of shrimp or like not even like cocktail
shrimp like crustacean like in the sea
shrimp it's so I have seen both okay and
as a connoisseur of the shrimp um yeah I
just wanted to be clear shrimp does not
refer to the form of juist because he's
actually usually quite
buff what's also weird is you see a lot
of these ones where it's like no one
will share this on a poster with a
million shares yeah and it will be a
disfigured child begging for money on
the street and people responding just
like wow this is so so terrible I will
support this it isn't obvious whether
these are real people or not yeah but
Facebook as a product has just
deteriorated and the the traffic's gone
down web visits are down something
ridiculous like 20% 25% over the last
few years along with most of the major
internet platforms and actually the
product itself functions so poorly if
you one of my favorite things I found
recently was if you type Facebook
complaints into the search bar you can
find six seven different groups with
thousands of people all complaining to
what they think is Facebook but when you
go in there it's just the most obvious
scam artists saying like oh yeah DM me
I'll help you get back in there and then
the occasional Judas goat with someone
responding who's another scammer saying
oh this person really helped me and it's
so strange because yeah this website
makes billions and billions of dollars
but the actual product is broken broken
you log in you're like there's nobody
here it's a it's a dead Mall there's
there's sort of like diluted Boomers
walking around like people who people
who like don't have their wits about
them sort of stumbling about the place
but uh not no like actual activity of
the type that we were used to 10 years
ago or the type that would indicate
there's a thriving product happening I
wouldn't go on there to talk to a friend
which kind of feels like the point of
the thing yeah and even Instagram the
only reason I keep Instagram is I have
three or four friends on there who for
whatever reason maybe they hate me is
they like they're not great with text
they're not great with email they're
amazing on Instagram DMS yeah and I
guess it might just be the lanes of
brains that people go into Instagram is
right now pretty bad too as you well
know yeah in the sense that you do get
algorithm algorithm person's thing
algorithm algorithm yeah but I think
it's going to get so much worse I think
once Facebook really falls apart they're
going to go now we need to make
Instagram even more profitable Adam
misseri at the helm just nimbly
screaming at people that we must show
more ads did you see a few years ago
when uh with Kylie Jenner I think it was
when she complained the funniest thing
there was she was saying we need to stop
and her and she posted uh we just want
to see photos of our friends like what
are all these videos like Instagram was
just for photos of our friends what
happened and I I love Adam Missi the I
hate him I think he's a disgusting he's
the guy who runs Instagram under
Facebook he used to be the head of
Facebook's newsfeed as well which is
just the Michael Jordan of breaking the
internet and he responded to that by
saying we're actually going to show you
more videos which honestly I have to
give him credit for just like one of the
most well-known celebrities in the world
he's like actually it's going to get
worse what you gonna do use Tik Tok no
don't use Tik Tok don't don't use TI
well and but that is striking because
celebrities like her used to be the main
currency of Instagram this was that was
sort of one of the points of social
media was oh hey this celebrity is
actually on there actually posting you
can comment they might see it yeah it's
the imagin proximity yeah well and in
some cases like real proximity people
used to have those sort of casual
interactions with celebrities or people
they were interested in um and then
there's the effect of you know the old
effect of Twitter of this being the sort
of large social casual social network
for lots of different professions you
know um uh everyone is sort of visible
to each other everyone's posting things
um and having generally a good time and
then you see ads as well and that's what
you get for it being free and seems to
have disappeared that that version of
social media yeah and Twitter is a
particularly weird one because it wasn't
that bad before Elon took over yeah but
Elon it wasn't growing it wasn't growing
but it um I think users were growing and
it was not profitable but had been
profit it was profit adjacent it could
have trundled along it would have been
fine then musk comes along and says hey
everyone you've you've never seen me run
a company before publicly it's going to
be so epic and based and it was just he
has ruined it yeah mostly because he
fired the trust and safety people I
don't think people realize how important
those people were cuz it wasn't just
them stopping people saying slurs which
has of course increased yeah it was them
stopping spam and the spam on Twitter is
so bad now you just get you will post a
normal thing and there is just hole
someone posting hole in the reply just a
bot instantly and I don't mean that in a
oh you click through and it's no it's
just that's the picture I mean that's
become a meme now on Twitter in the way
that you know whoo this blew up go to my
SoundCloud used to be a meme now it's uh
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and bio let's bleep [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] but um
yeah [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and bio that is that is the
new meme of what is in the reply of
every single Twitter it's escalated now
where it's just naked yeah just full
hole and it's it's crazy but that was
musk attempting to grow the website he's
not a good CEO he's very bad at this
that's why it went so poorly but that
was his attempt to go okay I will take
Twitter and I will just make it grow
I'll make the money come out of Twitter
and it doesn't work like that cuz social
networks are very precious creatures
yeah you touch one thing a lot of things
break yeah and he touched a lot of
things and a lot of things are broken
now but you're kind of seeing with
Instagram and Facebook what happens when
someone better at this does it and Mark
Zuckerberg's a horrible creep but he
knows what he's doing and also everyone
that works for him they're all part
javat olivan the co uh BOS the CTO BOS
the CTO by the way did a letter an
internal letter called The Ugly back in
2016 2017 and within that he said all
things are Justified for growth it's a
crazy thing to write he talked about a
terrorist planning an attack and killing
people because of Facebook using
Facebook and then he said but we
connected people it so but that is what
Facebook is Jesus Christ I know it's
really horrible when you look back and
you see these things and they said them
out loud yeah but when you see what's
happening today you kind of say oh that
makes sense and a lot of what I write is
just me looking at old stuff and Going H
just oh no I don't like that that that
makes more sense than it should and then
you kind of look to them to be better
you try and look even optimistically for
a second isn't anything it's not they're
not even trying anymore not even trying
to pretend that they care anymore and
that's really what frustrates me well
what would what would it even mean to
make Facebook grow in a way that that
helped people right or in a positive way
because they already had a third of
humanity signed up for this service
which is I mean that's got to be a you
got to be pretty close to the ceiling
there considering how much of humanity
lives in dire poverty currently you know
of the uh seven or eight billion people
on on Earth how many is whatever um uh
and so if they're showing growth if they
need to show growth like the only way to
do that is to continue to to like
squeeze the juice out of the existing
users you can't continue uh selling the
same thing you were selling back in 2010
to more and more people that's the
problem so there is data I've seen that
said suggests that only 100 million
people more people got online between
2022 and 2023 so as opposed to like
hundreds of billions of people getting
online so the amount of people getting
online is going down it's not going down
it's slowing right the low hanging fruit
almost everybody who has the means to
get it now is has it or we're reaching
the end of that process the big problem
being that like the global South is not
getting online there probably serious
issues there that are just not being
solved right one might think and Mark
Zuckerberg actually flirted with this
idea before about um with the third
world and trying to get people on line
and he just didn't do it right there was
stuff about like having a really low
bandwidth low internet Facebook like
we're you're going to be able to get
Facebook on a phone that can work out in
the middle of nowhere with like almost
no battery like that kind of thing just
as an attempt to we got to keep the
numbers going up I feel like in India
there was some sort of legislative thing
but nevertheless That's a classic
Facebook solution to a different problem
yeah the actual problem there would be
syn hundreds of millions of dollars into
internet infrastructure if you want to
actually do this right fix the problem
don't make a new Facebook to fix and
that's a huge problem that the internet
compan compies I think worldwide have
never grappled with the fact that
internet infrastructure like limits what
they do it's a little bit of a separate
issue but it's just something I think
about all the time how Google a couple
years ago tried to um launch you know a
video game service called stadia where
you would where where they where their
their premise was I'm sorry this is off
topic but it boggles my mind to think
about it all the time their premise was
computers are too expensive instead
people should rent the computer from us
we'll have it in a Data Center and
you'll just like send the frames back
and forth over the internet your your
controller data will go to the server
and it'll send back frames so you'll
play Call of Duty running on our
computer but sent over the internet and
I was like that's completely [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
backwards computer Computing is very
cheap people are able to get like
incredibly powerful computers at a at a
very low cost right now no one has good
internet people in the US are paying
hundreds of dollars a month for internet
that's worse than anywhere in Europe
because our internet infrastructure is
so bad and Google I think at some point
had a fiber optic program to like try to
bring fber people that failed and like
that should be if they want to grow the
internet or if they want to grow their
products in the US that should be their
main focus is making sure that like
everybody has fiber and they just didn't
do it and they're facing the
consequences to a certain extent so the
irony of all this don't know if it's
there is a connecting fabric though and
all of this is no one invests for actual
it they want growth but they don't
invest for it right Google invested with
Google Fiber and it grew in some places
it was fine but instead in of investing
on the time Horizon you should with
something like this which is 20 years
yeah they gave it 5 10 they were like
not really making us a bunch of money
and we don't really think of the future
so we won't right so they didn't and
they canceled it just like Google Reader
Google wave all those other things just
it's another little side project while
they keep raking in money off of ads yes
it's like
it's it's frustrating because Google
stadia for example there are there is
precedent of this working a Xbox game
pass uh Playstation remote like there
are internet streaming things like that
already now it's streaming from people's
consoles people do like the idea of
streaming gaming yeah but like you said
the internet infrastructure isn't there
and also it's not good enough yet even
if it is it's just there's something
missing and they're not really thinking
why don't we make it really good then
we'll do it yeah they just went well we
got to what was it 2021 they did that
was 2020 they just did it at the one
time it looked like it would work yeah
and then they didn't they just gave up
on it what they should they tried it for
a year and then they just H never mind
whole entire year as well it also was a
sucky program like you had to buy the
games but you didn't you bought the
games but only on stadia yeah and then
they ended up refunding everyone which
is nice but also why do this at all like
yeah regardless with Facebook with
Google with all this they don't think of
the future they don't get to think of
the future if they want to please the
markets everything has to be now now now
and if it's the future it needs to be
the vaguest possible version so that
they can roll it back if it doesn't work
so that they can change it so that Jim
Kramer screams at them in the right way
and it's frustrating because like you
said Facebook is running out of people
to sell to and Facebook knows the moment
the market realizes the market is going
to punish them punish them hard now Mark
Zuckerberg can never be fired he has
they have this Labyrinth thing Class A
Class B thing where Zuckerberg controls
everything thank you Shan Parker by the
way it's all his fault he is the one
that negotiate with Peter teal to have
the third board seat go this is the guy
who was played by I think Justin
Timberlake in the movie way moreing
whenever I hear his name I'm like Justin
Timberlake is who we're talking about
yeah yeah but that's the thing Justin to
be like way more Charming way
cooler but Mark Zuckerberg could do
anything yeah which is why he's sunk $30
billion into the metaverse but he could
just say screw you I'm going to have
this company work sustainably it's going
to be a great company still going to
print money right but he likes money he
likes power and he's always been like
this back as far as 2008 they were
buying Google ads to get Facebook
holdouts onto the site yeah company's
been rotten since the beginning but
there is no reason it has to be like
this other than the fact they're scared
of the markets they're scared of what
the markets will do but also they don't
care none of the people running these
companies actually give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about
technology they don't build technology
SAR py of Google CEO of Google alphabet
as well McKenzie man uh Mark Zuckerberg
actel Koda but also I had a bunch of
growth freaks the heav elant CEO coo as
well like
all of these people are growth Freaks
and what sucks is it really does not
have to be this way it just is because
it's super profitable for now yeah but I
see everything slowing down everything
is slowing down and they don't have a
next big thing to sell to the markets
when the markets realize that they've
got nothing else it's not like they have
a great product they can point to got oh
people love this yeah look up how much
everyone loves Google right now they
love oh wait they don't because we put
search in there to show the markets how
cool we are it's they're no longer
building products for people like you
and me they're building things symbolic
capital I call it to show off to the
market and say look we'll grow forever
we're so Innovative and we'll be
Innovative forever it's very frustrating
it feels like we've turned this corner
where the tech companies used to sell us
things that were genuinely almost
magical products you know the iPhone
Google Facebook these were things that
you showed the promise them to people
and every single person said I want that
right now I need it in my life it'll
make my life much better today I
remember when I got an iPhone and
suddenly I can look at a map wherever
I'm going it changed my life voicemails
that was the big thing visual voicemails
oh my God that saves so much time but
that was all the low hanging fruit and
now they are in order to keep up that
promise to Wall Street to to keep up the
promise of we are going to keep growing
like that forever because that's what we
did for the last 10 years for the next
10 years we've got crypto AI VR and the
public to all those things is saying
what yeah like what why would we want
that what is what is that for but the
companies are like pretending as though
everybody wants it they're making
concept videos they're they're and
they're tricking Wall Street to some
extent but it's all like a fake version
of what they used to do yes so call this
the rockcon bubble where for about 20
years they have found all of the
hypergrowth markets on the Enterprise
level like Cloud we've gone from point
when computers were relatively
decentralized in the sense that getting
a file from you to me was quite
difficult to ubiquitous Enterprise and
consumer Cloud so you can share a file
with someone quickly it's kind of
seamless you don't realize how much is
going on behind the background we have
really good batteries we have incredibly
fast smartphones we have apps on our
smartphones that connect with each other
we have all of these things all of these
we can now rent a property in a few
clicks we can do all these things in a
few clicks that we couldn't before these
were all hypergrowth markets these were
ways of building billion hundred billion
trillion dollar Industries we're out I
think we're actually tapped out of them
yeah except everyone is still acting
like there is one yeah and so vr's a
weird one because been around for a
while and anyone who'd used it was like
yeah this is still Niche up until now I
have friends who love V said this is my
mate Casey says yeah VR is Niche and he
loves VR I love VR I think it's really
cool yeah when it works which is a
loadbearing win yeah I mean I I I tried
it you know like I have a I have a quest
too I played um I'm a I'm a gamer I
played the valves halflife Alex game you
know the best quality game from one of
the best studios in a thing I loved the
game was really fun I stopped playing it
after a couple days cuz I couldn't
handle being nauseous for 3 hours after
playing for 30 minutes like it just
wasn't worth the experience and nothing
has motivated me to put on that or any
other headset since and no one has come
up with
a compelling pitch for what it's for
including apple whose only pitch seems
to be what what if all of your emails
were in the room around you well who
gives a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] who does that solve a
problem for so what's funny with the
Vision Pro is I have one and I watched
half of June on a plane before getting a
migraine what was really annoying was as
much of the movie as I could take so
cool yeah I love giant screen I've used
like the desktop it's cool yeah about
two years too early they should have
kept it in the oven but I can see what
they're doing with it what's also
interesting is Apple's been surprisingly
for their new thing surprisingly quiet
they've not been too pushy with it
they've not they did the whole Apple
thing well this will be you walk around
an office with this very funny idea um
they haven't talked about it in like six
months it's not like they're making a
big deal about it still but then you go
to like Mark Zuckerberg and the
metaverse for example yeah so just a
complete lie how the hell is that not
some sort of sec problem like he went in
this video and was going on about oh
yeah I'll go into the metaverse and I'll
hit a button and I'll change how Mark
Zuckerberg here looks just complete
fanfiction nonsense the whole thing was
bollocks but what it is was that was
Mark Zuckerberg realizing I bet I could
say something that sounds plausible and
none of the people in Wall Street and
many people in the media like CBS This
Morning they're not actually going to
care they're just going to go along with
it the problem is that he's stuck in his
own bubble as many of the CEOs are where
it's when you don't build anything of
use for a long time when you really have
no connection with a regular human being
you just believe that everything you say
is smart and I think he thought yeah
this will work fine no one will like
they'll just buy Horizon worlds even
though it sucks and it didn't work but
it worked in the media there was a large
chunk of the media who liked it yeah
Wall Street kind of liked it and then
they saw how much it was costing and
they went no no no
you got to get rid of that Mark but I do
believe that that was the first time you
saw one of these CEOs becoming aware of
the problem in public he he wanted this
to be the next internet he said it'd be
the next generation of the mobile
internet I think Zuckerberg knew back
then that the growth train was slowing
and he needed a new thing except he
chose the most insane thing he's he
chose virtual reality and also online
gaming so unproven Niche Tech and just
one of the most expensive things to
build in the world from a company that
is terrible at building things
Facebook's launched like 15 different
things and canceled yeah like the best
thing they built is the Facebook portal
which is just a video camera like all
their other products are things that
they bought WhatsApp Instagram Etc every
they don't innovate but also they only
build things for growth so now that they
just they're out of ideas but the
metaverse was a sexy big idea that
sounded if it was real yeah if it was an
the actual thing he promised would have
been except to do what he wanted to
based on Ready Player one which is a
dystopia
he would need extra sensory Tech that
does not exist like very basic things
like touch and feel and spatial
awareness senses within the human body
with the brain that just cannot exist
yeah maybe hundreds of years away yeah
and it's so weird that I I'm still
shocked he even pretended and I'm more
shocked that everyone agreed with him
yeah I mean when you even looked at what
they built like it was laughably bad you
know all this I mean I did a video about
it all this stuff about like we've added
legs and things and they didn't even add
legs that's what's they never did add
legs they never actually added legs
that's what I I mean it looked worse
than Second Life which was you know is
20 years old as a product now um it had
no U people you know the actual service
was a dead zone people logged in and and
had nothing to do on it um and the idea
that people would hold meetings there
all this stuff it was like it was H like
Mark Zuckerberg at least gives the
appearance of being a smart guy it was
hard to imagine him believing his own
bull bu [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] in that case I just think
he's Craven I think he doesn't care I
don't think he cares whether it was real
or not he was just like but these little
pigs will buy
this just complete that man so I did
some Facebook reporting and just
everything you read about Mark
Zuckerberg and the Facebook crew and the
people at meti you're like these people
are just evil like there's an evil to it
uh they have this guy uh nam's um Joel
Kaplan the head of US policy so there
was a a time during Facebook's wonderful
history where the algorithm kept pushing
this video called
plandemic conspiracy theory so Mr Kaplan
I believe worked with the Bush
Administration he pushed to not have it
suppressed he said no no leave it alone
and the only reason that he ended up
taking Facebook ended up taking it down
was because Kevin Rose of the New York
Times posted that it was the top video
on Facebook wow and that was using a
tool called crowd tangle which used to
let journalists see inside the most
famous things on Facebook yeah and then
Kevin kept posting that hey everything
on the algorithm is just right-wing
garbage there was a lot of press about
that about yeah that that that top rated
Facebook things were all conspiracy
theories so Facebook's response that you
think would be wow we've got a real
problem with the right wing taking over
no their response was to uh shut down
crowd Tangles so that no one could see
Alex Schulz the CMO real real winner and
then all of these the people running the
company Facebook is unique in the sense
that I think the other companies are
just completely lost and run by
management Consultants Facebook is
just honestly the evil machine it's so
funny how nakedly evil they are and just
like I know it's dramatic to call things
evil but you look at what they're doing
you look at how they act it's there's a
great book by um Jeff Horwitz called
broken code that everyone should read
read that book and come out of that and
tell me whether Facebook is a nice
company or a bad one because you read it
since 2008 they've been like this and
all the OG people who did all the
original stuff with people you may know
yeah algorithmic thing that cure people
you might know used Google ads to Target
people who W on Facebook outed sex
workers uh helped patients find
psychiatrists who really didn't want to
be found cashmir Hill did some great
journalism around that the people who
worked on that uh Natalie Gale uh Javier
olivan Alex Schulz they're all running
the company now yeah it's the same
people people and this is with my work
people have said oh you seem angry how
can you not be when you read that you
read this stuff and you're just like
it's not even like there's one person
who said yeah uh this is bad though they
just kind of like H yeah I mean maybe
we're abusing notifications a bit you
know but that's business
baby it's just so and it's so weird and
it's so it's so weird there some of the
stuff you read in this just you're like
this is all almost cliche in how yeah
deliberately bad it is yeah especially
coming from an industry that that for so
many years presented how good it was how
virtuous how this is a new way of doing
business we are not like those old
companies in the P the Cheryl Sandberg
lean in this is a new thing where you
know this is the utopian future sanberg
is McKenzie as well yeah yeah they're
all there yeah oh god um well talking
about these you know fads from I mean
the metaverse is almost two years old
now as an idea and no one has said the
word metaverse to me nor have I read it
in like a Bloomberg article in like 18
months like it's it's gone it's dead the
the end um I think everyone has
conveniently forgotten about you know
Mark little attempt to to juice what was
happening with this company um same with
crypto crypto is basically I mean you
know whatever the bit torrent freaks on
Reddit are still hanging out saying hdle
but you know it's no longer uh Super
Bowl ads or you know something that is
uh uh you know the next big thing in
business now the next big thing is AI it
seems like everyone has forgotten about
those previous past two fads yes how
much is AI especially coming from
Facebook just another one of those like
is that just Mark trying to do the same
thing again so Facebook and AI is almost
an entirely separate thing because who
even knows what they're doing there AI
as a general fed has a bit more validity
yeah but not much more yeah because
large language model are I mean the
first time I played with one I was like
oh this is cool and they're still pretty
cool sometimes I go play with one every
once in a while the problem is with AI
they do something they do something and
that is also the problem because AI as a
concept been a while been around a while
yeah like decades and it's very loose
term it can be used to describe a lot of
things you exactly which is great for
companies like Microsoft so Sachin
Nadella 2021 says that he could not
overstate the Breakthrough that the
metaverse was yeah two years before that
he said that Hollow lens too was a
breakthrough their AR goggle thing yes
which have now been but they exist but
they've been they he's fired most of the
team yeah and satcha is now major
beneficiary of the open AI boom he
they've put what $13 billion in they've
invested early and they invested $10
billion mostly in the zor credits so
their cloud services the thing is with
AI is it smells like the future it has a
feeling of the future and when you say
AI people will fill in the gaps
autonomous agents that do things for you
oh um a super smart friend who knows
everything about right it has the
advantage of it's at least been around
in science fiction enough that the
public knows what it means you had to
explain what crypto was and what the
metaverse was unless someone had read
like snow crash or Ready Player one but
artificial intelligence oh I know what
that is that's the that's the computer
that talks to me from every movie I've
ever seen from her yeah from from 2001
from the movie AI what I love is when
they quote these movies like yeah like
great things for AA like 2001 the movie
that classically ends with the computer
helping the
game like but with AI what's interesting
is it has both the smell of the future
but none of the taste because the idea
of what AI could be this autonomous
thing that does things for you to quote
samman a super smart person who knows
everything about you all these things
sound plausible and you can with chat
GPT approximate something that sort of
feels like it kind of yeah but the
problem they have is all these companies
are promising a thing that is not there
yeah so Super Bowl commercial for
Microsoft's co-pilot during it there's a
bit where it says write the code for my
3D open world game and he hits it and
then it cuts away before you actually
see what would come out so the problem
with that is that is not what comes out
it tell it I've typed this in many times
because I'm a little
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] um and it just gives you a guide
for doing it and it's like a yeah it's
like an SEO article like first you code
the game
Microsoft can't even show you why you
should give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about this thing on
their Super Bowl commercial yeah they
can't actually explain what it does
today so they have to talk about the
future Sam mman worst of them talks
about what it could be what it will do
it will be like a virtual brain all
these things and the thing is the people
in the markets the Jim Kramers of the
world the cnbc's of the world much less
Bloomberg Bloomberg has done some
excellent journalism about AI not so
much with CNBC mhm those some do like
Hayden field there is great but
nevertheless the markets people just go
and artificial intelligence is the
future yeah and this is good and thus
they kind of buy the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] train but
then the consumers get these things they
get chat GPT they get co-pilot what have
you and then they say now what yeah
what's this meant to do what's it do and
I'm sure some person will now email me
and say oh well actually it helps me
with my productivity and every time you
ask them to explain it they said well
first of all sat there and I did all
this stuff it's like no no no okay shut
up shut up I don't care because we're
being told we are being told one thing
and presented another we're being told
our autonomous AI future is here and
this is why these companies will grow
forever because Google meta all
Microsoft they're all connected to the
AI boom yet the reality is the actual
products themselves llms don't really do
enough they do something you can use
them they are kind kind of like the next
generation of internal automation
they're like robotic process automation
like UI path it's stuff that kind of
exist but a bit better there are some
cool things yeah I I I used on the
phrase on the show before I forget where
I got about the idea that it's a it's a
word calculator it'll there is a way
that if you put in a certain combination
of words you might get some output that
you find useful to some degree um but
it's not like a lot of the stuff's
things you could have found on Google
already um a lot of it is something that
if you put in a little bit of time you
could figure it out you could do it
yourself you and it always feels Hollow
because it is yeah it's just it's
calculated like it feels calculated
surprisingly enough but the problem is
as well it isn't that it's useless it's
the it might only be worth 3 or 4%
profit growth like it's not it may be
the future but it might not be the next
big thing but they're selling it as if
it is and what the big problem is is
going back to your old iPhone example
you could tell a friend exactly why that
thing was cool they it was too expensive
yeah it was like 600 it was a lot of
money but they certain wow this looks
great like oh you can listen to your
music and text people you didn't have to
onerously explain why people should care
with chat GPT genuinely gone to my head
I'm not sure how i' describe what it
does I mean I describe the process but
what is chat
gbt um it it can write stuff kind of but
it gets it wrong it can generate
pictures of stuff so
right and you can you can talk to it
sort of and it'll give you a rather
boilerplate response it can if you want
it to I whenever I'm playing with it
which I do sometimes I'm always like
okay give me a recipe for a uh pizza
with poop on it and then it does that
and then I say now write that as a
limmerick and then it writes a little
poem I'm like that was mildly amusing
like I've never seen a computer program
that can do that before um you know
there's stuff like I talk I've talked I
think before on the show about there's a
game called AI dungeon that like works
like a text Adventure like an old text
adventure and but it can do anything
right you're like I want to turn into a
wizard and fly away and it'll just
generate some text that describes you
doing that so it's sort of like a like a
oneperson tabletop role playing thing
where like an automated DM who can you
know uh spit out a fantasy for you
that's like yeah absolutely nothing
people might pay for that sure but
what's the it's not like Steve Job
standing on stage going it's a phone
it's an iPod and you can it's a
revolutionary internet device you can
connect to it from connect to the
internet from anywhere that you are you
hear that pitch and you're like my God I
mean that'll change my life exactly
like you look at what GPT does as well
and you look at Claude and anthropics
model for example you look at L metas
one and you go wow okay you can do stuff
now what now what now like seriously
what is the next step of this GPT 40
just came out the thing that got them
EMB rolled in the whole scandal with
Scarlet Johansson yeah so that was an
iterative update but that's the best
they've had it's the last time they did
anything new and it's so bizarre because
I feel like quite lonely in saying this
but what if this is all they've G yeah
what if this is it because once everyone
works that out and is willing to say it
the tech industry has backed this so
ously they've really gone to town on
this one to the extent that they feel
forced to I mean apple looks like
they're doing all this AI stuff like
with a gun pointed at their head they're
like we've got AI emojis we oh it's it's
gonna right we've got Apple intelligence
and like they give this whole
presentation and I was like these are
the features that I give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about
the least that I've ever seen in an
Apple keynote what I really liked about
that though was the chat GPT integration
into the new iOS they're like yeah we
got chat GPT it will sometimes answer
some things and you will have to give it
permission every time 100% just
something they did for the markets
that's just B yeah we got chat GPT in
this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] whatever who cares but
when you look at what they're doing with
their own models they kind of
interesting oh you can do distinct
actions across apps that that's cool
don't know if it's the next big thing
but it's a cool new way for the phone
but when you look at that sort of
feature well that just looks like that's
just a regular old feature they're
calling AI now you know that it's it's a
little bit of automation actually AI it
is actually their own models but it's
their own models runon device it's stuff
that people have been doing so Edge
Computing so on device AI mhm but yes
like it's been around in very simple
example the the one I give is like you
can Raspberry Pi so these tiny computers
which by the way significantly bigger
Innovation than anything generative AI
has done people invented Raspberry Pi
should be like no about yeah it's like a
$40 powerful computer that you can put
anywhere powerful enough you can attach
you can have that and it can have Aji
running to like for like a machine that
can identify a strawberry that's rotten
on a farm genuinely useful industrial
stuff yeah what Apple's doing is just
what what you can do when you have
complete control over your operating
system and no one else is really allowed
to touch it they SDK that can connect
the model to different parts of
different apps could be really
cool but also surprisingly de about it
like it was a big thing at worldwide
developers conference but there's no big
ads there's no big like they've done a
media push but it's not huge right there
and also they don't appear to be really
I'm sure that they have giant GPU so
Graphics processing units which are used
to train these models sure they have
them but they've not been very flashy
about saying we've just
built hundreds of acres worth of service
space for the future it seems like
they're hedging their bets like they're
they're dipping their toe in because
they feel like they have to but not
going all in yeah and apple to be clear
no company's particularly ethical but
Apple seems to also realize we piss off
all our users and make our products suck
ass maybe they'll stop using iPhones
yeah that's bad for business they want
to do they don't want to do what Google
just did the Google AI search that one's
so good though that one that one really
that one really felt like begin to
disassociate when I saw I because I've
been watching this for a while because
it was on Google Labs yeah there's an
SEO expert called Lily Ray who's been
watching it very close and she's been
posting for a while just saying this is
bad they should not launch this these
results of Bonkers and then they didn't
surpris and Bing did the same thing a
year ago like it released AI results in
bing and people made fun of it because
it did exactly the same thing that
Google did except they were very
cautious with it Yep this is a side
feature please don't trust this Google
you got to give him credit for just
being like yep here you go and then when
people found the terrible results they
said actually that's good yeah it's
actually good that you found that and
also those are uncommon queries anyway
so no one makes
pizza and
it's but as though but they've also said
forever that like what is it 15% of all
Google searches are are like searches
that they have never seen before are
completely unique like their bread and
butter is unusual Google searches that's
the point of Google to help you find
things that are unusual um well the
interesting thing about chat gp40 to me
um okay so the AI boosters or a lot of
the people I know who are still
frightened of AI um you know here in
Hollywood the thing that a lot of people
were saying last year uh during the
strike is this is just the beginning
it's going to get rad rally bettery this
is we don't you know they've got stuff
cooking up that we don't even know about
yet it's going to be so huge you know in
5 years people were literally saying to
me last year in five years Hollywood
won't exist as an industry you know
because AI will be so radically great
and you know I would have to say have a
little bit of skepticism because this is
what this is what Sam Alman is telling
people he's saying my product is going
to destroy the world so you should do
what I want yes um but where is the
evidence that it's going to get
radically better rather than that hey
they've invented this thing called a
large Lang model that can do this one
thing but it might not have actually
this like incredible growth curve ahead
of it and I think some evidence for that
for me was chat GPT 40 was not a radical
Improvement in the quality of the large
language model or its results it was a
better productization yes of chat GPT
where it's like okay now chat GPT is in
a little app and it can it has the
front-facing camera it responds faster
it responds a little faster it has a
voice now it didn't have a voice before
but it's still saying the same [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
right like it still has the same
cognizance it's not smarter it just can
sort of look around a little bit better
we put the same dumb brain into a
slightly more advanced robot dog but it
is still a dog yeah and so what do you
think the prospects are for the radical
Improvement of AI because I've started
to read these things oh they're running
out of training data that sort of thing
so the big problem they have is that
training data yeah so there was an
estimate in the w Journal researcher I
forget his name it was the GPT 5 so the
next model of chat GPT or GPT their
large language model will take five
times the available training dat or the
five times the amount of training data
that it took to train GPT for mhm so big
problem there is they don't have much
more they are running out and they may
have run out well chat gbt 6 takes
another five times that's an exponential
problem and on top of that
they don't seem to be too good at making
new models they were meant to spin up
one and more efficient model for
Microsoft called
arus godamn it God damn it like I like
when I read that I'm [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] just God
damn it and then it didn't work out cuz
it wasn't efficient enough which is not
a good sign but also these things are
not getting they're getting better but
they're not getting better it's not like
the jump from I don't know gpd2 to GPD 3
on top of that the ways they're getting
better do not suggest they're going to
get better in the ways that Sam Orman
has been talking about a super smart
friend that knows everything about you
suggests features that are not part of a
large large language model right like
memory is something they've kind of
worked on there are other people who've
worked on memory within these things but
the fundamental thing of knowing
requires knowledge which requires actual
intellect which GPT cannot have it's
mathematics it's extremely complex yeah
but also all of these people talking
about oh it's going to be so much better
in the next year history doesn't look
great for you either but also how how
just how yeah why do I have to
constantly explain to you why your
product is good why do I have to make
your argument for you why don't you have
one other than it will be good and
that's the thing everyone wants it to be
because it would be cool and also if
there's no big Tech thing coming out
what's the future look like for Tech
it's a scary I just have to continue
living in the present forever like I
need the computer to distract me but
also it's a situation where so much
money has gone into it so many billions
of dollars so much money into Data
Centers so much money into marketing
efforts so much Venture
Capital everyone is so deep down the
hole that kind of who's going to wake up
first rather than it getting to some
point Sora the video generating model
from chat GB I can't wait to talk about
this yeah so good it's so bad um yeah
everything it makes has Hall so in
hallucinations in the written word it
will say something authoritatively that
isn't true in Sora it just makes like a
monkey with seven arms and it looks
terrible yeah and every time you ask it
to do anything it
takes I think it's if it's 20 seconds
long it takes 10 minutes or 20 minutes
to generate yeah and it the prompts no
matter how precise it usually makes up
some extra stuff yeah and the amount of
training data they'll need to make Sora
work is insane yeah on top of all of
this also horribly unprofitable and it
doesn't do anything it does not do
anything it doesn't make anyone money
like this is this is the big thing
people talking about oh well it's going
to get exponentially better first of all
it hasn't been but on top of
that it's still not profitable it's
still horribly
unprofitable and it requires all this
energy and it requires all this training
data there's so much more evidence that
this is kind of tapping out in the
generative AI space yeah I mean when
when sort of came out and let's be clear
that product is not available to the
public it's it's they released some tech
demo videos but again working in
Hollywood a lot of people I know said
well this is the end you know like
they're going to this is going to the
future of movie making they won't need
to film anything they'll just like have
Sora output shots and you know I'd have
to walk through with people I like okay
first of all this is not available to
the public they've released like six
videos that they say were made by this
right so how many bad videos did they
need to make before they got these six
that they showed us right yeah how long
did it take to make each one of these
like what was you know we talking about
uh you know 30 frames per second of 4K
uh footage right and not even 4K by the
way oh really so I spoke to someone who
makes who a guy from a company called
shy kids that made a video with Sora
they had to get it at 48p because it
took too long if you went higher
resolution yeah because I mean rendering
times are are very serious just with
traditional visual effects and so you're
talking about a large language model
generating something or it's not a large
language model but a similar technology
right a a generative AI s's large
language model okay great um uh but so
there's that piece of it um then so so
the amount of processing that it has to
do compared to making you know a dolly
image is like exponential right um then
you don't have the ability to make a
tiny tweak right that you do in uh you
know when you're actually working with
an actor you can say walk a little bit
faster walk a little bit slower if you I
know because I've you know if you ask
doi generate the same thing but make it
a little bit brighter it gives you a
whole new image right and so it would be
like that as well plus if they you know
they made a great image of a lady
walking down a Hong Kong street right
with a with a shiny floor right with SH
with where there was rain on the legs at
one point girl like that yeah yeah but
it like it looked pretty okay it looked
plausible yes but the only reason that
it knew what it looked like for a lady
to walk down a Hong Kong Street was
because it had ingested huge amounts of
footage of people walking down Hong Kong
streets like it needed the footage to
begin with to generate the thing so it
can't generate new things and you know
you won't be able to solve the problem
that the executive will have at the film
company where they're like oh I don't
like the take can we get another one no
actually we can't because if we do that
it'll be a completely different person
in a completely different situation so
that problem is unsolved you to ask well
isn't it [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and and it's going to be
massively expensive to compute all of
this over and over and over again
generate all of this so at what point is
it cheaper just to send a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] dude
with a camera to Hong Kong and get a
lady on a rainy day like it it what is
the but it's a great Tech demo but
people are getting rolled by seeing the
tech demo and imagining what it could do
rather than looking at the reality of
Technology at all and that is the entire
AI hype bubble R Lodge it is letting
people so journalists let's be honest
filling in the gaps for these companies
yeah Sora great example so okay
theoretically if the computer could spit
out an image of a woman walking down the
street at any time that would be great
but like you said it is not just a
question you can't even ask if you say
woman with black hair Asian woman with
black hair different Asian every time
probably pink hair at some point right
because of the training data is trained
on well and because the technology is
fundamentally unpredictable like that's
that's how it works you can't say I want
exactly this but slightly different it
because it is generating istic it's
probabilistic yeah and it's funny
because look at chat GPT when people
write about the future of open AI
they're not talking about this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
they're talking about what Sam mman has
been beating off on on TV for a year
they're talking about Sam mman saying oh
yeah well he said to New York Magazine
in 2016 I think it was New York Magazine
New Yorker that in it would be not
unreasonable to think within 10 years or
20 years I think it was that he would
have a computer version of his brain and
he's very good at making these things
where the gap between the pr itions is
long enough and no one's really going to
check yeah I will check Sam I'm I've got
it in my flipping
calendar I do um but you look at this
and every he goes out there and he'll
vaguely say that chat GPT is the future
AI is the future we need to be scared of
AI he'll say AI is not a creature but
what he wants you to think is did
someone think it's a creature because he
wants this Mystique because if he
actually had to talk about the thing he
s today he go well it's a calculator of
sorts well it doesn't always work but
when it does it's sort of
good and it's and I can understand in
business process automation I mentioned
uipath they're robotics a robotic
process automation company they're worth
billions because of them doing these
very minute very simple customer service
things but because you can scale that
that's useful GPT and large language
models fit into this kind of thing
extremely well these companies are
growing because of that that will help
them that ain't sexy and that ain't big
that's not true
you can't markets that it's just that
and also RPA is profitable GPT large
language models absolutely not but
because Alman goes in there and says is
this thing that kind of looks like the
future look this thing can do kind of
realistic videos people say they're
scared I'm scared of what this could be
and they fill in that white space and
they say well because this thing can
approximate how human rights this thing
will write in place of humans within
five years oh because this video kind of
looks like something you could film of
real people naturally in 5 years this
will be how entertainment is generated
and the problem is that's the old old
that's the old world when things used to
there is no Mo's law for this crap this
is not a system a situation where we're
simply going to get more power and this
will fix itself even if we threw so much
more power at this problem it would
still hallucinate because that's maths
baby but that's how it works and it
still wouldn't be able to give you that
slight variation on the previous clip
because it would still be probabilistic
that's the nature of the technology it's
not something that they can just like
cram more transistors onto a smaller
chip like they do with Mo's law and the
problem is as well is notice that samman
has been crying about how he needs more
power he needs an energy breakthrough he
needs more server space he's begging
Microsoft for an hundred billion dollar
supercomputer which by the contingent on
a meaningful Improvement to GPT so he's
he's screwed but he's asking for these
things because there is no way this goes
much further yeah based on what we have
today and the only company that's really
having a great time with this is NVIDIA
because jent WS can just like yeah it's
chips faster you you little pigs will
buy this every day and he kind of you
watch any of his Keynotes Nvidia CEO and
it is very much him just completely
waffling there's a bit in the latest
keynote where he says yeah you know
you'll have a super a a which talks to
smaller AI which then speak to other Ai
and people in the audience like woo yeah
B [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] idiots like the lot but but he
doesn't really care cuz he's he's the
guy selling guns to the war he's just
he's just selling chips and so it
doesn't need to work for him he's going
to make a lot of money right now it
works what he's selling works the chip
does the thing yeah like he he's fine he
is also just I he has jumped on Trends
before Nvidia has had a very weird
history yeah games Nexus has some great
videos on Nvidia he's been waffling this
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] before he did it with crypto
that guy's just just a classic business
like he he's almost kind of folky in how
much of a classic techit he's just like
yeah faster bigger who gives a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] when
you look at everyone else with these
llms just this air of desperation yeah
Facebook as you mentioned great company
uh they've put AI in everything now
there's AI in Facebook there's AI in
Instagram you can ask meta AI anything
yeah with it at 1: a.m. last night when
I couldn't sleep yeah sure and it's now
responding on comments it responded on a
parenting group whoa because you can
activate it so it responds on groups it
responded on a parenting group a couple
months back saying that it had a gifted
child and then recommended the
school I was just when I saw that I'm
like this is so good I hope there's more
of this I genuinely hope that I want to
see so I want to see this thing cook
everywhere but that's such a great that
when I saw that I'm like oh maybe that's
what Zuckerberg wants it to
do if you need people to interact with a
product you need them to engage what
better way than poking viciously with it
hey look look you've got people
responding to you you have someone to
talk
to I don't think it'll work but I can
imagine someone being like yeah really
good idea but on top of that again how
is that profitable every single one of
these transactions every time someone
uses this thing it's losing them money
yeah because it it is very high takes a
lot of to make this so expensive and
also there's no profit on the horizon
where's the money coming from like
taking away all the cynicism just
where's the money honey like where is it
yeah are they running ads in the middle
of the chat GPT responses what are they
doing even then do you think anyone's
like they're now saying they have that
they are 404 media reported that they
are triing doing injected ads into
people's videos on Instagram they are
ripping out the wiring from the wall
they are desperate and I think the AI
stuff is just them going ego we're doing
the thing now yeah who cares Zuckerberg
doesn't care at all he can't be F like I
mentioned he's just doing it what's
really interesting is Microsoft they're
the ones where I'm like you guys are
really in the whole I think they are
actually really in trouble so of course
heavy investor and open AI however open
AI a nonprofit sure buddy yeah yeah for
real but heavily invested in open AI
heavily saying it's the future this the
future but also tied to Sam Alman who is
a nakedly corrupt and very strange
figure but on top of that promising the
world with AI but probably more aware
than anyone of how limited it is because
they have all the money into J gbt they
got their own
models put so they're paying Oracle
billions to build more data centers they
build data centers too I don't why
Oracle is big on build outs I guess and
it's very weird because they must know
they must know this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] sucks and they
like the co-pilot thing where they had
the the they could not even explain why
you should use it they are probably
looking at this and just counting down
the days they're just like I they
there's a company called inflection
which made a empathetic large language
model called po I think it was that
Microsoft absorbed them in the most
bizarre way they acquired them but also
gave contracts to the m they took all of
the people from the company who made the
large language model then made a deal
with the remaining inflection company
people to keep running it and now I
think the Department of Justice is
looking into it because it's extremely
weird it was also worth a billion
dollars Jesus what are they doing like
this is these are not the actions of
someone doing well these are like yeah
this is like crackhead style Stu this or
it's it almost seems like a Ponzi scheme
where it's I always need to find the new
injection of money and I mean look the
the the the sky-high valuations of tech
companies all the money that flooded
into the industry my understanding is it
came in for two reasons a the costs were
extremely low you know like for running
an internet company way cheaper than
building a new car company right you
don't need factories you just need data
centers it's like the the cost are low
and B there was a potential to create
entirely new businesses entirely new
business models you know the what is it
the blue ocean approach to business
right you can uh create this like new
world and the first person to dominate
it um and that is what they are they
need to continue to try to create those
new blue oceans those new vast universes
unex untapped wildernesses to go explore
and there might not actually be any left
and so I guess my question is what does
this mean about the market like if the
market is driving this right we've been
talking about all the bad decisions that
the tech companies are making um that
are forcing them to turn a large
language model from hey a kind of cool
Niche product that maybe would be kind
of neat like into the wave of the future
everything's going to be different where
it's going to destroy the entire economy
and we're going to rebuild around large
language models they have to make that
argument because the market is demanding
it of them so what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] happened to
the market where the market is demanding
this right because we are describing the
the the dysfunctions of tech as being a
symptom of the market so what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
is up with the market so Market's
addicted to growth and the raw economy
is much larger than Tech I just know my
tech much better than I know wider
economics more fun to talk about too
yeah I also believe that trying not to
was done in KW the whole I'm not but
nevertheless there is a problem across
the whole stock market where it's
addicted to growth when everything is
always growing at all times why would
you not invest in the thing going up
because everything it's always gone up
you see it in games companies getting
way overfunded hiring firing hiring
firing journalism a great example people
taking over ISM oh well we'll just shove
more money in it and we'll get so much
more money out never works but man do
they feel good about it yeah and what it
is is that the markets are just
disconnected from value there has been
an E I don't really know when it started
but there has been an economic shift
away from
sustainability and I make Casey put it
it's a good fire is one that's
sustainable it keeps you warm what they
are doing now is throwing bits of
furniture Into the Fire they are
throwing gasoline on it getting burned
and like ah make more
warm and the problem is companies that
are sustainable that are reliably
growing or perhaps they're plateauing
but they are still making more money
than they spend they're happy employees
happy customers those aren't sexy to the
markets the markets must have growth I'm
not sure what started it I really am not
yeah but it's everywhere it's just more
pronounced in Tech because of what you
mentioned blue ocean approach when you
crave growth at all times this Tech is a
sexy little beast oh my everything's
growing all the time you've got these
little companies that grew with three
people that are worth during the
metaverse time it was one that got
funded I think like hundred
million they didn't have a product they
just formed the company I have no idea
how they did it well and every investor
once you got in early you know you you
were the first person in there was this
great big thing don't you want to hop on
board I mean I hear this sometimes
people were telling me 10 years ago you
should make something for VR VR headsets
are the next big thing and I was like I
actually don't think that they are but
um you know that's what I was that's
what I was told um and I find it very
interesting that you know we're we're
having this debate constantly about like
is the economy good or bad right that's
like the the core issue for Biden right
now like people feel that it's bad but
the numbers are actually good
unemployment is down you know interest
rates blah blah blah there's this whole
thing and one of the things you can
point to is the stock market is doing
very well it's done extremely well since
2020 and then before 2020 it was doing
extremely well since the housing crash
it's been like this this sustained
upward growth um and you know I've got
i' I've ever reement funds you know like
hey that's great for me look at the nice
big number right um but it puts this
worry in the back of my mind well it
seems like the one thing that the people
who run the economy know how to do or
that the system is optimized to do is to
produce good stock market returns you
know that no matter what's happening no
matter what the fundamentals are we can
get the stock price to go up yes um but
that that might be by these rot economy
methods that that it is by squeezing
more juice out of the thing while
destroying it like short-term short-term
short-term you know know uh Shoring
everything up you know sticking 2x4s
underneath all the sagging uh sagging
ceilings yes um and that that is what's
really going on which would imply that
there is perhaps a reckoning coming uh
I'm scared of that yeah I am definitely
scared of what happening in Tech because
once the overall thing you're talking
about I believe like why people feel bad
when economy good it's cuz things are
more expensive the cost of living is
high everywhere rents have gone up they
rarely go down yeah wages are stagnant
it is harder to get a mortgage than it's
ever been yeah it's so difficult
mortgage rates are high too the basic
costs of living one's life are harder
and higher and nastier in a very
tangible way yet there are articles
saying economy is good yeah we should
all celebrate with what [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] money
yeah where am I what am I celebrating
I'm I'm not complaining myself I'm lucky
I really am yeah but also healthc care
cost in this country is what I GRE
father work for the NHS like I have
great the fact we don't have Medicare
for all in this country is completely
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] insane insane but also that's
why people feel bad it's not about a CNN
article about the economy being good
it's their life kind of feels shitty and
when and when they say this feels bad
everyone's reaction is H yeah things
like overdraft fees that's a good thing
they can do but there are more things
they should credit scores should be just
illegal they as a concept they're evil
made by evil people evil evil evil stuff
that's a great example of something make
mortgages easier to get that's a way of
fixing things but yeah to The Wider
economy yes I'm scared of a reckoning
and I'm especially scared of one in Tech
because when the markets realize that AI
is not the next best thing or the next
biggest thing even they're then going to
say so what is yeah what do you got for
me Mark Zuckerberg is going to freak out
I I don't know I actually don't know
what happens I just had a Tom doton from
The Wall Street Journal on the podcast
and I asked him what happens if all of
this compute space or the gpus get
bought for AI and the demand's not there
yeah and he said I don't know yeah and I
don't know either and that's actually
the scariest thing that a little bit
like the housing bubble or something
like that we bought a lot of something
that we thought was going to be worth a
lot of money and it is not anymore and
that's exactly what it was that and it
reminded me of the hiring in 2021 when
all the tech companies hired tens of
thousands of people they didn't need
just to hoard them yeah but the biggest
thing is there's a way of repurposing
that stuff but there isn't much there
really like you can't just throw gpus
into something you can but like what's
it going to be and there's no other next
big thing sitting around if you think
about it there have been many directions
we could have gone in the past yeah you
had Airbnb you had stripe you had Uber
you had all of these different things
that you could do there's really none of
that right now there's there's some
exciting companies but there's not like
a next big thing in in process and if
there isn't there's going to be a
terrible downturn against Tech look at
the startup market now worst funding
environment I've probably seen in my
career 15 years and that is more of a
bell weather than anything else like if
it's a frothy investment market and the
public markets are a bit scared okay
that just means the public markets
public companies aren't
innovating it's weird that it's like
this the startup Market should tell
everyone what it is because Venture
capitalists aren't spending their money
CU they have no easy wins they know
something's up but all of the public
companies and some of the private ones
have got them tied themselves tied up in
a a tizzy following a market I think
they all kind of realize this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
and when that falls apart it's going to
I don't think one of the big tech
companies will die but I think you're
going to see a massive collapse in one
of them I think meta is probably the
biggest one especially because you can't
you can't G Zuck out I mean it's quite a
prediction if that happens like I mean
huge amount of the stock market as a
whole like the US is the tech industry
um and that's like people's uh Pension
funds it's their retirement accounts
it's uh like that's a that's a broader
economic Reckoning uh again I mean not
making predictions here but you know
2008 that was housing it rippled
everywhere else you know there's like
potentially a similar Ripple here there
is and I don't know if it would be quite
as ruinous because it will bring the
stock market down but stock market will
find a way to survive I'm more worried
about tech in general I'm more worried
about Society view of tech the thing
that the tech industry and I I try and
tell as many people as I can tech people
especially the ones in power are so
goddamn smug they're so sure everyone in
society loves Tech I don't think that's
the case I think things like Google's AI
search are turning people against Tech
yeah and Tech may say who gives a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
about these people I know they make us
money but they're little bastards I
don't care they use my things I make
money off of them except when regulation
comes to Tech they're going to really be
in trouble yeah on top of that private
private investment in Tech is going to
go down even further yeah no one's going
to people already don't trust these
companies if they start
collapsing I mean do you like one of
these big products is going to just stop
Facebook is probably it it's the first
one that's really collapsing in user
numbers if they're moving their numbers
around to make it sound better
something's wrong if Facebook falls
apart or if Instagram goes into the red
that's that's when you're going to see
these companies freak out or maybe it's
just going to be in three is when the
markets realized that llms are not the
future and then all of Microsoft meta
Amazon they're all going to get ripped
through and it I would say sometimes
people said oh wouldn't that be funny
not for the people working at the
companies who are victims of
circumstance yeah well especially after
these companies have already destroyed
so many other Industries um like
journalism media Etc um have been you
know just e either destroyed or the
industries destroyed themselves trying
to chase the tech companies as has
happened in Hollywood for example uh
it's it's pretty bleak is there a chance
just as a you know way to bring us in
for a landing here is there a chance
that you're that you're wrong and things
will go along continue to go along fine
or uh I I mean do you have any positive
view of the future so yes so I don't
think it's going to be a full scale
apocalypse where everything goes to zero
I do think that when this AI thing falls
apart and the markets start getting a
little mean I think you Pro I think s
Pai gets fired I think he gets rolled
I'm surprised he didn't over Google AI
search I think they will have to start
making things a little bit better they
could find a Next Big Thing sure but at
some point when the because in the rockc
bubble piece I wrote traffic to most of
the major platforms other than like
Reddit LinkedIn and Tik Tok is going
down yeah these companies are losing
users there are less people getting
online I do believe that there could be
a shift where they go oh God we need to
fix our products we need to be a bit
more sustainable
I believe we kind of heard a little bit
of it in 2022 the year of efficiency and
so on and so forth I think that there
will be that that pushes things I also
think the EU is going to aggressively
move against generative AI in a way that
makes them move away from it anyway yeah
I think that you will see these stocks
get chopped up a bit and things will
realign but the future tech industry
will have to be more sustainable it's
not about optimism it's just the growth
at all costs economy will always exist
to an extent but Tech Will have to
realign because so much money is being
wasted right now yeah billions is being
burnt and I just don't think the
companies and personally talking to the
startups I know the companies that are
getting funding right now are the ones
that have this crazy idea at them you
don't know you heard about this what if
a company made more money than it
spent crazy idea that these kids these
days they got all sorts of ideas I mean
hopefully you know there's a coming
correction and hopefully there'll be
enough people who see it coming and
change course ideally to blunt some of
the impact I will say one thing please
the startups and the investor like the
small scale seed investors I talked to I
talked to them all the time from a day
job in
PR they don't seem worried but they also
don't seem beguiled by large language
models they generally everyone right now
the earli stage people they're talking
about sustainability they're talking
about building things that will last and
not growing too fast smaller teams that
gives me a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ton of hope that's great
when I talk to these people and it's
usually like and this is
aging myself at 38 here but it's a lot
of these gen Z Founders they don't give
a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about big Tech they appreciate
that they exist but their reaction to
this thing is kind of like mine which is
why are you acting like this this is a
bad company this is a bad business these
llms are cool yeah but they're not doing
the things you say what if we built a
business that people like that they paid
for and it's very pragmatic and it's
cool I I actually that gives me a lot of
hope it's why I'm not full scale Doomer
about this and honestly I think big Tech
could use a punch in the face
figuratively I think they need to be
taken down a few PS I think they need to
realize that they've forgotten their
customers and forgotten their purpose in
life I can't thank you enough for coming
on here to talk to us about it we'll
have to have you back in a year or two
to see whether or not your prediction
because these are very strong
predictions and I want to see how
accurate they are because that you you
are you are uh validating my own
emotional truth and you are making it
very definitive well if I'm wrong I'll
be happy to explain why that sounds
great I love that attitude as well Ed
thank you so much for being on the show
for having me oh where can people find
your work so you can find me at where's
your ed. app and that's my newsletter
and better offline. comom that's my
podcast and iHot radio and coolzone
media thank you so much for being here
Ed thanks you well thanks once again to
Ed zitron for coming on the show I hope
you love that conversation as much as I
did if you want to support the
incredible conversations that we bring
you week after week once again you can
do so on patreon head to patreon.com
adamon over five bucks a month gets you
every one of these episodes ad free and
you can join our wonderful on onine
Community full of people just like you
who love learning and complaining about
how screwed up the world is for 15 bucks
a month I will read your name at the end
of every podcast episode and put it in
the credits of every single one of my
video monologues this week I want to
thank Eden Welch Patrick Flanigan katton
lindl Andrew urao Marcus Mitchell
Vanessa Russell Josh beol and mask when
you can protect your community thank you
so much mask when you can protect your
community for slipping that message in
Via a $15 a month donation if you want
to slip a clever message in at the end
of this podcast once again head to
patreon.com Adam conon to join all the
wonderful people who make this show
possible of course I want to thank my
producers Sam rman and Tony Wilson
everybody here at headgum who makes the
show possible head to Adam con.net for
my tickets and tour dates thank you so
much for listening and we'll see you
next time on factually that was a
headgum podcast
