welcome back to the program coming up in
this half hour rich hall will be here
and in a couple of minutes I'm going to
introduce you to Barbara Blackburn who
as you know is the world's fastest
typist now okay now it's time this woman
who was supposed to be here earlier in
the week we ran out of time and I'm very
happy that she could stick around and
come back and see us she has a
grandmother she is all the way from
Salem Oregon and this woman is the
fastest typist in the entire world
please welcome Barbara Blackburn
fastest typist how fast is that first of
all tell me what what's a good average
typing speed all good average typing
speed should be around 75 100 words a
minute maybe Wow that's blistering right
along well you can't you can't go down
as low as 60 if you want to but 60 would
still be considered okay a person could
get a job with 60 words a minute
that is your average job speed alright
and and tell us what is your best word
for a minute ratio I have typed 170
words a minute on the minute timings I
have gotten up to 200 on computers no
kidding 200 words a minute then you said
minute timings how long can you sustain
and 5450 50 minutes which is 37,500
words key word strokes so the Guinness
Book says so for 50 minutes you you go
along at that rate now what about
accuracy accuracy is one of the things
that I strived to have all the time I
don't like making mistakes do you ever
make mistakes well I'm not perfect yeah
how do you know you're the world's
fastest so how do you know you're the
world's fastest the Guinness Book has
made the comment that I am the fastest
on the door keyboard I don't know what
that means well it's a it's a different
type writer keyboard it's not it's
different good of the fact that the
words are the keys are rearranged now
somebody was explaining to me that the
the original typing system was laid out
just arbitrarily that's right and and
the system you're talking about was
there were some thought into what
letters you use more often than other
letters that is correct it was
scientifically developed by dr. August
Devore way back in 1932 I love his work
I'm sure
now now Barbara they tell me if this is
a correct statistic that in the
traditional method your fingers move the
distance they travel in a day of typing
is like 15 miles that that is correct
that's what they have run some studies
on and have found to be true yeah and
with this system your fingers traveled a
mile about a mile all right I guess are
we ready to do this we have a challenge
for you Barbara yeah should we go over
there now come on over here Barbara
let's set this up now when you when
you're taking a do you make extra money
because you're so fast at this no not
really no kidding
that stinks tell me about all right now
do you take dictation off of printed
page or through your ears through my
ears yeah now do you do you understand
what's going on do you comprehend what's
going on or do you just type it you have
to understand it in order to be accurate
and correct so you know everything that
you type basically okay all right I'll
tell you what we're gonna do let me
bring out the Barbara the world's
fastest typist is going to go up against
the fastest typist we have on our staff
ladies and gentlemen the hardest-working
production assistant in American
television say hello to Barbara Gaines
let me help you with that typewriter
Barbara
this is Barbara's first time on our show
and we're happy you decided to help them
then how fast can you type a minute
Barbara I'm really nervous I probably
won't be able to talk but what's your
best time 85
those are huge buttons and we're sweater
okay Barbara Blackburn Barbara gays
ladies now
she's one of our guests be a little more
she can't lose all the way from Salem
Oregon
alright here's what we would like you
ladies to type for one minute we'll have
a clock on the screen and from the
official baseball rules 1984 Edition
they will be typing tonight Section
eight point zero five the balk rule
ladies are you ready on your mark
begin typing one minute here writing out
the default rule
[Music]
[Applause]
okay
you know you know I guess maybe I forgot
to explain that you know you didn't you
didn't have any paper in there I know I
guess it's easy to say you're the
fastest that's that's the most peculiar
thing now do we have time to load it up
and try it again or is this okay Barbara
put some paper in there I'm sorry
yeah Fermi you've won that one all right
best two out of three okay here we go
again ladies begin typing paper that's
just darkness
[Music]
all right a minute left and the winner
receives the lovely dinette set
[Music]
all right we're getting under 20 seconds
remember they're typing the lock rule
section eight point zero 5 1984
additional baseball rules right five
seconds remaining okay all right okay
what ladies come on over here we'll do a
commercial then we'll take a look at the
results come on over here folks
[Applause]
[Music]
it didn't something very strange has
happened Barbara gains our own
production assistant did a very nice job
I'm not sure how many words exactly but
she acquitted herself quite admirably
Barbara nice job thank you very much no
Barbara figure out how many words you
got there in a minute no no Barbara
Blackburn something happened here
through no fault of your own I guess we
get bomb equipment or something let me
just read the first sentence genteelly I
a loose Alalu soul in i amok vets mid
control a vintner istic tea plane what
no what exactly happened there they
screwed something else there's something
something happened to the typewriter
while it was while it was here because
you know this smacks of organized crime
if you ask me more no but in all
fairness to you apparently we had the
wrong ball on your something now
something is happening right it was all
right when I was supposed to be here
last night yeah well we'll get it fixed
and you come back but for right now
Barbara Gaines is the world's fast
[Applause]
we'll be right back ladies okay let me
just quickly recap this using the
standard system Barbara had 50 words a
minute and about a dozen errors and
Barbara was using the the other system I
don't know what went wrong but we'll
figure it out now I'm sorry we're almost
out of time I want to apologize a rich
hall will be rescheduled I'm very sorry
we ran out of time for him because of
this typing nonsense and it looks like
someone may have taken a dive we'll get
into this next week good night everybody
oh and if you were with us on Thursday
night you know that there was we had the
world's fastest typist on our show this
woman is her name is Barbara Barbara
Blackburn and she can type 220 words a
minute and she was out here for a oh she
was out here for a little typing
demonstration and all hell broke loose
so we've we've launched our own little
investigation into that but in the
meantime please say hello to our good
friend Paul shape
all right let's spend a minute here
talking about what happened the Thursday
night we had a very nice woman her name
is Barbara Blackburn she is the world's
fastest typist in fact she has entered
here in the Guinness Book of World
Records she attains a speed of a hundred
to 70 words per minute using the Dvorak
simplified keyboard system and a couple
of other records right here so we
thought it would be fun to have her on
the show and have her go head-to-head in
a typing competition with our fastest
typist who happens to be Barbara Gaines
that one of our production assistants
and they were going to type from the
official baseball rules book I think the
block rule was what they were gonna type
okay so she came out and we started the
competition take a look at this
videotape and I think you'll see this
was the first place in the competition
we noticed something was not quite right
[Music]
[Applause]
okay see she didn't put any paper in the
machine and we thought well this is kind
of strange for a woman who can type a
hundred 70 words a minute so so we we
had to reload her machine and then we
started the competition once again and
here's what happened at the restart I
don't know if you can see it they're
frozen but what she was typing was
complete illegible gibberish now we
asked her about it and and here's here's
Barbara's explanation for why what she
typed was unreadable Barbara Blackburn
something happened here through no fault
of your own I guess we get bum equipment
or something let me just read the first
sentence Gentilly I elusive elusive in I
a mock vets mid control of vintner istic
t plain well no what exactly happened
there they screwed something out
something something happened to the
typewriter while it was while it was
here because you know this smacks of
organized crime okay something happened
to the typewriter while it was here well
immediately we impounded the samples of
the two typing Barbara Gaines and
Barbara Blackburn and so we thought
tonight we would find out for ourselves
is she in fact a world-champion typist
or a world-champion con artist we've
assembled now a blue-ribbon panel let's
begin the investigation shall we
gentlemen how do you do first of all
thank you very much for coming in this
first man to my left is the typewriter
repairman he is from Manhattan office
products his name is Lenny Danny yellow
am i pronouncing your name correctly
Lenny nice to meet you sir here we have
the machine that Barbara typed on have
you had a chance to take a look at it
yeah I looked at it before and is there
anything wrong with it not at all in in
your years of repairing typewriters have
you ever seen something malfunction that
would cause it to type gibberish uh
yeah but in this case I didn't find it I
see is it possible that on the night of
Thursday whatever that date was that
somebody had tampered with the machine
and then after the broadcast untampered
it so that no one would notice that
there was a problem not that I could see
them uh-huh and as far as you're
concerned this machine is typing
perfectly working or do you want to
demonstrate that for us well the
selection is correct you can see
yourself there's a test for rotate and
tilt okay rotate and tilt test is just
fine so Danny in a brief sentence how
would you describe the condition of this
liquid water nothing wrong with it
perfect working order
[Music]
[Applause]
Danny
[Music]
the next member of our blue-ribbon panel
is president of corporate security
consultants and former secretary of the
New York State polygraph Association Ted
even check Ted nice to meet you sir okay
before the broadcast you had a chance to
listen to some of what Barbara was
saying on the tape and I believe you put
it to some analysis what are the
findings yes we did David and I put it
through a stress analyzer and we came up
finding out that there is a great deal
of stress when she's talking about the
typewriter itself and former claims to
speak and and your experience that the
stress could indicate possibly what
exactly oh we can indicate anything from
the fact that she's completely
unfamiliar with it to the fact that she
doesn't understand herself what's
happening but you're prepared to testify
that in fact there is some sort of
tangential stress there absolutely great
deal of it
[Music]
all right now from the United States
Navy ladies and gentlemen please say
hello to lieutenant area and kal taxes
lieutenant lieutenant I understand you
took the example of the typing from
Barbara Blackburn and to the layman it
just appeared to be gibberish and you
did some decoding on that example what
what did you find there a lieutenant yes
I have Dave and I've studied this and as
you'll see it's a simple substitution
cipher it reveals the Balch code as a
matter of fact mm-hmm simple
substitution substitution cipher meaning
what exactly
well actually what has happened here is
that the typing was done so that each
letter was displaced one to the right
and one particular hand oh I see so it's
possible then that for example when I
took typing in high school and just
learning I would inadvertently place my
hand in the wrong position on the
keyboard and produce something like that
that's correct as a matter of fact I
have here a diagram of the Borak
keyboard which is the one she used and
as you'll see all the letters type with
the left hand are as they should appear
correctly however on the right hand we
noticed that the discrepancy arises it
appears that her hand had been had been
displaced one key to the right all right
thank you very much lieutenant I tell
you what with this in mind let's take a
look again at that videotape as they're
restarting the typing competition and
see if we can notice any motion or
movement of the right hand going from
its original place to the place that the
lieutenant suggests remember look
closely at the right hand here now is
the videotape
so apparently for whatever reason the
hand moved one notch over
[Music]
so then summing up briefly here what is
our conclusion well our conclusion is
that certainly the fault does not lie
with late night the staff the production
crew the technicians or this fine piece
of equipment the IBM Selectric
so then ladies and gentlemen perhaps the
fault lies elsewhere
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
