here's a question we should all be
asking what went wrong not just with the
pandemic but with our Civic life what
brought us to this polarized rancorous
political moment in recent decades The
Divide between winners and losers has
been deepening poisoning our politics
setting us
apart this divide is partly about
inequality but it's also about the
attitudes toward winning and losing that
have come with it those who landed on
top came to believe that their success
was their own doing a measure of their
Merit and that those who lost out had no
one to blame but
themselves this way of thinking about
success arises from a seemingly
attractive principle if everyone has an
equal chance the winners deserve their
winnings this is the heart of the
meritocratic
ideal in practice of course we fall far
short not everybody has an equal chance
to
rise children born to poor families tend
to stay poor when they grow up up
affluent parents are able to pass their
advantages onto their kids at ivy league
universities for example there are more
students from the top
1% than from the entire bottom half of
the country
combined but the problem isn't only that
we fail to live up to the meritocratic
principles we
proclaim the ideal itself is flawed it
has a dark side
meritocracy is corrosive of the common
good it leads to hubris among the
winners and
humiliation among those who lose out it
encourages the successful to inhale too
deeply of their success to forget the
luck and good fortune that help them on
their way and it leads them to look down
on those less fortunate less
credentialed than
themselves this matters for
politics one of the most potent sources
of the populist backlash is the sense
among many working people that Elites
look down on them it's a legitimate
complaint even as
globalization brought deepening
inequality and stagnant wages
its proponents offered workers some
bracing
advice if you want to compete and win in
the global economy go to
college what you earn depends on what
you learn you can make it if you
try these Elites missed the insult
implicit in this
advice if you don't go to college if you
don't flourish in the new econ om your
failure is your fault that's the
implication it's no wonder many working
people turned against meritocratic
Elites so what should we do we need to
rethink three aspects of our Civic life
the role of college the Dignity of work
and the meaning of
success we should begin by rethinking
the role of universities as Arbiters of
opportunity for those of us who spend
our days in the company of the
credential it's easy to forget a simple
fact most people don't have a 4-year
college degree in fact nearly 2third of
Americans don't so it is folly to create
an economy that makes a University
diploma a NE necessary condition of
dignified work and a decent life
encouraging people to go to college is a
good thing broadening access for those
who can't afford it is even better but
this is not a solution to
inequality we should focus Less on
arming people for meritocratic combat
and focus more on making life better for
people who lack a diploma but who may
essential contributions to our
society we should renew the Dignity of
work and place it at the center of our
politics we should remember that work is
not only about making a living it's also
about contributing to the common good
and winning recognition for doing so
Robert F Kennedy put it well half a
century ago Fellowship Community shared
patriotism these essential values do not
come from just buying and consuming
Goods
together they come from dignified
employment at decent pay the kind of
employment that enables us to say I help
to build this country I am a participant
in its great public
Ventures this Civic
sentiment is largely missing from our
public life to
today we often assume that the money
people make is the measure of their
contribution to the common
good but this is a
mistake Martin Luther King Jr explained
why reflecting on a strike by sanitation
workers in Memphis Tennessee shortly
before he was
assassinated King said the person who
picks up our garbage is in the final
analysis as significant as the
physician for if he doesn't do his job
diseases are
rampant all labor has dignity today's
pandemic makes this clear it reveals How
Deeply we rely on workers we often
Overlook delivery workers maintenance
workers grocery store clerks warehouse
workers truckers nurse assistants child
care workers Home Health Care Providers
these are not the best paid or most
honored
workers but now we see them as essential
workers this is a moment for a public
debate about how to bring their pay and
recognition into better alignment with
the importance of of their work it is
also time for a moral even spiritual
turning questioning our meritocratic
huas do I morally deserve the talents
that enable me to
flourish is it my doing that I live in a
society that prizes the talents I happen
to have or is that my good
luck insisting that my success is my due
makes it hard to see myself in other
people's
shoes appreciating the role of luck in
life can prompt a certain
humility there but for the accident of
birth or the grace of God or the mystery
of Fate go
I this Spirit of humility is the civic
virtue we need now it's the beginning of
a way back from the harsh ethic of
success that drives us apart it points
us beyond the tyranny of Merit to a less
rancorous more generous public
life
