so it's been about a month since this
article and the accompanying podcast
came out and I haven't stopped thinking
about it since the article is called the
CEO of Zoom wants AI clones in meetings
and it's really funny because if you
listen to the podcast the host of the
podcast who's the Editor in Chief of
this website nay Patel he says the exact
same thing he also can't stop thinking
about it I haven't stopped thinking
about it since we recorded it I think
you're going to like it but I wonder if
it's for the same reason which is that
this is just some of the dumbest stuff
I've ever heard come out of a human's
mouth like it's so stupid that I can't
believe it's published and I can't
believe Eric yon the CEO of Zoom has not
emailed them and been like could we take
this down please anyway let's go through
it together join me on this journey into
just like the dumbest future anyone
could
[Music]
want you can go listen to the podcast if
you want I'm going to highlight the
things he said just factually what said
with words and with no comment for me
we'll comment later I'm just going to
tell you what Eric Yun the CEO of Zoom
you know the video conferencing company
said about the future of Zoom you know
the video conferencing company so Eric y
the CEO of Zoom wants Zoom to be an AI
first company he says that in the future
Zoom the video conferencing software
will be able to send digital clones
of you to meetings and those digital
clones will read your emails so that you
don't have to like they'll respond to
emails they will act as you they will
make decisions they will go to meetings
and answer questions exactly the way you
would do it it says an AI Avatar will
essentially be an AI version of yourself
meaning it will act the same way you
will and you can use it to do your work
because it's going to behave the same
way that you would in that situation it
has all of your knowledge and all of
your information and in fact you could
have an infinite number of the AI
digital clones that could all be synced
together and working together but also
what if you could change the parameters
on those clones what if you could like
make one a little bit better at being a
Salesman or you could like turn up the
empathy when you go fire a person for
sending an AI clone to a meeting or
something you can do that with zoom you
know the video conferencing software let
me read to you from this interview his
vision for the company today for this
session IDE I do not need to join I can
send a digital version of myself to join
so I can go to the beach or I don't know
check my emails the digital version of
myself can read most of the emails maybe
one or two emails will tell me Eric it's
hard for the digital version to reply
can you do that again today we all spent
a lot of time either making phone calls
joining meetings sending emails deleting
some spam emails and replying to some
text messages still very busy how do we
leverage AI how do we leverage Zoom
workplace to fully automate that kind of
work that's something that is very
important for us I think for now the
number one thing is AI is not there yet
and that still will take some time let's
assume fast forward five or six years
that AI is ready AI probably can help
for maybe 90% of the work but in terms
of real time interaction today you and I
are talking online so I can send my
digital version and you can send your
digital
version so Eric Yun the CEO of Zoom is
predicting that in five to six years
Time 5 to six years from now Zoom will
be playing the Paradigm shifting role
and ensuring that you can send your
digital clone to meetings to answer
emails to make decisions replacing 90%
of your job Eric Yun the CEO of Zoom
says in five to six years 90% of the
work done by human workers will be done
by digital clones hosted by Zoom you
know the video conferencing software
where Zoom the company who looks like
this that company is is going to be the
one to introduce AI to the workforce in
a way that works and then you know we'll
be at the beach like you and I we're at
the beach the digital clones are doing
all the work 5 to six years 90% of the
work we're at the
[Music]
beach the tech world is just hoisted up
by journalists who don't ask second
questions where they kind of just let
really rich people with companies say
stupid [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] without like asking them
about it like asking any second question
like Eric Yan CEO of Zoom is like 90% of
Labor will be gone because our digital
claes will replace them and it's like
where did you get that number babe why
are you saying that number very
specifically what do you mean nay Patel
the interviewer here I think he does an
admirable job walking this fine line
right like he can't laugh in the CEO of
Zoom Eric Yan's face and be like you
think digital clones are happening in 5
years like oh my God what do you mean he
can't do that right so for example
here's one of the questions nle Patel
asks Eric y the CEO of Zoom he says what
about hallucinations like right now we
were all very excited when we saw how
good chat chpt was but then we realized
almost immediately that it just makes up
garbage it just makes up lies AI is a
nice little tool you can use but you
need an expert to check it and you're
saying in 5 to 6 years we're going to be
rid of that problem like we'll no longer
have hallucinations are you guys working
this it's so funny because Eric Yun the
CEO of Zoom he's just like well yeah
that's a
problem you can't you can't get there
overnight five to six years from now you
know I I'm I'm sure that'll be fixed
that's going to be fixed and nay Patel
asks a second question something I
appreciate very much and he says are
y'all all working on this or like this
is what you guys are fixing do you have
some information we don't have like
what's happening here and Eric the CEO
of Zoom says the funniest thing I've
ever heard in my life he says it's down
the stack it's just down the stack I
just correct me if I'm wrong no you are
so right absolutely this is technolog
stack you have to count on so many
others yeah so is the AI model
hallucination problem down there in the
stack or are you investing in making
sure that the rate of hallucination goes
down I think that'll be fixed you know
in the low but by but I guess my
question is by who is it by you or is it
somewhere down the stack some on the
stack you you've heard of the job of
like stack developer and you've heard of
the website like stack Overflow uh the
stack is just like a data structure it's
fine it doesn't matter um actually I
don't know if this is true is this like
a factual piece of information or just a
story that people tell let me know in
the comments I've always heard that you
describe the stack as like one of those
plate things that like a buffet where
like plates pop up right that's the data
structure so you can push the plates
down by adding new plates but the bottom
plate is always on the bottom so Eric
Yun the CEO of Zoom you know a company
that looks like this a video
conferencing company says no no we're
going to be AI first right and at the
top of the stack you have ai tools a
thing that Zoom offers at no cost to you
and the thing about zoom's AI tools is
that they're all just chat GPT like the
AI tools offered by Zoom is like they
listen to the meeting and they read the
chat and they convert that all to like
the text of the meeting and then the AI
language learning model summarizes that
meeting and sends it back to you that's
an AI tool by Zoom which is equivalent
to like the Capstone project of a 10th
grader using chat GPT Zoom just uses
chat GPT right and down the stack you
know way down the stack 5 to six years
from now apparently somebody is going to
make a tool that can make an AI clone
that Zoom will then use to replace 90%
of the workforce but that's down the
stack it's just down the stack like in
between Magic It's Magic but five years
from now it's down the stack I just I
can't stop saying it's down the stack I
think it's one of the funniest things
I've ever heard in my life like how is
that going to happen what's going to H
it's down the stack it's just down the
[Music]
stack okay but let's roll it back let's
discuss what I would have asked as a
second question when Eric Yun the CEO of
Zoom said in five to six years he's
going to replace 90% of the workforce
with AI digital clones that attend Zoom
meetings like the first thing I would
say is zoom is a company that looks like
this Zoom does not have the capital to
purchase whatever company's tool that
could actually make digital AI clones so
are they developing these tools nay
Patel does ask and erun is just like you
know it's down the stack it's going to
happen in the future like I'm sure these
problems will be solved I'm sure they
will be solved and I would just say HST
homst is solving the problems if we were
going to make a list of why this is so
stupid that's the first big thing I
would say why would whatever research
Group whatever company that produces
this amazing language learning model
that can be applied from person to
person that is so high fidelity that it
can be fine-tuned that you can change
the parameters on it and send like a
good salesman out why would they ever
give that to zoom why would Zoom be
involved at all Zoom is a company that
looks like this they do not have the
capital to purchase this they do not
have the capital to do this research why
would Zoom be involved at all why what
do you think your role is in this sure
you can grab chat GPT and you can shove
it wherever nobody wants it because
nobody wants it but like everyone can do
that why do you get to make the digital
clones what specifically is zoom
offering Zoom is a video conferencing
company what do you mean that also
doesn't work even in the magical world
where you can make an AI clone of
yourself that can go to meetings and can
make decisions it's just like that's not
how meetings work meetings are not like
here's a summary of what Angela knows on
this topic in a meeting I'm having a
conversation we are talking in a room
together or we are talking on Zoom I
mean nobody's using Zoom they're on
Microsoft teams or like we're drawing on
a whiteboard am I going to have to wear
like a camera and a microphone at all
times so my zoom clone can get all of
that information because Eric Yun the
CEO of Zoom is acting like all of that
information is in emails meetings don't
happen in emails meetings are
conversations meetings especially for
scientists like myself we're writing
equations down and we're trying to solve
problems and we're all talking about
previous experiences we've had in
different labs and different
environments that will help us solve the
current problem and none of that is in
an email none of that can be scrapped by
the AI to get the information how would
this even work how does the AI clone
know that in 2013 I was in an undergrad
lab and I used a very specific algorithm
how does it know that how is it going to
know that because that's how I'm going
to solve the problem with my brain how
does my AI digital clone have that piece
of information are you saying that Eric
Yun the CEO of Zoom will somehow figure
out how the human brain works and
somehow be able to map my brain and put
it into the Clone because otherwise the
Clone is just reading emails and the
only information it has is what's in the
emails am I literally wearing a
microphone every day to train it on what
I would say in different situations it
doesn't make any sense it's so stupid
the technology will definitely not exist
in 5 years but even if it did it would
would not work that way have you even
thought about this for a second the next
thing I think is like who's paying for
this like does my company hire me and
then give Zoom money to make an AI clone
of me that I can then send to meetings
or do I have to pay Zoom money to host
my AI clones and keep track of them and
make sure all the information is up to
date like why is zoom involved in this
at all like if I have an AI clone
wouldn't that be something I'm
disseminating to the various companies
I'm working for or alternatively more
probably the CEOs of whatever company
I'm working for would steal my identity
and be like well this is company
property now now we have your clones and
you're fired right it just this doesn't
make sense where are the AI clones who's
keeping track of them who's storing the
data who's training them how long does
it take to train them what do you mean
an AI clone can intend a meeting and
answer exactly how I would answer and
this is 5 years away what do you mean
it's was down the stack but like once
that happens what do you mean what's
exactly happening it made me think about
it probably more than ericon the CEO of
Zoom has thought about it the thing
about AI is that it's a tool right you
cannot blame an AI tool for a decision
it's made that will always be on the
person who uses the AI tool right so if
I send my AI tool to meeting and I tell
a random customer that like hell yeah we
can build that thing right and then
later I find out that oh no my AI clone
said I could build a thing that I can't
build and we took
$475,000 from this company to build it
and we can't do it and now we owe them
that money which has already been spent
on buying tools because the AI clone
purchased the tools because it's allowed
to make decisions and it thought we
could build the thing but I'm the
scientist and I know it's not possible
so now we owe the money we don't have
plus the litigation fees once they sue
us for saying we could do a thing that
we can't do is Eric Yun the CEO of Zoom
going to pay for that is he going to
insure us against the AI clones making
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up or lying a thing that AI does
very very well I mean it's not lying it
just it just gobbl GS whatever
information it has into an answer and a
lot of time that's going to be nonsense
is he going to guarantee that it's not
nonsense who is going to pay for this
when this thing [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up is that what
the CEO of Zoom Eric Yun is saying is
going to happen happen like instead of
being a video conferencing software
they're going to be a like an insurance
company for AI tools and they're going
to say our digital clones 100% all the
time is that what's happening because
you can't have an AI clone make a
decision unless you know 100% that it
will be an actual good decision that you
would have made and you can never know
that because AI is a black box it
doesn't work that way it's so stupid to
say that this is even close to feasible
it's embarrassing to say that this is a
possibility AI tools like this would not
save anyone any time because even if you
sent your AI clone to a meeting you
would then have to read the transcript
of that meeting to make sure that your
AI clone didn't say anything stupid and
you would have to send emails and be
like what is your AI clone talking about
dude and you would start having really
weird time wasting meetings where you
would email Dave and be like your AI
clone has convinced my AI clone that
this law of physics is broken now
they're gone off on a loop and they
think they can break the second law of
Thermodynamics and that's not how this
works so we need to reset our clones to
four days ago and we need to figure out
why you're and it's such a waste of time
it doesn't make sense and Eric yon the
CEO of Zoom is just like it's down the
stack we'll solve that problem it's fine
it's down the stack so this is a really
minor problem and I think it's the
easiest to refute by saying like this
will change with Generations but I
cannot imagine logging on to a zoom no
one's logging on to a zoom call logging
on to like a blue jeans meeting and
everyone's face populates and it's all
AI avatars and I'm sitting there like
the only human no I would just log off I
think people would find it very rude if
you send an AI Avatar to a meeting
instead of sending yourself maybe like
social rules would change and two
generations from now people would be
totally okay with you sending your AI
clone to see your grandma in the nursing
home but to me that seems pretty [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
up and like offensive and mean and Eric
Yun the CEO of Zoom even says to Nay
Patel who's interviewing him he's like
you know I don't want to be at this
meeting I would send my digital clone to
this meeting and it could handle it just
fine and you can kind of hear nay Patel
audibly be like oh you would send an AI
digital clone to this meeting huh that
is rude so I'm assuming when you looked
at your C today you saw a decoder
session you were going to come to that
on your own what would you have sent an
AI Avatar to instead I think not AI
Avatar essentially just the AI version
of myself right sure essentially in
order only just to to listen to the call
also can interactive with you know
participant in a meaningful way right
let's say whenever let's say a decision
you know the team waiting for the the SE
to make a decision you know or maybe
some meaningful conversation my digital
twin sort of really can represent me I
think you can throw that one out like
maybe in the future no one will think
that's rude I would find that very rude
I would immediately log off any meeting
where everyone was in AI I'm not going
to sit and talk to a computer absolutely
not what a nightmare no but also also
Imagine an AI Avatar digital clone could
actually do my job like it could type my
code for me it could make my PowerPoint
slides it could go to conferences and
present at meetings it would come up
with new ideas and write new software
and run new simulations and and apply
for Grants and get funding and it could
do all of that by itself and I'm at the
beach why would my company pay me if all
of this is being done on their servers
with their energy hosted on like their
computers with their you know
information and their goals and
strategies at that company and I'm at
the
beach I don't have a job anymore I'm not
at the beach actually
I'm just hungry because I don't have any
money because I don't have a job because
the AI clones have taken the job I don't
think this technology will exist in five
to six years that's a ridiculous thing
to say but in the event that it did no
one is paying me to send an AI clone to
do something while I sit on the beach
that's not how companies work and Eric
Yun the CEO of Zoom knows that because
even though they're a video conferencing
software Zoom does not let their
employees work from home
so is Eric Yun the CEO of Zoom paying
his employees AI avatars to do stuff
while his employees are at the beach I
don't believe that for a second
absolutely not if this technology
existed why would companies ever pay
anyone like you said that AI digital
clones can do 90% of the work work which
you think is just answer emails and go
to
meetings why would companies ever hire
anyone like they could hire one guy and
that guy would do 100% of the work made
up from the 10% of everybody else's jobs
but they could also have that guy's AI
clones you know go to all the meetings
write all the code go to all the
presentations do all the things like
they don't need to hire people if the
Clones can do the work so this isn't for
people this isn't so you and I can have
a 4-day work week and go to the beach
this is for the people who own companies
to go to the beach infinite growth with
zero expenses because the AI clones do
all
work so it's not really for us right but
it doesn't really make sense from a
corporation perspective either why would
you trust Zoom with all of your cui
that's right I have a job I know what
cui is why would you trust Zoom to make
an AI Avatar to look through all of your
secret information all of your
proprietary company information all of
your secret little apps that you're
making and then send all that
information to zoom so they can make an
AI clone if you think about Zoom the
first thing you think of is probably
like a vaguely positive feeling you know
that Zoom a company that looks like this
completely failed to capitalize on where
you were talking to like your
grandparents for the first time like
over camera in April of 2020 and it was
like really weird but like also like you
have Nostalgia for that time and like
maybe you associate Zoom with that but
if you take a second and think of the
second thing you know about Zoom it's
that the CEO of Zoom Eric Yun pushed a
product to launch that was not ready
that led to a devastating data breach
right that was litigated for years
that's the second thing you know about
zoom and now you want to give it an AI
digital clone that has your social
security number companies with
proprietary data are not going to work
with a company that's most famously
known for not handling security issues
well if you search for the CEO of Zoom
the first thing that pops up is his
apology letter where he's really sorry
about mishandling your private
information the second thing that pops
up is probably devastatingly for him
this interview where he says some of the
dumbest stuff I've ever heard someone
say if you're a company and you're like
oh my God we could replace all of our
workers with AI That's amazing are you
going to want to do that with zoom what
if a competing company schedules a
meeting with some of your AI clones do
you trust Zoom to be able to handle that
correctly do you trust Zoom to
authenticate that the person you're
talking to is the AI clone of the person
you're talking to do you trust Zoom to
ensure that the stuff that's
communicated with that AI clones is all
aware to both users like what if the the
Clones are moving information that you
don't know about and you're just
receiving a little summary of what
happened do you trust Zoom with that I
mean I I'm not a billionaire company
owner so I don't know but like I I would
probably Google the company I was was
going to use First and the first thing
that happens when you Google Zoom is
privacy data breach lawsuit and and that
leads me to like my biggest problem Pie
in the Sky five years from now some
random magician has made a tool that can
allow you a user to create an infinite
number of individualized AI clones that
you can Tinker around with and change
the parameters to do whatever you want
that exists 5 to six years from now why
how does Zoom go what is zoom doing in
there like why would the company that
wants to use AI clones go through Zoom
that doesn't make sense Zoom is a video
conferencing software if every single
person no longer goes to meetings you
don't need video conferencing software
two AI clones will not call each other
with 3D avatars and look at each other
over a zoom screen and have a
conversation that doesn't need to happen
they can meet
instantaneously summarize the meeting
with the little a AI language learning
model send it to the user within a few
seconds of the user saying oh send my AI
to make a meeting like there's no
there's no use for the zoom video
conferencing user interface Zoom doesn't
exist if AI avatars replace all the
meetings because you don't need to have
meetings anymore Zoom is a video
conferencing
service what are you talking about what
do you mean explain to me why AI avatars
would get on a zoom call with other AI
avatars they don't they they can't see
they don't they
can't what do you mean it's so dumb it's
really it's really
[Music]
dumb I think part of the reason why eru
and the CEO of Zoom gets away was saying
dumb stuff and people like pay attention
and write it down is because look at him
this guy is like a handsome billionaire
and like yeah look at the zoom stock
again do you see that part where it goes
up like that was I mean it's devastating
the co pandemic is and was devastating
and hundreds of thousands of people died
but like at the time it looks like Eric
Yun the CEO of Zoom is like really smart
right he knows what's going on like he's
got his finger on the pulse of like what
people need and so when he says really
dumb stuff like 5 to six years from now
90% of work will be replaced by AI
clones people are like well maybe I mean
he was WR about video conferencing
software and it's just like listen to
the words that he's saying though don't
think about him being handsome don't
think about him having having a billion
dollars don't think about how he just
got really really lucky like the biggest
Golden Goose anyone has ever seen that
one time just think about the words that
he's saying I'm going to read it out
loud for you and listen to the words
from me just some dumb woman staring at
a wall that I'm in a tiny closet can you
tell how tiny this I'm talking to myself
in a tiny room imagine if you heard me
say these things would you be like
wow we're going to have ai clones in the
future that's amazing no no you wouldn't
right I personally have the doubt okay
maybe this underlying technology the
large language model isn't as stable a
foundation to build the vision that
you're describing
how do you overcome that because that
seems like the problem today with the
big AI Visions llms let people imagine a
lot of things but maybe they're not the
thing you can actually build the vision
on you're right on that for any new
technology you cannot get it overnight
on the way you'll see some hurdles like
hallucinations it's one of the problems
the very it's a very well-known
problems I think given the progress down
the road that problem will be fixed for
sure
right however because of that problem if
you do not Embrace that technology I
look at my meeting summary it's
amazingly accurate and I think I
understand in theory there's a
hallucination problem but so far with
our meeting summaries I don't see that
so maybe in other contexts that'll be a
problem if you were a venture capitalist
and you heard me just say that which
just boils down to like yeah
Hallucination is a problem but like I
don't see it it'll be fixed would you
give me $3 billion to make a bunch of AI
clones for you no cuz it sounds dumb it
doesn't make any sense you can't can't
just say oh yeah that's a problem but
it's a small problem but it's not a
problem for me but it'll be fixed like
it doesn't make any sense and just
because he's a handsome billionaire
people write it down they think what he
says has value but it doesn't it doesn't
make sense which leads me to like the
biggest self-own of this interview which
is that this guy thinks he has a job
this guy is like you know jobs you know
when you work and you have like five
meetings and you don't have to be at
four of them you know that's like a work
day and it's just like Eric Yan CEO of
Zoom that's not what work is like going
to five meetings is not a job you're a
CEO the one job that exists in the world
that could be immediately replaced with
AI and you don't know that you think
your job is a job and that's so
embarrassing for you you think five
meetings a day is a job like people
that's not what jobs are people do work
like they make products like you have
workers that like write code and talk to
customers and you have salesmen they're
not just in five meetings a day I have a
tool for you give me
$100,000 and I will tell you my AI tool
it's not an AI tool but people always
call tools that aren't AI tools Ai and I
think that's funny where open whatever
email client you use erun this is for
you the CEO of zoom and set an auto
reply and for the next month okay do a
trial for a month and have the auto
reply say hello everyone thank you for
your email I am in the midst of a family
emergency and I cannot respond if there
is an absolute work emergency please
reach out to me at this number if not I
trust your judgment to make whatever
decisions you need to make for this
company thank you so much for your
patience in this time and just every
time someone emails you every time they
invite you to a meeting have it send
that and I guarantee you Eric you and
the CEO of Zoom nothing would happen to
your company I mean CU your company
looks like this it would be the same it
would be stable no one would ever notice
if you didn't attend your six meetings a
day where you were like what if an AI
clone could attend this meeting write
that down what if Zoom was an AI company
right guys and they're just like Eric
Eric we have to talk about like the data
breach we owe $80 million and you want
to you want to be AI first is that
that's not what this meeting is about
Eric that's that's how I Envision the
meetings are with him it's fine
I think this is the problem right this
this interview is not for you and I like
we are never replacing 90% of our work
with an AI Avatar and then at we're at
the beach that is like CEOs of companies
get to be at the beach right like we
don't get to partake in that it's not
for us this software is for CEOs of
companies who want to fire all their
employees and make the line go up right
they want they want infinite growth with
no expenses AI could do that for them it
won't but you know according to Eric Yan
who's selling this product that doesn't
exist it's down the stack according to
him it will and then you can be at the
beach not you or me but like the CEO of
a company is at the beach and I think
this is really interesting like Zoom is
a publicly traded company their goal is
not to make a video conferencing product
and give it to Consumers it was in the
past but now their goal is to make make
this line go up and it's not going up
sometimes companies do provide stuff to
Consumers and it results in this line
going up but that's like a side effect
and not the
goal they want this line to go up right
but the primary goal of of owning and
being the CEO of a publicly traded
company like this is like your
responsibility to the shareholders make
this line go up and like uhoh it's not
doing that I'm going to do some really
morbid and I'm going to plot the stock
price of zoom on top of covid deaths and
you can see that very briefly as I said
before Zoom was like a golden egg from a
Golden Goose and like it was like whoa
what's happening and then you know
Microsoft teams just was like oh I guess
video conferencing software is important
from people here it is and they just
rolled it out and everyone stopped using
Zoom like it's a very brief little thing
right but that's not how company work
now the line has to go up so it's
failing Zoom is failing like like
they're cash flow positive but like this
is a failing company the CEO of zoom
ericon in this interview talks about how
he's going to be competitive with
Microsoft and Apple and stuff and I just
like you're obviously not competitive
with Microsoft but like you could have
been and I don't understand what
happened the thing about Microsoft is
like it's got to choke hold on American
businesses right everybody uses Outlook
everybody uses team everybody uses like
office suite but it all sucks if someone
emails you a teams meeting and you click
accept on that teams meeting Microsoft
Outlook by Design takes that acceptance
email and moves it to the trash folder
of your email so if two days later
you're like oh didn't I have a meeting
at 2 pm you have to go open the trash
folder of your email and click it and
find the zoom link I'm just kidding you
would find the micone moft is teams link
nobody uses Zoom if you search in
Outlook like a phrase that you know is
in an email you're looking for Outlook
won't search for that phrase Outlook
will instead change the search to what
it thinks you you wanted to search for
instead of what you typed what you
wanted to search for it's infuriating
all of Microsoft products are hot hot
garbage like it's just so bad so I don't
oh insert like the Hank Hill mean meme
about one drive I just I don't
understand why when Zoom was at the top
of this tippy top it didn't just copy
all of Microsoft's stuff and shove it
out as like companions to zoom and then
go onto a Reddit forum and just look at
all the complaints like the thing about
invitations just going to the trash
automatically and just fix all that like
why didn't they release a bunch of like
like a teams messaging product to go
with your Zoom conferencing calls what
are you doing why are you trying to make
AI clones instead of a chat box to go
with your Zoom conference calls it
doesn't make sense what are you doing
Eric Yan the CEO of zoom and I had
thought about all of this because I
listened to like the first 30 seconds of
this on my way to work and I don't have
data on my phone so I couldn't keep
listening to it CU I thought I had
downloaded the podcast but I didn't and
so I just spent my whole Drive being
like well what could zoom have done to
fix this what could zoom have done in
the moment to like take a little bit
away from Microsoft Office and just like
steal some of the the choke hold on
American businesses and I came up with
that idea slowly add on every single
tool that Microsoft Office has so you
know January of
2021 when universities are deciding like
should we keep paying for this Zoom
subscription or should we just switch to
teams for the classes a bunch of people
would have been like oh we have to keep
using Zoom I use their calendar service
oh we have to keep using Zoom my
research students they're all we all
have this old conversations we need all
this stuff like let's just switch to
zoom and then I came home I downloaded
the podcast and I listened to it and it
turns out that Zoom did do that the
whole time I was using Zoom every single
day for like a seven-month period they
also had a little chat box they also had
a little calendar and I just didn't
notice it I just it wasn't advertised to
me it didn't pop up like they didn't
they didn't push that there was no push
notification being like hey you want to
use the chat box to send that message
you know
Zoom could have simply had a little
email reminder that was like hey when
you invite people to a meeting do you
want us to send a reminder 15 minutes
before that meeting that they accepted
that meeting instead of sending it to
the trash and I would have been like
amazing I'm only using Zoom calendar but
like I didn't know about it it wasn't
advertised to me and zoom expects to be
competitive with Microsoft like they
can't even they can't even do that how
are they competitive with Microsoft I
mean of course five down a stack five to
six years from now 90% of Amer americ
[Music]
Workforce I finished the podcast and I
learned that Zoom had already been
making those tools and I was like oh
what else has Zoom been making and like
maybe I haven't heard of it maybe Zoom
has interesting stuff but like nobody's
paying attention so maybe Eric Yan the
CEO of Zoom is going saying crazy things
on podcast so that people will go look
at zoom and be like maybe I should try
zoom and so I went to look at Zoom to
see what they're offering lately and I
found let me introduce you to post post
Quantum endtoend encryption Services
post
Quantum I I'm not going to talk about
quantum computers quantum computers take
advantage of like quantum mechanical
principles and the basic idea is that
because of how quantum computers would
be built if they were built to scale
they would be much faster at doing
computations than like a classical style
computer so quantum computers have been
built but they're all really tiny and
they don't even compete with classical
computers but in the future if
engineering problems could be solved and
someone could build a huge quantum
computer it would be way faster and way
better than a normal computer right so
what does this have to do with
encryption the idea is that if you have
a quantum computer because it can do so
many calculations it could break an an
encryption key that you shove into it
because it just it doesn't take that
long to try all the possibilities do you
know what I mean so what Zoom is saying
is that they've developed an encryption
tool that can work in a postquantum
world postquantum end to end encryption
and they're the first so the obvious
question I have reading this is like but
quantum computers don't exist like that
like the quantum computer that you're
fighting against doesn't exist so how do
you what and I actually sent an email to
zoom and they really helpfully responded
let me read it to to you I said hello
I've read this article but I don't
understand what postquantum e2e is and
how it differs from e2e do you have a
paper I could read on the topic what
exactly makes this a postquantum
solution thanks and they responded
really nicely almost immediately and
they linked the same thing I linked and
said I had already read which is very
silly but listen to this postquantum
endtoend encryption offers the same
security property as end to-end
encryption namely that only the meeting
participants and not even Zoom server
have access to the Keys used to encrypt
the meeting unlike the ladder the
postquantum thing it's designed to
withstand the threat to an adversary Who
can capture encrypted Network traffic
hoping to acquire a quantum computer in
the future and use it to decrypt the
captured data so if you're talking to
your Mima on zoom and a hacker steals
that data and then just puts it away and
then waits till they get a quantum
computer a thing that is only
theoretically existing and there's so
many engineering challenges to actually
building it it might not ever exist it
might exist in some point in the future
Zoom is saying they can't crack mima's
code now because it's post postquantum
except note zoom's postquantum end
to-end encryption is not designed to
defend against potential attacks that
would require the current existence of a
quantum computer capable of breaking
classical cryptography at the time a
meeting takes
place
oh so it doesn't work uh they also sent
me a white paper which is very nice
because that's what I was asking for but
let me read to you what that says our
protocol protects against this Threat by
using the kyber post Quantum secure key
encapsulation mechanism to strengthen
the encryption used to transmit the
meeting key between the leader and the
participants however for performance
reasons and given that the threat of a
quantum computer is not considered
imminent we do not currently defend
against existing Quantum adversaries so
our signature and authentification are
not postquantum secure and it's just
like so what is that what is it what
what is it you say that you have let me
take you through some questions I
imagine that a customer would ask
hearing this you might say wait quantum
computers at this level exist and zoom
would say no and then you might say then
how do you know what quantum computers
will be like and zoom would say
Quantum Quantum the answer is quantum
and then you might say but how do you
know what postquantum computer hackers
are going to be like how do you know
that your post Quantum
e2e actually works against quantum
computers and and zoom would probably
say Quantum Quantum Quantum and then you
might say okay so if I buy this product
your postquantum
e2e will protect me against quantum
computer hackers now or in the future
and zoom would say this for performance
reasons and given that the threat of a
quantum computer is not considered
imminent we do not currently defend
against existing Quantum adversaries so
our signatures and authentification are
not postquantum secure and it's just
like you see how Zoom is offering a
product with the promise that in the
future it will be useful but at the
moment it's not really a
thing that's kind of a trend with zoom
right like oh in the future five to six
years AI clones all over the place so
you should probably watch Zoom stock
maybe buy some Zoom stock cuz in the
future imagine I raise $3 million
to develop a very specific chemical and
I put it in a in a bottle like this and
I was like look at this lotion it's got
a chemical that's going to protect you
against alien bugs you know postquantum
alien bug spray and you would say oh my
God aliens exist and I would say no no
and you would say oh so how do you know
what the alien bugs will be like and I
would say Quantum and you would say but
how do you know that your lotion
protects against the alien bugs and and
I would say Quantum Quantum Quantum and
you would say so if I purchase this
product though I will be protected
against alien bugs and then I would say
well no for performance reasons and
given that the threat of aliens is not
considered imminent we do not currently
defend against existing alien adversar
so the chemical defends against aliens
but the spray bottle does not do you see
how that doesn't make sense like you how
do you sell a product like that what
does that mean what does it mean you
can't say oh in the future this will
probably happen which is why you should
use this when do you think quantum
computers will exist what year is that
you're preparing for that now in the
event that like not only are quantum
computers like tractable engineering
wise they're so easy to build that like
random hackers can have them and they're
not just like huge like cold things in
Labs like what do you mean what do you
mean though postquantum what are we're
not postquantum we're not postquantum
yet what do you mean postquantum sounds
very silly AI clones in meetings is an
embarrassing thing to say what is the
point what is this this is a public
interview you can go listen to Eric Yan
the CEO of Zoom a video conferencing
company talk about how 5 to six years
from now 90% of the work you do will be
replaced by a clone that's an AI
language learning model tuned to you
that you can like alter a little bit and
make it a better salesman and it will do
all your emails and all your spam and
like you don't have to say happy
birthday to your mom anymore you can
just send your digital clone is this
what the people want AI tools and it's
just why send your AI digital clone it's
down the stack you're at the beach
you're at the beach you're not at work
you're at the beach down the stack it
doesn't make any sense how can someone
say this out loud and think that it
sounds like they're doing a great job
being the CEO of their company the the
entire future of Zoom hinges on the fact
that 5 to six years from now someone
will do magic and make an AI tool that
works and is and is trusted and has High
Fidelity and you can allow it to make
decisions and do things for you because
you trust it because magic has happened
and now we trust the AI tools and for
some reason Zoom gets that and they're
the one that is the steward of that code
and they send it out and they're they're
managing it and it's down the stack it's
just down the stack you're at the beach
it's down the stack what does that mean
why would anyone say this it's really
embarrassing to listen to why would
someone go on a thing they know is going
to be published and say things like down
the stack
[Music]
why there's this like saying I guess
it's like one of the Murphy's Law things
it says never attribute to malice what
can be explained by stupidity and I
don't I don't really like that I like
obviously people do stupid things I do
stupid things Eric Yan the CEO of zooms
does stupid things all the time it's
totally fine but I think it's dangerous
to just assume that people are stupid
and when someone goes on you know a
podcast and talks about how five years
from now zoon is going to be responsible
for 90% of the workforce in America
maybe that's not a stupid thing they're
saying I mean it is technically a stupid
thing they're saying but
like doesn't he have a reason for
convincing people at 5 years from now
Zoom is going to be competitive with
Microsoft isn't it this plot the line's
not going going up how can he make it go
up he already tried talking about
postquantum Computing how else can we
make it go up M maybe AI tools if I gave
this interview and I said things like
that I would be embarrassed right you
drive home and you're like what was I
saying and I would call The Verge and I
would be like you know I think I messed
up that interview like I know you're
going to write about it but could I have
another shot could I try again to talk
about my company and I think the people
at the Verge would like yeah you really
messed that up that was real dumb what
you said there and they would let you do
that and you could go in and you could
be like here's what Zoom does we're a
video conferencing service but he didn't
do that this is just on the internet for
everyone to listen to right so there has
to be a reason like it's not
[Music]
stupidity so um let's just talk about
the legality of just completely lying
about the prospects of your company and
what that means
I mean it's not lying right let's be
charitable and say just being like super
optimistic about the prospects of your
company which currently looks like this
and whether or not it will be
competitive with Microsoft in five years
when someone does magic and makes an AI
tool that works listen I'm not a lawyer
right obviously I'm not a lawyer I'm not
making any statements I am simply asking
what is legal and what is not legal okay
I don't know I'm not not a lawyer let
let's create a scale okay on the one
hand you have Elizabeth Holmes right and
she's like from one one one drop of
blood I can't do it one drop of blood
cure cancer blah right she's she's like
you know how when you go get a blood
test I got a blood test the other day
they took four vials from me because
they have to do a bunch of different
tests right and some of those tests are
done with machines and some of those
tests are done with humans and 10 or 12
years ago Elizabeth Holmes was like no
no with my thing you're gonna take one
drop and all the tests will be done and
that's a really stupid thing to say
right that's stupid that's equivalent to
someone saying five years from now ai
clones are going to do all the meetings
in the world right that doesn't make
sense right because at that time and
it's still true today because she was
lying that wasn't a real product like
some blood tests have to be done
multiple times some blood tests have to
be done on machines some blood tests
have to be done on different machines
some blood tests have to be done by
humans it doesn't make sense that you
could all of a sudden have a paradigm
shift in blood test technology and stick
it in a little box that looks like a
cure IG right and that was illegal she
said those things that were lies and she
went to jail real jail like big boy jail
right that was very illegal way on the
other end of the scale you have Elon
Musk saying the Cyber let me read it the
Cyber truck will be waterproof enough to
serve briefly as a boat so it can cross
Riv rivers lakes and even seas that
aren't too choppy so that was 2 years
ago and you know this is
[Music]
today also not a true thing also a
really dumb thing to say just you don't
understand cars or boats or Seas you
going to rubberize the boat Where's the
ex like what do you mean it's going to
function as a boat like an incredibly
idiotic thing to say but no one believed
him and that wasn't illegal right cuz
he's not in jail she went to jail where
does Eric y the CEO of Zoom fall on the
scale like him saying five to six years
from now I'm not building it it's down
the stack but someone will give me an AI
tool that will replace 90% of the human
Workforce fall on the scale of like one
drop of blood cures cancer to like this
garbage car is also a garbage boat where
is it on the scale I'm not a lawyer I
don't know and I also question like how
long can you keep this going like oh
it's a postquantum tool we have that you
can check it when we get quantum
computers when we have a quantum
computer that works you can check to
make sure that my my post Quantum tool
works in the future and then 6 months
from now it's like oh no we have another
we have another call um um AI tools 5
years from now you know uh Zoom will be
will be in charge of all the AI clones
that's where we're working on that's
what zooms on next and it's like cool
but what are you going to say six months
from now what do you say six months from
then what about when the five years is
up and this obviously hasn't happened
what what is the result of this how long
can someone keep this going what is
happening I really wonder what the
people who work at Zoom feel about this
like years years ago when you got hired
and you negotiated for like stock
options instead of 401k matching how do
you feel when you tune into the Verge
podcast and you hear the CEO of your
company say say it's down the stack like
where where is your retirement funds
where are they they're down the stack
it's down the stack it's fine and it's
it's crazy because like of course Zoom
employees don't think they're going to
get to be at the beach right Zoom got
rid of its work from home policy Zoom is
a video conferencing company if anything
they should have everyone working from
home and be like look how great it is
look how we can use zoom and we're
functioning perfectly as a company
everyone works from home isn't that
amazing isn't Zoom amazing that's what
they should have done but instead
everyone's back at work the CEO is on a
podcast talking about how you can never
get rid of human connection with zoom
but you know what Zoom will do send an
AI clone to your your father's birthday
party for you so you're at the beach
[Music]
hey Angela how's that Star Trek peard
video coming it's going to happen it's
down the stack I've been working on it
down the stack don't you feel guilty
because you took a job doing atmospheric
modeling so you could get into the field
of climate change research and help save
the world but you didn't do that your
job is comfortable and now you spend
your free time on your little hobby
making little YouTube videos I'm sure
your grandchildren will love watching
your old YouTube videos where you call
Galaxy's little guys that you smos
together while they forage for lead
ridden volunteer tomato plants in fields
of water logged cars and demolish
concrete buildings it's down the
stack it's down the
stack Yik
