Peter B Goan you're joining me today we
are at the Battle of ideas and it's a
bit of an interesting weird strange one
because just outside there are what
would you say thousands or tens of
thousands of people what's going on
outside at the moment there's a rally
for Palestinians and specifically about
the Israeli Palestinian conflict and and
and what are your thoughts as to the
motivations of many of the people there
well it's interesting you should ask
because we actually asked many of the
people my friend re and I are doing
videos here among other things in London
and we actually asked what what they
wanted like so we went to speaker Corner
uh we've been to two rallies so far this
is the third but we have the Battle of
ideas so we're not there and we actually
ask people what they want most people do
not have a solution to the problem I
don't know if it's many or most but a
lot of people say will say we want peace
and Justice and then when you ask them
what peace pieces so they traffic in the
in the meanings of different the
different meanings of the terms they
mean something very different by peace
and Justice though what you and I mean
okay well let's start them with what we
mean and then what do they mean well
what do you mean when I say peace uh
people not uh arguing with one another
yeah people getting along not killing
each other uh what what do you what do
you mean by
Justice um I suppose if someone killed
someone you want to put them in prison
is that is that what I mean I think I
mean that well yeah there are different
so without being overly I don't know do
you want me to be overly philosophical
go on yeah well you know there are
different types of justice retributive
justice you know punishment distributive
justice uh in the history of Western
intellectual thought it starts with
Socrates and the Republic books one
through three of the Republic what's
just what is
justice that question continue you know
is Justice paying your debts it's like
what is justice that
continues in that tradition up to John
rolls in the 70s when John rolls talks
about Justice is fairness so a just
Society my view is that a just Society
has to be a fair Society so how do we
create conditions in the society to make
it more fair we can talk about that I
have I think the right is not correct I
think the left is not correct um I think
that we've lost sight of the bigger
picture but even that conversation
diverges significantly from what many of
the people out side mean when they say
justice and the reason I know that is
because we've gone on the streets and
we've asked them we've asked our and we
have it on fil asked the C so they mean
some kind of remediation of past
Injustice they mean a kind
of um Palestinians have been living
under the booty of the Israelis for so
long and now it's time for justice
either to turn the tables or from the
river to the Sea so they mean something
very different by Justice but unless you
actually ask them that you can't assume
that your conception of justice and
their conception of justice is the same
and again that has nothing to do with
Israelis or Palestine or Jews or
anything it's just figuring out what
people mean when they use words and
that's not an academic thing too it's
just like what do you mean when you say
justice and so when you've spoken to
these people you're ascertaining that
they mean to are we are we saying to
kill Jewish people to get rid of some do
some mean that for sure are are driver
was pretty explicit about that others do
not others mean a two-state solution or
others mean kind of some kind of
Retribution for previous injustices
suffered by Palestinians but again the
only way you would know that is if you
actually ask them which is why I wrote
the book how to have impossible
conversations how to figure out what
people mean by just asking them
questions well what do you mean by that
do you think that we rely too often on
on slogans and we don't actually think
through I mean from the river to the Sea
do you think most people really have
thought about what that means when Pro
Palestinian people say that it's a good
question I don't know I'm no expert in
the Middle East at all and as a general
rule I avoid talking about things that
are outside my area of expertise I don't
have a solution to the problem if I'm
forced I would say two-state solution
but I don't really know I'm no expert at
all and that's putting it
mildly but I do I am interested in in
the way people talk I am interested in
what people believe I'm extremely for
one of my research areas is why someone
changes their mind what causes people to
change their mind what is an
intervention on a personal level what is
a macro intervention on a societal level
and how do we get people to rethink
either to rethink some of the positions
they hold or to doubt some of the
positions they hold so they become less
confident and more humble and how do we
get people to start listening to each
other again and talking to each other
again it's such a complicated one
because obviously if we talk about those
people out on the street right now I
imagine there's such a variation in a
variety I'm positive that's true yeah
and so and and some must think well hang
on you don't speak for me you're saying
something I'm trying to say something
much more nuanced and you're really
going for it how do you when you go and
speak to these people and you spoke to
them in the last few days a little bit
did you attempt to change Minds a bit
did you and and how could you have
success with that yeah I attempted to
instill doubt in people so no matter
where so we we put mats on the the
Stratford station or speaker Corner
region Park and the match strongly
disagree disagree slightly disagree
neutral and on the other side agree and
where wherever they'll stand I'll I'll
try to I'll ask them what would it take
so let's say they stand on the slightly
disagree or what would it take to move
you to the neutral there should be a
two-state solution okay so they stand in
the slightly disagree what would it take
to move you one mat just one to the
agree just one mat what would it take to
move you to the neutral and one of the
things we found we just released this
video so you can watch it yourself but
one of things we find if we have
somebody we did this with the two-state
solution there should be a two-state
solution one person went to agree one
person went to disagree and then we
asked them to write down their best
reason what's your best reason for
believing that and then we asked the
person opposite them to guess what their
best reason was and they couldn't guess
it they didn't even know why someone
would believe
that that will show you if nothing else
will demonstrate the difficulty of this
problem it's not even an incommensurable
it doesn't even rise to the level of
being incommensurable because nobody
understands why anybody believes
anything of course we've done that to
ourselves but that I mean is that what
empathy should be is empathy i' I've
been thinking about this myself people
always talk I'm so empathetic and often
they mean they get very sad when
something happens to their in tribe is
is true empathy about being able to
appreciate the the other side is that
what empathy is should ask Paul Bloom
that question yeah um
I don't know I don't I don't I'm not
sure empathy maybe it's a useful
heuristic or maybe it's a useful tool to
help solve the problem to be empathetic
to the Israelis or be empathetic to the
Palestinians I'm not there's just so
many crude years of detestation I'm not
sure that empathy would be a useful tool
in that I think the first order of
business would be to try to figure out
why someone what someone believes and
why they hold the position not agreeing
with them but like well why does someone
believe isra Israel is and I don't want
to talk about this this whole this too
much littleit like well why does someone
believe that it's a the Israel doesn't
have a right to exist it's a state why
does someone believe it has a right to
exist and then to just do your best to
figure out okay so you just heard him
give the reasons what did he say like
ask them to repeat the reasons back like
I think we're not even remotely close to
empathy yet like not even we can't even
we don't even know the best reasons for
why people would believe the most
rudimentary things about the con the
conflict of people with whom they
disagree like we don't even we're not
even at that stage
yet how do you even yeah is it's sort of
that is it wienstein sort of if you
could speak to it lion it wouldn't
understand if you could lion could speak
English uh it's almost that same thing I
grew up Donald Davidson too yeah right I
I grew up in a Jewish Family and
obviously but here's the thing when
something horrible happens in Palestine
we we mourn as a family sit there going
oh no you know and and part of that is
also going God what this is going to
look so bad for us I have to admit
that's that's unlik God what's going to
and then part of that is that's a loss
of life and you see the images of of
children and babies and things it's the
worst thing ever but I feel like there
are people on both sides who when those
horrible things happen the first thing
they're thinking is right how can I use
this politically and ideologically and
beat the other side 100% what is that
well it's a kind of tribalism it's um I
wish I could blame it on something as
fasile as a YouTube algorithm or but
it's it's a conflict that has been going
on for a long time I'm again I'm not the
person to have this with whom you should
have show Guy this is way outside my
area expertise I do find it to be very
blunt with you I do find it to be
disheartening now that I've gone around
and I've spoken to people people
carrying signs people and so I'll say to
these people okay so what's your
solution what do you think should be
done no no idea not even the two St out
one like no I don't know it's
complicated okay well like well what do
you mean like so they feel strongly
enough that they're holding a sign but
they don't even have a vague notion I
think maybe what again and I'm
hypothesizing partially I'm inferring
from what people have told me but they
want their elected leaders and their
politicians to know that they support
the Palestinians and so they're out in
Mass so public policy will change as a
result of when they see people
demonstrate by the same time token I
would think that they would have some
idea
of of how to have some kind of a
meaningful solution to save life some
idea and person after person when we've
gone to the rallies and Speakers Corner
no clue it's complicated I don't know I
find that really infuriating and and it
it is just you just have to ask one
question further for the whole thing to
fall apart and that's I guess it's a
very human thing we get very passionate
and excited and we don't necessarily
think things through but I've also
wondered the same thing I think free
Palestines are Noble idea why shouldn't
these people be free and then you go how
and and I'm sitting there thinking how
and people I know will be shouting at
the screen now saying a two-state
solution well the two-state solution has
been offered twice to Hamas secondly it
involves Israel pulling out well they
pulled out of Gaza and look what happens
so if you're the Israeli politician
going my only job is to look after the
Israeli people that's the only thing I
care about that's my one job I'm hired
to do the last thing you're going to do
is pull out even further and from the
West Bank which is significantly larger
than Gaza that's that's absolute Madness
so that that can't work and a one-state
solution obviously can't work because
there's so much hatred between these two
people how could they possibly coexist
together so there has to be a solution
but I have no idea what that is well
you're asking the wrong guy yeah well
well what I can ask you though about is
I think um one of the people I've spoken
about recently who got involved in this
was Greta tunberg yeah and it's a
similar thing with the climate change
situation I think most people I mean
even if you don't agree with the I think
it's 97% of scientists about climate
change I just like the idea of they're
not being smoke in my face and if
there's a renewable nice way of doing it
that's lovely and that's great but
obviously to change to a society like
that a lot of people are going to lose a
lot of jobs a lot of people like a lot
of people are going to suddenly be poor
probably not Greta tumberg probably not
me or or you but a lot of people and
it's another situation where you're
asking a question and if you actually
ask another question okay Greta how do
we do this I've not heard her say that
so I want to what I want to ask you as
well is is is partly that and part
what's going on where she can put out
something about Israel Palestine and in
the same photo have this thing about
climate change as if they're somehow
linked yeah so so there's a lot to talk
about there the first thing is when
someone tells you they don't know I
think a great response is thank you okay
thank because that way they're not
pretending to know things they don't
know so what's the solution to Israel I
don't that you know what that's actually
a great answer because we have so many
people who are suddenly experts on
anything that's relevant to the 24-hour
news cycle they act as as if they they
have phds and virology
Immunology Israel now everyone's an
expert in the Israeli Palestinian
problem people who never thought about
it for two two seconds so there is a
kind
of um Amplified by social media and
clicks Etc so I I think that's one thing
that we need to be aware of is that we
need to create cultures where people
proportion the cofin Ence in their
beliefs to the evidence they have for
those beliefs and one of the ways to do
that is when someone says I don't know
is to say that's a great that's a great
answer thanks for that that's a good
answer thank for not bsing me okay now
back to the the greater thing so
ideologies cohere so usually you'd only
need I think it was Hitchens who said if
if if I know two two beliefs that you
have and I can infer a third you're a
very boring person yeah you so so that
that means that your belie
because they cohere an
ideology it's and given that not almost
by definition ideologies cannot be true
in terms of being proportioned to the
evidence so people have extended the
confidence their beliefs beyond the
warrant of the evidence and so ideally
it would be like a pontalis painting
they'd be just you would have different
beliefs of different things based upon
the evidence and then maybe that they
would probably cohere in terms of a
picture but the picture wouldn't be an
ideological coherence it would be of the
painting excuse me it would be a
coherence based upon evidence so we
formulated these beliefs based upon
reason and evidence and you know what
and that's why we ask people the
question all the time what would it take
to move you one mat I if they say
nothing then the belief isn't formed on
the basis of evidence because to change
your mind about something means that
there has to be a piece of evidence that
would come in that would cause you to
change your mind
and so when you and Michael
schellenberger has written some great
stuff very very close friend of mine you
know apocalypse never was a great book
and he's spoken at length about the idea
that bracketing for a moment
anthropogenic global warming climate
change if you just bracket that what are
some energy solutions and why should we
a priori take some of those Solutions
off the table like
nuclear so um those so answer your
question those ideologies cohere
precisely because they're ideologies and
they're not formed on the base of
evidence if they were formed on the if
if they were formed of the base of
evidence then they wouldn't cohere
unless you wanted to make the argument
that there are certain ideologies that
are just intrinsically true but if that
were the case then they wouldn't be
ideologies yeah so the whole thing falls
apart and I suppose a lot of it is
related to what what is being know
called intersectionality and and
postmodernism yeah uh and that's how you
end up with climate change
LGBT uh and Palestine which don't seem
to work I mean LGBT and Palestine
doesn't yeah well that certainly doesn't
work but you have to be careful with
linking a postmodernism or what Helen
pluckrose calls applied postmodernism
into that that Suite of World Views
whatever you want to call Velton sh how
however you want to term it um you how
would you explain this like because I'm
just thinking Some of the audience will
be to all these are new completely new
terms how would you explain that oh what
the postmodernism Yeah I think
incredulity describes as incredulity
toward meta narratives in other words a
a meta narrative is something like uh
you know Evolution Christianity these
are Grand overarching explanatory
principles that
explain um explanatory mechanisms for
phenomena things about the world things
about what people believe so there is no
meta narrative in the postmodern view
that there's just kind of individual or
atomistic views that people hold about
different things so we need to be very
mindful we've made in the
last oh I don't know depending on how
you define it 40 years 30 years we've
made a turn
toward uh in philosophy you call it a
subjective turn a turn toward
subjectivity and a turn away from
objectivity and we've demeaned
objectivity we've demeaned truth and
we've replaced those things with
subjectivity or um ways of knowing or
lived
experience but lived experience will
only get you so far lived experience is
great when it comes to what you want to
eat what kind of music you want to
listen to who you want to have intimate
relationships with but it's terrible in
terms of
ascertaining facts about the world why
do you think that's be become you know
this turn towards subjectivity why do
you think that's happened is there is it
has it replaced religion in in a sense
that's a 4-Hour podcast
yeah but we have moved towards it
haven't we I mean I I've said this i'
keep saying this at the moment because
one of very funny it was I keep
forgetting his name Ryan long Ryan long
the comedian Canadian oh yeah yeah yeah
he did a great one the other day about
um pretending to be an actor who has to
decide whether he wants to post a
pro-israel or a pro Hamas or Pro
Palestine uh Twitter post or whatever
and he's like should I post this or
who's going to agree with this let's see
what the UN has to say and the UN said
trans lesbians are lesbians that's they
had to say about the whole thing um so
what's coming on
there oh boy
really to quote something I said off
camera to you Florence Reed from unheard
says we are living in a uniquely stupid
age this is a uniquely idiotic age that
in which we find ourselves that's scary
it's it's terrifying especially I think
I heard that in our conversation with
John RI especially when you talk
about I'm going to anthropomorphize a
little bit if you don't mind but AI
being born into
idiocy they were always idiots right
they so now we have large groups of
people including Supreme Court Justices
pretending they don't know what a woman
is I mean 20 years ago or 30 years ago
and I've got a lot of respect for
religious people a lot of religious
people listen to this podcast of course
but 2030 years ago JK ring was getting
abuse from religious people we mustn't
forget that now interesting cultural
turn isn't it turn the cultural War
that's why I wonder if it's sort of
replacing religion to an extent cuz JK
roning is at the center of that okay so
that's called the substitution
hypothesis I made a ton of videos about
that and a really good way I think to
explain this is have you seen Game of
Thrones no really he used to help
publish their books though oh dude
you're dead to me but anyway and G with
Thrones when when when uh there's old
gods and New Gods but the only reason
you need old the only reason that the
old gods you have new Gods because
belief the old gods are fading and so
the question is is superstition and
belief the default mode for human beings
and if that's the case as Christianity
went down what replaced it well it goes
by different names Wesley Yang calls it
the successor ideology ma noaz from the
island here calls it regressive leftism
applied postmodernism from Helen
pluckrose um I don't know wokeism
whatever you want to call
it I I don't know if this Dawkins told
me is we did this inass him about and
Shermer about the substitution
hypothesis I don't know if the
substitution hypothesis is true Dawkin
told me he he hopes it's not or his
whole life's work would be wasted um but
but we
definitely we definitely have a problem
now we pretty much know what the
problems are people don't trust their
institutions because they're not worth
trusting we've demeaned the meritocracy
I mean we can run through the problems
people have done that at length that
question is how do we how do we solve
those problems which is another 4-Hour
podcast if we have some sort of almost
biological imperative that's correct me
Superstition or something we me it's so
hard because I I can hear almost people
listening to this thinking that's
interesting but I I don't have any
superstitions and things like that and I
I would be interested to see what number
of people that is cuz I bet it's
actually the majority but I don't know
but PE people who are Warlords don't
think they're Warlords people who are
superstitious don't think that they're
superstitious they think that they have
evidence for their beliefs that's one of
the things I think that the atheist
missed in The Atheist Christian debates
is that atheists would say well they
have Christians or religious people in
general they have no evidence for the
belief but virtually no nobody thinks
they have no evidence for the things
they believe they think they have
evidence but people who don't adhere to
that framework think that the evidence
that they think they have is not
sufficient to Warrant belief in the
claim certainly not sufficient to
Warrant strength of the belief in the
claim that's why putting people on those
mats belief is not binary you know it's
not on off it's not ones and zeros
there's a spectrum of belief
and part of the problem it's an ancient
problem is that we
find I mean even look at the terms a
person of
conviction we we
find that if somebody is a man of
conviction then that's a that has a
moral veilance to it it's like a
positive moral thing whereas when I he
hear someone is a person of conviction I
just think that's a person who doesn't
change their mind when faced with
competing evidence change their beliefs
you know I think that I respect people
who can change their mind more there's
something will store I think it was said
recently but other people have said
there have been iterations of it forever
but I I feel very you know confident in
my convictions the ones I do hold at the
moment they all seem to be right to me
whether it be about abortion or this or
that the topic of the day uh and they
all seem right but I know that there's
absolutely no way that I could be the
one person in the world who is right
about everything I think so what are
those things that are utterly wrong and
and do you have them as well Peter well
yes I do but to to go back to what you
said to linger on that if you don't mind
why would they be convictions well
beliefs then well then they beliefs yeah
yeah so they so I think if I think we
can improve our Collective epistemic
situation our Collective situation of of
knowledge if we just got rid of thinking
if we just framed it in terms of beliefs
instead of conviction so yeah I'm sure I
I have them you know the the age old
problem is if you know you have them
then why do you why don't you stop
believing them and the reason is because
I don't I don't know what they are do
you have an incling an incling into
which of your beliefs might might be
most likely to be wrong I do pause
there's a thought so the the the some
things complicate that anything that has
an identity level salience will
complicate that like some okay important
to your identity yeah so you're less
likely to revise a belief it has and
that's one of the things that we're
teaching kids in col in colleges and K
through2 systems now is that they're
better people because they hold a belief
and this is part of your identity the
pronoun thing whatever it is and then
this is really this is really important
for you but yeah do I have an inkling of
what it is um I have an inkling about
how to think about the
situation uh but I so so here's how I
think we should think about
it part of the problem I think
that why so many people have been
bamboozled by these
ideas ideas that are just clearly false
like every every outcome every disparity
and outcome is due to systems or that's
kend's idea or D'Angelo's idea of white
fragility you only have these police as
you're white or you believe this you're
fragile no I'm not no okay well that
proves you're a racist so these ideas
are the kind of ideas that young kids
would like twins would call you accuse
each other on the playground MH adom huh
they're adomen aren't they you believe
this because a certain there's a certain
element of that but they're just silly
so I think the way to think about it is
because we've extended the umbrella of
Rights
to minorities to animals Etc I think one
of the things that people do implicitly
is they project into the future and
extend the umbrella of Rights if you
know whatever like
and I don't I believe the trans if you
want to be trans and you're 18 that's
great you can undergo any procedure I
fully support you I'm adhere to the
principles of liberalism and democracy
and you don't you shouldn't be
discriminated against Etc I'm all on
board with that but I think people are
no butt in that sentence I think people
extend that umbrella of Rights and they
keep extending it and then they they
want to be on the right side of History
hence that term the right side of
History so I think that's one of one of
the prophylactics for falling into
delusion I think that there are I think
that there are others but yeah I think
if I were to guess I would say
um it's a point I've raised before but
meat eating taking sentient life uh I
would say um a kind of um
action I mean I could I don't really
know if I knew I would change my my that
that's one way you feel most like that
might be the one where in another life
in the future I could look back and say
oh that was the one where I I I came
down on the wrong side
of yeah yeah or i b i I somehow made the
calculus incorrectly in my head because
I I have Chron's Disease and I know that
like when I eat sugars and carbs I feel
like crap it and so I know that if I'm
on a high protein high fat diet I feel
better but what is the cause of my I
mean how many cows have I been the
deaths of how many cows have I been
quite a few so I went veggie and and I
used to think exactly I used to say what
you what you said I used to think that's
the one when I was eating meat oh maybe
that's not right maybe that's the one
maybe it's no good that I'm helping this
industry I'm I'm not some righteous guy
anyway I also got a bit disgusted by the
idea of that meat in my mouth here's
another one I'll throw out to
you you have not you in particular but
people in this age have been too
sensitive to people's feelings the kind
of hyper sensitivity that we have
cultivated as a virtue and Society has
trapped people into ways of being and
thinking about the world that does not
lead to their flourishing and the
flourishing of
society yeah well well that's it because
I think it would be I think some people
think it's so simplistic just everyone
be nice when I put this poll on my
YouTube channel like do you literally
think that trans women are women right
10% said they literally literally do and
and that that seems but a lot of the
answers were why does it matter just be
kind and as if it was that simple and
that's just historically I mean I I
imagine you would be thought of as kind
if you were a member of the Nazi party
that would have been kind back then yeah
that's the other thing maybe we
have if there were a hierarchy of values
or maybe we've kind of Mis
prioritized which values should be
front-loaded and which values we should
attempt to
manifest you know if if there's such a
thing as a moral fact I've recently
become like the rest of the world I have
a vague passing interest in AGI not too
much but it was AGI for those who don't
artificial general intelligence and so
Sam Altman and others have said that
we've made rather Dam dramatic progress
I'm not talking about CH chat GPT I'm
talking about some kind of a sentient or
self-consciousness um and it could be
that there are moral facts could be that
there are solutions to problem like
think about Chess for example through
artificial intelligence we could we've
now or go the game of ancient Chinese
game or go we've solved problems that we
that for centuries human beings the
smartest people literally the smartest
people have been unable to solve but it
could be that and again this is to say
this is hypothetical this is like hyper
extremely hypothetical it could be that
we need some kind of General artificial
intelligence to figure out our moral
facts our moral facts but we just can't
apprehend them and so we should be
valuing certain things more than others
we should be prioritizing certain moral
values so this is when you say what's an
example of something I could be wrong
about that I've Mis prioritized my moral
values but you wouldn't trust it would
you because you you first you'd be
thinking that the AGI has been built by
humans this was one I I asked Dawkins
Dawkins said that the one thing we know
about external extraterrestrial life is
that it will be darwinian and I said but
what about Ai and he said well that will
be built by the darwinian process so
it's still part of a darwinian process
uh there our our fingerprints will still
be on the AI so now if I put chat I mean
the people all the time put it I think
maybe you've even done this on Twitter
was it you maybe I've seen some people
that uh you asked uh chat GPT a question
and it comes out with this very
Progressive answer right correct yeah we
don't trust it necessarily uh and it
Chad Chad GPT would be be different from
General artificial
intelligence um so so here's the problem
it's it would be similar analogously
would be similar to a being who claims
to be omniscient the only way you would
know if that being was omnicient if you
yourself were omnicient so you would
have to know everything to know if the
being also knew everything the problem
is you you wouldn't really be positioned
epistemically or otherwise to know if
you do everything so you would know
there'd be no way to ascertain whether
not another being knew everything but
one thing is for sure if we did develop
some super intelligence or
whatever one would want to call it that
and it said look you've Mis prioritized
your values you've got to Value this
you've got to think of this or you've
got to think of this that would
certainly be a reason for the
conversation but because you wouldn't
possess that it would be kind similar to
mathematical proof that's what moral
reasoning is you could reason to the
moral
propositions that the AGI told you that
that you should forward I'm not saying
that's true I mean maybe maybe it say
this is the whole thing is nonsense and
their own immoral facts I don't think
there are I not that I know but I I
really feel like you know there was
there was a time where slavery seemed to
be moral I'm sure there are arguments
that can be made that it is obviously
there were there are Arguments for the
Nazis as well that they should kill all
of me and my family and I'm sure these
were moral arguments that I vehemently
disagree with but I just think it's such
a mess like how could a computer decide
you know it's that old thing should you
divert a train that's going to kill one
person to kill 10 people what's the AI
going to say as the factual right way of
that well that that would be that's part
of the issue right so you're you're
you're talking about a
nonbiologically I don't want to call it
life but you you you're it would kill it
would kill the one wouldn't it well I
don't know what it would do maybe it has
access to a superior form of reasoning
but in in a similar way that one would
demonstrate a mathematical proof it
would lay out the reasoning and it could
be that the reasoning that it has for
certain moral conclusions or reasoning
that in spite of our best and brightest
we haven't come up with these ideas
speaking about best and brightest you
spent a lot of time around students in
uh universities yeah you work to
assistant professor was that what it
what well what was I uh God it was so
long ago it actually two years ago yeah
philosophy and then I quit so yeah well
you've done a l i mean you've gone to
campuses as well and Dani your street
epistemology with with these people is
are you concerned um about a lack of
curiosity and Nuance among among
students and and is any part of this I
mean is it to do with a lack of
experience or the fact that the human
brain doesn't apparently fully develop
until 25 no I think the first line of of
uh of uh metaphysics is
uh all men desire to know Socrates is
famous we know wisdom begins in Wonder
the idea that we want to know I I I
think that we have created institutions
that have
systematically
pounded just social Twitter is perfect
example of this the you pay a price for
wond
you pay a price for and that's the death
of philosophy right there if you want to
engage an idea about I don't so even now
thinking about what an example would be
I don't even want to say what an example
would be because you know so so I mean
I'm thinking I'll say it anyway but I
was thinking about well what if you
wonder about uh you know race and IQ
well what would be entailed by that if
there are differences or what if you
wonder about you know Peter Singer the
ethicist the Australian ethesis what do
you wonder about what we should how
Society should treat people who have IQs
below 25 even wondering that not
professing to have answers certain an
very specific answers to that has
detrimental social consequences and it
could have detrimental professional
consequences as well so I I I I think
that we've created tools through social
media I think we've created academic
institutions that have pounded Wonder
out of people and they've Advanced
certain narratives over other narratives
and you get punished or rewarded based
upon your beliefs just looking at uh
someone posted job job postings and
philosophy they're like philosophy of
race philosopher and we know exactly
what these we know exactly what the
narrative is there is no like we know
exact it's a construct I mean I can tell
I could we could lay out the whole
syllabus right now and so I I don't
think it's that people now wonder less
or they're less curious I think that
they've abnegated a kind of
responsibility to let their institutions
think for them about very
specific propositions usually moral
propositions very specific ways of
viewing the world thinking about
oppression and oppressive structures and
you know systems being responsible for
all of our problems and so I think it's
it's like putty uh it's replace wonder
if you think about it you know it's just
puted that over uh
with st stop Gap measures of
understanding the world I remember when
I spoke with John mwater he I think he's
wonderful and yeah John's Great the
linguist and for those who don't know
you know and and he was talking about
the sapir wolf hypothesis the idea just
for the for the audience anyone who
doesn't know that different languages if
you learn them can give you a different
sense of the world and there is some
evidence for it if you know that French
people might describe a um a bridge as
with masculine qualities because it's a
masculine word there in German DEA is
feminine so you might be see as feminine
stylish and graceful rather than bold
and imposing and all these kinds of
things and some people think there are
certain tribes where they don't see uh
they don't have left or right they've
got east west north and south and stad
which is incredible because you look at
a painting and depends which way you're
holding it uh as to how you would
describe it it's really remarkable thing
it's a remarkable the human brain can do
that but a lot of the questions in
Academia are about whether that is um
gives gives these people superpowers
basically if they have these amazing
languages that we need to discover more
about and they are they just give you
these amazing superpowers and it's great
and John mwat is a bit skeptical of all
of that and he said if we're willing to
accept that and look into that then we
have to at least wonder whether our own
languages such as English are actually
better because they've helped us to grow
this kind of civilization and and all
these kinds of things and nobody wants
to touch that and I think that's a good
example of what you're saying yeah it's
also an example of you you can't both be
you can't simultaneously be relativist
than an egalitarian yeah yeah that's it
and so the we we live in in one sense we
live in a hyper egalitarian age where
people are making claims that oh
everything is equal every system is
equal every culture is equal every
culture well that's clearly nonsense
right I mean you just look at banking
structures or thinking
about the charging of um I'm trying not
to go down trying very cons consciously
trying not to go down that rabbit hole
but interest in Islamic society and how
they get around that because the suras
in the Quran but and and Hadith as well
but so I I
think I think that's right and I think
we need to be we need to be aware of the
dangers of relativism in terms of
leveling your critique against
certain you know who I think I think it
was Sam Harris said who who am I not to
judge who am I not to judge by by what
privileged position can I step out of my
Society my culture my Customs my
psychological predispositions my moral
instincts who am I not to make the
Judgment that the treatment of women is
wrong that the that the here I go again
I'm thinking about the rally outside but
you know that the inheritance of a of a
woman should be less than the man the
core trial of a you need different
number like who who who am I
not to to make a judgment about that
right there something Yasmin Yasmin
Muhammad talks about she great yeah yeah
and she talks you know why is it such a
horrible thing when a white young child
is abused but when it happens to a
Muslim child and something that you
Yasmin gets very teary eyed just talking
about the West don't care because they
say oh no that's religion and traditions
and stuff let them do their thing yeah
unveiled was a great book I can't
recommend highly enough but that that
it's not even it's beyond the bigotry of
low expectations
it's truly thinking there's a different
moral standard by which we should hold
people who have a different color skin
and so maybe that goes back to your
question about what are some of the
things that I could be wrong about maybe
I wasn't a harsh enough critic of other
cultures and then or or or other
practices or other traditions and of
course you know maybe one should have
ignored the social consequences more the
problem with some of those things and I
don't mean to
be extra topical I don't need to kind of
fall down this specific rabbit hole is
that people think that there are certain
like neocon policy implications
predicated upon you know but George Bush
got this a lot although he and Rell and
his buddies actually were neocons but
that that you won't make a judgment
about something because you think that
implicit in that is US military
intervention or NATO or the West yeah
there's too much baggage but it's a it's
a very it's a very interesting time in
which we live in that so many of us are
completely held hostage to a minority of
a minority of people last time I looked
it was 8% of the people who are hardcore
Believers in this ideology and there
others who are in the orbit of the
ideology but they're not as the
progressive postmodern yeah but the part
part of even part of the problem with
that is you never really know who's who
believes what because we've created a
culture of fear in which no one will
talk about what they actually believe so
we don't even know what people believe
so there there there it's even worse
than being held hostage to what a
certain number of people believe because
you're held hostage to what you think
they believe yeah well this happens on
the left of course on the right as well
right has similar derangements one place
that I've seen it on the right is
because I've uh been like I keep talking
about this today so I shouldn't too much
but we can't say the word on YouTube but
PDF files people who live go on
playgrounds and stuff you know that kind
of thing right you can't on the right
won't let you even talk about it even if
about it will lead to fewer children
being attacked because obviously you're
talking about it being that's the only
way to do it we have to find a way for
fewer kids to be attacked but the right
will be so like religiously no no no
just just kill them all you're like okay
but you kill them all and then there's
more so we've got to actually do
something or even so that's another
example of things that people don't want
to talk about you know there so some
some people have put for it I I went to
to not to throw the the conversation to
the toilet if you will but I went to
Regent Park to go to the bathroom and um
on the the sign when we're doing Street
epistemology and the sign in the
bathroom is at no adults boys only and I
really had to go to the bathroom and so
I looked around there was there were no
other bathrooms right like literally
none so I asked a a woman who was
there you know whenever I travel I have
to be just super conscious I don't break
the law and the last thing I need is
like that kind of accusation but I what
am I supposed to do like I really have
to pee yeah and so I asked woman could
you please please make sure she know she
didn't know me I think the accent helps
a little bit but can you please make
sure that nobody walks in this bathroom
for just 60 seconds yeah and so she said
sure but I I do think that the whole I I
don't want to say it cuz I want you to
get
demonetized people the the P the p word
I do think that there is a kind of on
the right I think you're correct about
that I do think that there's a A can I
even say g r o o l i n g I think you can
cuz we it might be a makeup Channel okay
but but not too much but we've say ging
okay so there's even that kind of
narrative so so it's it's interesting to
me that many of the people and it's flip
because the left used to be the Free
Speech people many people on the right
won't even entertain conversations if
it's not within something about which
they they they you know they have their
own moral certitudes they have their own
tabos have their own things that they'll
talk about not talk about yeah and I
think that I think part of it is the
history because there has been a history
and I know people get very angry when I
say this of the farle I'm not talking
about 95% of or 99% of people who are on
the left but the farle and allowing and
enabling uh that PW um I was talking
about it before but there was an example
I mean just in in Berlin there was a big
thing called The kentler exper
Experiment he was a big Lefty green
party and he paired up homeless boy with
these people as their Foster carers as
like a part of a their strategy policy
the French uh some of the postmodernist
thinkers were involved in enabling some
of that in South Park there was that
NAMBLA episode as well NAMBLA I don't
know if world associ yeah so that has
historic there has been that issue on
the left but I still think it's like
this this trigger happy reflex from from
the right to not even discuss how we can
make this
better yeah it's interesting in this
conversation you know everybody knows
what it is but we can't say it it's like
when people write sh exclamation point T
like literally everybody reading that
knows what it is but yet they don't do
it there's a kind of phoniness about
that oh yeah there's a kind of so sad
it's kind of fakeness we're all faking
like what do we fake it yeah and what's
a swear word anyway right yeah I did I
did something with Dawkins he on my
podcast he called P Morgan a fo and I
knew that would get a lot of views and
you and I were talking about it before a
lot of people on YouTube at the moment
views are down and I've got a whole
Theory as to why that is it's to do with
mainstream news channels paying a lot of
money to YouTube but that's a whole
conspiratorial rabbit hole for another
day um wait what was my point what was I
saying oh you were talking about calling
him a fool right I put F star star star
because I I wanted to just keep the
Mystique a little bit a lot of people
were pissed off at me because they
thought it would have been right
and they were like well it was only fool
uh and I just thought how interesting
that we had these different words and
things and that would have made it
a better video somehow and how would
have even called him a it's not a
noun um yeah and again John mwat I'm
just fascinated by the way their swear
words have changed so it used to be hell
and Damnation and all these kinds of
things were and then it became bodily as
we moved away from religion so fire sh
and stuff and now it's only identity
those are the ones you cannot say
identity words and there's one where
there's a crossover which is the c word
you can say it more in the UK but in
America it's still yeah you can I was
actually EMP played company and I heard
that said twice by two different people
yesterday but you would never say that
in the US because it's got identity
conations in the US because it's a
misogynist thing in the UK you call a
guy that so there it's just bodily here
it's just bodily it's the same
thing over in America yeah so so those
were the fword gay people it's funny
like so when when I was teaching I'd say
I never had a single
complaint like never I mean I was
judicious and but but if you misgendered
someone said or if you did you you could
make other kinds of mistakes but it's
interesting but you know Jonathan height
talks about that in terms of
Purity uh I do I do think mcw's work on
and I we did it I really like John we
did a nice podcast together I do think
that it's it helps people understand
their own if to borrow return for their
situatedness or the fact that there
really are these arbitrary moral
currents that run through Society for
what you shouldn't say and what you
shouldn't say but you know we all have
those those built into us I think it was
Ashcraft former Attorney General who
there was a statue that you know of of a
woman's breast he wanted to cover the
woman's breast up at the camera of the
cost was like $88,000 if you know if
this guy were born in the in Afghanistan
he would have been a Taliban so like we
we have this stuff and certain people
certain percentage of the population has
these Purity Concepts more than others
but here's the thing in one sense I
would argue that we need to mitigate
against those impulses especially as
they bleed into the Public Square but
the problem is that if you have those
impulses you don't think that they
should be mitigated right you you you
you want to discharge them into the
public Arena yeah and so that's again
socrates's question a person doesn't
want but they don't think they lack so
if you don't think you lack it like if
why why would someone who
doesn't why would someone who thinks
that you should cover the breast of the
statue which to me is completely
insane but it could be that they would
say to me well you need to mitigate your
impulses for kind of secularism or you
need to mitigate your your impulses you
you you want a kind of society in which
perversity and depravity or ubiquitous
and run wild you know to influence the
youth Etc yeah so that's why it's so
important to have conversations and talk
about how you rationally derive these
values so we can live together in a
society I I gather that those words that
become sacred words are actually the
other hemisphere of the brain to
language yeah which is why you see
there's like a video on YouTube of
Steven fry putting his hand in freezing
water and if he swears a lot he's able
to do it for longer because it's
actually a different something a
physiological difference when he says a
swear word to what he's not saying when
he can hold that hand longer yeah and
it's really interesting to think what
arbitrary thing will be next because now
its identity it was bodily it was
religion that's a kind of sub a kind of
substitution hypothesis or an adjunct a
cousin of the substitution hypothesis if
the default is it has to be something or
what comes next it seems like it has to
be something think yeah I seem uh I
think like what was it well I said to
John what what comes next if there is
something what's next he said obviously
we can't ever know but you know what's a
big thing what could be big in a few
decades climate change maybe you call
someone a windmill or something and you
know windmill isn't a bad thing with
yeah I've I've hypothesized this is my
my dear friend Michael Shermer said
don't don't don't tell me you smart make
predictions I have a very risky
prediction I think that
the fast ination with aliens is only
going to grow I think it's going to be
something orthagonal to the current
culture War uh aliens my prediction is
that they're going to be more alien
sightings more alien and shellenberger
reported on that um but I think it's a
it's a it's a fascinating potential vein
of the future culture War I hope I'm
right because certainly be a much nicer
War so then the words like the you have
like the MW and the SW word which be
like molder and scar oh you're such a
molder you're something like that I I
don't know but but again yeah he McWater
is right it's very hard to see because
we all have we we both have a kind of
cultural myopia about so but but the
other thing is the future is notoriously
difficult to predict that's what makes
it Mak it the future so we don't really
know we we don't really know we we can
hypothesize and make educated guesses
but we don't really know it's what Ricky
D said he said uh you know nobody knew
nobody could have predicted 10 years ago
that in 10 years the most offensive
thing you could possibly say is women
don't have penises yeah that's that's it
so we don't know what's going to be in
another 10 years so there we go where
can we send people uh do you want to
people go to your channel that kind of
thing yeah YouTube p b o g h o SS i n
I'm on Twitter Peter bagoan I have an
executive director of the national
progress Alliance I have a nonprofit so
that's what supports this trip and it
supports the videos that we do so it's a
5013c tax tax um you can get a a I don't
know was it refund or whatever it is on
your taxes but it's a it's a nonprofit
I'm also a founding faculty member at
the University of Austin founding
faculty fellow so hopefully I'll be in
Austin the university will be up next
year and we'll be teaching as
truth-based
institution and I go all around the
world I travel 11 months of the year
with my and read nice wonder and we make
videos and we do interviews and we have
conversations with a wide range of
people so if you if you like our content
uh if you it's it's nonpartisan it just
helps people think through issues and
clarify issues and yeah we do talk about
controversial things like the Israeli
Palestinian situation but I do my best
when I facilitate those dialogues to try
to understand what people are saying and
when the viewers watch that they'll know
oh okay this is what someone means by J
jce that's what that is it that is so to
learn everybody what Justice really
means and all of those things go to
Peter ban please do check out his
channel he's given up his time to have a
miserable moment with me no he's had a
lovely time I think uh do go it's a
great time it's a great time it's a
great thank you go to Peter B Goan go
subscribe to his channel and while
you're here hit like on this video and
keep watching for these interesting and
controversial
conversations
