Alvin couldn't believe that the man
whose money he had just saved was
calling him a thief but after he thought
about it for a moment he realized that
he couldn't very well pretend that he
simply happened to find the money nor
that it belonged to him by any stretch
of the
imagination I expect if you rob a robber
said Alvin it doesn't make you any less
of a robber I expect not said Abe Alvin
and Arthur Stewart let the money dribble
out of their hands back down onto the
planks once again Alvin made sure that
none of it fell through the cracks money
wouldn't do no good to anybody down in
the water you always dishonest said
Alvin about money yes sir said Abe but
not about
everything I have to admit that there's
parts of some stories I tell that aren't
strictly speaking the absolute God's Own
truth well no of course not said Alvin
but you can't tell a good story with
without improving it here and there well
you can said Abe but then what do you do
when you need to tell the same story to
the same people you got to change it
then so it'll still be entertaining so
it's really for their benefit to fiddle
with the truth pure Christian
charity CA was still asleep when they
found him but it wasn't the sleep of the
newly knocked upside the head it was the
snor sleep of a weary man so Abe paused
a moment to put a finger to his lips to
let Alvin and Arthur Stewart know that
they should let him do the talking only
when they nodded did he start nudging CA
with his toe CA sputtered and awoke oh
man he said what am I doing here waking
up said Abe but a minute ago you were
sleeping I was why was I sleeping here I
was going to ask you the same question
said Abe did you have a good time with
that lady you fell so
