I always thought of myself as being
leftwing the more I looked into it the
more I realized oh I'm not leftwing
actually these people are crazy and the
world they're trying to bring into
existence is probably going to be
terrible and so I think they should be
stopped they think this sounds like a
nice ideal yes it's not a nice ideal
actually it's actually the end of what
they claim to be uh to most value which
is diversity diversity comes from
inequality cuz equality means sameness
and if we're all the same then there is
no diversity we're committed to a set of
ideological
demands that insist that we characterize
the world through its own lens and that
I think is actually the most dangerous
and pernicious part of this did you
agree to that ideology do you agree with
that ideology you are forced to whether
you like it or not through the strength
of law as a white man I've had so many
different advantages which are
immeasurable but possibly to had an
effect on where I am today yeah but
how's it unfair that you've had those
advantages because they didn't and I did
how's that unfair I think that's a
definition of unfairness is I don't
agree I've just been canceled from a few
things I can't really talk about them
right now but it's happened to me I
think I'm quite moderate you've been
canceled from lots of things um not not
that many actually have you not well go
so so what have you been canceled from
weren't you kicked off patreon yeah just
just patreon really is what I've been
canceled from and some YouTube
monetization yeah yeah but I I don't
know if they'd call that cancerization
but demonetization I suppose is a form
of cancellation yeah I I think so it's
incentivizing well I was actually just
going to talk to you about Russell Brand
Russell Brand being a a key talking
point in the hook for a YouTube video
but also somebody who has been accused
of doing lots of horrible things he may
well have done them we don't know he has
that personality we don't don't lock
people up for having a personality um
but was YouTube right to take away his
ability to earn on its platform well I
mean I don't think so um the man hasn't
been convicted of anything to my
knowledge uh he hasn't he's had a trial
in the court of public opinion it's been
rly smeared I mean for anyone who
doesn't know Russell Brand they can look
up his history and find it's quite U
controversial and extreme maybe uh maybe
he's done some of the things he's been
accused of I don't know but the point is
he hasn't been put on trial and he
hasn't been convicted of anything so
this is just the case of a smear job
really I think we do need and this is a
bit of a controversial opinion but trial
by media everyone always says it is a
Bad Thing trial by media but I think we
need the media to hold the elite to
account sometimes but is Russell Brand
really the elite money lots of money
Hollywood big big money money money
maybe I mean the problem with it is
there's no boundaries on it right so at
least when you have uh something
happened to you that involves the courts
or the governments you have
constitutional rights you have a legal
system that protects you that you can
use to defend yourself and to uh attack
the people who have wronged you but what
can you actually do about the media and
not much and the media's job is to try
and poison public opinion against you
and that's to make Society itself
hostile to you which actually is a
really evil thing to do because that
means because I mean at least if the
government is persecuting you you can
find Solace away from the state in
society itself you can spend time with
your friends your family your neighbors
whoever it is and you can at least in a
sort of Robin Hood style way get Sucker
from the general public but what the
media's job is is to poison the general
public against those people so you can't
even find relief there and so it's to
kind of totalize all of society and
that's that's their game plan they know
that they're doing this and they do it
on purpose and I think it's actually
kind of evil well their game plan's to
make money isn't it
not just I think I mean they obviously
want to make money but I think that it's
not a coincidence that they do the
things that they do rather than doing
other things that they also could do
right like for example the the media
generally tends to be very left-wing
even the right-wing media is weirdly
left-wing like the Daily Mail will put
out really bizarre left-wing stories
like it's schizophrenic or something and
so maybe the Daily Mail is trying to
just play both sides but then you've got
a whole Suite of the media that is
congenitally leftist and will attack
people they view as being right-wing uh
in that just Perpetual way and
so there's not a lot you can do to hold
those people to account because often
they're quite Sly with how they frame
things as well and so they will Dodge
around accusations of liable and things
like this so any legal mechanism you
actually had they're clever enough to
get around it so they'll put say uh
something bold and terrible in the
headline like Russell Brand is a racist
and then underneath he is accused of
being racist so like in if they would
take cour look it's just the accusation
we're reporting on the accusation but
they know that when people walk past the
news stands they just see Russell Brand
and go away with that impression in
their heads because no one reads past
the headline see I think I I'd have to
see that specific headline I think they
would be done for defamation with that
no they did it just that was that the
time if they did that they wrong it's
not that that's just the thing but it's
that's in bold and centered and so they
know that people will walk away with
that impression because they know people
aren't going to sit down right I need to
study you know pull out the spectacles
and go through the whole thing in full
detail they know that people don't do
this they know that a very tiny
percentage of people actually read the
articles and whatnot but a lot of people
will come away with the impression oh
Russell Brown's are R okay fair enough
and that just seeps in to the general
understanding of the culture and they
know that they're trying to poison the
general public against that individual
and so what people really need to ask
themselves is why have I why am I being
presented with someone I don't know and
being told they're a bad person cuz that
happens a lot you know the like the c
danula is's a great example the general
public had no idea who can danula was
suddenly he's a Nazi the word Nazi is
associated with him on every newspaper
article about him and so the G do I know
anything about this guy why are they
trying to poison me against this guy you
know that's what I think people would be
would benefit from having a a just
consciousness of because at least they
would be in some way resisting the
attempt to program them for anyone who
doesn't know count danilo's Mark me the
Scottish uh comedian YouTuber comedian
uh who taught his dog to do a Nazi
salute because it was funny it's it is
funny it is it was funny and it was to
wind up his wife well yeah and and and
so and he's someone we' you know we're
both I think I'm quite a bit friend I'm
not friendly with him I spoke him three
years ago you are um and that's okay and
he got something that I've been just
talking with Helen pluckrose about
actually that apparently in the UK it's
much more common for police to
investigate people for saying the wrong
thing or whatever than it is in the US
oh yeah they've got first amendment
protections so the government literally
can't punish them for things that they
say uh which is just a fantastic
Improvement on the situation in the UK
where people are persecuted for the
things they say all the time and the
thing is the police have got a natural
incentive to desire to police the
internet rather than say real life
actually a lot easier to police the
internet they can do it from a warm and
heated office or air conditioned office
uh and that's probably why 95% of
burglaries go unsolved and thousands of
people every year are actually arrested
for posting things on social media that
is mad it is mad isn't it is is there
anything that someone could say that you
think is worthy of at least a police
investigation sure um I mean if someone
say admitting to a crime or something
say If someone says well I buried three
bodies under this house or something
yeah yeah that's worthy of a police
investigation put that in the trailer I
buried three at the beginning of this
video um you know but like having an
opinion on things or characterizing
things shouldn't be something that can
be investigated you you effing NW
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] as unpleasant as that might be
I don't think that should be a crime
actually should we be able to say the
nword well yeah I think it's Bonkers
that I'm saying the nword yeah I mean I
don't want to and I don't think people
should want to and like there are lots
of things that you even though you
shouldn't say it that's should be for
the remit of the people who know you to
talk to about right so you know your mom
might say oh why are you saying stuff
like that and it might change your
opinion and make you more reluctant to
say such things but I I really I really
find it despicable that we've decided no
here's a selection of words and phrases
and but what what's worse is
characterizations
that have become criminal so anything
that you would characterize in a
particular way that the government deems
as being racist or misogynist or
homophobic or whatever that can actually
land you in jail and okay so now we're
committed to a set of
ideological
demands that insist that we characterize
the world through its own lens and that
I think is actually the most dangerous
and pernicious part of this
because did you agree to that ideology
do you agree with that ideology you are
forced to whether you like it or not
through the strength of law before we
get into the nuts and bolts of this
episode I just wanted to ask you did you
know I have a new clips Channel as part
of the Heretics Community you really
should at least know about it sometimes
you're on the go or you don't have
enough time to watch the full interview
or you want to be reminded of some of
the highlights just go to Heretics Clips
there's a link in the description and
subscribe to make sure you're getting
the full Heretics experience and
revisiting some of your favorite moments
such as Sonia pton on Elite abuse and
various videos about prince Andrew or
what about Helen Joyce tackling trans
rights that's Heretics Clips go
subscribe now yeah it's so arbitrary and
changing changeable as well I I talk
about this I've talked about before so
apologies to those listening but I'm I'm
a linguist as well I speak a few
languages so I'm fascinated by like how
those words became insulting so now we
have identity words those are the ones
so nword there's a k word and a y word
for Jews there's uh FW for gay people
everyone's now thinking those horrible
words you mustn't say 20 years ago it
was bodily functions and bodily aspects
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ass I can say those words now
I can't say the c word I could but
YouTube might punish me because that
delves into the identity terrain as well
as the but then 300 years be before that
it was profanity as in sacred words
religious words yeah words about God the
devil and no one thinks twice about any
of those things but that's where the
concept of profanity comes from what
will'll be next so we've gone from we've
gone from we've gone from religion to
body to
Identity I don't know what comes next
John mwater once said to me um just as a
random thing it could be uh climate I to
do with the climate you'd call someone a
windmill or something or like an oil
stain possibly I think it's going to be
more about the comfort of the person's
mind and mental state so you already see
um the RW being stigmatized um about
assault no no uh no different art word
about people's mental capacity okay yes
I don't know slow in French yes yes slow
in French yeah exactly um or late yes um
that that's become a stigmatized word
because I think it really all comes down
to the sense of
disquietude that a person feels in their
own mind it's about their own um sense
of mental balance and I think that's
what is ultimately being trying to be I
think they're trying to protect it um
but of course there are consequences to
doing that as well going back to trial
by media because I do want to make this
point I I and I understand what you're
saying that of course there are going to
be bad actors involved in the media but
without them I don't think they would
have caught Epstein I don't think would
about savil so I think we do need that
media I just I well they protected
them some did and the others uncovered
them um the police didn't do much though
the police didn't do anything uh I I
actually think it might be a more case
of social media that is the reason that
savil and Epstein are known for what
they are because uh there was the leak
from an American journalist who uh
between segments on her show was
complaining that she'd compile the giant
Doss inine and it was just shut down by
the network uh and this she found very
frustrating understandably so because
me's literally a child trafficker um and
of course the savel stuff the BBC
protected him for
decades and it was well known apparently
at the BBC I mean I never worked at the
BBC so I didn't know anything about it
because all I got was the output from
the BBC which of course didn't come out
and say hey by the way one of our most
famous presenters a a pedo actually
weirdly they didn't do that segment on
the BBC uh so I don't I don't know I
mean the the the thing is the thing is
with the media it begins with a fairly
Noble premise right which is okay so the
the fourth estate is going to hold the
the powers the be to account which
sounds like a fantastic idea you know I
agree politicians people uh like the
governor of the bank of England or you
know whoever it is you know any you know
any person who has a a very important
position that they're difficult to
remove from there should be public
accountability and the media therefore
should serve the public interest but I
don't think anyone can reasonably say
the media is actually serving the public
interest at this point it seems that the
media frankly has been captured by
probably being bought off uh but also
through ideology um to be the Defenders
of the status quo at the moment and so
anyone who comes up who seems to be
challenging the status quo uh is
rendered as some sort of Enemy of the
State and so the media isn't really
acting in the best interest of the
general public but they are acting in
the best interest of I guess what you
could ter the managerial Elite uh that
think that actually everything should be
controlled by some people remotely who
know how things should be uh which is
pretty pretty awful I think one thing
you said is is that the media is very
leftwing I was just I'm hearing people
listening saying oh hang on Murdoch uh
owns so much of it and he I know you
said Daily Mail is a bit schizophrenic
but it's not a left-wing uh no it's not
it's not a leftwing uh institution
itself but the Daily Mail is one paper
Sun Fox News that's
three you you so relatively you'd say
there's more far more there's far more
on the left
and it's normal you know it's just the
way the media has been for a long time
it's hard to think of any impactful I
mean the BBC recently had to do a
reorganization within their own ranks
because they admitted their own liberal
bias and it was like okay why would they
have to do that the BB meant to be the
Bastian of neutrality in the country
it's like yeah actually we're really
liberal and we need to we need to change
that and if we don't change that we're
going to continue to alienate ourselves
in the British public who actually
aren't particularly liberal who actually
really quite far right in a lot of ways
um but those people don't get to have
any representation I mean it's kind of
crazy like if you look at BBC question
time like it's always the same it's
three liberals and one milk toast
conservative and J car and well
occasionally J car yeah but but whenever
you know it's a political you know slate
uh it's always like a guardian
journalist the green party member and
then someone who writes for the
Telegraph and it's
like the telegraph that's that's the the
right now is it you know that's the
entire representation right-wing thought
in Britain gets and it's it's just very
frustrating I get really wound up
especially you know I talked about
cancellations and there's things I can't
yet talk about there's a few things
happened recently um and you end up
talking to people who I do think are
well-meaning a lot of these people but
they live in a world of artists and art
curators and book publishers and like
this it is so far removed from society
So when you say uh you know the average
person is nothing like these people the
things I hear them say behind Clos doors
about we oh we should push this book
because I know the with the marketing
team said the public don't want it but
we should push it anyway because I
believe in this ideological thing about
this particular trans black person who's
a whatever you know and you just got you
want to go like you want to like
throttle these people because you want
to say like I know you mean well cuz I
think it comes from a well meaning thing
but I want to say like hang on do you
realize that's what the world thinks of
you they see you as going we know what's
right for you yeah and the thing is as
well they never they never spend any
time um interrogating why they think the
things that are good are good right why
do why do you believe that pushing this
book is actually a good thing and
they'll give you a very uh shallow
answer something along the lines of
representation
it's okay well let's talk about
representation um where exactly should
the average British person feel
represented in say the
BBC well I was I wasn't allowed on I
don't know if you know my my back so I
used to make sort of pseudo L THU kind
of stuff and then got told by every
production company in the UK about 50 of
them I went to every single one said we
can't have you on screen anymore so
we'll take your ideas I think you know I
think I do know yeah yeah they they said
we take your ideas is but we want a
minority on screen to do it and I was
like what so it would look like they did
the journalism and I learned five
languages to be able to go around the
world and do it and I was like and they
were like yeah but we'll get a
translator so I like right anyway that's
why that was BBC Channel 4 and so I know
about that bloody hell doesn't seem very
just does it no no and and it it you
know there was that if you seen that I
guess it was it was um Colin right I
think the swipe right Twitter he and
Elon Musk recently retweeted it of like
here's me on the center left and here's
the far left person you know my my
comrade or whatever uh and here's the
right and then gradually that that
person on the far left shouting you know
you're a bigger and then here's me
moving to the right and I I feel that I
felt that happen I felt that movement of
like oh I'm not allowed in this tribe
anymore that happened to me too yeah so
what happened to you well just the same
thing um I took objection to the way
that the left I I always thought of
myself as being leftwing but um I didn't
know much about left wi philosophy at
the time and the more looked into it the
Mario realized oh I'm not leftwing and
actually these people are crazy and the
world they're trying to bring into
existence is probably going to be
terrible and so I think they should be
stopped it has some nice ideas in the
left sort of share the wealth wealth is
always shared like that's not their idea
like like kings used to literally give
out money after looting a city to their
nobles to keep the Nobles happy like the
Nobles then give it to the peasants
they've got no Choice they've got to pay
the peasants for the labor like
otherwise they won't do it so we wealth
has always circulated like this isn't
some sort of new innovation that the
left have come up with the left's
Innovation is to make it so that we all
have the same wealth they want us to all
ultimately be the same and that's
actually a really evil Prospect if you
think about it because that means that
someone who does no work at all is
entitled to exactly what I have exactly
what you have uh which is not fair see I
like hanlon's Razer I and and maybe to
the point of being naive but I'm just
sticking to it the the idea that it's
not necessarily out of evil but maybe
stupidity I mean you said yourself you
were quite leftwing it's it's not it's
not even evil um it is evil but it's not
that the people are evil it's that they
think this sounds like a nice ideal yes
it's not a nice ideal actually it's
actually the end of what they claim to
be uh to most value which is diversity
diversity comes from inequality because
equality means sameness and if we're all
the same then there is no diversity and
this is the problem with liberalism it
is a great homogenizing force that seeks
to turn everything into the same thing
and they don't know when to stop what do
we do then with the idea that there's 8
billion people on the planet there's a
whole bunch in the UK some were born
like in a bin and I went to a private
school and had a nice life mhm and I
okay we don't want Equity because that's
just ridiculous but what what do we do
we just go well that's your lot well I
think that the the most important thing
for people is to feel that they're being
treated fairly mhm right that's I
because as soon as we get off of
ideological language like Equity
equality Liberty all this sort of stuff
and say okay but on on the basis of how
we feel about these things am I being
treated fairly and so there was a there
was an example I think was in chesher of
a a a young chap who had looked his
entire life to join the police course
and so he he' got the right
qualifications he'd done the right
training and they denied him on the fact
that he was a white man and he sued them
successfully of that Brant right uh and
this is obviously unfair it's not fair
that because he is a white man it's not
fair because you're a white man that you
shouldn't get to promote and produce
present your own documentaries it's just
not fair like that's not that's not
right and we don't need um a a massive
ideological apparatus to come to that
conclusion any person come to that
conclusion as their own personal
judgment well if you were to strongman
their argument would it not be as a
white man I've had so many different
advantages which are immeasurable but
possibly had an effect on where I am
today yeah but how's it unfair that
you've had those
advantages because they didn't and I did
how's that unfair I think that's a
definition of unfairness is it I don't
agree just because you've got something
and I don't have something it doesn't
mean it's unfair but I didn't work for
it I just was given it without having to
do anything yeah but that doesn't mean
that it's unfair so what would be unfair
unfair is something that happens despite
you deserving this thing so for example
you deserve what you have because your
parents gave it to you there's no one
more deserving than the things that a
parent gives to their child right no one
else deserves my son my love that I give
to my children more than my children
deserve it no one is more deserving of
that is but then if we flip that the
child that's born in a bin they deserve
that no I'm not saying they do isn't
that the flip side though if we all
deserve the place that we're sort of
Born Into no it's it it it's not that
there aren't unfairnesses right there
are unfairnesses but that doesn't mean
just cuz someone has something good that
was given to them through unfair means
for example if I don't know anything
about your situation but say your dad
works very hard all of his life and can
afford to send you to a private school
right yeah he was working class and I
didn't sure but that doesn't mean it's
not that doesn't mean it's unfair the
means through which your dad acquired
the wealth to be able to send his son to
a private school was totally fair
there's no Injustice that takes place in
that life
right and so that you have something
that someone else doesn't have doesn't
an injustice make I'm not saying that it
isn't an injustice that someone else is
born in a bin sure but then you look at
okay well who put them in the bin like
you know their parents that was also my
dad unfortunately it was a terror maybe
on that case but the but the point is
that there isn't a necessary connection
between these two things and so to
arrive at the point we're at now and say
well you're going to have to lose what
you were fairly given for what someone
else for to to rectifying unfairness
someone else experience that wasn't at
the hands of anything that uh any of the
people who brought you to where you are
that's an injustice and of itself it's a
really difficult one and I I I I get
what you're saying I thought about this
recently because a friend was saying you
know there there was an article I think
it was I don't know if it was at the BBC
or wherever it was that most people a
higher percentage of people had been at
private school who ended up going to
these high jobs and things and it wasn't
it wasn't that high but it was higher
than the percentage of state school but
it was it was it was lower it was it was
like 20% off from private schools even
though only a few per actually go to
private schools or something like that
um and I was thinking like oh yeah is an
unfair advantage and then I thought but
there has to be some reason that the
parents made the sacrifices to send
their kids to that school I think we
make an assumption that everyone who
sent their kids to private schools is
like living in a helicopter or something
I don't know that's thing of all rich
people live in helicopters in my mind
but a lot of them made I mean probably
most of them made huge sacrifices and I
mean in my case my my siblings weren't
able to go to a private school it was
like a sort of sish choice I've ended up
clever and better looking than them as a
what can you do it is a hard one though
yeah why send your kids to a school like
that and I don't know what the answer to
that is unless you go well abolish
private schools then you shouldn't have
it I I don't know what's the what's the
underpinning desire uh to to abolish
private schools it's not to improve
everyone's education it's to reduce the
education of those people that got to go
to the private schools reduce the gap
between sure it reduces the Gap but the
the Practical effect is that no one gets
the excellent education now
everyone gets the same mediocre
comprehensive education everyone gets
from the average failing British school
um and so what you all you've done in
the bid for fairness through the
leftwing lens is reduction whereas
through a non-left wi lens actually
fairness could be charity it could be
helping someone out it could be doing
something for someone else but it
doesn't mean reducing someone else it
doesn't mean taking something away from
someone especially if I mean your your
case is a good example what have
accumulated wasn't accumulated through
exploitation it wasn't accumulated
unfairly so why the hell should anyone
have the right to take that away from
you it's a philosophical debate about
fairness and the macrocosm there is my
father worked really hard his parents uh
worked hard and second generation before
that they were poverty stricken and just
moved in so there's that movement up the
chain they've all worked hard they've
instilled in me the value of hard work
and all of those things and that on a
macrocosm is very I mean it's the
epitome ofir on a microcosm I'm born
with a season ticket to Spurs and a
private school education and some people
have a very very difficult life yeah but
that doesn't mean that that's unfair
that's the thing and the the thing that
underpins this conception of the world
is a kind of rosian view of what the
world should be like and so so roll John
roll is a liberal philosopher very
famous for his veil of ignorance th
experiment he said look if you knew you
were going to be born but you didn't
know what kind of world you'd be born
into what kind of world would you choose
to be born into uh before you were born
so if you if you wouldn't say oh I don't
want to be born into a world with
slavery because you might be a
slave you don't know that you'd be a
slave and so you roll the dice oh you
got a one now you're born as a slave and
so you in the position the original
position would say well I don't want to
be born into slavery because I might be
but all that means is that you want to
be born into the Communist Utopia right
cuz you don't want to take any chance
that oh there might be something that's
bad so I want to be sure that I'm always
going to have as exactly as how much
money or wealth I need I want you know
to be born into a world that's got a
pleasant temperature all year round you
know you're going to you're going to
make up a Fantastical utopian position
uh which will never happen right and so
this the problem with this sort of
thought experiment is what it presumes
is actually that you have the power and
authority to change anything about the
world right so because I mean look at
what you've done in your little
hypothetical here you've as you've
ascribed to yourself the power to
determine I'm going to take that
person's stuff away and give it to
someone else so this is like Godlike
power that you've assumed that you're
entitled to in remaking the world to
eliminate unfairness it's like I'm sorry
I I just don't see where the Authority
for that power comes from where's the
Authority for me to take away your good
fortune and give it to someone else come
from I don't have any right to take away
the things that you've got and me
complaining well I mean it's just unfair
that you get to have the nice things you
have well a you can't demonstrate any
unfairness and B I don't think that is
unfair and C if if I then arbitrarily
took it away from you because someone
else doesn't have that that's very
unfair so I think really it's the way we
conceive of the world because we what
we've done has approached this with sort
of the the mindset of some sort of
football manager right it's like we're
playing a football manager game we're
like right okay we're going to mess
around with the entire team it's like no
no no the team is not this isn't a team
this is people's real lives this is our
entire country you know people actually
get to do things with their own life
that you aren't in control of and the
fact that you can't accept that as the
sort of liberal manager is the problem
that's the problem you've got to accept
that there are limits to what you can do
and they don't and this is the entire
all of our politicians buy into this
kind of framework we're like well we're
just going to start moving things around
and take things away we're going to
start taxing you this it's like this is
my money you're taking away this is my
labor my effort my heart my sweat that
I've put into getting all of this and
you'll just say yes we're just going to
crank up the taxes on you like
that that's an injustice you you idiots
you know and and they don't understand
that these are people's lives that
they're ruining yeah yeah oh my God it's
so complicated I'm not by the way those
aren't necessarily My Views I'm just I
know I know you're steel Manning the the
oppos strong Manning didn't I yeah this
fine keep doing that I've done it like
five times and then had to delete it and
put steel Manning like voice over after
steel Manning um I don't why do I want
to call it strong Manning that's
probably like some weird like gay porn
that I've been secretly watching and
inadvertently admitted now I can tell
you had a private
education it wasn't a boarding school or
anything like that um those guys no I've
why is the soggy biscuit game always on
a rich tea is always what a rich tea a
rich tea what do you mean biscuit is
that a type of biscuit yeah I'm just
beyond biscuits I don't know the names
of biscuits transcended biscuits I've
transcended biscuits um but is it that
is that the is that the biscuit have no
idea is is it a posh biscuit is that
white no no it's a really plain biscuit
yeah soy don't look up the soggy biscuit
game anyone um it's a really okay
interesting points all of them however
it's still in the interest of the
wealthy in a country I think to pay
those kinds of taxes because you don't
want a country where there's just people
dying all over the street sure and there
are lots of ways to make sure that you
don't have people dying all over the
street uh a total redistribution of
wealth isn't one of them actually okay
uh well it hasn't worked anywhere right
like is California more equal due to
their socialist policy
is New York more equal is Portland more
equal no no I lived in Argentina this is
when I started moving away from that and
they've had rightwing as well yeah South
America has been very leftwing for a
long time it's like ingrained in them
and it's a weird thing cuz even though
they've got this like far right they've
had far right dictatorships they go very
left and it's a different kind of left
over there because it's like a
nationalistic left which we don't get
here we associate nationalism with
poppies and Army and rightwing and um
vigilante hunters for some reason and on
the that's just what they're all into
and and on the left uh not that kind of
pride is actually we hate this country
and it's so funny you go to you see how
just again arbitrary um values like
nationalism it can be either side can't
it all the Argentine left just just
Argentina Flags maridon piran weird yeah
it's kind of like um the sort of Labor
of the 70s in this country isn't it
don't know I wasn't about well I wasn't
either but no I've never right you um
but the the the sort of the sort of old
uh Tony Ben style labor where it was
rooted in the sort of working man of the
country but of course that's all
disappeared now when I was younger
liberal meant leftwing yeah now I'm
hearing liberal about the right is it
just is liberal a thing away liberalism
liberal explain the what these mean and
are they away from the left and right so
Li liberalism is the philosophy that
emerged in the 17th and 18th centuries
uh that was extracted from abstracted
from English tradition so English
tradition has always focused around the
rights of Englishmen and the ancient and
settled customs and Liberties that the
English enjoyed uh because these were
actually um deeply envied by people
almost everywhere especially on the
European continent because it was long
held that the king of England wasn't a
tyrant and he was one of the few kings
that wasn't a tyrant um and this is what
Magna carter is about this is what habus
Corpus is about this is what the Bill of
Rights is about and you'll notice that
in each of these documents they all site
the ancient Liberties and customs of the
English and so in I think it's the 17th
century or 18th century um you get
various uh legal philosophers like
Blackstone who end up kind of codifying
what the rights of Englishmen are and
then you get John lock at the end of the
17th century abstracting that into the
rights of man and that's where you see
in the American Declaration of
Independence and the American
Constitution the right of man in the
French Revolution you get the right the
the rights of man and
citizen so it's a suite
of historic and traditional rights that
has been taken and T put into a doctrine
that then can be taken anywhere in the
world and imposed now what that means is
that it renders every society that is
imposed onto it as being illegitimate so
it doesn't happen in somewhere like
England or America and the revolutions
there are actually not totalizing and
destructive because if things are being
done in the way they've always done to
have someone parrot that Doctrine back
at you say well yeah that's how we do
things and so everyone just goes R fair
enough that's how we do things but if
you say go to France then you realize
that actually things are very different
they've got the ancient regime I'm not
pronouncing it correctly uh and it's a
very different Society the institutions
that built up in England to support the
rights of Englishmen obviously don't
exist in France and so now they've got
the universal rights of man which is a
great leveling exercise whereas in
England actually the rights of
Englishmen were like um kind of like a
union like against the person above you
so you would have this almost sort of
spiritual theory of the rights of
Englishmen that would be appealed to
against someone who you felt was doing
wrong to you and this was well supported
it was something the English were very
proud of um but when it comes to France
it's a very different beast and so now
it's the universal rights of all
Humanity it's like okay that's very
different because if you've got
a particular and parochial view of
Rights that's centered and grounded in a
historic Continuum at a particular
geographic location that that takes on a
kind of
homely natural perspective especially as
there was no no one document that
everyone agreed to but in France you
instead have to Simply reformat the
country and that's exactly what they did
they they took a rationalist approach to
reconstructing France so they began at
year zero they they reformatted all of
the districts into roughly equal sizes
they decided that everyone has exactly
the same rights and it's like okay but
nobody actually has exactly the same
rights like everyone's right to things
is actually kind of different actually
you know my right to my house is not
your right to my house and things like
this and so in the French Revolution you
see the seeds of what comes after it you
see the seeds of fascism and its
excessive nationalist nationalistic
Tendencies you see the seeds of
Communism in its successive leveling
Tendencies you see the the seat of
liberalism um in its desire to have
a much more open and less stratified
society and what this does though is it
renders all of the world as being
basically immoral and so
now liberalism takes on a crusading
aspect right we've got to change Germany
we've got to change Spain we've got to
change all of these things and this is
what we're seeing to this day and so the
question of left and right comes from
the French assembly but and the question
of left and right the the reason these
things are left and right is it was a
question of should the king have a veto
over us I can't remember what the topic
was now but it's it's some it's actually
kind of trivial and should the king have
a veto and the people who didn't think
so sat on the left and the people who
did think so sat on the right and so
basically this came to mean the forces
of tradition versus the forces of
progress and so liberalism was on the
very Vanguard of the of progress until
it got to a certain point at which
people felt roughly that this was where
we should be and then it kept going and
it kept going and so now there are the
the people who you would say are
classical liberals like Margaret
Thatcher she's a very liberal figure
right she I mean that you you can't end
up with the phrase there's no such thing
as Society without being an extremely
doctrin liberal and she was what we'
call a neoliberal now big fan of hyek
and various other Austrian School
economists
um deeply liberal in the way that she
constructs the world but she is now a
right-wing figure because liberalism has
continued to go to the left the force of
progress have gone on and so now um
we're far beyond that so margar Thatcher
is now a far right figure it's like that
shows you how much further to the left
things have gone and now we're literally
at the point where we only discuss
minority issues like we're not allowed
to discuss majoritarian issues because
that is some form of racism that's some
form of Oppression
and the one of the congenital things
about liberalism is it seeks Universal
recognition so if you have a group of
people who are a majority and you have a
group of people are minority well
liberalism will always find the minority
more legitimate than the majority
because there will be a notable power IM
balance and this will cause a
differential in recognition and so the
minority becomes essentially a locust of
morality because it is aess
and the majority will become a locus of
immorality because it is an oppressor
because it re it restricts the amount of
recognition that the minority can have
uh and if you're seeking equal
recognition
well the large groups always going to be
bad and so that's why in this country
all we ever talk about minority issues
and we can't talk about what the average
English working family's concerns are
they're not represented anywhere can't
we say if if if I believe I'm liberal
can't I say that when it was where it
was 15 years ago I'm also concerned
about parting what Generations before me
have said you know oh back when I was
younger you end up sort of saying these
things and catching yourself and going
God but back in the sort of early 2000s
or whatever it was where there was still
enough room to make jokes that were like
funny and a bit offensive but that's
okay I mean I'm Jewish I I used to be
able to accept Jewish jokes now now I'm
very sensitive to them because they
often come from woke people and I'm like
well hang on you you know you won't let
me even say anything about anything else
and yet you're willing to make the jokes
about oh have you paid for your dinner
and that kind of thing I used to find
that funny when I was younger how sad
that society's moved in such a way we
can't have a joke we can't Mark meum of
course was a great example of that
that's quite funny yeah I spoke to David
bedil who I I you know would become
quite friendly uh but but he's he's much
woker than I am yeah and
he I don't don't dob him in it or
whatever when he's not here to defend
himself but he he seems to believe that
this woke hierarchy of race or whatever
that oh it's okay but why aren't the
Jews in it and I'm going well isn't that
like the litmus test why do we want to
be in it at all I'm not a Jew but like
you know why would anyone want to be in
it was the canary in the coine isn't it
if there is one person who's just left
out for no reason then you go or
whatever reason and you go okay this is
actually Punk there's something wrong
with this whole hierarchy we can't just
say oh now we're in it it's fine and
then all the sort of white people who
not Jewish don't get to have you know
how that fair so can't we just say this
is what I want to get like I don't
believe that where liberalism has gone
is liberalism can you say that can you
no that's not liberalism anymore thing
is it is liberalism that's the problem
okay um the the problem is liberalism
has a particular internal logic and it
operates along this logic dialectically
so you you get the two you get the
liberal and the illiberal position and
liberalism and that synthesize into the
new liberal position and then this
continues on and so because liberalism
values it makes two fundamental promises
which are Liber Liberty and equality
right Liberty is actually quite an easy
one to accomplish constitutional rights
will solve the Liberty
problem equality is essentially an
impossible problem to solve uh and so if
you have people who feel like they are
marginalized they will always always be
able to say well we're not equal are we
and the liberal has to say that's a good
point we're not equal and they can
always say well we did promise did
didn't you and the liberal say yeah I
did promise that and so the dialectic
continues whatever they're arguing will
get infused into liberalism as it is now
and so will carry on and this is why
intersectionality otherwise known as
wokeism um has been so successful in
conquering liberal thought because it
said look these people aren't getting
recognition that means they're not equal
that means you're lying and every Li
well H I'm not I'm not I'm not a liar
and they say well the reason you do this
is cuz you're a racist or you're a
sexist you're misog and every liberalism
no no no I'm I'm not that I believe in
the abstract undifferentiated Universal
mass of humanity what are you talking
about which is literally the fundamental
premise of liberalism obvious nonsense
um and so they are now strong armed and
say yeah well we're going to have to
give black lives matter everything they
want we're going to have to give the
trans people everything they want we're
going to have to give these people
everything they want because otherwise
I'm a bad person if I don't recognize
them and that's why liberalism can't
stand still oh my God so what happened
next how does this keep going can it go
further of course it can uh there's
there's no limits to the there's no
there's there are an irreducible number
of categories that we could categorize
on um and it will continue and you
already see you already see the seeds of
it where you've got the
lgbtq I A+ blah blah blah all of these
things are getting tagged on are just
smaller divisions of minority identity
and eventually almost everything will be
on there and so this I don't think has
got any signs of stopping and in fact I
think that if you go um back to the
philosophers who have first invented
this part of it is a kind of um hiigaran
constant destruction uh there's a sorry
no marusan constant destruction where
the point is the reduction of what came
before to the end point where everyone
has equal
recognition do Dr Ian mcgilchrist was
was saying that every Empire begins to
analyze itself too much and and falls
apart is that in line with what you're
saying it's definitely why liberalism is
able to operate in the way that does I
mean if we were in the middle of a giant
war or something like that we wouldn't
be talking about any of this right if
the Germans were flying overhead no one
was saying yeah but I don't feel we're
being liberal enough this is the thing
because you know so I lived in Argentina
six years and I have family there now
and all of that stuff and whenever I've
spoken to friends and family friends and
things like that over there it's
actually funny to see a lot of the older
people are very on board with the Trans
thing when we first start talking about
it right so when I first start saying i'
mentioned one or two things and it was
so funny because I immediately was like
people were so shocked around the table
we're talking in Spanish about and I was
just like well it's got a bit ridiculous
that I was that they actually had to say
to each other I I heard them sort of
look at me and go like's it must be a
language problem he's misunderstood what
he said there you didn't mean that
Andrew did and I had to gradually say no
but you don't realize in England it's
very different to what it is here
because over there it's like the old
kind of trans the Classic transphobia
this kind of like I hate this person
because they are weird and different
from me or whatever and they get killed
in the woods or whatever happens Jesus
that happens and not by me or or my
father I spoke before going around
killing people as as we coming back to
the uh if someone confesses to a crime
yes yes yes in the woods does it happen
that's another Point well no so um all
right mate um and then I started
explaining but you know it's like you
know but you don't want them to play in
sports
with girls and they're like oh God no ah
okay in in prisons and in these kind and
every time they like what no no no the
point being they are such on such a
different level because like half the
country can't eat you know this isense
to them so they're just going like oh no
you should be nice to this oppressed
minority don't think don't murder this
person yes I won't murder this person
correct but also I don't think they
should be in women's presence yeah
exactly once you said that everyone was
like what even like the most liberal
people over there that hasn't even
become a concept yet over there
bizarre it it there's definitely an
aspect to um living in the end of
history as it were where actually
everyone's doing or was doing relatively
well we had lots of money we have peace
primarily
and like you say it makes you
introspective you've been described by
James delingpole as a leftist
Libertarian who stick is to question the
received wisdoms of our time is there a
way to convey to an audience what it is
to question received wisdom without
sounding redpilled peaked woke um I
don't I don't think I'm a leftist
Libertarian yeah I think it was a point
I found on Wikipedia about lots of
different people have called you
different things across the Stace yeah
yeah I have been called a lot of
different things um I just call myself a
traditionalist at this point um it's
probably the furthest right you can go
really yeah yeah wow because liberalism
was founded in opposition to
traditionalism uh but I think
that liberalism doesn't have a Monopoly
on the things it claims and in
especially in the English tradition you
can find all of these things I mean in
fact liberalism takes them from the
English tradition uh and so I'm just a
traditional Englishman um and so I
believe in all the normal things that
traditional English people believe
um but sorry what was the question but
it's interesting what you're saying
because I think so many people I speak
to about very similar things have been
called rightwing as a as an insult and
as a slur and I can understand why what
one might want to sort of take ownership
of that like well it's just you know
there no different to being left wing
except the other thing well is well
that's isn't that interesting how the
Prejudice is to oh you're rightwing as
if that's an insult like well what does
that mean well people associate it with
Hitler because we learn more about
Hitler than we do about Hitler was a
socialist oh God I'm not even joking he
was act he self-identified as a
socialist he ran a command economy he
had all sorts of abstract categoricals
and exactly the same way the Socialist
do now he he wasn't a traditionalist the
traditionalist someone who doesn't think
that they have a mandate for total
control over Society right every liberal
does as you saw with the John rser thing
obviously Hitler being the archetype of
totalitarian does obviously the
Communists do being you know the 20th
century being more than enough uh for
that for evidence for that but I don't
think I have a mandate over all of
society right I actually think that your
business is your business my business is
my business and actually I I would call
myself a virtue ethicist as then it's
how we get from A to B that really
matters I mean obviously it could be
you're trying to doing something evil um
but if you're just being a normal person
and you work hard you get paid and you
buy a house then that's there's virtue
in that right that doesn't mean that in
fact that in fact means that I don't get
to take that away from you because you
did something virtuous in fact what
Authority am I assuming to say that I
should take that away from you like
youve again it brings up all sorts of
questions of what exactly who do you
think you are you know the liberal and
the Communist who wants to reformat
Society like who exactly do you think
you are and where do you think you get
this Authority from is there any value
in trying to help people who were born
into less fortunate positions and and I
I get what you were saying before which
is like well yes but whenever it's tried
the gap's even the gap's even bigger
though isn't there are loads of ways of
helping people stealing from other
people just isn't one of them but but
people aren't going to just do it off
their own valtion not enough not in high
enough numbers charity used to be a
massive thing in this country like the
victorians had hundreds of different
charities NHS began as a charity like
charity used to be one of the core
tenants of British life and used to get
um used to have monuments to people who
would spend huge amounts of money I mean
for example there's an interesting
example in modern day uh in San
Francisco there is the Zuckerberg
Hospital how even got that name because
it got an endowment from Mark Zuckerberg
to build a hospital did you see that
Kirby Enthusiasm episode where they
donate to Wings of hospitals I haven't
seen that Larry David and Ted Dan
cheers and Larry's all happy with
himself because he donated a wing and
it's called the Larry DAV wing and then
Ted Danson's one's called just Anonymous
donate Doner but everyone knows it's Ted
Danson and Larry's going around getting
all upset just like how's he done this
everyone he's he's telling everyone it's
him and all that but it's interesting to
see zerber didn't call it just like the
anonymous brackets maybe Mark Zuckerberg
hital but this this was totally normal
and it was a part of a much stronger
society when you export all of these
things to the state then people feel
less inclined to do things for one
another and this has been um just
generally ascribed as the sort of
collapse of civil society when you've
got a civil society where people feel
that they have an obligation to get
involved then well things can be done
without civil
servants so okay then what is and we
don't have enough time for like but a
brief yeah you're in charge now oh God I
imagine yep I'm putting you in charge I
have that power by the way uh by virtue
of my father working hard or and so what
are some of the like the B the main big
steps okay because you don't want you
don't want people being poor and having
and being born in difficult and having
difficulties so what would you do well I
mean being poor and having difficulties
being poor is a relative question right
so I mean our poor have
iPhones and they eat McDonald's so I
mean there are going to be kids in
Africa who are in Cobalt mindes at the
moment we say you're not poor right so
poverty is a relative phenomenon um that
is about comparison to the people around
you um so I'm not going to try and
eradicate poverty because even if
everyone's standard of living is that
they're driving around in Jaguars those
people who don't have the flying cars
will say well look how poor I am I've
only got a Jag right sure uh so that
it's not about eradicating poverty it's
about making sure that everyone has a
good opportunity and is not unfairly
dealt with um so for example it I think
and I'm not I'm not a free market guy
either I'm I'm in favor of property
ownership I mean we're at the point now
the free market is actively inhibiting
people's abilities to BU property so I
mean part of the free market if you look
at the eu's the EU being like the
ultimate neoliberal project really uh
their four demands of the movement of
goods Capital
labor and something else I wealth
probably I can't remember what the but
the but the point is if you've got a
totally free market then money can move
to a certain place but also labor can
move to a certain place and that means
if you have a rich country what was a
rich country like Britain and then that
labor market is open to poor countries
uh then you get a distinctly unfair
occurrence happening which is the mass
movement of people to that rich country
and that has knock going effects uh
that's the reason rent so high you can't
buy house because it turns out the
people from elsewhere are people and
they need to live somewhere and they
want to get jobs and this means that the
cost of housing goes up massively but
also wages are depressed because of the
it the the job market becomes a buyer's
market rather than a sellers market so
if you're running a business you've got
lots of different people to choose from
you can actually start undercutting
until you get to a person who is
prepared to work for a much lower wage
than someone else uh if you had a more
narrow pool of recruits applicants then
you would have to be more competitive
with what you're offering uh and then of
course if you've got a narrow pool of uh
applicants that means you've got fewer
people so someone who's renting a house
can't say right I'm going to rent out
for £2,000 a month it's going to be only
,000 a month so it changes the the
dynamic of who benefits from these
things and so I would probably uh stop
immigration yes yeah and it's the the
fact that that sounds extreme
really tells us a lot about the position
we've come to right because it's totally
unusual to have immigration most
countries don't have immigration is that
right yeah because nobody wants to go
there right I mean like how many how
many immigrants do you think Uganda
takes every year Well I couldn't say I
know in Argentina loads of bolivians are
going in Venezuelans all going in there
but I guess AR well how many people are
immigrating to
Bolivia maybe paraguayans I don't I
really don't know but the point is most
countries aren't actually a load stone
for Mass immigration right it's not it's
actually not normal to get millions of
people every year 1.4 million this year
1.3 million last year 1.2 million before
conservative government it's actually
not normal to have this kind of mass
movement of people and it's it's in
unusual cases like the United States or
Britain or Europe where this happens
most countries are actually kind of
static when it comes to their population
because usually there's no incentive to
go there right but we're in this unusual
position where we've had this for 25
years and so now a quarter of England
and Wales are foreign born it's like
right okay this was not how things
should have gone the infrastructure
we're using was built in the 70s and the
80s when the population of the entire
country was some like 55 million 56
million and the population now is
probably over 70 million M although the
census says 69 million there are going
to be lots of people who aren't counted
census just has a sense of humor dirty
one yeah and so this is why everything
is failing right this everything costs
the fortune the NHS will never not be
funded like the the the constant refrain
with the NHS is oh the Tories are not
you know cutting the funding of the NHS
like no you can look at the NHS fundings
it's constant upward graph the problem
is when you bring in millions of people
every year a million a million a million
well the burden on the free at point of
service Health Service just keeps going
up and so there's no end to this and
then you go okay why AR the house prices
going down there's going to be there's
got to be a collapse in the housing
market no because there's constant
demand you're bringing in more and more
people so there's never a point at which
that can go down because these people
need to live in houses obviously and
then the job market why is why aren't
people's wages going up well because
there's no incentive to hire you who
wants a higher wage over someone who's
content with a lower wage and so these
things all add up and so after 25 years
and after I think it's about 15 million
people who are here now weren't here 20
years ago um that just has to stop CU
it's destroying the country and that's
not even to speak of the cultural
displacement of the native peoples of
the briles or anything like that that
purely to speak on an economic level
country is being destroyed by mass
immigration there's that argument did
you ever see that um Kelly Osborne
Sharon Osborne's daughter I did who's
going to yeah but the thing is about the
thing about that is okay she said that
and it was just it came out not how she
wanted to say it yeah what was it who's
your cleaners are the clean our toilet
who's going to clean our toilets yeah
and there was there was a woman on
Question Time who said who's going to
serve our coffee at Pratt I like
teenagers that's great but yeah okay I I
thought when she said that I felt a bit
bad for her cuz she obviously didn't
mean it that way and it felt like the
others the others rounded on her and and
the the the bad thing there was like the
hypocrisy is like but but you're all
think they're all thinking it because
they are super rich Hollywood whatever
who are just thinking I want want people
to come in so they can clean my toilets
and they rounded on Kelly Osborne who
didn't really mean what she had said she
just blurted it out yeah I felt a bit
bad for her and it's that thing of like
oh no no honey you said the wrong thing
all this stuff and they are thinking it
however it is a there is a bit of like
people people born here who have had
generations to build up and build up
after generations of being in this
country don't want to be doing those job
that might seem ambitious to somebody
who is born in a very difficult
circumstance somewhere else is there not
I know you're saying teenagers but
teenagers just I don't know they're born
in such a world that I don't see them
doing those jobs well that's only
because we've allowed it to happen I
mean when I was a teenager you got a job
in a bar or a pret or you a bar or a
pret toilets Yeah clean toilets you know
like these are these are jobs that
you're supposed to do when you're young
because they don't pay very well you
know they don't they're not brilliantly
paying they're not meant to be careers
right but we're turning them into
careers and it's this is this is not
good and we deprive people
of a kind of life experience right
because okay I don't want to do that
yeah but you're 17 and you want some
money to go out partying on Saturday
what are you going to do you know I I'll
just go out you won't I won't go out
like no you're just going to like okay
fine I'll get the job I'll get the money
and I'll go out and have a good time
with my friends and that'll be a
learning experience then you go off to
University and you get a career whatever
you know but there should these
shouldn't be career
options did you clean toilets I did I
used to live in Nuki and for £325 an
hour because minimum wage didn't exist
at that time how old are you 44 huh well
there you go how old were you cleaning
the toilets 19 how did you find it it
was all right was it all right it wasn't
wasn't that bad mean you've
got I know I don't keep mentioning
cultural references but have you seen
the thick of it um do you ever clean
your mom's piss or whatever there's a
there's a Welsh woman who's going having
to go at the uh the MP and she just goes
up to him have you ever had to clean
your mom's piss do you know what it's
like and he was going I doesn't seem
that bad does it I don't it's I mean
you've got rubber gloves you've got you
know cleaning tools and stuff like that
it's it's not like I had to do it my
bare hands or something you know it's
not the end of the world no and yet you
chose to your I
wanted I I wanted the money so I could
go out to the bars you know and my
parents were like get a job and I was
like okay fine I'll get a job you know
it's it's it's it's not like the end of
the world and it teaches you character
yeah I worked at kids camps looked after
kids and things um hated it yeah I
actually hated it because it reminded me
of death uh cuz I was reaching that age
of like 17 18 when you're you know
you're all melodramatic and every year
the kids stay the same age and you're
old and further and further away from
that and so you felt that you were dying
yeah I never felt like I was dying at 17
what about now no you don't think about
that no not really you're up at 3:00 in
the morning you're not you're not
thinking about that no cuz got too much
on that's the trick when I'm really busy
I'm happier yeah if I'm not busy those
thoughts are back in the head see 17year
olds were busy cleaning piss in
nightclub toilets so they wouldn't even
be thinking about death was I'm sitting
there like like building a rocket with a
kid just going oh God I was once this
and now look at me and it's how long
left have I got 30 years 40 years and
I'll be dead but that's an interesting
segue too um where can we send people to
your stuff um you can find us at
lotus.com or search on YouTube for the
podcast of the lusers and uh check us
out there who is a heretic you
admire I keep meaning to send this to
people before who is a heretic I admire
you can take your time if you want and
we can just edit that
out I'm not gonna say not pal
um [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
hell it would be funny but I'm not going
to do that
um actually I quite admire Tommy
Robinson uh which is never a popular
thing to say in po company but I think
he has been unfairly maligned um because
he was raising the alarm bells of a real
problem that was really happening and he
was told it wasn't happening and it has
come to the point now where it's
undeniable and he isn't what people said
he was he genuinely isn't as far as I
can tell I have yet to see something of
his no one ever presents any statements
of his they never say oh Tommy Robinson
said this evil thing it's okay what did
he say they don't say that they say he
is a racist he is a bad person he is
this he is that it's like okay but what
has he actually done and what his crime
is is to represent workingclass English
interests that's his crime and of course
if we go back to the well it's about
representation is about recognition well
he represents a majority who are being
unfairly oppressed actually uh against a
minority who are being unfairly
privileged and that's why he's treated
the way he is and also there are class
issues there as well of course CU he's
got a workingclass accent and the people
he talks to get their coffee and Pratt
uh and they hate him for it it's an
interesting one Tommy Robinson because
you know for this for this podcast
you're thinking okay who should I have
on and you want controversial people but
then Tommy Robinson is probably him and
Katy Hopkins I know non Brit might not
know who either of those are those are
two where you go oh is that going to
stop future guests coming on and then
you do think what are the things that
Tommy Robinson has said now Katy Hopkins
there is actually yeah yeah exactly Katy
Hopkins you can find statements some
things yeah uh but even then I don't
think there should be a barrier to
talking to these people because it's not
the sum total of their personality but
with Tommy Robinson I just don't know
what it is he's supposed to have said
it's bit of JK rolling in that sense
isn't it I don't know what you keep
asking people what what is it JK say I
don't I don't know yeah I I'd need to
look into it a lot and and then I really
pour through it and go okay that was
what I guess what I'd be looking for
then is that Hardware versus software
thing has he said things that have had
to go at people for their Hardware who
they are if we're talking about Muslims
oh because they are Arabs who do this
and that well that's the thing I've
never seen him say anything I've only
ever seen him talk about Islam as a
Doctrine and philosophy and a belief
system which theoretically in Liberal
Britain we should be able to discuss but
apparently we're not because the powers
the be conflate Muslim with an ethnic
group yes they call it racism it's like
how could that be racism unless there is
there is an argument I suppose if we get
really into the weeds that Muslim is in
the same way that Jewish can be a
culture you can be an atheist Jew Hitler
would have come after you is that the
same for Islam I asked Yasmin Muhammad
that an ex-muslim she said no because
they kill you that's the whole point if
you're if you're Muslim and you're not a
believer that that doesn't work but
obviously everyone has their
interpretation of how they're going to
do it point being as far as I can tell
Tommy Robinson has only ever been a
Critic of Islam and he I don't think is
a racist I mean he like the English
Defense League I was never involved with
or anything like that but I
retroactively went back to look at it
and there were lots of it was a very
multi-racial organization there were
like you know seik divisions and there
were lots of black people involved
because it was just people who had felt
that they had been unjustly dealt with
by the Muslim Community who weren't
getting um accurately represented by the
powers of the be who should have taken
an active they should have actively
stopped certain kinds of behaviors and
didn't so yeah anyway I can't find
anything that actually is something you
could hold over Tommy's head and say
look this is why you're a bad person it
just seems to be the fact that he has
been raising the alarm for the native
English working class and the powers of
be being very middle class and
contemptuous of these people have used
him as a totem to
Smash down and turn into a terrible
person in the eyes of society but
actually I just don't think that these
things are accurate and I'm not saying
he hasn't got a criminal record or
something right it's very it's common
for working-class men to have a criminal
record against the state uh but that I
don't think that makes him an evil
racist or something because he doesn't
seem to be interesting well I don't even
know what to say to it because I need to
look deeper into it I don't know enough
about what he said I I was exactly the
same about 5 years ago and I was like
okay well I'll look into it I was just
like what what's he done well I I
encourage everyone who's listening
everyone who's watching some people will
be just will get a reaction from that
and say oh no go and have a look send me
a message telling me what he's done that
is wrong um send Carl a message very
angrily tell feel free send angry ones
to call I've asked people look send me
like a clip or you know a text message
or something like that that he sent
where he's like I hate Pakistani or
something like that you know I just yeah
you would think that lots of people
would be in my mentions going here's the
evidence but no one ever is we shall see
guys please do go and follow Carl I'll
put the all the links in the in the
things you can go down and do that and
uh keep on watching this show there'll
be similar things right here so just
watch the things
