as a young man I liked to think of
myself as an
individual I was quite taken with Anne
Ran's Atlas Shrugged her book confirmed
what I believed that what I achieved in
life was up to me that if I was smart
enough determined enough I could
accomplish anything I set my mind to and
I didn't need anybody's help I could do
it all on my
own one day later in life I was asked a
simple
question tell
me just one important thing that you
have accomplished in Life or that you
believe you could accomplish that you
believe you did or could do entirely on
your own without help from anybody else
just name one thing
I had no answer and you know what I
don't think anybody else could answer
that question either sure I had things I
was proud of I graduated near the top of
my class from law school I'd become a
partner in a successful Urban law firm
with my own hands I had built one home
and had significantly remodeled several
others I'd also built a 47 ft commercial
fishing vessel and for nearly a decade
had successfully earned a living with it
fishing in Southeast Alaska I'd run for
the US Congress I'd served as a campaign
manager in the successful defense of a
Statewide ballot initiative I'd served
as a nonprofit executive and Advocate
I'd written books and seen them
published both fiction and
non-fiction but there was not a
significant thing not one that I had
done in my entire life that I could have
done without the help of others a lot of
help help that began the day I was born
and that had continued throughout every
single day of my life helped from the
people close to me of course from family
friends teachers and colleagues but it
didn't end there I'd also had help from
every person now and in the distant past
who had in an incalculable host of ways
made my life easier my understanding of
the world more complete my tenure and
success on Earth even
possible it's probably not surprising
that we humans like me are able to so
easily convince ourselves that our
success in life comes down to our own
individual
capabilities certainly such a view is
deeply empowering it lets you feel that
you don't need to depend on others it
also given that we humans have so
clearly dominated the planet Earth over
all other creatures and that it seems to
be our intelligence the power of our
minds that appears to be the most unique
and defining characteristic that
differentiates us from the rest of the
animal kingdom we can quite easily
conclude that if intelligence is
responsible for the success of our
species it must be that the smartest
most disciplined and most capable
individuals among us could surely take
sole credit for for their individual
success as well it only
follows except spoiler alert it doesn't
follow and the reason it doesn't follow
and I realize this is
counterintuitive but the reason it
doesn't follow is because intelligence
alone turns out to be surprisingly
unimpressive as a survival
trait when however intelligence is
paired up with a successful
well-functioning
Society then its impact can turn out to
be
astonishing it's not all about
intelligence it's about intelligence and
Society they have to work
together I'd like to tell you how I
became convinced that that follows
recently in the course of writing a
science fiction novel called Darwin's
Dilemma I found myself struggling to
understand the likely point of view one
might anticipate in some future
artificial
superintelligence a being akin to the
Hal that we all probably recall from
Arthur C Clark and Stanley cubric
classic 1968 novel and movie 2001 A
Space Odyssey
naturally if we're to understand how a
future artificial superintelligence
might respond to the universe around it
the best actually perhaps the only place
to look is at ourselves we after all are
the only fully self-conscious highly
intelligent beings with which we have
experience and thus we are the only
known example that we have to draw
upon as we all know human intelligence
doubtless evolved as a biological
survival
trait at first glance it seems like it
must have been an incredibly effective
one consider our recent
past we humans went from a global
population of about half a billion to 8
billion
today that took us a mere 500 years or
so and since our intelligence would seem
to be by far the most significant
difference between us and all other
creatures on Earth uh with which we're
in competition by the way surely that
intelligence must account for our
dramatic
success but take a second look at this
population
chart it also poses questions first
among them seems to me what took us so
long it turns out that we humans had
actually acquired more or less our
current level of cognition some 200,000
to 300,000 years ago long before the
more recent glacial period this chart as
you can see only goes back a mere 12,000
years at this scale to capture all those
200 to 300,000 years of History the
chart would need to be some 20 to 30
times
wider picture that for a moment and I
think you begin to see the
problem if we're so
smart why did we only get around to the
business of dominating the earth a mere
500 years
ago throughout the vast majority of
those previous 200 to 300 Millennia we
humans were hardly blip on the Earth's
evolutionary
landscape we had an average global
population in the neighborhood over most
of that time of somewhere in the range
of 300,000 individuals or so not the 8
billion we have today we even approached
Extinction at least
once meanwhile of course survival
Strategies employed by our much less
intelligent biological competitors were
very often far more
effective consider creatures equipped
for example with fangs or claws with
speed or wings or
gills creatures that were bulky or who
carried armor or who could camouflage
themselves creatures that had abundant
reproduction could echolocate their prey
or had incredibly Keen eyesight hearing
or a sense of smell we could name any of
a host of other more immediate survival
traits those creatures frequently put we
humans to shame whether you measure by
species longevity by Geographic spread
by diversity or by Simple Abundance we
humans we just didn't Stack Up not until
very
recently so look now right there at that
lower right hand corner of the this
chart and ask yourself this what
changed there are actually a multitude
of explanations typically offered for
the Social and technological explosions
that occurred during the Chinese song D
Song Dynasty and the European
Renaissance following the 15th Century
AC clearly in both Asia and in Europe
this was a critical turning point in
scientific medical and social technology
the change was so extraordinary one has
to ask why did it happen just then why
not much earlier and why so suddenly so
dramatically what pieces had come
together that catalyzed such an
astonishing and sustained explosion in
our human population a growth that has
continued ever
since at the time it began in around the
12th to 15th century when there were
about a half a billion people on Earth
today by the way we're adding a billion
people every 11 years in what has to be
the most massive planetary
sustainability experiment of all
time take another look at this this
population chart one can clearly see
that something was in the wind as far
back as five or 6,000 years ago
significantly that was about when humans
began developing pictographic writing at
that point word of mouth was no longer
the only way that information could be
shared with others or passed down to
Future
Generations then about 3,800 years ago
the first first phonetic alphabet
appeared as well for the first time oral
language could be translated into
writing by using a mere 20 to 30 easily
memorized written symbols by memorizing
those few symbols anyone who could speak
could also easily learn to read and
write soon there were Scrolls then there
were
books but here's the
thing books were massively expensive in
Europe for example it could take a team
of writers literally a year to produce
just a single
volume a book could cost as much as a
modest home only the very wealthy or a
few powerful institutions like maybe a
church or a teaching Academy could
afford to own them and those that could
weren't likely to be handing them around
to just anyone who might be interested
in reading them for some books were
actually seen as status symbols as works
of art as treasured heirlooms but not
actually even intended to be
read the truly explosive Revolution
began when it did because it had finally
become possible to mass-produce the
written
word with the introduction of the
printing press that's what changed
everything printing appears to have
begun in China in about the seventh or
8th Century using wood cuttings and
rubbings from engraved Stone it had a
great deal of immediate impact even
though its scope may have been somewhat
blunted by the largely pictographic
written language in use at the time but
then in 1430 Johannes Gutenberg invented
the movable type printing press in
Europe
significantly gutenberg's movable type
took advantage of that simple easy
tolearn phonetic alphabet and it allowed
for the printing of different pages from
different books by merely arranging
those same castled letters over and over
again this new printing technology made
use of paper which was by then available
in both Europe and Asia and it probably
helped that gutenberg's Christian Bible
became the first International
bestseller and very likely served as a
powerful motivation for the masses to
learn to
read with printed books for the very
first time in all of human
history observations ideas strategies
for living Technologies of every kind
could be reproduced by the
thousands and quickly shared
everywhere we humans could finally
permanently and accurately document
complex ideas and
experiences and we could share those
ideas with millions of others with
anyone who might be
interested that sharing Could Happen
across geography in multiple languages
it could happen across cultures it could
be passed down forever to Future
Generations in what became an
increasingly massive on goinging
accumulation of our Collective Human
Experience and it all coincided with
that critical turning point in our human
population while the printing press was
certainly not the only remarkable event
taking place right at this time it had
to have had an incredible impact on
everything else I would argue that its
appearance just at this critical moment
in human history is a great deal more
than mere
coincidence when gutenburg press started
up in the mid
1400s the total number of books in
circulation in all of Europe could be
counted in the
thousands a mere 50 years later there
were 9
million that's 9 million books in a
European population that was one tenth
of what it is
today the printing press had obviously
become a mighty Catalyst that took hold
of the intellectual Revolution already
underway and that propelled it forward
as a social and technological explosion
everywhere on
Earth I might add that it was also an
explosion not unlike the one that we're
all observing today as we watch our
Collective human database being
repeatedly deepened and re-empower by
modern
Electronics so that still however leaves
us wondering about the mechanism by
which all this happened what is it about
the sharing of information of life
experience that could be so empowering
that it seems to have transformed human
survival on Earth
I think the answer is that books
contain
data and data is what makes
intelligence
useful to understand why that may be
consider how it is that our intelligence
actually works in practice as a survival
trait ask yourself this what is it about
intelligence that actually helps us stay
alive in our interactions with the
complex and dangerous world around us we
humans do engage in certain fairly
obvious sort of reliably observable
behaviors first of all we observe our
surroundings secondly we struggle to
contextualize and understand the
significance of what we're seeing
especially in so far as it relates to
our
survival and then third based on that
understanding we design strategies that
allow us to reach out and actually
manipulate the world around us so as to
maximize our advantages and protect
ourselves from harm that's how
intelligence helps us
survive those three
activities
observation purposeful
comprehension and strategic manipulation
of our environment are all decisively
empowered by
intelligence they are how our
intelligence functions in real life to
help us survive and
flourish significantly our success in
all three of those Endeavors depends
hugely upon the information the data
that we can acquire about life
experience what we see how we understand
it what we can do about it is data and
unfortunately there is a very distinct
limit on the amount of World experience
of that data that any single one of us
can ever hope to experience ourselves
over the course of our own single deeply
constrained and painfully brief
lifetime but that imitation can be
overcome when we
share prior to the printing
press the only truly detailed sharing of
life experience of data that any of us
humans could hope for was still through
Word of Mouth information came to us via
oral tradition it came from family
members or perhaps from a circle of
friends and acquaintances within our
tribe or Community perhaps perhaps it
sometimes came from fellow students or
colleagues in professional guilds or
trade
groups sometimes it came from
intellectual clergy and sometimes it was
even passed down as closely guarded
Secrets handed on by the fellow members
of some exclusive
Elite that was the only way it could
happen before the printing
press after however the incredible
sharing and democratization of knowledge
that resulted from the printing press
allowed any of us to tap into the
experience of millions of others whoever
they were and wherever they may
be all we had to do was read their
books and that is why it seems so likely
that the printing press would have
served as a critical Catalyst for most
everything that happened in the years
that
followed so if you you've ever been as I
once was intrigued by the popular but I
think deceptive notion that all human
progress derives from the efforts of a
few remarkable individuals from people
who somehow rise above the social order
and who just on their very own without
any help from others have transformed
our world I'd say to you think again
despite what we'd like to believe our
extraordinary human evolutionary success
does not appear to have been driven
solely by our
intelligence nor was it driven by the
Brilliance of those amongst us who
somehow transcended society and worked
completely
alone it was not the product of our
personal intellectual prowess it was not
as Anne Rand would have had us believe
and Atlas Shrugged a gift from some
remarkable few amazing individuals
acting alone redirecting the course
history no no our success was decidedly
not the product of rugged
individualism rather Humanity's
remarkable success was very clearly
driven by
intelligence empowered by social
interchange if we want to survive as a
species and to continue to thrive in the
future that conjunction of intelligence
and
Society will be the mechanism that
enables our
success that is the Hope for the future
of humanity it is the hope that rests
upon our ability to make that mechanism
work if you'd like to see a written
version of this presentation or if you'd
like to see some of the annotations that
I have assembled in completing the
research which supports it you might
take a look at my website it's at wwwd
Stewart St
t.net wwwd stewart. net I also have two
other related YouTube videos thus far in
this series one is entitled how we
humans know right from wrong thank
Darwin and the other is how we humans
know who to
trust thank Darwin
finally if you found this video
interesting you might also enjoy reading
my recent award-winning science fiction
novel Darwin's Dilemma a story of humans
AIS and the future of intelligence it's
available on Amazon at Barnes &amp; Noble
and in bookstores and
libraries thank you so much for watching
and please subscribe to my YouTube
channel and I'll be sure to bring you
more thanks
