ma da da is rubbish release on site is
where it's at that said his masterpiece
taken in 2016 that could be painted on
the roof of any church welcome to
Manchester 2016 New Year's Eve and
there's a lot of sights to behold here
this is the most English photograph ever
taken in history so first I want to
focus on this little fella here who's
getting arrested by the police for
reasons unknown now I want to posit the
theory that he's getting arrested for
something very inconsequential like he
yelled the word to loud noises he's
sort of choking and gone very pink which
is the most humiliating way to get
arrested that is possible there's a
reason that dad's tells soft lads like
me to punch people in the throat if you
ever get in a fight it's because not
being able to breathe is very very
humiliating and that's what's happened
to this lad here now we have this lady
who at first glance you might assume is
this lads girlfriend or wife I have a
different theory I think what's happened
here is she doesn't know him at all
she's just taking two steps out of her
diet just to go and berate him forget it
arrested you zoom in on her mouth for a
look at the shape of it it's completely
primed to say you stupid
bastards now these girls have had a good
night out and you can tell that for
three reasons
one none of a wag coats whichever Norv
is basically tradition - two of them are
eaten chips which is the only way to
finish a night out like this and 3-0 of
them a crying which is basically a
miracle New Year's Eve the only possible
stick in the bud is this lad energy
Leigh who's trying to chat about who's
proper it's the end of the diet and
you're the only ones who are left and it
now they're all gonna fob him off go
home in taxis get into bed with that
taking that mascara off and then eat a
whole piece are in bed tomorrow morning
while I'm on bring some tea
now these boys have absolutely it
you can tell that because there's a
whole fight going on at the front of
this picture that they're not getting
involved in at all and that's because
they're tired they thought they'd come
out and pull tonight on beers Eve we're
gonna get off with some of those girls
eating chips over there they were going
to take one home and they both whatsapp
each other the next board and to say our
well very active instead they're going
on with each other absolutely miserable
about it what an absolutely crapped new
year now my theory is that this lady is
the only stable woman in the shot if you
consider the fact that she's got a coat
tucked around
she's got very sensible heels she seems
to be shouting off at the cameraman
and she's walking furious absolute
carnage around her like it's nothing
that suggests to me that she has the
energy of a barmaid who's just at a 10
hour New Year's Eve shift absolutely
can't be asked when people get arrested
people pissing and vomited and people
queuing up for taxis and silence she's
had enough and then we have this cherub
the angel who ties the whole masterpiece
together he's entirely hairless across
his body absolutely no pubes to speak of
at all he's more relaxed here and I've
been in like a bubble bath drinking of
whiskey he's more relaxed here lying
down on the drizzly cobbles of a
Manchester Street or New Year's Eve that
I think I've been in my entire life and
that's the real spirit of Englishness
and New Year's Eve as Street buy-in and
drunkenness that's all
[Music]
