Cara I finished your book it is
surprisingly dishy you called it the
burn book after Mean Girls mhm so this
is supposed to be what you really think
about everyone like Mark Zuckerberg Bill
Gates Elon Musk all of them all of them
that's exactly
right I'm Hunter Rosen this is Radio
Atlantic and carara is Cara swisser the
most straightforward way to describe her
is veteran technology journalist but the
bigger truth is that she was put on this
Earth to cover Silicon Valley from the
minute that Cara got a giant prototype
cell phone in her hand she knew that she
had to move west so there she was at the
beginning of the dotcom era in the
makeshift garage offices where everyone
coated all night and at the parties
where they drank and then told her
things and as they became more famous
she became more famous for being both
incredibly well-connected and a
journalistic bulldog not sure sure how
those two things held together but they
did and she kept it up for years and at
this point when it's way way harder to
get access to these Tech Titans Caris
swier is one of the only journalists who
can say that she knew them and many of
their parents way back when which
explains the book's dishy Vibe and P.S
there will be
cursing it's not about like people's
dating that's not what you mean you're
talking about their actual personalities
right yes exactly I want you to
understand how they got from one place
to another how what happened to Elon
Musk like how did he go from being a you
know relatively quirky odd billionaire
with a bunch of negative characteristics
that were small to a massive [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
right how did that happen why do I care
if he's an [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] well you should cuz
he's very powerful that's why you know
he's not just a little powerful I'm like
literally he's running space space and
he is involved in the Ukraine thing and
he runs one of the biggest social media
platforms on the planet this is not a
little person he's an enormous influence
on the world so right so it's like
gossip we should enormously care about
because these guys personality is
essentially make our world yeah but I'm
not going like elon's fat like and there
there was famous pictures of him looking
very fat right I don't care if he's fat
I push back on gossip but this is what
they're like I'm telling you I was there
I saw it like that's I I don't know if
that's gossip CU I'm not talking about
their dating lives or unless it's
pertinent by the way and which it
usually isn't sometimes it is certainly
you know you've just seen the series of
stories in the Wall Street Journal about
in his case drug use right is it
affecting him and I think it's pertinent
in this case right right it's just odd
because we as people who live in this
world are subject to the incredible
idiosyncrasies and particularities of
these people's personalities I mean
that's the impression I got from your
book I mean you you're essentially right
that there's this pattern these are
powerful men most of them are men they
go from being idealistic Strivers to
these like compromised insulated rich
people and we live in their world we and
we do right what companies have been
more important over the last two decades
than tech companies they're also
currently still the richest not just the
richest people but the most powerful
companies and were poised to yet another
Wrinkle in the tech space around
generative AI they waste to major
entertainment companies they'll lay
waste to insurance companies they've
starting to dabble in healthare they're
in space they're in cars and it's the
same group of people and so don't you
want to know it's kind of like living
with like Edison's living right now so's
Carnegie we're living with those people
right now and so I felt it was really
important for you to understand how they
got here and who they become right that
was my goal so let's focus on the become
because it it it's truly we cannot
remember them as evolving humans anymore
they're cartoons they're cartoons now
and one advantage you have is that you
actually can so if you can go back to
your younger self I mean you recognized
something in them really early on like
you could have been a political reporter
you could have done lots of other things
and you defied a lot of people and said
no I'm doing this why what was there at
the beginning well you know I was at the
Washington Post to put that in context
and the game at the Washington Post is
cover the white house right at the time
that was like the big hot thing but the
minute I started covering the internet I
was like politics doesn't matter cuz
these people are going to own everything
like they're going to own politics
they're going to change politics you
know I studied propaganda when I was at
the Foreign Service school and then
later at Colombia when I went to the
journalism school but I was interested
in the uses of propaganda always Nazism
CH in China even in the United States
how we use propaganda to move
civilizations right and convince people
and obviously everyone focuses in on
Nazism because they were unfortunately
effective at it and they in their case
they used radio right radio was very
important if you ever watch the films of
Lenny Rena you saw the movies you know
and so when I saw the internet for the
first time it reminded me of that kind
of technological shift whether it was
for the printing press for radio for
television which obviously had a big
impact politically and when I looked at
this I was like oh this is even bigger
like it was so easy to understand what
it was it was like them but bigger mhm I
could immediately see what the tools
could be used for and I think a lot of
people didn't but did you think it was
cool amazing going to change the world
uhh yes yeah you know look there's the
Paul vilo quote when you invent the ship
you invent the Shipwreck right when you
inv every every technological change is
a tool or a weapon like nuclear fion
right and I like the tools and I
definitely see the possibilities but I'm
like also oh wait look what you could do
here right right you could see the seeds
of danger but also there was genuine
passion and openness and pride and all
of these things were all there at once
they were proud of what they' done yeah
yeah yeah they should be and then when
does it start to turn like I'm looking
at page 57 in your book and and you
write about lines that they gave you
it's not about the money it's not about
the fame when that happened I I wrote
kind of a silly article about it it was
one of my first articles when I started
covering stuff there because I was like
you're [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] kidding me like you're
not children like and I wrote a funny
story about it like they say it's not
but in fact it is or the way they dress
you know I'm just dressed in a hoodie
I'm harmless I'm like you're not
harmless you're just dressed in a hoodie
right you know it's no it's no different
than Gordon gecko in the beautiful suit
and the town car it's not that different
just cuz you're riding around on a
bicycle like you're still dangerous I
was really fascinated by their attempts
to affect childishness or childlike I
found it childish but child like Wonder
was one of their little you know PR
things it really they were sort of like
that cuz their food Foods were always
soft and their clothes were always soft
and you know it was very much Peter Pan
and the lost boys like let's eat
Twinkies all night let's play video
games they had sort of had this Arrested
Development that was really fascinating
to me I see but initially you just
didn't know like it seemed interesting
intriguing like full of wonder but it
didn't seem like terrible yet um I was a
little worried about some of it because
it was it was people that were in their
20s some of whom were in their 30s Bezos
was a little older
who were just continuing to act like
they were children they were sort of
trying to abgate responsibility and not
act like adults right because ultimately
this was adult stuff um and there was
one scene where the guys who found it
excite which nobody remembers now but it
was one of their competitors you know it
was so calculated they had a garage as a
door right we started a garage but here
it is I'm like why do you need it now
right you know okay sure I'll go through
your garage door whatever but they had a
slide between the second and first
floors you know one of those big
children's slides and they were like get
on the slide Cara I'm like I'm not
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] getting on the slide I'm 35
years old or whatever I was like No And
they're like everybody slides down the
slide and I was like I didn't like it
when I was four I'm not doing it now
like what are you talk I'm old like no I
won't do it and so but they love to sort
of have that like harmless you know as
they wearing fleece and comfortable
shoes and flip-flops as if they are
different than anyone else who's making
money but you could see little bits of
it whether they were sort of lifting
other people's content without a care in
the world and then you started to see
the money mattering right right did you
say they eat soft food yeah it was all
like pudding there's a lot of pudding
and you know um lot of pudding I was
fascinated by their food choices like
you got free food all the time and a lot
of it was sweets right you know one
place who like we're charging for food
was Apple they're like I started to walk
away they're like you got to pay for
your food I was like oh right forgot
you're adults you know what I mean
because they would give away food but
all of it was soft soft food pudding is
how I think of it pudding a lot of
pudding a lot of pudding can you tell
the story about the diaper onesie party
that you write about because truly I
found that really hard to believe wasn't
it I was for me too when I got there so
I was used to going to these ridiculous
parties right and they were good places
to Source I didn't enjoy them I'm not a
big party person as you know so I went
to this baby shower for Sergey Bren who
was one of the co-founders of Google and
his wife Ann Wiis and you know everybody
was there so I'm going because I can
they tend to say things when they're
drinking right or whatever and they you
know they want you to like them so they
tend to like it's a great place for
sourcing it just is and so I went to
this it was a warehouse kind of thing um
and when you walked in hanging from the
ceiling in the entryway of their baby
pictures and I thought that was cute
that's cute cute cute cute but then when
you walked in they wanted you to wear an
outfit they loved outfits these people
love costumes and so I'm I'm trying to
be open-minded but they had uh onesies
that you could put on onesies giant
adult onesies you know and then they
gave you a sucker and the food was like
all baby food type of stuff with baby
food spoons and so she's like which one
do you want and I was like none of the
above I shall not be wearing a diaper
for [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] sure I would not do it I
can't believe they didn't realize the
optics oh oh it was crazy I was like
whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa like oh no no
no and but the onesies were even more
interesting because where do you get
adult onesies right and I was like they
just they had an idea and they went with
it they just they decided we're going
with this and when you walked in
literally I'll get to the ice sculpture
in a second but they had a jumpy one of
those jumpies which I do like by the way
you know but adults were jumping in a
jumpy because they're fun they had
roller skates Sergey bin was on roller
skates they had all manner of balloons
it was all kids toys right it was like a
Wonderland if you were a toddler you'd
have been thrilled to be there except
these were adults and so everyone was
dressed up like that except for Gavin
Newsome who was wearing one of his
fantastic suits I was like both of us
have dignity obviously and he was like
you you'd have taken my picture I was
like I absolutely would have taken your
picture if you were in a diaper right
now and there's no question and you
deserve it if you did if you put on a
diaper a onesie you'd have deserved
every bit of political Fallout from that
and I would be thrilled to kill you but
there was a an ice sculpture too cuz
they the food was elaborate but this is
giant all sculpture of a woman and it
was a white russian coming out of her
boob so it's milk and so you put your
glass up to it and got a White Russian
and and I was like what the
falz ancest and all the exactly the
whole thing and then I was like and they
had no irony like there was no there's
not even there wasn't a you had Sergey
running around on his roller skates you
know I don't know what I was like did
you not have enough time as a child I
just was like what the and I look maybe
I'm not fun I I can I'll I'll admit I'm
not that much fun I really really don't
like parties that much but I was like
this is like not what I would do if I
had a billion dollars right well I can I
don't know I can see the Temptation you
are under constantly to psychoanalyze
like you you write sentences like they
all seemed achingly lonely and they had
deep insecurity and I'm thinking like
does she know that for sure and what is
that about our world today you know I
think you think we now treat them as
Heroes like they're real people and I
think if you look a little bit at their
parents or their backgrounds like Steve
Jobs actually would talk about this
Larry Ellison I had a long talk with him
about his mom leaving him it left him
with an aunt and he didn't know his
father he was very aware of the impact
it had on him you know in many ways I I
can't believe I'm saying Larry Ellison's
totally mature but he had a very cogent
discussion and he I think some of it
drives these people right yeah you can
see that with Elon you know I got beaten
up as a child and therefore I'm going to
beat up the world or something you have
to be able to pull from all their life
experiences in some fashion or where
they grew up and what shaped them for
what they did what happened to them a
good person to look at I think is Travis
kenck because he had started a bunch of
companies and he had gotten kind of
screwed by various powerful people and
he was angry I always looking for their
motivation and his was he had failures
before Uber and he was not going to lose
this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] time right right now your
relationship with Mark Zuckerberg
founder Facebook goes way back and you
wrote that there were things about him
that you admired initially that he was a
little bit different than other people
can you talk about those I mean look he
was he was a very awkward person a lot
of techies are well known for not having
really good social cues right just the
way it is and it's there's a lot of them
in Tech and you run into them a lot and
he was one of them right had a very hard
time with social cues but a very lovely
guy and by the way I met his mom I met
his dad I met his sisters very lovely
people he had a very nice upbringing and
a very supportive upbringing it seemed
he was sort of the toast of the family
right and he got supported in his
interest in technology he was nerdy and
they supported that which was good right
he was made to think it was a good thing
and so you know a lot of his stuff at
Harvard was was rough the way he took
people's information and you could just
see glimmers of what was going to happen
later that said I think he as he evolved
later he was trying very hard to learn
very quickly stuff that he had missed in
college right he was trying very hard to
learn and compared to a lot of people
even though he was aggressive I would
say like Bill Gates could be just an
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like he's became better over
time like by the way and I believe in
people improving their personalities but
Mark was always very polite and very
Earnest and very even though there's
elements of you know when you saw those
texts were they they they trust me dumb
suckers that was a teenager saying that
right I didn't think that was the basis
of his personality I don't just nothing
he's done in his life reflects that he
has a lovely wife he seems to be a very
good father he's very committed to his
Athletics you know and so I I kind of
was sort of like what's motivating this
guy why does he feel the need to have so
much dominance over everything and so I
was really trying to figure that out and
the central debate between the two of
seems to be accountability like how
would you characterize that I feel like
you guys have been having this
conversation for decades what are the
two sides of it I felt like he should
understand how powerful he was and he
pretended he wasn't he he always said we
in the community and like we as a group
will decide together and I was like if
there's a we here why do you get to
decide everything why do you have you
know unassailable power at Facebook I
from a technical point of view I get it
you don't want a VC to come in and screw
you markk I I think he was very aware of
that but he kept saying we a lot when in
fact he was the one who made all the
decisions so I was interested in that
dichotomy and we debated that a lot he
also didn't seem to see negativity in
people that they would take these tools
and do something bad with them he I just
was like are you have you not read any
history here's Hana aand like let's
let's let's give you a little you
obvious you know and I I joke about it
like he didn't finish college and so for
some reason he just didn't see that it
would turn out
it could turn out badly and you know
that's a good part of entrepreneurs like
I'm going to keep going but in this case
it had real world implications so every
decision he made was always good for him
and bad for everybody else necessarily
and they didn't think that he was like I
am giving you Facebook and I was like
but you run it you control it you and it
for some reason that was really and part
of it was because he had socially
awkward Tendencies but that's not an
excuse so what did you learn about why
he needs this dominance like after these
Decades of debate like what is
motivating him you know I haven't talked
to him in a while since our last
disastrous interview for him but
he I don't know he's just an aggressive
young man right he's not young anymore
but he's you know ultimately a lot of
these people they think they know better
without knowing right like I'm like you
have no wisdom but a lot of opinions
right you haven't gained wisdom over
time if you look back at the quotes it's
jobs who actually had wisdom like he
predicted podcasting he talked about
privacy he he he was reflective he was a
very reflective person and as aggressive
as he was and let me just say he was
very aggressive he read widely he
thought widely and a lot of these people
very much like the platforms they
created they thought reductively good or
bad black or white like that kind of
thing I never thought about the the the
anti-intellectualism of the Silicon
Valley Founders and hows I didn't really
think about that you've mentioned a
couple of times they stop talking to you
and like so it seems like at some point
you know like with the Zuckerberg
motivation thing or Elon they kind of
get away from you like you can't quite
guess their motivations and you can't
understand them like they get out of
your grasp yeah yes in Mark's case I
agree with him he shouldn't talk to me
he's he's had two disastrous interviews
with me and I kind of am like okay I get
it sir like you really some something
with you and I you I don't think he
thinks I was unfair to him in that
regard I don't believe that I think he
knows it was his fault hold on I just
I'm going too fast cuz people don't
necessarily know this just what was the
disaster with Mark Zuckerberg that
you're referring to well there were two
interviews I did with him one he started
with Walt and I did one with him where
we were asking about privacy he started
sweating so much and he almost he looked
like he was going to faint and it got it
ricocheted all over the Internet it
looked like we sweat him to death like
essentially during an interview it was
kind of a physical manifestation of
nervousness he said he had the flow I
think it was a panic attack but
nonetheless he it wasn't good for him at
that juncture in his career to look like
he had a flop sweat essentially um and
the second one was I think more serious
cuz he handled that one rather well he
was very cordial to us about he knew it
was him not us and in in the second case
we were doing an interview in 2018 and I
was really incensed about the Alex Jones
decisions he made because he Al Jones
who was the person who said the Sandy
Hook massacre was a false flag or
whatever just heinous person and I'm
like do you have no responsibility to
the heinousness this guy is putting out
there and during that interview he
shifted it to anti-Semitism which is
pertinent now of course and he said as a
Jew you know he essentially was doing
that which I was like okay don't do this
don't go to Holocaust because I actually
know a thing or two about this right and
about propaganda and he's like he
essentially said Holocaust deniers don't
mean to lie and I was like oh my [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
god you're kidding me you think that
like you know I was think oh baby baby
no no no no no don't go here but instead
of saying you're an idiot I let him talk
and then you heard him you heard his
thinking on it which was very
problematic and ill-informed
and stupid really stupid is what it was
but he was in charge of a huge platform
that was making decisions so that's what
I was trying to put out there like this
guy doesn't know what he's talking about
and he's flying the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] plane right
like he owns the plane he's flying the
plane we're all on the plane and he
doesn't know what he's talking about and
that's what I was trying to get through
and he got in a lot of trouble for that
right away and I knew he would I you
know me and the producer were like o
let's get out of here and post this
because this is problematic um he
apologized later pretty quickly saying
he didn't mean to say that but he did
say that's what precisely what he said
and then it took him you know a lot of
time to knock them off the platform but
during that time oceans of anti-Semitism
washed over Facebook and and created all
kinds of problems and really did Rabbit
Hole a lot of people with that bile and
those lies and so my thing was this guy
is making decisions for society that
have huge implications and I believe
much what's going on now has a direct
line to what decisions he made right
because it was the biggest platform and
so I wanted to say the person running
the news doesn't know what he's talking
about and he has enormous influence over
when he decides to become educated about
these things all right we're going to
take a short break and when we come back
Cara stops wondering about what
motivates these Tech Titans and talks
about what we should do about
them so at some point you stop trying to
understand what motivates them they are
rep pacious information thieves as Walt
Mossberg called them that's what they
are they're information thieves and they
but they don't care about the wider
Society right and the impact and so it
it's Mark benof the head of Salesforce
who they consider a class Trader I think
he called them cigarette companies and I
think that was a perfect metaphor
actually they're doing all this damage
and we're paying the price right we're
paying for deaths and the destruction
they don't pay the price and they get
all the profits and so I was like when
are we going to make them pay for what
they've done like it's not their
complete fault but it's certainly you
know they're always like Fox News I'm
like okay sure let's they just paid by
the way in in dominion and they're going
to pay again with smartmatic I'm glad I
got you in this mode because I want
people to have the experience that I had
reading this book which I wrote in the
margins this is dark like you have a
sentence which is like LOL haha speaking
of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I'm sorry to say we are and
that's where I wrote this is dark it's
dark it is but it's trying to be funny
it's also like the The Twilight Zone
thing to serve me do you remember that
was a classic episode where these aliens
come down and fix all of humanity and
everyone's like oh yay aliens they're so
good they've Sol dollar problem and they
they find a book that the only thing
they can translate is to serve man and
they think oh it's to help man but
actually it's a cookbook right I'm sorry
to let that on but it's a cookbook they
sort of fatten people up to eat them
which I'm like okay that's what they're
here for and so I am always yelling it's
a cookbook it's a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] cookbook
everybody stop e they're coming to eat
us is that what you us yes they're here
to they're not here to help us they're
here to eat us and so like it's a
cookbook and you are being cooked by
their stuff you're addicted to it you're
dependent on it for your job and your
life everything happens over it they
control over and who the hell are they
you need to know who they are um and
it's it's unspeakable amounts of power
you think we had the robber barons back
you know whether it was Carnegie or
Rockefeller you know the people who laid
the railroad Etc they had enormous
influence and sway over how our society
developed well guess what this is that
on steroids right right so that's
depressing and you wrote as much as I
tried to sound the alarms I couldn't
stop them so so so then you left Silicon
Valley and moved to Washington you you
left with that feeling of someone's got
to stop them so who is that someone now
the government the government hasn't
done nothing the go our legislators have
you know I I wanted to meet a lot of the
legislators and and and I've never seen
an industry so powerful have almost no
regulation relating to them except for
old regulation right old antitrust old
privacy laws and so I was sort of
astonished like can you imagine
pharmaceutical companies without any
strictures Wall Street without any
strictures mhm and is there anything in
there that gives you hope like what's
the thing that you're most hopeful about
well there was an Insurrection they
didn't act right M so we're still in
totally their fault let's blame Donald
Trump but they were handmaidens to
Edition as far as I'm concerned so we're
still pessimistic we're still
pessimistic no I just don't know when
we're going to pass a a national Privacy
Law it doesn't look like we're going to
do one when are we going to pass an an
algorithmic transparency law what are we
doing on generative AI what are the
rules of the road we want them to do we
want killer drones probably not right
like hey I this is a global issue too by
the way do we want them to concentrate
power in this area because it's a very
expensive thing so a lot of these
companies even if there's a lot of
startups like open AI Microsoft's
backing open AI Amazon's backing
anthropic it's the same characters
running the same show on a really
important new technology so do we really
want them to own the Future do We maybe
we do but maybe we should talk about it
as a society and by the way I what I go
back to is guess who invented the
Internet alore a little bit but we did
guess who paid for it we did why are
they getting all the benefits and we're
getting all the costs that's all I want
to say is guess who gave Elon Musk a
loan that saved Tesla we did mhm we gave
him money maybe he's helping us great
great Innovation Innovation so happy for
it but you should have some respect for
the body politic at some level and so I
would really like our government
officials who are elected as flawed as
they are they're elected right so let's
demand that they pass laws that at least
not hinder Innovation that's their
argument because I don't believe I don't
love regulation either but there none I
like more than zero I like more than
zero and so I would like to see a
privacy bill I would like and believe me
at this point I don't know if it'll work
we are selling ourselves out to them for
a dating service and I don't think we
should MH in the meantime because you're
a parent of four children I'm going to
end on a personal note what do you do
with your like what do you tell your
kids you you're on your phone all the
time I would just to be honest I I've
seen you you're you like live with your
phone so so it's I love my phone yeah I
love technology this is one thing I
don't think you'll find this an
anti-technology book I love Tech
technology I love it I believe there
could be real solutions around cancer
climate change Tech longevity wow all
the good things we could do I'm the Star
Trek person like we could use technology
for greatness or we could use it for bad
things right which is mostly what it's
been used for you know I think a lot
about the future for them and what it
could be used to help Humanity survive
even going to Mars I mean he's right we
need we need to be a multiplanetary
speeches is Elon Musk we need same thing
with is they're correct we need to be a
multiplanetary species or at least have
the possibilities given climate change
is so drastic so I embrace that I
embrace that and for my kids I want them
to think for themselves and understand
that they can be manipulated by this
stuff they're quite Savvy I don't I'm
not as worried about my kids as you know
they don't do dance videos and all that
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] interesting because I think most
parents listening to the bulk of this
conversation they they'll come away
thinking oh the kids are being
manipulated this is a bad World get off
your phone being manipulated by the way
adults adults are worse on this stuff
than you know they go crazy on Twitter
you know you yell at you yeah it's such
a Canard to think young people don't
care about great information they do
it's just we have to start thinking as
media of where they're getting it and
that's a very simple move but that was
remember what a big argument that was
put it on YouTube or not right right it
got sorted out and that's where they are
so why don't we go to where they are and
stop arguing about how they're getting
it if we put good quality stuff they're
open into good quality stuff I believe
that at my heart of hearts I really do
that's the most hopeful thing you've
said in this conversation I said it at
the end I said it at the end of the book
too I talk about human creativity cannot
be replaced yeah everything else can
right everything else can everything can
be digitized but the human creativity
they cannot do it can they will not do
it and that's where we win right that's
ultimately and that is the plot of
Terminator so there you have it okay
excellent we'll stop there Cara thank
you so much for coming on thank you it's
a delight to talk to
[Music]
you this episode of radio Atlantic was
produced by Kevin Townsen it was edited
by claudina bade fact checked by
Stephanie Hayes and Sam Fentress and
engineered by Rob smak claudina bade is
the executive producer of Atlantic audio
and Andrea Valdez is our managing editor
I'm Huna Rosen thank you for
listening
[Music]
