hey everybody I want to talk to you
briefly about the truth about system D
so for those who are Linux newbies
system D is an it system for Linux and
it also controls a lot of different
demons on your device like the network
manager SSH through a program that you
can access them called systemctl and
there are other things that it controls
as well or that it does for your system
and the reason why that's strange if you
don't know if you're not familiar with
the system D debate is because Linux is
effectively a lot of good news software
and the Linux kernel itself became after
Unix and they kept the things about UNIX
that they liked and then disposed of the
things they didn't like in UNIX the
philosophy was always do one thing and
do one thing well now what does this
mean it means if you have a networking
daemon running on your machine and an
SSH daemon running on your machine the
code for that networking daemon should
just be a networking daemon that's all
it should do the reason for this is
because it makes things more modular if
for some reason the the author of that
demon decides to stop developing the
project you can easily replace it you
replace one thing on your device on your
device it's easier to troubleshoot if
you know where the issue is etc it just
basically makes things the fact that
makes things more modular and easier to
troubleshoot should be enough so anyway
systemd like I mentioned earlier
controls these a lot of processes on
your system and people dislike that
because it's not following the UNIX
philosophy which means if something goes
wrong with system D the author does
something that people don't like the
author decides to make it non free
you don't you don't just replace your
your init system with like run it or
some other alternative you have to
replace a lot of things you have to
basically find an entirely new operating
system one that probably doesn't already
you know basically just use one of the
other options and then relearn
everything so that's kind of the the
legitimate reason because there are
there are that I think it's a good
reason to dislike system D but what
you'll hear in the system D debate is at
least what I've heard I should say
because there are people who are very
passionate about this who are way more
educated than I am but what I hear in
the debate is a lot of illegitimate
reasons to not use system D like they
don't like the author
I completely concede it's your choice
and your right to not use software from
people you don't like when it comes to
floss I don't particularly care about
the politics or the personality of the
person who authored the code but it's
not a concern of mine with paid software
of course it's different because you're
you're I mean you're not supporting a
movement of any kind really depending on
what the software is most likely you're
not supporting moving around but you are
giving money to someone so for example I
hear it all the time where I live in a
kind of liberal area I see people all
the time who rant about the ethics of
Steve Jobs while they have iPhones and
to me it's it doesn't make any sense but
whatever when it comes to floss though
this is much less of an issue because
not only can you take over the project
and fork it and make it into something
of your own but you don't have to show
support for anything other than floss
you can just show support for the the
philosophy behind floss and not really
show like I don't think using Emacs is
showing support for Richard Stallman
anyway sorry a little bit of a recursive
rant
was I even saying come on man oh yeah
okay so they're legitimate reasons to
like systemd legitimate reasons to
dislike it well one legitimate reason to
dislike it which is the breaking of the
eunuch philosophy but if you're a newbie
this is the whole reason I want to make
this video and I'm gonna call it the
truth of systemd if you're a newbie and
you're coming to Linux the truth is you
will likely be using system D all of the
not all most of the things that are
targeted to new users use system D this
is a bun to Debian elementary pop by the
way okay I tell you okay so I'm me you
guys do you guys know me by now I much
you know wake up and then Linux is my
life and then when I go to bed the first
thing I do last thing I do before I go
to bed is usually I'm on a Linux machine
doing some kind of development so I know
quite a bit about Linux but I don't I
don't plug into the news a lot
surrounding Linux unless it's like
really big but the other day
I was helping someone troubleshoot
something at the University I work out
and I said okay what distribution are
you running and he goes pop OS and he
literally said this literally I'm not
kidding this is what he literally said
I'm using literally correctly here this
is what he said
pop os you've probably never heard of it
can you believe that
I was shocked I was taken aback and I
was like yeah I've heard of it it's not
like a hidden operating system what are
you talking about look he's you just
like did you say it in front of your
grandma and your grandma went what and
you thought oh wow it's no one knows pop
Louis that was weird anyway now if
you're using pop OS or a blunt - or
debian or elementary you're gonna have
systemd on your on your machine and so
when you're a newbie you will think that
systemctl this is what happened to me it
happens to everyone who doesn't look it
up initially you will think systemctl is
software on your machine for managing
and organizing demons but systemctl is
actually a feature of system D and other
features of system deep but that's the
biggest one because when you look up
like for example why isn't I'm using
Debian and for some reason
SSH isn't working okay well first you
have to install the OpenSSH server and
then you have to do sudo systemctl
enable SSH D or SSH and then you're good
to go
it should always be started on your
system whenever you turn it on
and so you might think oh there you go
it's a demon manager or whenever you use
suitum sudo systemctl restart network
tag manager you know you might think
that's a again the thing that manages
demons on your device but to people in
the know people who know it's a boot
loader or I'm sorry no it's an init
system they you know and they think it's
doing too much you'll go online you'll
look up this system D debate and you'll
hear people say no you should be using
run it no you should be using cysts v
you know you should you should not be
using system D for all of the reasons
that all of the one reason I've just
mentioned here all these none of the
other reasons really matter to me I've
never noticed as far as new users go I
have never met anyone anyone who has
changed from system D or a system D
default distribution to a non system D
default distribution and noticed any
difference whatsoever for example before
I knew what a NIT system was I installed
parabola OS not because I knew I didn't
even know it was arch I just wanted to
arch based rather I just wanted to
install something that I thought looked
cool and I think their advertisement
their big advertisement is we
exclusively use floss no matter what
like our none of our repositories will
ever have anything non free and they
fully follow UNIX philosophy but at the
time I didn't know what that was so I
installed parabola did not notice any
performance issue and that's typically
what new users care about you know they
care about I want to turn it on I want
to get it working I want to customize it
and I want it to work quickly you know I
want it to work in a way that I find
usable which is fair and then as you
learn more you explore more you test
more you do more risky things let's say
riskier things even but when you first
get started none of that is gonna be a
concern so the truth about system D is
that if if you are the kind of person
who you look things up you Google things
you want to read about what you're gonna
get yourself into before you get started
and you're reading a lot about Linux
you're reading all these forum posts
you're watching these YouTube videos
what will happen what does happen
sometimes with with new Linux users is
you'll come across an article or a forum
post or something about system D and
you'll go oh I got a factor this into my
decision you know I've really got to
think about this because I don't want to
use a trash boot loader that's an it
you're an it system is PID one you keep
on calling it a boot loader what's the
one side about you know your your
banette system is PID one that's like
the most important thing ever and the
truth about system D is that well the
truth about init systems is that that is
not something you should be worried
about at all and this is just my my
personal opinion but I don't think it's
something that new Linux users should be
concerned about when I say new I mean
like if you aren't familiar with what
parts of the operating system or Linux
and which parts are new software and
which parts are neither
I think being concerned with your init
system is a it's too far it's it's way
too far ahead of where you you should be
focused on and that's not because like
you know it's not important
necessarily to know what on your system
is Ganu / linux / anything else that's
not necessarily important but you'll be
interfacing with that stuff way more
than the the init system even if you are
running system D you know it's just way
more likely that you'll be running
you'll be
working with non and it's system
software but I'm get distracted sorry so
that's the the truth of system D the
decision isn't important and system D is
just fine there's nothing wrong with it
I I still get confused
well I still hear people who they talk
about system D in such a vitriolic way
and they're clearly deeply deeply
affected by the fact that this this
violates the UNIX philosophy which again
is a legitimate concern I just don't
think it's something to be concerned
about at the moment again it's all flaw
system D is all floss and if it becomes
something else or something does happen
I can't even think of a good example of
what would happen but if something did
you you could just switch over to a run
at system or a system you know you
could just switch over to parabola or
you could switch over to Slackware or
something but anyway so that's kind of
just what I wanted to get across I think
I've every time I see a system D debate
online I'm just like oh no not again
like who is this for you know who is
this for is it for init system hackers
like people who work on init systems or
what because it's definitely not for
gnu/linux users just not for hobbyists
it's not for people who are interested
in well I should say I find the
conversation interesting I promise I'll
wrap up I'm gonna keep on going
I find the conversation interesting
because I find technology interesting
but I don't like the vitriol I don't
like the ferocity with which people
fight against and/or defend system D
especially because in the end game
overall
it's not a very important decision to an
end user in my opinion again I'm sure a
lot of people disagree with that but I
don't think it's a very important
decision to an end user and I'll even
say this because it's such a non
important decision there's no problem
with you never using system D if you
decide yeah I look at breaks UNIX
philosophy I don't I don't care about it
I'm only gonna use run it then fine like
that's that's completely that's okay
it's not that important is my whole
point
but if you are gonna use systemd or if
you're not gonna use systemd rather you
should be made aware that if you're a
newbie most of the tutorials you find
will be targeted towards system D
systems so people will say okay well to
troubleshoot your network issue try
restarting your network using systemctl
if you're using run it systemctl will
not be on your machine which means you
have to find the different way to do
that which is usually something like
going to /x c /n it d forward slash some
other whatever the name of the demon is
and then restarting it manually
you're just depending on what system
you're running if it will change but
anyway so that's pretty much it I've
gone on for long enough don't be
concerned with people who ate on system
D don't be concerned with people who
rave about system D it's a bootloader
it's an init system rather and I don't
think it's something that most Linux
users should be concerned with or
actually are concerned with I think it's
just kind of fun to have an opinion on
something that's that's so inflammatory
that's it Thanks
