so the question is what is physiology so
basically have you ever wondered what
makes your heart rate go up when you get
frightened you tell that what makes your
stomach growl when you become hungry so
the Oxford Dictionary which defines
physiology is the science of the
functions of living organism and their
parts that's what we look to do so when
we study physiology what we want to do
is try to study one particular aspect of
physiology while keeping everything else
controlled so therefore we can see what
that one thing does I'll tell you a
little bit how that is really a problem
in terms of studying physiology
basically this is the simple thing in
terms of physiology you have some factor
which causes a response it's hot outside
you sweat we try to understand that
mechanism sometimes there are multiple
factors that cause the same may cause
the same response so what we end up
doing is trying to control factor one
and two and look to see what factor
three does and do the whole all the
potential perturbations to see what
happens okay but this is actually really
physiology in a very small concept what
happens is we have multiple factors that
all interact with each other and then
they end up causing a response and their
response will actually end up causing a
feedback going back to the initial input
so it's a little bit of a challenge to
try to understand this to try to control
one when you have all these interactions
integrative physiology so I am
classified as an integrative
physiologist I try to understand how
everything works together so it
integrates many mechanisms and
regulatory functions from molecules all
the way up to whole organs to the whole
body so we recognize the importance of
complete considering complexity and
variability and that will be important
at the end in terms of translate what we
do in the lab out in
to the real world so a little bit of a
history of what I want to talk about in
1968 there was a graduate student in the
department of physiology named Tom
Coleman that is not his 1968 picture
that is a more recent one
Tom had a master's in electrical
engineering and he was trying to
understand the mechanisms that caused
hypertension high blood pressure he was
working with dr. Arthur Guyton who was
the chairman of the department at the
particular time and they tried to take a
little bit of a different tact in terms
of how to try to understand what's going
on because the human body is very
complex so they developed a mathematical
model of the human body and that is
actually shown here and this was
actually in 1972 published paper and it
actually had 450 variables in it
so the important thing about this was it
actually demonstrated the role of the
kidney and controlling blood pressure
which has been a major role for it for a
lot of the research at the Medical
Center over the last 50 years Tom
continued working over this over the
next since 1968
I took the project over a couple of
years ago and this is the current
version so we've gone from 450 variables
up to own little over 10,000 variables
and parameters this just shows all the
interactions that we have you look on
the right-hand side we actually have 14
organ systems we have cardiovascular
renal respiratory nervous system
metabolism we can do sex differences we
can do drugs legal drugs but we can do
drugs and we can do different types of
pathologies such as again hypertension
diabetes obesity obesity heart failure
and look at some of the responses that
take place with that so what do we use
this model for the model is called humid
you can actually download it if you wish
at humid org this is actually the
demonstration of the model so we're
going to bleed a person we're not going
to kill them yet but we're going to
bleed them so basically this is what it
looks like and if you look on the left
hand side these are all the parts
and there are multiple menus in within
each of these so what we're going to do
is we have our control system here
looking at blood pressure we're going to
do a control for ten minutes and now
we're going to go up to hemorrhage which
is the tab all the way at the top it's
bleeding at 100 mils a minute of
milliliters a minute and we turn it on
we'll go back to chart and we'll go for
15 minutes and what you see during this
period of time is that there's a falling
blood pressure there's a reflux increase
in heart rate which is what you would
expect we went for another five minutes
and you can see that it's actually blood
pressures tends to fall a little bit so
let's not go look at some of the
underlying things that take place first
tab is actually blood volume which shows
you that you're actually losing this
blood blood volume over a period of time
the second tab looks at nervous system
which is the sympathetic nerves which
actually work to constrict the blood
vessels in your body to try to maintain
your blood pressure you can see is the
nervous activity is going up so
hopefully we can increase our blood
pressure the third one is actually
what's called norepinephrine which is
also released from your nerve endings
and your from your adrenal and the whole
purpose again is to contribute constrict
your blood vessels so one of the
consequences of constricting your blood
vessels is that you limit flow to
particular organs you essentially make
it less flow go there so what you see is
if you go look at what's happening with
with the gut under splanchnic
circulation you can see his flow is
going down two things you have to
protect the heart and the brain with
hemorrhage those are the two things we
can actually go up to the top and last
look at what happens with the kidney and
that's actually going down also so this
is what we this is what the model looks
like in terms of using it from day to
day so what do we use it for we actually
use it for education the challenge with
that particular thing I showed you it is
extremely complicated students get lost
they don't know where to go look so what
we've done is we've actually created a
site called just physiology and we'll
give you a little bit of a demonstration
with that we actually have a patient
called mrs. pale she gets dizzy when she
stands up I have the weird names I put
in for that
so we can actually we limit what
students can see we'll go ahead and do a
simulation for ten minutes and this is
all running on Amazon server so students
can do it whenever they want to and what
you'll see is we give a normal blood
pressure and everything looks pretty
fine over just the next couple of
minutes while the simulation goes across
at ten minutes what we will do is we
will turn it to where she's standing up
and this is a very simple thing again go
for ten minutes and what you'll end up
seeing is her blood pressure Falls
dramatically she gets a reflex increase
in our heart rate but you can see it's
going down very low and so therefore she
has a problem clinical problem there are
some options over on the right we're not
going to go into today which we could
treat her to try to prevent her
orthostatic hypotension we actually use
this with medical students to hopefully
understand what disease states what
appropriate treatments are and if there
are problems for them to learn it in
this particular case then not with their
real patients the second thing we use it
for his research and this is I'm gonna
give you a little bit of a study that
was done by a colleague of mine he was
working on a device that was very
similar to a pacemaker and it actually
worked like this the pacemaker ended up
working through some factor would
stimulate the nerves and you would
actually end up with a decrease in blood
pressure turns out it worked extremely
well the this was the basic physiology
design idea behind it was that the
nerves were involved so what he did was
he actually surgically removed the
nerves that went to the kidney which was
very important even move that and what
he got was this is exactly the same fall
in blood pressure so he was sort of in a
conundrum he said okay this is the way I
think it works I removed that factor it
didn't work so the next slide actually
shows you that's his experimental design
and everything in red was when he turned
the pacemaker on and you see the blood
pressure fell for this couple week
period and as soon as you turn it off it
comes back up to normal so we started
thinking about this is that well let's
use human and run the simulation and see
what
weapons so when you run the simulation
we got exactly almost the same response
this was actually when we blocked the
nerves
so therefore what ended up happening was
we went through and dug through the
model and dig a little bit of
exploration to figure out what was going
on and what we found out was there was a
hormone that nobody had really thought
about we knew it went up we knew it
changed but how what his importance was
suddenly came to the forefront and this
goes back to the point is that we have
very redundant systems inside our body
if we didn't something one thing goes
wrong we wouldn't live very long so
there are lots of these systems they
didn't write together so that's one of
the values that we have in terms of
using this particular model of human
physiology to try to understand these
redundancies so the last thing is we're
working on and this is probably more
exciting than probably anything I've
done in my last 30-something years of
being a faculty member so we're looking
at using the model for what's called in
silico clinical trials so if you think
about this there are a lot of clinical
trials that are going on whether it's
for a device to treat something or
whether it's for a drug to also treat
something but looking out at this
audience we are not alike we all have
different makeup whether it's our
genetic whether it's our diet whether
it's our lifestyle it really is a big
challenge to try to figure out how each
of us would respond to the same
treatment and in fact if we gave all of
you a very simple treatment such as
maybe a diuretic we were half people
that would respond with a big response
some people that would respond with a
very small response or not at all
so how do we go about looking at that so
what we have done is develop the ability
within human to create virtual
populations virtual patients if with the
sufficient computing power we could do
50,000 we could do a hundred thousand we
could do a million patients that are all
different from each other and so what
happens is we want to use the
in terms of helping with clinical trials
to understand those patients that would
respond to a treatment whether it's a
device or a drug and more importantly
those people that do not respond because
if you have somebody that doesn't
respond it's not a value to treat them
with that particular device and
especially if you're trying to do the
clinical trial it's better if you don't
have them or know who those people are
so therefore you don't include them in
your trial
so we've tested this a little bit we've
actually had some work with that we've
got interest from the Food and Drug
Administration and a particularly a
medical device company so we did a very
simple clinical trial we generated 2,000
patients with site with hypertension and
we use this treatment that is actually
in development we simulated a treatment
which is essentially a something that
removes the nurse from your kidney and
what you see here is the percentage of
patients is on the y-axis and the
pressure drop so you can see anything to
the right of the vertical line is good
their blood pressure dropped these were
patients that no medication would drop
their blood pressure you got big drops
in blood pressure the problem is what's
over on the left of the line that number
so you actually have patients and this
is actually happens in the real clinical
trials whose blood pressure goes up so
here's a device that you don't know
who's going to respond and in some
patients you actually get an adverse
effect so this is where we're going now
in terms of using our computer
simulation to help with like in silico
clinical trials so what I've hopefully
presented you what is the most complete
computer simulation of human physiology
a little bit about what we use it for
the clinical trials at the end I'm very
lucky for to be following up on the
vision of dr. Coleman and dr. Guyton
that started 50 years ago looking at
doing this and I also have some very
good colleagues dr. john hall dr. tom
lamar dr. Drew Pruett dr. John clemmer
that helped with this project thank you
for your attention
[Applause]
