[Music]
a modern Jet Plane the epitome of speed
and power some people think today's
sophisticated computers are also the
epitome of speed and power but today's
personal computer may be more like a DC
C3 compared to a new kind of machine
called A reduced instruction set
computer what is that we'll find out
today on this edition of the computer
Chronicles
[Music]
the computer Chronicles is made possible
by Leading Edge makers of IBM compatible
computer systems including Lotus
lookalike spreadsheet word processing
with spelling correction communication
software and Haze compatible 1200 bod
modem Leading Edge with over 1,000
service centers
Nationwide additional funding is
provided by McGraw Hill Publishers of
bite bites detailed technical articles
on new hardware software Ware and
languages cover developments in computer
technology
[Music]
worldwide welcome to the computer
Chronicles I'm steuart chaet and this is
Gary kildall Gary and I are playing this
game of Risk here R and as you know Gary
there's a very risky game out there
called risk risc standing for reduced
instruction set Computing some major
players in that game IBM and ulet
Packard for example some people are
saying Risk Technology is the wave of
the future sure other people are saying
risk is already a p technology what does
this expert think well Stuart the
current IBM PC line the PC the XT the at
and so forth they're based upon a
processor called the 886 the 886 is
really the uh Next Generation following
the 8-Bit processors a forun was called
the 880 and so we've got right now is a
we try to expand into a larger memory
space go from a 640k restriction to
let's say 8 megabytes and things like
that there it's really very very
difficult to do that it's kind of a
messy architecture so risk gives us is a
starting point we can say okay here's a
simpler instruction set faster less code
space makes it easier for a compiler
writer write to write compilers and for
a software writer we can stay with high
level languages and really really don't
care well we're going to take a look at
IBM's risk machine today the rtpc we'll
meet the man who coined the term risk
and we'll talk to some other risk
experts both pro and con as I mentioned
ulet Packard is one of the major players
in Risk right now and we're going to
start out by going out to hp's risk
lab in the search for faster and more
powerful computers improved Hardware is
often taken center stage while changes
in architecture trailed behind the new
architectural design used in risk or
reduced instruction set computers uses
simpler instructions requiring fewer
machine
Cycles in the early 1970s IBM examined
the kinds of operations most commonly
carried out by a complex instruction set
machine and found that only about 20% of
the simplest instructions represented
about 80% of the processing time risk
architecture relies on these simple
computational elements to execute most
of its operations in a single cycle
while risk is made few inroads in the
Market at least one major company hulet
Packard demonstrated its confidence in
Risk by introducing a whole line of
risk-based machines as the next
generation of its high-end computers
all computations except load and store
take place in the data path inline sub
routines can be called up for complex
functions and assist processors operate
when required for floating Point
arithmetic and
Graphics the special nature of risk
design makes it well suited to
engineering and scientific applications
where instructions of four bytes or less
can be executed in one
cycle but while such application s
demonstrate the advantages of risk some
critics contend that the speed gained by
reduced instructions could be wiped out
by the longer data paths and by the need
to accommodate complex
[Music]
functions Johnny us now in the studio is
Dr Joel bebal vice president and general
manager for the information Technology
Group at ulet Packard and next to Joel
is Dr David Patterson professor of
computer science at UC Berkeley Gary
David just for background uh what where
did the risk come from what's the the
origin and what really makes it
different from a traditional kind of
machine architecture well the idea of uh
is going to toward Simplicity of going
back to kind of a small as beautiful
philosophy uh there's lots of Origins to
it one of the main ones is was done in
BM during the middle 70s and some
research groups out here in
California the philosophy is by trying
to make simpler computers to make them
faster and more cost effective now if we
compare let's say a a traditional what
we call a traditional machine like a a
286 uh IBM PCAT how does a risk machine
compare in terms of
speed um the belief is by those re
researchers in the field is that using
the same resources you can get something
like a factor of two to four Improvement
in cost performance compared to the
traditional designs so given the same
transistors as Intel uses on the 286
finding the at we should be able to
build another machine twice as fast or
four times as fast Joel I had heard a
number which makes it perhaps easy for
some people to understand about this 80%
and 20% business which somebody
discovered maybe it was you back at IBM
in the 70s or so could you explain that
well I think the notion is that
computers spend most of their time uh
80% of their time is symbolic number
uh doing a few simple things and don't
do the complex things very often and so
the notion is that if you optimize the
machine to do the simplest things as
well as possible and to do the complex
things as infrequently as possible then
you might come out with a machine which
for certain types of jobs would be more
effective than those which pay the
penalty of complexity across all of the
things that it does each of the times
that it does them Joel if if you're talk
about risk is that a philosophy the way
you design a machine architecture or is
it a specific set of instructions no it
certainly is a philosophy or a style and
in fact it's a style which differs
depending on what you're trying to do so
the main idea is not to add any
complexity to the machine uh unless it
pays for itself by how frequently you
would use it and so for example a
machine which was being used in a very
heavily scientific way where floating
Point instructions were important might
make a different set of trade-offs than
another machine where that wasn't
important similarly one in which
compatibility with other machines was
important or in which certain types of
networking was important would include
different features but in each case they
ought to be done as the result of
measurements of relative frequency of
use and the penalty that you would pay
for the inclusion or non-inclusion of a
particular feature so where do you see
risk architecture being important to say
in Computing right now is it we're going
to see it move into the scientific area
is it going to be a replacement for the
current desktop computers I don't think
you're going to like my answer because I
don't think there is such a thing as
risk architecture I think what there is
is good engineering design of a machine
called a computer and in my view all
such machines ought to be designed by
analyzing exactly what they do and what
the objectives of the person building
the machine are and then building that
analysis into the specific design it's
turned out that a smaller number of
instructions those which are most
frequently used can in fact address a
very wide range of applications and
types of applications sizes and types
and so that's come to be called the
reduced instruction set machines because
in fact they do wind up being a smaller
number of hardwired instructions but to
make a successful product includes many
many other things at HP for example we'
spent probably two-thirds of our time on
portions of our new computer family that
have nothing to do with the instruction
set itself now if we introduce a new
machine into society it's there's a
problem obviously of trying to get
applications onto that machine what's
the strategy in terms of uh let's say
heeled Packer is how how are you going
to get people to move into a new
architecture like that well in our case
um we're trying to get our customers and
for Lucky maybe a few of other people's
customers to move on to the new machines
from at least three previous families
each with their own instruction sets
compiler families and so forth so we've
had to provide smooth migration paths
for previous customers when the people
have programmed in a high level language
we can often accommodate that simply by
recompiling which gets us most of the
features but not all of the Native mode
architecture when people don't have that
capability we run in a compatibility
mode and we have a wide range of tools
and accelerators sometimes in hardware
and sometimes in software which
essentially take the old instructions
and transliterate them or translate them
into the new ones and that could be done
in a variety of ways David you helped
create this notion of risk how do you
think the evolution has come I mean you
hear Joel saying well it's not really
such a simple thing as just a risk
machine well I think what's been
interesting is how viable the philosophy
has been in many different fields the
original work that was done ignored
what's called symbolic Computing for
artificial intelligence and the folding
point computations the experiments that
several groups have done since then have
shown that risk flossophy of an
experimental based design works
extremely well uh for symbolic
processing for languages like common
list and for the floating Point
computations uh number crunching
applications so I think it's it's
surprisingly viable approach okay
gentlemen thank you now we've been
talking about a risk machine in just a
minute we'll take a look at one the IBM
rtpc in just a minute so stay with
[Music]
us Johnny us now in the studio is Dr W
Frank King general manager for advanced
Engineering Systems at IBM and next to
Frank is you Martin vice president of
development at Ridge computers Gary you
uh the risk concept is really apparently
the central processing unit instruction
set corre philosophy now what about
related Concepts like uh parallelism um
IO Concepts things fast IO processing
have you worked at on those things at
all sure uh at Ridge what we've done as
we've concentrated first on the central
processor but the entire machine has to
be designed to be efficient and so we
spent a lot of time initially on the io
processor section to make sure that the
performance of the io matches the
central processing unit and now that
we've got this simplified processor
we're examining parallel architectures
which can take advantage in the same way
of this simplified architecture now uh
VX computers the 11 780s and 750s and so
forth are used a lot because they're
good IO processors do you think that the
risk architecture with say fast IO is
going to be a competitor for VA well I
think that uh whether or not you have a
risk computer you need a fast IO system
uh we when we designed our first machine
made sure that we had an extremely fast
IO system to go along with this fast
computer and so as we move into
marketplaces where there are lots of
users and diss connected to the machine
we find that we do just as well as a vax
okay good Frank this is a real example
of a a risk machine it's the RT um this
apparently uh you can give a pretty good
comparison on the speed of this because
isn't there a co-process that runs in
this machine that will run the standard
286 applications there is Gary this
machine runs 1.6 to 2.1 million
instructions per second and it has in it
a co-processor board with a 286 on it
that runs about a third of that speed
mhm Frank what what Market is this
machine aimed at you've got this out on
the market now for some period of months
now who's buying the risk machine uh we
uh packaged a tabletop version of the
machine primarily for those people that
need speed and capacity above what the
IBM personal computer and the personal
computer type uh systems can support so
it's really for people who need more
speed and more capacity who are they uh
Engineers is an easy example Architects
doing building design people in the
insurance industry that that are uh
examining actual aial tables those kinds
of you see business applications in
addition to science engineering high
function business applications now Frank
just for a reference point what is the
cost of this machine this machine as it
sits here on the table is about $10,000
mhm and that comes with how much memory
this has up to 4 megabytes of memory in
it and a big 70 megab file in it okay
Frank you mentioned design and Gary I'm
going to put you on the spot now I want
to see how easy it is to use this rtpc
here you're you're going to be our
operator and you're going to help show
off Frank's machine now what can you
show us on this Gary well I'm a expert
now I've had the total of 10 or 15
seconds for an instruction I'm going to
go in here and get a technical uh
illustration and so I select that and
click on it opens a window up and uh
here's a document of some sort with a
with a vector drawing I believe yes and
I'm going to do is is go and select this
and if I point at this little segment
properly um got to get a hold of there
it goes it starts flashing and now I can
get a little menu down here and I'm
going to take this thing and rotate it
and as I move the mouse around you can
see that the object itself is moving and
then I can just leave it in that
position okay that real time rotation I
take it as an example of something
that's requiring a lot of fast
processing to handle that that's right
or I can pick up a piece right here for
example so get of it and my hand eye
coordination isn't that
good okay well there it goes again okay
now what I'm going to do at this point
is I'm going to take the thing and move
it around we're going to take it and
slide it down to this portion of the of
the screen so you can see the action
there is pretty nice and then just leave
it Frank one of the concerns I've heard
about the risk machines is the problem
of adapting software and and so on where
where do you stand on that do you have
to write new software just for this not
really most of the software that runs on
this this machine is written in a high
Lev language and so the compilers have
to be there to support it and you do
have to have compilers that that know
how to work with risk architecture but
the compiler really masks moving this
the current software to this kind of
machine this is basically a Unix
operating yes this is basically a Unix
operating environment supports C and
Fortran and those kinds of standard
languages what's your strategy for
moving applications over we talked about
yield fa about that what's your well
first of all we we Define a set of of of
compilers that and those are the normal
compilers and then the the price
performance of the machine has to
justify people wanting to spend the
money to move their software to it mhm
you you have uh you have a small company
Rich computers and I think you've sold
four or 500 of these risk machines who
are you selling them to and how are you
carving out a niche among the HPS and
the ibms well our Niche is primarily
price performance in a technical
Marketplace a primary example of a
customer um you may be familiar with if
you've seen the Super Bowl or the
Olympics all the animation that precedes
those programs were done by a local
company Pacific data images they have 12
ridges doing nothing but cranking frame
after once again the heavy duty Graphics
requiring the speed and the power that
risk can give them
y Frank uh where do you see going next
we we hear rumors of an enhanced rtpc
coming out and some changes in it what's
is that true well certainly IBM never
talks about it Futures so I have to
start out by talk saying we're not going
to talk about our futures but what we
see going on in this industry and the
desktop uh microcomputer industry is
really a doubling of speed and capacity
about every 12 to 14 months so clearly
if we're going to participate in this
Marketplace and we intend to that kind
of improvement over time has to be
sustained now we're seeing some pretty
uh substantial improvements in speed on
the 286 and 386 side isn't that pretty
competitive with the with the risk AR
let's say at 24 MHz 386 isn't that
pretty close to the speed of this
machine the 386 that are available today
of course are 16 MHz but as the as the
Intel architecture becomes faster uh in
order for this kind of a machine to
justify the price and the price
performance it's going to have to stay
faster and that is attention mhm
gentlemen thank you very much now we've
seen a risk computer we've been talking
about applications let's find out about
how One customer is actually using a
risk machine Wendy Woods went to ESL in
Sunnyvale California to find
out ESL in Sunnyvale California is
designing the world's fastest systolic
processor a chip that could be used in
such diverse technology as sophisticated
listening devices or in image processing
of pictures from outer space the task
requires tremendous computing power for
which Engineers depend on a risk-based
Pyramid Technologies mini computer it
enables us to have a machine that runs
much faster and that that's very
important to us because our programs
take so long uh we also have a number of
users on these machines uh so and it
it's very efficient in handling that and
the particular kind of instruction mix
that we get from from our integrated
circuit design which is fix Point
instruction or integer instructions as
opposed to floating Point numbers that
have
exponents uh those run particularly fast
on this risk architecture the integrated
circuit that ESL is designing has 62,000
transistors and the risk computer is
employed to perform a thorough
simulation and verification of that
design before it is committed to Silicon
to make sure that it actually works
you'd think that after 2 years people
here would be sold on risk Tech
technology but not so parallel
processing they say offers similar
advantages but the bottom line is that
these kinds of projects never have
enough processing power and Engineers
are not ready to marry any one
technology in their attempts to get a
job done for the computer Chronicles I'm
Wendy Woods
[Music]
with us now in the studio is Jan Lewis
president of the Palo ala research group
and next to Jan is George Maro whom we
all know as our commentator here on
computer chronicals and George is also
currently vice president for engineering
at intelligent access Gary Jan the
computer Community has been pretty
reluctant to accept new architectures in
the past is this going to be a problem
with the risk architecture I think this
will be a problem for a couple of
reasons first is the concept of
accepting a new architecture but the
other thing is that uh there's a lot
about risk that I'm very skeptical about
and in fact the commercial applications
have yet to actually prove that uh risk
is going to give us True Performance
increases the machines that are out
there both the HP that's shipping in
small quantities and the RT really are
watered down versions of risk they're
not true risk machines although they do
use some of the risk principles and some
of the performance improvements that we
see May in fact not be because of risk
but because of other factors such as on
chip registers being a lot more in
quantity M George what you think about
Risk
Technology well looking at it from a
point of view of silicon the Richer
register sets and the simplified
instruction sets favor the use of
silicon so that's a positive thing on on
the negative side we just seem to be
keep making new instruction
sets and that's like inventing a new
type face every time you want to say
something again so it's a real Balancing
Act yeah what I'd really like to see
happen is for some of these guys to
figure out how to make a computer that
would run anybody's binary without
recompiling or translations of any of
this stuff that's what I'd really like
Jan you said the machines on the market
are watered down and they don't really
reflect the the the theory what's the
problem what's the technology problem
that prohibits that well there's a few
things first of all the the concept is
that you have very few number of
instructions I say 50 or less jurge says
eight or less um but you have few number
of instructions each one using basically
very few clock Cycles one theoretically
and that you get maximum performance as
a result but in fact the machines that
are out there do need extensions they do
need other things and in fact the RT for
instance actually averages about uh one
instruction per 2.7 Cycles as opposed to
the theoretical one so they're not
purely risk we've sort of evolved from
risk in the pure sense to risk like
architectures
to architectures using risk principles
to Simply simplifi instruction sets with
on sh registers what are the first uh
applications going to be for risk
architecture where are we going to see
it is it going to be in the scientific
pad cam Community or I think it will be
largely in the scientific Community um
for one thing it doesn't require quite
the same amount of IO which still is a
problem and the other thing is in terms
of accepting new architectures I think
if there's one community that is less
standards conscious as probably is the
engineering and scientific Community
George Jen you're both saying there are
quite a few problems here with risk we
hear we've heard the phrase that ulet
Packard is gambling its whole computer
division on Risk Technology uh I mean is
that I don't think that's quite Fair
because I think part of it is an part of
what HP has done and is an investment to
transport customers from their standard
environments over into something that's
perhaps a little bit more flexible so I
don't think they're gambling the whole
company on it what Jan says is right uh
but on the positive side uh compiler
writers with lots and lots of registers
compiler writers are going to be able to
write better compilers and maybe we'll
finally get to the point where we've
truly got portable high level languages
with with this kind of background that's
probably the biggest hope of course the
scientific Community will jump on them
quicker it does rotate images faster
that sort of thing what about the
competition from uh the new processors
from Motorola 60
68020 U the new 386 uh they're talking
about 24 MHz now is that going to knock
knock uh I was on a forum called the
32-bit shootout where Motorola
introduced the 68030 and those are very
very high performance machines so it's
possible the traditional approach will
continue to get better but eventually
we're going to get down to the point
where silicon's important and and there
risk machines win on Silicon better than
the complex instruction set George Jen
Gary we're out of time thank you very
much and we'll be back in just a minute
with this week's computer news
[Music]
in the random access file this week both
IBM and ulet Packard have just made
announcements affecting their risk
machines HP says software problems will
cause a delay in the plan shipment of
its Spectrum minicomputer delivery is
now expected in mid 1987 and IBM has
announced upgrades and improvements in
its desktop risk computer the rtpc the
new RT model 15 will feature improved
networking capability memory and storage
IBM also said it's cutting the price on
the
rtpc IBM is also beefing up its
Salesforce announcing the transfer of
more than 2,000 employees into sales
with the goal of increasing its overall
Salesforce by 5,000 people Apple has
announced a deal with Northern Telecom
that will enable the Macintosh to
network over regular phone lines the new
hardware and software speed up Mac
Communications by a factor of 18 Lotus
is showing off its new Hal program for
123 users at this week's info 86 show in
New York Hal is an AI based add-on that
simplifies interaction with lotus 123
and Lotus is also announced its first CD
ROM product called One Source it's a
compact disc containing 20 years worth
of financial data the on Source cdrom
can communicate with
123 at the annual software Publishers
Association convention in Washington a
spokesman for Education Systems
Technology said computers will reverse
the trend of smaller classroom sizes the
report said computers will enable
teachers to handle classes of 90
students with more individual attention
than is now possible in smaller
classes time for this week's software
review and here's Paul
Schindler you know computer software
writers are constantly on the lookout
for ways to improve manual systems now
if you like me use this kind of of
system for keeping track of things on
your desk I think you'll like tornado
notes tornado notes is a memory resonant
multi-purpose Note Taker and finder it's
like a combination of yellow stick on
slips paper and a database management
system tornado notes takes this common
idea a step further by creating a more
desk likee environment not only can It
search your whole pile of notes for a
specific reference it can arrange those
notes as you'd arrange a pile of paper
with some notes easy to access on top
and some notes buried on the bottom
tornado notes can insert dates and times
Import and Export files and offers a
reasonable word processor plus online
help unlike some older memory resident
programs tornado notes seems to coexist
well perhaps a sign that memory resident
program writers have finally signed some
peace treaties tornado notes is $50 from
micr logic in hackens sack New Jersey
for the computer Chronicles I'm Paul
Schindler a company named gaml link has
come up with a new product that you send
copy from a PC directly to a fax machine
the add-on board costs about $1,000 by
the way Federal Express announced this
week that it is eliminating its own fa
service zap mail due to heavy losses an
organization called the overseas
security advisory council is starting up
a bulletin board on International
terrorism the council says it hopes the
BBS will become a source of important
information for American businessmen
traveling
abroad a blind businessman in IND
Indiana has developed a talking
spreadsheet program for blind users it's
called WRA sheet and it offers six rows
by 22 columns and most spreadsheet
functions the developer says he'll give
it away for free to other sightless
people finally researchers at Carnegie
melon University in Pittsburgh say they
are making progress on synthesizing the
protein molecules that may one day be
the CPUs of molecular computers one CMU
researcher says molecular computers will
make possible the replacement of
effective human neurons in the brain and
will allow for tiny tumor Patrol
computers in the body that would spot
abnormal cell growth and automatically
repair the cells that's it for this
week's Chronicles we'll see you next
time the computer Chronicles is made
possible by Leading Edge makers of IBM
compatible computer systems including
Lotus lookalike spreadsheet word
processing with spelling correction
communication software and Haze
compatible 1200 bod modem Leading Edge
with over 1,000 service centers
Nationwide additional funding is
provided by McGraw Hill Publishers of
bite bites detailed technical articles
on new hardware software and languages
cover developments and computer
technology worldwide
[Music]
