Islam is the most dangerous Beast people
think uh you know that they're siding
with let's say a minority or uh an
oppressed people Islam is pretty much as
far right as you can get I've got my
passport that they're asking for it now
and he's just like okay listen like do
you have your passport in your hand
still and I said yeah he's like do not
go into that police station do you hear
me and Islam seeks to uh take over and
control every aspect of an individual's
life and then political life social life
economic life but there is a goal to
further this and to destroy and break
down Western Civilization as we know
it what is it about Islam that is so
attractive to the West
particularly part of the woke left at
the
moment I guess Islam offers that
obviously that counter kind of
contrarian uh landscape if you will like
almost uh an answer to the world's
problems that is very much
anti-western um so again I think that's
why a lot of the you know the woke or
the left are lapping it up in the sense
that they've got this common enemy which
is the current status quo and Western
liberal democracies as they are um and
we've seen this Alliance you know happen
time and time again and it's obviously
their agenda is going to reach a point
where it's no longer mutually beneficial
and it's not the enemy of my enemy as my
friend so yeah I'm waiting to until we
kind of reach that point where of no
return When you know people understand
who it is that they are supporting
consciously or unconsciously in this
effort to kind of push back against what
they think is the ills of our society or
Western Society at large that's so
interesting actually you got me thinking
about someone was saying recently uh the
left has really moved away from
democracy now it's really moved away
from liberalism and so I suppose it was
natural it would move towards any kind
of authoritarian religious right-wing
kind of something we would associate
with the right forly yeah no exactly and
I mean Islam is pretty much as far right
as you can get in that sense um so again
it's it's murky Waters because what
people think are you know that they're
siding with let's say a minority or uh
an oppressed people or a religion that
needs protection Islam you can't really
give it those same kind of um uh excuses
because it's not just a religion it's
not just people who you're ING with to
defend a set of their beliefs or you
think that you know their cultural way
or their way of living should also be as
accepted in uh current like in in a
democracy like like here in the UK Islam
is more than that and Islam seeks to uh
take over and control every aspect of an
individual's life and then political
life social life economic life it's got
a solution to all of those things um so
yeah you end up very much in the
complete totalitarian farri sphere of
things and that is the the the worry
with Islam it's even if it's kind of um
not you know showed its face in the in
the scariest manner it is dormant but
it's always lurking it's always lurking
to push further and and kind of take
more away and a lot of the time that's
happening on so many different fronts
whether it's politically whether it's on
an individual level but there is a goal
to further this and to destroy and break
down Western Civilization as we know it
it's a Perpetual state of mind it's a
perpetual War wow is is there a way is
there a concern that by talking about
this we're being uh I know the I I don't
like the word islamophobic but some
people are talking about anti-muslim
anti-muslim bigotry and things like that
I is that a concern at all do do we
sometimes Venture into that when we show
Too Much concern about the extremes of
Islam um I think definitely what we need
to do is not put those two terms
together and not conflate them
because anti-muslim bigotry especially
here in the UK it does exist and it's a
very much a thing that we need to uh
vocalize and talk about and acknowledge
and you know it's not something that we
can just Islam is not something where
Muslims or anti-muslim bigotry is the
baby that can be chucked out with the
bath water kind of thing you have to
take any critique of Islam we need to
make sure it's protected from getting
the anti-muslim bigotry kind of
confusion spilled over and and vice
versa if we are critiquing Islam as a
set of ideals as as an ideology we are
not critiquing the actual you know
Believers of this of this ideology I
actually look at them almost as victims
of Islam themselves especially the ones
who are more moderate or liberal or
really genuinely do not have any idea
the depths of what their religion so to
speak um demands from them and it's the
ones who are more real and authentic the
people who take it literally or the
jihadis or the imams or the the shiks
and mosques who are you know messing
with people's minds through the sermons
or their narrative they know what
they're doing so when we're calling out
Islam for exactly what it fundamentally
says to do um yeah we might be
completely countering what some imams or
Scholars and and those people are saying
but that is very much still critique of
the ideology itself and not the people
I've been saying that since my first
video altogether because this is a very
dangerous uh area to be an activist in
obviously not just with the threats of
death looming but to always I mean I
come from a Muslim background where my
own family is still Muslim uh many of
them are at least culturally Muslims
there are varying um spectrums of belief
there or actual you know devoutness but
I could not if if you start thinking of
it in terms of anti-muslim uh bigotry
then any policy that's aimed to counter
Islam or Muslims would affect them as
well so it would be we shooting
ourselves in the foot if we don't
acknowledge that Muslims should also be
protected um in the same way anyone else
should be but they their actual ideas
and the things that they hold to be true
are very much Up For
Debate and and what this this is the
question I think people always want to
know is what to what extent are Muslims
in the UK in the US as well in the west
uh ideologically captured to an extreme
amount or or should we what percentage
should we be worried about and is there
such a thing as just a very moderate uh
nice relaxed Muslim person surprisingly
there is I've met many of them I know
many of them um thankfully and again it
comes down to a like a lack of wanting
to engage or connect with their with
their faith on that level so they're
kind of uh immune to you know what what
Islam actually says or asks for them but
then again they are in a state of
cognitive dissonance because when we see
a terrorist attack let's say even when
911 happened I wonder how they are still
maintaining to see all the tragedies
that Islam brings with it and everything
it's doing around the world and still
hold on to that belief but there is
absolutely um I think in the UK we we do
have a problems if we see that in the
rest of Europe as well playing out where
we need to tackle extremism we have
second generation third generation Brits
who are closer to their religion than
the first generation of of their family
that might have come here and instead of
seeing Oh us get more and more
assimilated and you know like take on
British values or kind of feel part of
Britain you see them at loggerheads with
that and you see them holding on to like
an iota of an identity which very much
Muslim identity trumps any kind of other
identity that you might hold to be true
because you have to love Islam first and
you have to outwardly show your your
Muslim identity first so if there are
second third generation Brits who are
going to read Friday prayers at the
mosques or going to universities and
joining isok the Islamic societies and
they are coming out completely
radicalized or with extreme views that
are fundamentally dangerous you're going
to University you've got gay students
around you you know you you're studying
with Jews you're studying with all kinds
of people who your religion tells you to
fundamentally hate um so I have
mentioned this before but I do think in
terms of assimilation
we've really it's not been undertaken as
a project that's sustainable in the UK
and we're seeing the backlash of that
now we're having you know every day in
you turn on the news there is something
where we're having to fight against
islamism or look at the law or look at
definitions and all of this jazzes going
on to contain what has been left to
manifest for so long why do we have this
issue maybe it's a more complex answer
than I'm even imagining but with Islam
and not say uh Hinduism seism or or the
Hindus and siks in this country
um I think fundamentally again this is
why Islam is the most dangerous Beast
because it hasn't gone through this
watering down phase it's it's the
youngest of the abrahamic faiths and it
very much like I said it's it's got
political imperialistic elements to it
which is fundamental to its core so like
other religions even Hinduism I think
there's a branch within Hinduism that
allows you to be nastic they say which
is basically almost atheist within and
still be within the fold Islam is
literally Al be in or die um so that's
that's the way it treats denter so you
can already imagine that the power
behind the scripture and then the claims
I love it when hitchon says Islam makes
really really big claims for itself
because it's true it says that not only
is the Quran and it divinely inspired
word of uh God it is literally verbatim
the word of God and this is the final
message and Muhammad was the final
Prophet so all this finality and all of
this lack of room for uh maneuvering or
Reformation or all of that is keeping it
stagnant and that's what makes it so
dangerous because the beliefs in there
are inherently dangerous and then the
lack of uh room for interpretation or
growth or Evolution makes it that much
more dangerous we've got a really
exciting announcement we want you
personally to join us for two days of
discussion and debate all happening at
the inaugural dissident dialogues 2024
this epic event will take place in
Brooklyn on May the 3rd and 4th we'll be
joining leading think such as Richard
dorkin Steven Pinker Ian hery Ali John
McWater Constantin kiss and Francis
Foster and I will be speaking so do come
and watch we want you to join us for a
gathering where everyone is part of the
conversation conservatives progressives
atheists theists left right and
everything in between dissident
dialogues presents a rare opportunity to
immerse yourself in a conversation with
the most influential thinkers of our
time we will tackle important topics
relating to religion science politics
and culture if you're driven by
intellectual honesty curiosity and a
desire for the truth dissident dialogues
is the place for you dissident dialogues
a place for Dangerous ideas buy your
tickets now at dissident dialogues
you've said is like do do your thing you
know whether it's trans whether it's
another sort of woke thing whether it's
uh being Muslim Jewish Christian
whatever and it's when it becomes
authoritarian and it's like starting to
impact on other people starting to take
away their freedoms that's when it
becomes like hang on okay there's some
authoritarianism here and that's where
the bigotry lies I think I heard you on
Seth Andrews saying there are Sharia
courts in UK CI that would be an example
I suppose of sort of uh pushing certain
beliefs on a population of people who
don't necessarily want that is that
actually going on or is that to what
extent cuz I haven't I wouldn't see it I
don't know what does that look like
what's happening so um there's instances
for example um if you look at uh a
number of let's say law firms in the UK
who specialize in Islamic law or things
like that they have Islamic law as a
department what happens behind closed
doors in that in those communities is
that if you're let's say if you're a
woman and you're trying to get a divorce
your community your um the the the
people around you the people in your ask
everybody first of all they're going to
tell you a million reasons why you
shouldn't get divorce and to be patient
and to stay and all that jazz um but
then what they're going to do is
essentially maneuver you to not give you
access or excuse me not um not not tell
you that you know going through the
normal law or going through the normal
court system is actually beneficial to
you or will give you a lot more control
and so these women a lot of women are
pressured to go to um these kind of
sharia tribunals whether they're set up
in mosques or the leader of the
community so the Imam let's say if we
take really kind of um Hot Pockets of
like areas in the UK which you know
there's a very big Islamic community
like Bradford let's say or uh parts of
Manchester as well those there's de
facto like a a Sharia system where that
there's the Imam who's kind of in charge
of that local community and you're meant
to revert your like issues to him as
opposed to going through you know the
court system that's set up here so
that's happening on a on a scale because
even when I work in uh when I'm working
in the domestic violence sector so many
women who are seeking Islamic divorce
have said they're stuck and they keep
having to go back to this samam and he's
giving them reasons to stay or then we
have to give them the option and say why
are you even faffing about with that
there's this whole system that's set up
for you here and then they say no no no
no no but it's way more important to me
that I get the Islamic divorce and I go
through it that way but then again
Andrew if you've got children custody
according to Sharia is straight with the
father
um once the child is like 7 years old
and that this is what they're doing in
general to keep this these family units
together deliberately and make sure that
the mother can't start a new life with
her children as we can in this country
you know we can if anyone needs to get
out of relationship there are you know
uh methods in place to do that so this
is happening in kind of those those
heavily concentrated Muslim areas
especially where you've got mosques as
well like Finsbury Park Mosque East
London Mosque all of these connections
uh there is like a a man at the top who
will do the weddings do the vces dish
out those kind of things in a completely
parallel system it's amazing how similar
everything you described you could have
been talking about the hiic Jewish
Community um when I say that everyone
goes bananas at me uh I I think
especially because I am Jewish and it's
maybe the same for you being from an
Islamic family or Muslim family you get
it even more people are so angry that
you turned on or seem to have turned on
a belief system or whatever it might be
but they have that same issue I mean
Stanford Hills where I mean the is there
just aren't many hiic Jews at all in the
country I I don't even know it must be
in the tens of thousands if if that it's
such a small number of uh people uh but
I've seen the same issues it's just mad
that uh women who want to leave they
have to go through the hidic Jewish kind
of community to do so they're not
allowed to get keep hold of their kids
and then the other thing is that UK
courts find in favor of keeping the kids
with the dad because they don't want to
get involved and mess around with a
religious belief does that happen as as
well with Muslim families at the UK
courts you know much about that um in in
the situations that I've seen obviously
they've we've actually got sort relief
through the UK courts and the UK courts
have decided the children are better off
with their mother obviously um and again
the emphasis here is to have the
children be as like in great like
involved with both parents as much as
reasonably possible um but there is a
lot of pressure again for the um not
even for them to to deal with that
custody but to just reconcile you
reconcile at all costs anyway they don't
they don't want to show you that Muslim
families are breaking down or have high
divorce rates or you know any of these
kind of things even the word divorce is
such a big uh it's brings so much shame
like you it's the last Last Resort and
even the I this comes all the way back
from like threats from God in the Quran
is and and things like that or Muhammad
threatening his wives when they were
they were um you know they were giving
him a hard time for very right rightful
reasons but he they were told to shut up
or um Allah would give Muhammad better
wives than you so I mean the woman is
always like really really downtrodden um
anyway and the fact that they don't show
them that there's this relief option is
because they want to keep them in this
bubble where Western Society doesn't
infiltrate um it's internal policing as
well it's internal reputation guarding
there's a lot of that happening with the
sort of woke Unity with Islam at the
moment uh does some of that come down to
the bigotry of low expectations do they
see Muslims as lesser people who
sometimes have to keep these and and if
something bad happens to the daughter of
some you know who cares that they're
lower people anyway I I think the
bigotry of low expectations does play
into it for sure um it's especially this
this you know concept of okay it's their
culture or you know it's eastern
tradition and who are we to stay say and
and who's to say Western values are even
better or Superior or more equal or
Equitable or all of that that's all up
for debate with them so um yeah I guess
the big tree of L ation but it's it's
important to note that again Islam has
really really dark elements to it where
even if you're trying to converse with
somebody let's say who's not as
knowledgeable about Islam you could sell
Islam in a way that it could seem uh
like this is just a beautiful culture
let's say and let let let us fast and
let us do what it is that we do and so
what we're only demanding like a mosque
and Halal shops and this and that but
then you know you think that that's all
okay that that that's guarding their way
of life but then it encroaches and
encroaches and then you get protest like
the ones outside um Batley grammar
school um where you know you realize
that it's not just them minding their
own business or saying hey our values
are slightly different they don't line
up with yours let's just you know you
you do you and we we do us it's not like
that it's actually now having
intimidating protest getting teachers to
be away and hiding and having to leave
leave school get security all these kind
of things which it's just mad to think
if this is coming from people who have a
different slightly different culture
that we need to respect you're bending
over back WS to respect a really highly
regressive culture that doesn't just
seem to even want to coexist but wants
to encroach on yours and like you know
relinquish it to history I suppose they
would say that they are being so
tolerant that it sometimes you have to
be you have to be tolerant of
intolerance exactly exactly and that's
almost what it's what's happening here
and it's go that's when it goes too far
I suppose there was a really innocuous
looking video cuz you talk about the
security and these kind of clashes that
have happened outside to school and
there was one that just seemed like okay
a guy was eating his lunch did you see
this and because some of the Muslim
co-workers were fasting they made him
feel guilty and he had he put his lunch
away and it was just a little innocuous
thing but it was quite scary did you see
that video I did yeah I saw it really
briefly and then I was just reading the
comments but yeah I I exactly and this
is what I mean this this kind of small
aggressions or like minor aggressions
this is just somebody who's you know
trying to have his lunch um at a normal
day at work and it's minor aggressions
like that that eventually when they get
power and numbers and when it comes
together then you essentially or
effectively have a mob mentality uh it's
what we've seeing play out in the
Streets of London that's what we're
seeing play out whenever there's
something that you know they they don't
like um and these microaggressions can
turn into macroaggressions very very
quickly and it is that it's a case of
bending over backwards to cater to us
and our needs and we're the victims and
we're marginalized and we're the
minority and we need protecting and even
that push for like special pleading that
Islam needs extra extra cotton wool
around it than any other religion even
though we've got the equality act and
we've got protected characteristics and
things like they want their own special
bit of you know added protection and
it's just it it should not fly they
called him what was it C kaf cfir cfir
which is like what does that mean idiot
it's a perogative for like your
non-believers your disbelievers your
dirty you don't it's very yeah it's a
Prive and it is used as an insult or a
does it make you really angry then
when you see like an Owen Jones or like
a liberal Lefty guy defending something
and he believes he's doing it in your
honor or like for you absolutely
absolutely it actually makes my blood
boil but again um it it's the way that
Islam has also managed to it it kind of
alludes back to what you said in the
beginning as well that uh why is it so
appealing there's other like layers to
why Islam can be appealing for people as
well so people who are really looking
for some kind of structure or some kind
of uh something to be told almost every
minute of every hour of every day what
to do how to think uh it's a very it
offers you a very black and white
version of the world uh if you're a
Muslim the world is very easy to
navigate it's like the West versus Islam
constantly uh Jews America Israel your
worst enemy um and everything is in that
Narrative of will Islam dominate or will
uh the West dominate so your enemies are
very clearcut your causes a very
clearcut um and then people who think
that they've been failed by Western
culture as well for example you know
just to to put every ill of Western
culture out there like debauchery or you
know look at the the debates around
trans people and look how far the West
is slipping all of those things when
they feel the excesses of Western
culture have gone too far Islam offers
that like you know really riging that in
and I've seen even like white British
White English women who you know
suddenly they've they've had some like a
a number of bad relationships
relationships gone wrong um with a
certain type of man and then boom that
they'll Islam they'll turn to Islam and
they will be saying things to me that I
think wow this is everything I speak
against when you're saying I feel so
perfect and protected covered up and
look men don't look at me and they will
protect my honor and all of this and
it's just mindboggling to me but I
understand that people are various
reasons and Islam to some level off as a
weird Comfort or protection or purpose
particularly good I think like like all
extreme religions and things uh for men
like men get like all these wives like
it's the same you know all the Cults
religions uh in hidic Judaism as well
it's just all about the man it's quite
extraordinary um do you have an idea of
the sort of percentage of Muslims in the
west who who hold what you would call
dangerous
beliefs I don't know if I could if I
actually have it down to a percentage um
but I would say and again I I don't mean
to be an alarmist but like given what's
happening and when I say that I'm I'm
third generation myself and when I say
that people around me and of like
similar backgrounds in ages when they
hold vastly different viewpoints to me
people I work with or I'm surrounded by
and we've grown up in a very similar
environment or not because I went to the
Middle East for a large portion of my
life and then came back so I did I was
able to see the other side of things um
so to speak but it's alarming to me that
they hold views that are hundreds of
years back backwards and they are just
like kind of Getting By in society
because their views are just kind of you
know pushed down but these are people
who will walk around and maybe smile at
you and you know you'll serve them A
coffee or whatever but when push comes
to shove their views are fundamentally
misaligned with you so even basic things
about like whether it's UK foreign
policy or who to support in in a sports
game or little things like that um what
choices to uh protest for and not
protest for who to vote for in
government like you know even when
George Galloway has come in and anybody
who was disenfranchised with the way the
rhetoric was about Gaza and palestin
George Galloway was just the pro
Palestine Savior and so the entire again
as I said very very easy uh worldview to
adopt and they have done that nobody's
willing to maneuver and kind of you know
uh say well actually I'm a Muslim but
I'm also British first and you know
there's certain British values that I
would have to say I would fight for and
agree with even if it means it's
tiptoeing on things that I'm supposed to
hold true you're British I mean that
mean I can see that means a lot to you
and I relate to that as well uh you know
growing up Jewish as well or whatever
and some Sometimes some of the more
extreme not that many but some of them
are just it seems like that's their
thing first and that makes to me just no
sense we live here this is my country I
watch England in the football you know
less and less cuz they're not any you
just drive me mad but uh when they're in
the World Cup I do you know and and
that's all that matters for me and and
so is it is it quite a lonely feeling
for you like or was it at least growing
up around people who who were so not
into being I guess English first or
English first sounds horrible because it
sounds sounds like one of those things
but just being British and being proud
to be British yeah it again even where
I'm at now it's quite isolating because
even now so back then obviously I was
pretty much still in the fold but it was
only leaving England because imagine
Andrew when I was in when I was like
born here and growing up here I was so
surrounded by like a microcosm of the
beliefs that I held anyway so yeah I was
going to an English primary school and I
was in London well living in London
everything looks English and British
from the outside but I basically
mentality wise I could have been living
you know in an Islamic City or what have
you um so it's even isolating now
because the more that I've since I've
left Islam naturally when you leave
something like that you a lot of your uh
previous Hang-Ups or things that Islam
told you to you know hold true are all
gone out the window so your worldview
changes and naturally I like as you said
I'm I'm very proud to be like from here
and born here and I appreciate you know
just things about this country and also
the fact that it basically saved my life
when I was in in probably the worst
situation of my life and it's only
because of the values and things that
the UK stands for so it even now just
having a different view on maybe the
conflict in the Middle East or or uh
turning away from the mosque and not
attending every function that you know
people around you are going to I can't
speak my mind anymore around those
people and I don't which is why I have
my channel and I I do my activism on the
side but the nobody's they think that I
have either gone off the rails or
they've I've been called far right
lately just because of my stance that
they've not really heard and this is
just me unlearning I'm just learning all
this anti-Semitism that was filled in my
head I'm unlearning all the these fibs I
was told about Israel I'm learning all
of this but in the process of that I
obviously get charged up and I realize
how much misinformation I was fed or
lies or conspiracies and and I still see
people around me hold on to those
beliefs like like wildly hold on to
those beliefs and I see that they're so
clever and they've been educated and
they're holding phds and epic degrees
and I'm like but you're you could be the
most smartest person in the world but
when it comes to your worldview you will
main tunnel vision just because Islam um
so yeah it's wild it's frustrating isn't
it and and also this country I think I
think I'm I hope I'm right and not naive
in saying this I know there are racists
out there there are people I mean even
every day on Twitter there's a bunch of
people saying things about me being
Jewish I'm sure they would say about you
being Muslim or from being from a
different ethnicity or whatever I like
to think that that's a very small
percentage we see them on Twitter uh you
know Amplified but if like like I always
say this as 1% of men in particular
maybe women as well are psychopaths so
there's not much you can do about like
let's get rid of systemic racism it's
like well yeah but one out of every
hundred people who's on Twitter is going
to just be horrible no matter what you
try and teach them or whatever because
that's their that's what they're trying
to do but I do feel like the vast
majority of people are quite welcoming
like really welcoming especially when
they see somebody who's maybe their
family or a few Generations before has
come over and made a go of things and
wanted to assimilate they really want
you and then you end up being part of
that and wanting others and I think we
really lift each other up so find really
sad um you mentioned your your story so
tell me let's get into that what's your
story yeah tell me let's start with your
story um so long story short but
basically um do you want to to start
from the top I'm like I think so yeah
yeah let's do that okay so I obviously
as I was explaining just to you briefly
like I was I would think a nominal
Muslim growing up here in in London um
by normal I mean I'm very indoctrinated
but um I'm you know I'm still here and
part like actually just part of English
society I'm too young to kind of have my
own identity at this point so that flash
point of being really heavily
indoctrinated young because my granddad
was um the Imam of our local mosque um
where I lived so he put a lot of
importance on he was at that stage of
his life where it's just dedicated now
to religion um and I was really close to
him so I would go to the mosque with him
a lot every day after school um there
would I'd attend Quran classes
and interestingly they actually gave us
a book with the translations which a lot
of Muslims don't get when they first
read the Quran which is troubling but um
again as a seven eight-year-old child
this like Old English and these
translations aren't really going to seep
in and the Quran anyway is just a
terrible read so all the religious books
to be fair we had that as well the
Hebrew books and I got English
translations it's like blessed art that
right I'm I'm yeah honestly he who sits
on his throne I was like okay what get
your throne out yeah exactly float
around on your throne above
water yeah but yeah so I um I took it
really seriously and then at 9: because
of the like the teachings and what my U
Quran teacher was telling me um I did
decide to wear hijab obviously she said
this is the right thing to do at nine
years old anyway that's like a special
year for you know is that right nine is
the year they encourage you as well and
it's got a lot to do with um Muhammad's
marriage to Aisha the child bride it it
happened at nine so just it's like
passed down in in ISL in Muslim families
that nine you should start taking your
religion yeah is that a known thing
that's accepted within Islam that that
that she was nine cuz cuz I'm worried
about being salmon rash deed uh and I
don't want us saying things that they're
going hang on that's not true so we're
going to come and stab you in the eye so
the so I come from a Sunni um Islamic
background according to uh the Sunni
tradition it's the Quran and the Hadith
which you have to hold sankra sank basic
the Hadith tells us more about the
prophet and how he lived and how to
follow his Sunnah or example uh the
Hadith the ones that are considered
authentic as can be uh graded like um
very very Sound by Alazar University in
Egypt are that that Hadith verbatim says
um muham it's actually Aisha saying it
in her own words that U Muhammad married
me at when I was 6 years old and
consumated the marriage when I was 9
years old and there's various of the
Hadith which go on to say you know she
was playing with dolls and all of these
things now the what the the the try like
the attempt at whitewashing this uh has
come from Muslim apologetics and
obviously um pmics saying oh no no no
yeah if you look at the Islamic years
compared to Modern years and all of this
kind of thing she was 17 or 18 minimum
at the time some say less there's
constant argument to like hide this
because it's insanely problematic it's
morally reprehensible if you're meant to
follow this man's example which Muslim
men are supposedly he's Timeless he's
perfect um but yeah if you want to see
it fortim uh andrew.com just write 9
years old or Aisha marriage and it's
there I have no opinion on that um no um
I I'm scared out of my mind I really am
scared and I know that's the part where
I think you can say the stuff oh the
West has got to you know the left and
all that and when you get into the the
the doctrine cuz I read that rushy book
and my God what an amazing writer a from
that horrible scene he shouldn't have
written I I don't mean that obviously
and I shouldn't joke really but it's
scary yeah it's bloody scary and I don't
want to go down in history on record as
having said a thing even though I I will
always do it against all the other
religions and Scientology and Lord zenu
and all all of those things I I wouldn't
want to go down on record as having said
something about about the Muslim God you
didn't say it I said it for I said it
for myself yes okay go what's your
address no don't how could how could
someone just just I don't know but but I
think enough people are speaking out now
that that there's defense in numbers to
an extent I mean I don't know if you saw
Yasmin Muhammad on she's just so good
yeah sorry I've interrupted your story
go on for a nine years old hijab oh yeah
yeah sorry so I um so you can tell how
seriously I took this I mean this was
the the path to get to heaven and
interestingly um when I talk about these
communities most times behind closed
doors this is why I always talk against
the hijab even though you know it's only
because of what it means and and the
origins of the story but most families
are encouraging their young daughters to
wear hijab in my case I think because my
parents are a bit more liberal uh and a
bit more Progressive they actually
thought you know why like you're really
young you don't have to and my grandma
didn't want me to wear it for other
cultural reasons because she wanted my
pool of sutors to be open so she didn't
want me to you know write off a man that
necessarily didn't want a woman that
wore hijab okay so it was for those
reasons but I was kind of discouraged um
and then eventually s even in re classes
and stuff I I would demonstrate how to
pray like I was very much you know
overtly like proud of my religion and
kind ofeducation just for non religious
religious education classes at school
that we all did exactly yes I'd be like
oh Mimi I'll demonstrate how we pray
I'll tell you what Allah says and I'll
do little like Miss Goody T shoes for
Islam and then basically what happened
was my um Dad got a job like his job
moved him to Saudi Arabia right and we
were we had no idea what to expect
obviously um but because but just then
um on the brink of that I started to
play a lot more Sports and I I was kind
of like becoming more and more of a
tomboy at the is that still acceptable
to say yeah I think so tomboy is fine
okay yeah maybe maybe I don't know
anymore love you're more worried about
tomboy and I'm worried about what you've
said about the prophet Muhammad
priorities
yeah um yeah so I started to play sports
and obviously it was a bit of a
hindrance it's very unpractical it's
dangerous as well cuz if you've got it
hide with a safety pin or something you
know um so my mom wasn't best pleased
that that was all happening and she was
very very happy when she was like you're
playing football now it's dangerous you
know you need time to take it off and I
was like yeah you're right this is
that's nice though instead of time to
stop playing football exactly there was
also time to stop playing football as
well from uh the Elder generation
because you have to wear shorts and
Muslim women don't wear shorts and
things like that but again immediate
family were like yeah yeah football
first hijab later were you good at
football I was I was actually pretty
good at football I know it's different
culture but did you watch bendit light
Beckham I did watch it again recently
fil classic right it was so funny when I
went to school in Saudi because I
started playing football more and more
and I guess just because of the English
accent my science teacher actually asked
me if I was the actress from bendit Like
Beckham what and I was like no that's a
film that's insane I know I don't think
you even looked not like her I know I
was like she must be considerably older
than you yeah and I was a lot younger
and anyway was weird but yeah so then
sorry I moved to school in uh we moved
to Saudi Arabia and my hijab had come
off and the people I was suddenly
surrounded by I was at a British
International School but it had people
from all over the world um their parents
had come in all different types of jobs
so I was exposed for the first time in
my life more than actually going to
school in London to other faiths other
nationalities other experiences other
religions in a way that I had never been
while I was here that's insane that is
mad to like go to Saudi Arabia and have
the most eye openening International
experience as opposed to London which is
a Cosmopolitan city um and I've seen it
I've seen the difference in people who
have just been here their whole lives in
like one area one house one mosque one
Community as opposed to people who have
gone and then come back with like the
varying you know World
Views um but yeah so going going to
Saudi really really changed who I was in
terms of like my faith became more and
more liberalized as I was going so I was
seeing wahhabi Islam play out all around
me um up until our school Gates men and
um we had to wear a bias and we weren't
really allowed to be seen with boys as
soon as you got into the school it was
like could have been in the states could
have been here um it's co-ed we've got
discos we've got end of year parties uh
literally like you're having an
experience anywhere that's not Saudi
Arabia um so I didn't feel like I had to
hold on to being Muslim that much
anymore cuz I'd hear the call to prayer
five times a day modesty culture is
seeped into daily life you have an
Islamic police called the mwa they're
they're also regulating everything
making sure men are stopping and
stopping their cars and going to the MOs
to pray when it's prayer time um but
then I also saw dark sides Andrew like
casually after Friday prayer if there
would be beheadings or amputations so
like my my dad and my brother would come
back from prayer and say oh we could
have stayed because that was that's what
they said was happening afterwards and
this this was casual and for a young
mind like mine I would just question my
parents and say what is going on here
and they would also say just just this
is some wahhabi extreme version of Islam
this is not what we follow this is Saudi
doing Islam on steroids and they don't
know what they're doing um so I just
like I took that for what it is and I
will keep planting these little moments
of you know even driving to Mecca the
first time to go out to do pilgrimage um
because we thought we're so blessed who
gets moved from London to Saudi so so
close to God's home that every weekend I
could go and do the pilgrimage what what
people spend their whole lives saving to
do how long was the drive for you 40
minutes and again at Saudi Arabia you
don't drive yourself you have a driver
you you know all of these things are
like you literally just pop your Buy on
and go to God's house um so that was
that you felt a huge sense of like wow
God has called us close to his home but
driving towards it for the first time as
well and you see there's a Quran Bridge
basically as you drive and it says all
non-muslims that way and then Muslims
this way obviously only Muslims can
enter Mecca and like little things like
that again you'd hear stories of people
trying to sneak in or you know then
seeing the the plight of uh experts from
like normal Western countries who
couldn't have basic amenities like
having a glass of wine they would have
to be fermenting their own wine and
their house in the compound or like
fermenting beer or you know their lives
were very very difficult um and Saudi
Arabia made no kind of obviously it's
it's a home of Islam supposedly so it
made no um like concessions for these
people but I saw women being really
really badly like discriminated against
even non-muslim women with by the
Islamic police who would come my mom was
grocery shopping with her uh friends and
they're not Muslim so they had no reason
to cover their head but they were told
cover your head well you're in a Muslim
country what are you doing cover your
head and then some like horrible in
incidents as well that you know I heard
of like rape and people getting dragged
to the desert and especially non-muslim
women that they were targeted and
they're so afraid to even report it they
would just take a plane home to their
country of uh their home country or
their country of origin to just get
Justice or you know heal over there
because nothing would happen for them in
Saudi these These are women have gone on
holiday or the tourism holiday they want
to go and check out the pilgrimage to
Mecca or something like that and on the
way they've they've been sexually M no
these are non-muslim women who are
working in Saudi for various reasons
whether they're teachers at the
international schools or that uh come
over as doctors or they're the wives of
somebody else who's been at out there to
work things like that um so all of those
things were were like looming but then
we moved to Dubai and that was like a
nice really really like like good East
Meets West like a step ahead of Saudi
Arabia uh less of their restrictions
more of the West meets East but you
still get all the Islamic holidays and
all of that stuff so I thought this was
the perfect mix this is how Islam should
be done um in a country like Dubai you
know you've got all the amount of
tourists coming in you've got um it's
perfect and you don't you don't like
take away way or relinquish anything
from your Islamic faith or culture so to
speak um but then yeah again I was so
into the religion that I came back here
for University and wanted to study
Islamic law so I did that as well and I
was defending everything that Islamic
law says but I was trying to make sense
of it um so even now when I read back my
University essays I could like I see
hints of like this this questioning
feminist but I also see like but God did
it but God said so so there's reasons
behind it and you tell it's a confused
mind um but long story short then it was
only until I went back to Dubai and then
I was in a marriage that I uh really
wanted to get out of cuz uh it was
abusive on many levels but before it got
physically abusive I made a plan that I
need to get out of here and when in that
country um because there was no way that
I was going to be granted a divorce by
that man uh was one-sided there was a
really really like ancient Sharia law
that was put on me by the lawyer that he
had employed to like nip this in the bud
and I had never heard of such a thing um
so I'd just seen the bad elements of
Islam in Saudi Arabia and I'd heard
things but I never thought this is
directly related to Islam but when this
law called
daia it relates to the Disobedience of a
wife which is directly from a Quran
verse um that says if you fear
Disobedience if you merely fear
Disobedience from your wife then these
are these are the steps that you take
and this this Sharia law has been been
interpreted by Egyptian courts and
Tunisian courts and things like that to
so basically answering back can mean uh
Mischief or just the thought of you
thinking that I'm going to answer back
can be Mischief so imagine somebody
who's actively wanting to seek a divorce
yeah um so they were like well we slap
her with this um this law and this law
basically the UA policeman called me and
he said you must return to your
husband's house or um we'll arrest you
and take you there forcibly and then you
can't leave without his permission so
anytime I'd have to leave the house I'd
need to get permission again it comes
back to Islamic guardianship laws the
concept of a meam which is like a woman
basically in Islam you're never you've
never got your own agency so like put
think of like a family tree with every
possible male relative that woman will
be connected to if all of your close
ones are gone you will be connected to
your third Uncle twice removed would be
responsible for you before you would be
oh my God it's always always that like
that's what I was saying it's always
like women don't don't get a good deal
out of these Cults or religions yeah
exactly so I that's literally that blew
my mind and I was like again I was
thinking from a very UK Centric kind of
this is how because how can the law do
that how can the Judge how can the
police even warrant this to essentially
kidnap how are you married to this man
um is it arranged it was a like almost
like a sped up marriage so I I was
introduced to him from a friend um that
I went to high school with and so we
were like dating in in so much as a way
that you can date uh by by being Muslim
do you know what I mean so it's very
like you can't date freely or you can't
like travel together or you can't really
do anything it's very like managed bits
of time together um and then essentially
and now again whether it's Islam or
culture or a bit of both once you reach
like 22 23 years old it's like a ticking
Time Bomb you need to tick that you've
done uni now you've you know You' got
some semblance of a career that's the
next box and then it's children and
people start asking questions if you're
seeing just like hanging out or seeing
seeing in male company without a real
purpose or intent to marry um but my
parents were actually moving to Malaysia
and they said to me we can't leave you
in Dubai um without being married
especially being married in the eyes of
God um so it was more like a kind of
haphazard let's get this done before we
we move um and the only way for me to
even let's say have him fly out to
Malaysia if I was to go out or move with
them was to actually be islamically
married right
okay um the word Islam in Islam to get
married uh the contract it's called a
niika okay but it's very very dark as
well because the root word of that is NK
in Arabic which forms the word there's
no word for marriage this is actually it
it means sexual intercourse so that
contract is essentially a payment
transactional a father giving his
daughter over for a certain payment and
now you're able to engage in sexual
intercourse and a lot will be okay with
it that's a French word they've stolen
it Nik oh my God N means to have sex I
didn't even make that connection yeah
yeah
lur that woman I never thought either
from the other I never thought that must
be that though that's got to be that I
don't know etymologically because it's
the Arabic citic route versus the French
roote because of the the Muslim uh
immigration to France it must have come
in CU it's quite a Strang term God
Andrew we need to look into it yeah we
should be all linguist yeah we should
that's the next podcast yeah linguists
deciphering where language comes from
but that interesting that the Islamic
introduction into France and there are a
lot of words that have been taken you
know and there's always like you you
your my I your mom kind of
thing would be like or whatever yeah
yeah yeah there you go yeah well there
we go so that's and that that's that's
look that's terribly sad that that's
what what has to happen when you get
married yeah well the reason I brought
that up is cuz for me it's so sad like
even my my cousins and everybody who
still holds on to Islam they give this
they say they're so excited for this
nothing in in their life can happen
unless this ncah is done and it just I'm
like if you understood the the actual
root and the origins of this it is I
would much rather you go and get
registered or like go to the registry
office or you know do anything but that
like I go to church have a church
ceremony or you know have a nice like
reception in some manner but there this
obsession with when I say the tick boox
in culture is like it's it's covered by
that word niika I have to get my nikar
done and then I can travel I can live my
life I can do everything everything is
like contingent on that yeah and that's
all Muslim parents will ever tell you as
well well after your niiger after your
niiger after you you can live your life
do what you want yeah we have to be
careful with that word in the YouTube
sentences because it sounds too similar
to another word unfortunately hopefully
that would be all right though um and
look again I don't mean to compare or
not to equate anyone but iic Judaism
hiic Judaism is the same thing of you
know that that marriage night and a lot
of them feel like they were basically
molested that that night yeah said how
did you then get out of all of this um
so basically what happened is um this
law that they had put on me and I was
trying to still go through I trusted the
process even up to this point so I was
trying to ask for a divorce even like
Islam doesn't give a woman um like the
same rights for divorce as a man is
given
unilaterally so um Muslim countries that
have Sharia at play have now added that
women can seek uh it's called a that's
how you seek divorce through the courts
um you it's quite like a the evidential
burden of why you want it is pretty high
and it varies from country to country
but I was going down that route and
again if you go down that route um they
try and they make it so tough for women
that you have to give up your meaher
which is your basically it's kind of
like um the money that you were paid for
the nword um that sounds even sorry I've
like censored you into this gosh no no
no that's okay um so I they were making
my life hell anyway and they're saying
fine if you want to do that you're going
to forego this and I was like I can
forgo any amount of money I don't care I
just want to see the dword in the
Islamic version of the dword like
stamped on a paper this is done um but
they really really ramped up their like
harassment um whe like the police the my
local police station and then my
ex-husband's like barrage of like abuse
just kind of escalated so I'd find like
you know just things outside my house
and I was being followed and monitored
and on my way to work and back and he
would show up at like I think the
football World Cup was on so I was
watching England play with like all of
my colleagues and right in the middle of
the game one of my uh colleagues is like
noria don't move but we're just going to
get up and we're going to leave because
he's right there and I'm like it just
got too much Andrew I was like I can't
even like I can't enjoy my days I can't
enjoy my nights I can't sleep at night
and then the police calling me like Post
10 p.m. and on weekends when again an
Islamic country they're not allowed to
do that for a woman so I'm trying to
play them with their rules you know like
you can only call me during these hours
and things like that but they kept
demanding my passport and I'm like you
don't need a passport to deal with like
a civil divorce dispute you know what I
mean and I obviously I'm not like that
uh naive and I did I've heard all these
stories about Brits and Dubai I've heard
what happens and I know that the Turning
Point the pivotal factor is handing over
your passport cuz then you've
essentially handed Over Control yeah um
so when they kept asking for that I was
literally so done and I was so deflated
I was on the verge of giving it I was
like just take it do whatever um and
just before I was I was parked outside
the police station to give it over and
my the lawyer that was representing me
she went in and in a like last ditch
attempt I made a call to like the
British emergency uh number for xats and
I called and thankfully this this Angel
Of A man answered and I gave him like a
30 second rundown I was like hi listen
I'm a rich citizen I'm an exper in Dubai
I've been married for this long d uh
these are all the cases that they're
trying to put against me I'm just trying
to file for divorce I've got my passport
that they're asking for it now and he's
just like okay listen like do you have
your passport in your hand still and I
said yeah he's like do not go into that
police station do you hear me and I was
like okay and he's like I can't give you
legal advice but do not go into that
police station and hand it over and I
was like okay he's like how far are you
in the airport and I was like not that
far like I could he's like if you could
just pack basic things and just come
home come home to where the stuff that
they even trying to put on you doesn't
apply and at the same time Andrew my
lawyer ran out and she was like no no no
no no you're not going to win anything
here get out they are charging you with
all kinds of things things that are like
like like adultery and and theft and uh
all all kinds of things that you could
put out th air but in in Sharia things
they according to Sharia punishment they
are like life imprisonment and like
lashing and the punishments are in we're
dealing with barbaric punishments here
you must have been in a panic oh my God
yeah that that I would just literally
got like I just put my foot down went
straight to the airport even then uh
Andrew like walking in the airport every
time I had to scan my Emirates ID
through a scanner sometimes the scanner
would make a big noise and I was like
have they put a travel ban on me like
have they notified the whole airport and
my mother was just like have you like
have the wheels left the runway have the
wheels left the runway way it was yeah
it was just a panic to get out of there
and now you're back and now I'm back
thankfully yeah and it was it was having
the space and downtime being back here
even living in the UAE if I thought
things were uh like just not making
sense or something was off I never had
access to a free and open internet I
always had to go through VPN and I got
back to England processed went to
therapy for PTSD had EMDR therapy which
was incredible I would recommend that to
anyone who's ever like got electr what
is that it's eye movement
resensitization and depressing I've
heard of that yeah I've heard it's great
that brilliant I could not recommend
that enough like Andrew honestly it's
just wiped it from my mind and when I
got back to this country every time I
heard like a police sign a siren I would
literally think they're coming for me
and I'd like people i' have to say no
this is UK police like there's nothing
that was in Dubai you're here now you're
safe the police here like you know
they're not going to do anything like
that to you but I was afraid of men I
was afraid of police sirens and you know
London's like ambulance fire all these
things going off so I couldn't leave the
house for a very long time and this just
changed the game for me wow and now you
and you started you've got a YouTube
channel which is doing really well yeah
yeah no thank you it's uh yeah it's
growing slowly but surely holy humanist
okay and what kinds of things are you
putting up there um it's basically to
just I'm I'm trying to verbatim show
Islamic sources in scripture um
especially what it means for the way it
affects women in reality and children in
reality so I'm just trying to show
people that when I came back to the UK
and I actually like applied my attention
to be intellectually honest to see what
does the Quran say in my own language
like I would just read it in English now
I'm not faing around with Ki Arabic like
I'm done with that I've done it three
times in that language um so I just as
an adult and with a logical like mind I
I read it and people have access to the
same information as I was saying to you
like if you just go and doc after this
when we were talking about you know
Muhammad's married to Aisha it's there
and don't get me wrong they are trying
to take these down and they're trying to
censor it and they're trying to add
parentheses and brackets and soften the
blow and make it more palatable but it's
all there so I'm just trying to show
like just have women who can see the
other side it's predominantly aimed at
women but generally just like it's
basically my leaving Islam what I found
what I found most problematic and why
it's 100% man-made and really really
problem
and I and then he'll he'll see it that
would be epic and Ricky if you're
listening please give Islam a little
bash in one of your next uh shows just a
little bash give it a back I think not
not a bash isn't a try cuz then oh no no
no no convert Chuck it under the bus R
give it a back give it a go Ricky
convert to Islam just qu just little
bash um no I think I think he'll know
what you mean um yes go check out holy
humanist now go and help her out she's
had an amazing story go and like all the
things subscribe to the stuff and keep
watching this channel as well hit the
like button and watch this interview
I'll probably put Yasmin here
