what's up weirdos is it fun to kidnap a
woman I'm not saying he kidnapped her
but that's what everybody online thinks
because ballerina Farm is like this
Scandal that has blown up but the
Scandal is just this person's marriage
and how this husband treats his wife if
you don't know the account ballerina
Farm is a like a family Tik Tok account
she's got 9 million followers it's
Hannah's account and it has basically
become like the queen of tradwives like
anything that is about Trad wives is
like her she is 34 years old and she has
eight kids and she gave up her entire
life to raise those kids on a farm with
her husband but what's crazy about it is
that an article came out recently that
basically exposed and talked about how
that wasn't the life that she wanted at
all and she just got kind of suckered
into it and trapped because of her
husband her husband is named Daniel and
he is a trustfund billionaire baby boy
his daddy owns Airlines and this is how
he dresses when we started to farm I was
swept up in the beauty of learning to
make food from scratch that is
definitely a man who was born to a
billionaire and then decided oh I'd like
to be a little bit of a cowboy I'd like
to get a woman who's on an upwards
trajectory into reaching fame and
fortune in all of her dreams and I'd
like to trap her with children and then
bring her out to a very remote area of
America where she can mother those kids
do nothing else and be my pretty little
play thing while I put on a cowboy hat
and play dress up as a western boy even
though my dad is a billionaire who owns
Airlines you have to be very rich to own
a plane he owns Airlines and his son is
out here dressing like Tucker Carlson
trying to be a common man listen we're
going to get into it but I'm just going
to say my dad grew up in Arkansas
actually as a farmer and when I've gone
back and visited I have been like on a
cattle farm and I can tell you right now
his clothing is far too pressed and his
hat is far too clean to be a real cowboy
but that's not the point of this let me
give you a little bit of backstory about
how these two met in the article the
author writes that Hannah neilan but
we'll just say Hannah from now on was
the eighth of nine children born to
Mormon parents near Salt Lake City so
automatically the odds are stacked
against her to have any sort of life
outside of this one but it says right
here that Hannah gravitated towards
ballet at 14 she went to summer school
at juliard at 14 she was at juliard
juliard is like the art school it's so
exclusive it's so hard to get into like
ivy league is hard to get into juliard
is harder to get into than iy I think I
that no that's true I'm going to stand
by but at 14 she went there for summer
school and then she returned for her
undergraduate degree going for
University and she paid for that by
competing in scholarship pageants
remember pageantry because pageantry is
something that comes up later uh the
beauty pageants sometimes offered
academic scholarships or tuition money
to the winners yeah point being she is a
ballerina but not just somebody who
likes doing ballet like this guy likes
being on a farm near cows she is
actually good at it she is great at it
she is excellent at it she got to
juliard because of it now the article
goes on to say that Daniel also grew up
in a Mormon family one of nine and he's
the son of David neilan billionaire
founder of a number of commercial
airlines including Jeb blue like I said
and the author throws in that his
upbringing was moneyed and Suburban just
to really emphasize that this whole like
I'm a cowboy it's like him trying to be
different from his dad when really it's
just like you're playing and dress up
but you're also bringing your wife along
with you and stifling all of her dreams
the journal J for this article also
asked him this life was this what he
always wanted he said yes I expected
Hannah to be more at home with the kids
but she said I watched my parents
working together and so whatever we do
we got to do it together this life of
living on a farm with eight children is
the life that he expected it's just he
expected her to be doing a little bit
more actually now cut to an earlier
question asked in the interview where
the journalist asked Hannah is this the
life she always expected and her answer
is a little bit different and that's
what this whole thing is about because
people including the journalist started
notice that she talks a lot differently
when her husband isn't there and the
answers that she gives in her backstory
really seem to indicate that she was
kind of Trapped into this life look at
this so they're out right now the
journalist in Hannah and the writer says
we drive past the dairy cows looking out
across a river valley and the Arid
mountains Beyond was this what she
always wanted I ask when we get a moment
alone while Daniel checks on the animals
so they're alone Daniel's not in the
room at other points in the interview he
is in the room and her answers are very
different was this life what she always
wanted and she answered no I mean I was
like she pauses my goal was New York
City I left home at 17 and I was so
excited to get there I just love that
energy and I was going to be a ballerina
I was a good Ballerina she pauses again
but I knew that when I started to have
kids my life would start to look
different I was a good ballerina is one
of the saddest things I ever read when
in the context of her actually like
achieving Excellence getting into
juliard and then getting trapped to this
life which fine but she just said that's
not the life she wanted but she's a good
Mormon wife she's going to say well it's
fine but how they met was he was 23 and
she was nearly 2 years his Junior when
they were introduced by a mutual friend
at a college basketball game Daniel says
I saw her and I was ready to go sign me
up I was thinking let's get married but
she wouldn't go on a date with me for 6
months now when you really want to date
somebody and they say no no no no no no
no no no no no no no for 6 months
straight that's your quue to leave her
alone but Daniel the trust fun son of a
billionaire said but I want it I want it
so bad I want it so bad little crybaby
Prince and so one day she mentioned to
Daniel that she was getting the 5our
flight from Salt Lake City Utah to New
York City back to juliard back to ballet
the life the dream all of her future all
of her hopes everything she's ever
wanted but she didn't realize his dad
owned the airline this is so creepy
they're saying it like it's a romantic
story it is so creepy she says so Daniel
was like I'm on that same flight I
remember checking in and them saying
you're 5 a and you're 5B I just thought
no way that's crazy then Daniel Smiles I
made a call he had pulled strings at Jet
Blue and so began their first date she
said no no no no no no I really don't
want to date you I really don't want to
date you no no no no you're actually
really lame you're actually really corny
I actually have dreams I have a future
with ballet I don't want to do it
actually matter of fact these dreams and
hopes are so important to me I'm
actually flying back from my home right
now in Salt Lake City Utah to go back to
juliard and he said how about I call my
dad and and make sure that I can sit
right next to you that's stalking is
that not stalking that is it's only okay
because I guess she was fine with it uh
Daniel bro that is insane Behavior
that's so weird she goes on to say back
then I thought we should date for a year
before marriage so I could finish school
and whatever and Daniel was like it's
not going to work we've got to get
married now she wanted to finish school
she wanted to continue her ballet dreams
she wanted to focus on her future and he
said actually that doesn't work for me
even though you reject me for 6 months
straight I'm going to get on flights
with you I'm going to pull strings I'm
going to stalk you and we have to get
married now I don't care if you want to
finish your school I want you more than
I want you to be happy by the way the
fact that she said so I could finish
school and whatever as if she doesn't
care but if you look at the videos on
her page it is so clear that ballet is
her One True Love by the way her name on
Tik Tok is ballerina Farm ballerina
before Farm she views herself as a
ballerina and now when Daniel's in the
room with the interviewer she has to say
stuff like yeah I just you know wanted
to finish school or whatever like she
doesn't even care about it obviously she
does anyways Daniel was like it's not
going to work we've got to get married
now after a month they were engaged 6
months of no and her saying well if
we're going to date it has to be a year
before we get married and it was a month
and they were engaged and in 2 months
after that they were married so instead
of not dating like she initially and
then after he stocked her on the plane
you know I guess he didn't stalk her but
that is what that is if she hadn't liked
it and are we sure that she I listen
there's a whole other layer of this of
they're both in like Mormon families and
he's from a powerful family it's like
that's such a dynamic that it's like
definitely playing into this but even
once she's there and she's trapped and
she's like okay I guess we have to date
I guess we're dating cuz you're going to
follow me around for the rest of my life
and I can't take a flight without you
being on it next to me cuz imagine that
by the way if she rejected him and was
like no and then he gets on the plane
next to her it's like I guess romantic
but also kind of a threat of like
anytime you're on a plane I could be
there next to you so you better not
reject there's like subtext there you
know but even then once they're dating
she's dead set on a year before we get
married and then 3 months they're
married then they move into an apartment
Daniel rented on the upper west side oh
my God he's such a country boy he's
renting a second place on the upper west
side with his daddy's money you're not a
cowboy dude you're an oil bear you're
not John Wayne you're HR Pickins the
ones who know no but yeah they're on the
upper west side and 3 months after that
she was pregnant the first juliard
undergraduate to be expecting in modern
history that's how unprecedented this is
this is how dedicated people are when
they get to juliard nobody gets pregnant
in modern history in juliard do you
realize how crazy that is I I don't
think that that's an exaggeration it
doesn't seem like they're writing it as
a joke he's saying that the first
juliard undergraduate in modern history
to be pregnant is her because everybody
else is so focused on their dreams like
she was until HR Pickins over here came
in and tried to crush her and turn her
into oil sorry he's an oil Baron he's an
oil Baron not a cowboy and now she's
pregnant remember earlier in the
conversation when she said I was going
to be a ballerina I was a good ballerina
but but I knew that when I started to
have kids my life would start to look
different this is not a oh you know what
in the future after I'd been doing
ballet for a while it ended up that I'd
rather have had kids she actively was
trying to not be with this man she was
actively rejecting him and saying no no
no this is more important to me I
actually really need to focus on my
dreams I actually really want to be a
ballerina this is incredibly important
to me and he said well my Daddy has a
billion dollars so your dreams of being
a ballerina it's like your little hobby
but my dad's so rich that I should be
able to own you oh you're going on a
flight guess what I'm going to call my
daddy that's literally literally what
happened he had pulled strings at Jet
Blue and so began their first date he
called his daddy and said this girl
doesn't want to date me cuz she wants to
do ballet and then his daddy got him a
seat next to her so that she would feel
like she just has to do this and then he
got her pregnant so that she wouldn't be
able to follow her dreams anymore what a
caring husband [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] off look at her this
is her Dune ballet look at this look at
this she's enjoying herself that's 20 10
in China sorry I'm getting heated I got
to have a a diet root beer root beer oh
come on root beer this is what a real
cowboy looks like take notes Daniel dye
a root beer in a mason jar with a handle
glass not your freshly steamed black
cowboy hat and your pressed white shirt
you're not a cowboy you're a cosplayer
and by the way the reason anybody cares
about this in the first place is cuz she
really blew up in like early this year
January February because she won a miss
American Pageant you know how I was
talking about pageantry is really
important she was pregnant and she won a
pageant and there was this article
written about it with the uh who wrote
this the New York Times or I guess oh
wait no no she G she gave birth two
weeks prior to it but like all of her
training she was pregnant look at her
this is her competing at missworld right
here in Vegas and when that happened she
faced a lot of backlash from people like
listen I made a Nara Smith video where I
was talking about how people feel really
inferior when you present yourself as
being the perfect person because Nara
Smith was like objectively making her
videos as if she was actually doing the
things like making these things from
scratch like that's something that she
does but then people started making fun
of her and now she's like doing it
ironically and kind of poking fun at
herself I think she's totally fine and I
think Nara Smith is like honestly smart
for like rebranding and kind of being
self-aware I think that's totally cool
but as the Triad wife discourse really
exploded and people were really upset
ballerina Farm Hannah was definitely one
of the people at the epicenter because
it was like you have eight kids or I
guess seven at this time was it seven no
no it must have been eight kids and
you're winning beauty pageants and you
are a objectively very talented
ballerina and you're milking cows
homeschooling these kids in this in this
in this so much that people were like
it's like she's just making it look like
it's that easy and it's not that easy
and people got mad at her but now that
this article has come out and you can
see that her life is not at all what she
wanted it to be people are having a lot
more empathy and I want to show you one
video specifically where she was given a
birthday present from her billionaire
husband oh his dad's the billionaire
okay I'm sorry he just has $800 million
and then when his daddy dies he's a
billionaire just watch this video that
they posted I cannot believe they posted
this video of her opening her birthday
present it's her birthday present she
gave up her entire life sacrificed all
of her dreams all of her Futures all of
her hope to be this man's wife and raise
this man's kids that's really what
happened cuz she did not ask for this
life and he did remember he said this is
what I wanted except I wish he would do
more or I expected her to do more this
is the birthday present just buckle up
okay this is my birthday present from
Daniel we have tickets to Greece where's
it from hoping their tickets to Greece
you know I am the wife of an
extravagantly wealthy man who could buy
anything for me it's my birthday I've
given my entire life and my entire
future to him I'm saying I hope their
tickets to grease because clearly I've
been talking about it a lot and I really
want to
go so PL
tickets a hat I can wear in GRE she said
I hope they're plane tickets then she
opened it saw they're not tickets maybe
it's like something kind of cute and
it's like a hat that he's going to say I
can take to Greece because clearly I am
actually expecting this because I've
communicated to him and I really want it
and he can make it happen because oh I
don't know his dad owns a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
Airline and he can buy me plane tickets
to wherever the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] he wants he can
just ask uh Daddy can I have a plane
ticket to grease for my me and my wife
and daddy will say yes son my handsome
little boy and watch what it is as she
opens it up and takes it out of this
package because trust me she's not
taking this to grease it's not a hat
it's
not oh my EG friend EG did it
it's great and you can gather eggs so
it's really cute you see her
disassociating there right
here yeah that's definitely me when I'm
extremely happy about the egg apron that
my billionaire husband got
me I'm being filmed right now this is a
great great disappointment an egg apron
hey wife who's given her all to me
everything about her entire being is
under my malleable control in a ranch in
the middle of nowhere
and there's no way out you know what
you're going to get for all the
sacrifices you've made a little tool so
you can do more work for me I want you
to have a little tool so you can do more
work for me and by the way I said to the
journalist just a little bit ago I wish
you would pick up the slack a little bit
around the house I thought you would do
more for the kids so you know yeah happy
birthday hey Daniel I just want you to
look at me right now what are you
thinking look at me Daniel what it is
unreal How can I I know hardly anything
about this marriage and immediately know
what I could do for her birthday better
than her [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] husband who she has
eight kids with if she's talking about
wanting to go to Greece while opening a
present clearly she's talked about it a
bunch before and actually expects it
dude dude dude you're a billionaire
you're a billionaire it's my birthday by
the way my birthday is already passed by
the time this comes out but it's my
birthday tomorrow and if Sophia gets me
an egg apron all I'm going to say it's
going to be a big problem big time Big
Time problem
oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] she might she might have got me
eggy I'm speechless I'm speechless
Daniel would say as you should be you're
a woman that's what Daniel would say
that's what not not what I would say hey
do you want to sip some Dy root beer
grip it like a real
cowgirl just immediately gripping it
like a princess not a cowgirl damn
toothpaste it does not taste like
toothpaste get the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out of here
sorry for saying [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] get the hell out
of here I love you Daniel be nicer to
your wife come on her in that video
versus look at how she is when she's
dancing
me when my billionaire husband buys me a
tool to do more work for him for my
birthday she's actually really good like
that's really good ballet obviously
she's really good she was in [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
juli art look at her this is her in 2018
she's having the blast but you compare
that to how she acts when she's with the
man look at this and for me like my main
responsibility yeah we're we're raising
the animals we're taking care of the
ranch um I've really I really feel
strongly that I have to you know support
Hannah and you know we have a lot of
kids I can't expect her to take care of
the kids all day and also produce the
content uh that she wants to produce as
an artist and so I just have always felt
that if I take care of her needs and
what she needs that she can produce her
content and and honestly the business
side takes care of itself the business
side takes care of itself oh the
business side yeah it's funny I'm just
trying to support her because she can't
do everything that I want her to do I
really want her to take care of all the
kids but it's like she has one little
nugget of creativity and freedom where
she can occasionally film herself doing
a little ballerina dance and it's like
yeah I wish instead of doing that she
would just sit there and [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] parent
like a good mom but it's fine it's fine
it's fine it's fine that's what he's
saying while he's sitting out there with
his freshly steamed black cowboy hat
these wearing indoors cosplaying as a
western cowboy because he wants to feel
like a man because he grew up in his
father's Shadow the only reason that you
have your wife is because you called
your daddy for a favor Daniel you're not
a real man you're a little tumor that
fell off your dad and you're just
suckling at him trying to get back when
you're milking a cow does it feel like
you're milking your father Daniel does
it does it does it does it I just hate
him I hate him I'm sorry I I'm I hate
him aside from all the stuff that he's
done even to his wife when I see a fake
Cowboy I'm sorry a rich man acting like
a cowboy you're not you're not you're
not you're not you know we out here on
the farm we we're doing all of our
things you rented an apartment in the
Upper West Side while you were stalking
your girlfriend trying to make her your
wife even though even though she
rejected you and kept saying no no no no
no no because you were such a little
baby that you just needed it that's not
Cowboy Behavior why are your boots so
clean your boots are a little bit too
clean Daniel you have your wife shining
them for you Daniel real cowboys let
their boots get muddy cuz they work in
them and I know it feels like you're
working when you have your six men that
you've hired to actually take care of
the farm and they take you as a little
ride along but you're not I don't know
if that's even true but I think it is I
I I honestly do because look at him he's
not a cowboy now if you think that's it
trust me there's more listen you might
be thinking okay well they have eight
kids he can't stop putting kids into
this woman's body so that she has to
give birth to them he can't stop so at
the very least because of their vast
wealth he's at least providing some
amount of Child Support which by the way
is the reason that a lot of people upset
with him at first because like obviously
they have to have child support it'd be
insane to not have child support I mean
Child Care like nannies and stuff to do
this without nannies is kind of crazy uh
but check this part of the article they
have a cleaner but no child care neilan
Hannah does all the food shopping kids
in toe and Cooks from scratch they don't
do ready meals cool cool hey I know
there's 10 of us in this household but I
actually don't do things that are ready
made and I need you to make everything
from scratch including the borad despite
the more traditional aspects of their
relationship the article continues
Daniel is a Hands-On father yeah cuz he
doesn't have anything else to do he is
so rich he doesn't need to be doing this
he better be Hands-On he takes the kids
out to the farm doing all the laundry
the children appear to look after each
other while too there are so many ways
that they seem to have become an almost
self-sustaining entity still Daniel says
Hannah sometimes gets so ill from
exhaustion that she can't get out of bed
for a week his wife gets so ill from
being so overworked and so exhausted by
this lifestyle that he has forced on to
her that she can't get out of the bed
for a week sometimes and the birthday
present he gave her was an apron an
apron an apron that is a level of I'm
going to say douche bag that I can't
handle so when people were like well
this seems like a fake front that
they're putting up where she's actually
not doing all this but she's presenting
it as oh no no no she is she just didn't
want this and it's actually really sad
that she's doing this and she would
probably benefit a lot from some nannies
or some help with child care but Daniel
doesn't do ready-made meals and wishes
his wife did more even though he pushes
her to the brink of exhaust not to the
brink pushes her to exhaustion so that
she can't get out of the bed for a week
but actually I wish you did a little bit
more for me actually shut the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up
Daniel but what happens next in the
article is potentially my favorite part
and I highly recommend you go read it it
reads like a spy novel where this
journalist is trying to like get Daniel
out of earshot so we can ask some
questions to get the real information
because if Daniel's in here she's going
to not actually answer how she actually
feels look at this she says I just love
having them at home it's so quiet
talking about giving birth to her eight
children although Henry and Martha were
born in a hospital and people got mad at
her for that because they said well I
thought you were a tradwife who gives a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] but she says that she gave birth to
them without pain relief the interviewer
says none at all she shakes her head why
asks the interviewer she says I don't
know I just have never loved taking it
she stops herself except with Martha one
of the girls who was born in the
hospital I was 2 weeks overdue and she
was 10 lb and Daniel wasn't with me
Daniel the husband wasn't with me dot
dot dot she lowers her voice this is so
dramatic Daniel is currently out of the
room taking taking a phone call she
continues so I got an epidural and it
was an amazing experience hiding the
fact that she got an epidural from her
husband because she doesn't want him to
know that she got pain relief so clearly
the reason that she hasn't had pain
relief before is because he's been there
and he doesn't approve of it because she
described it as an amazing experience
and she lowered her voice so he wouldn't
hear the journalist asked where was
Daniel that day she says it was shipping
day for the meat boxes and he was
Manning the crew yeah by the way the
crew I have a hard time believing
Manning the crew means anything other
than standing like this well now now put
that meat over there boys I love being a
cowboy get that cow facing that way way
to go gentlemen I'm a real cowboy by the
way why is the framing like this from
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] long legs let me in now and
it'll be nice not once not twice but you
guys know long legs I think I already
did that in a video damn it just really
stuck with me I'm scared of that movie
not as scared as I am of Daniel because
check this out anyways it was shipping
day for the meat boxes and he was
Manning the crew the journalist goes but
the epidural was kind of great she
pauses and smiles it was kind of great
and then the journalist says I want to
ask her about birth control she he's not
saying this to her he's saying this to
the article that he wants to ask her
about birth control but that they're
surrounded by so many of her children
and Daniel is back in the room now too
so the journalist by the way Megan agnu
shout out Megan annu Megan can sense the
tension when Daniel is in in the room
and how there are certain topics that
shouldn't be talked about Megan is
picking up on that but she says do you I
pause and look at her fixedly plan
pregnancies what happens next Daniel
says no when he says no I guess that
means when God says no no we don't plan
pregnancies When God says no we don't
have I guess that's what he's saying but
Hannah responds gently it's very much a
matter of prayer for me I'm like God is
it time to bring another one to the
Earth and I've never been told no Daniel
says but for whatever reason it's
exactly 9 months after a baby that she's
ready for the next one he says Daniel
says it's a matter of prayer but somehow
it's exactly 9 months Megan agnu the
journalist continues the neans have
strongly held Mormon beliefs which they
mention far more in person than they do
online that's interesting the Mormon
Church emphasizes heterosexual unions
and sexual Purity it opposes elective
abortions allowing for exceptions only
when the pregnancy results from rape or
incest or when there is a threat of life
to mother or fetus by the way love it
when somebody spells it like fotus
because for real that little nugget is
an OP get out of here get out of here
not a fetus you're a fotus anyways moral
of that story is they have a kid every 9
months whatever reason it's exactly 9
months after a baby that she's ready for
the next one okay have you considered
Daniel a condom Daniel listen you have
made your wife do everything for you
have you considered potentially wrapping
that little bad boy up so that your wife
can potentially pursue even one one of
her dreams have you considered that have
you considered taking it out maybe
trying to do anything other than
impregnate this woman so that she can't
do anything other than Foster your
children and do nothing else with her
life have you considered that
potentially and I know this is going to
sound crazy to you Daniel she is her own
woman who might want to do something
other than raising your kids I don't
know I don't know have you have you
considered the fact that she didn't even
want to date you for 6 months and the
only reason she did is because you
called your daddy and got a plane ticket
to sit next to her like a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] creep
and then she said for a year I don't
want to get married and then 3 months
later you were married to her and then 3
months after that you had a kid and she
had to give up her ballet life and then
move to a farm to raise these kids with
you or sorry raise these kids for you
although she's not doing enough but you
are doing the laundry as we read earlier
and then you just give her another kid
the second that she's done maybe
probably the whole time she's like okay
but once this is over once this kid is
over I can't wait to get back to ballet
and I'm really going to be able to
pursue it oh bam another kid then she's
like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] this is really shitty but you
know what honestly it's great to be a
mother and I love this it's such a
beautiful life but I can't wait till
this one's over and I can focus more on
belly bam another kid and then five more
times Daniel we do not need more of your
progyny in this world and I'm not saying
that in a bad way you have eight eight
is plenty eight is more than enough you
can stop you can go snip snap oh my God
your wife is 34 years old and she has
eight children so the moment that she
started dating you her life has been
nothing other than filling the mold that
you have created for her and when she's
with you we see her faces like this or
egg apron I really wanted to go to gree
it's really cute and when she's doing
ballet she's looking like this you know
actually believing in herself loving
herself having a great time hey have you
considered Daniel that the joy of your
wife kind of matters a little bit no
obviously not because you're acting like
it doesn't matter at all meanwhile the
ENT High reason that this incredibly
talented ballerina with a full ride
scholarship to juliard I cannot
emphasize enough a full ride scholarship
to juliard she had a amazingly bright
future in ballet ahead of her you said
actually I have so much money and I'd
rather she stay here while I get eight
real cowboys to do the work in front of
me while I man the crew hey pick up that
shovel hey you pick up that pitch for
hey start digging in the dirt a little
bit get that cow to face that way I'm a
cowboy R him baby that's you Daniel do
you think that that life is actually
better and deserving more respect and
care dedicated to it than somebody who
got a full ride scholarship to juliard
buddy you are so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Rich you should
have fueled her entire life and all of
her dreams with your [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] money
because clearly you have nothing other
than a desire to get out of the shadow
of your own dad when all you can do is
ask him for favor to get yourself
everything that you could ever [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
want have you consider that maybe your
desire and your dreams are a little bit
selfish and just focused on getting out
from under your dad's Shadow and even
when you're doing that all you're doing
is hiring people with daddy's money to
do the real work for you so that you can
cosplay as a cowboy while somebody who
actually has talent who actually had a
future in doing something amazing and
unique that not a lot of people are able
to do you took her and you trapped her
in your life where she has to raise your
kids on your farm in your life you are
the son of a billionaire the only thing
that you should have been doing is
saying oh my God I'm glad I'm so rich
let me put all of this money behind you
so that you can pursue this career in
art fully happily and you would do that
if you loved her more than you loved
yourself Daniel you are such a little
loser boy and the fact that she is so
scared that she can't even say that she
got an epidural around you because she's
scared that you're going to judge her
and get upset with her for that bro [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
off [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] off you're just a loser
you're a loser sorry everybody who's
watching this video understands it we're
all on the same page it's not hard to be
a better husband than that like it
really isn't most people are it's not
even like me on a high horse being like
I can't believe you're like this you
suck a objectively from an average point
of view if you as a person were average
and treated your wife averagely imagine
how much happier she would be but in
said everything's about you suck Daniel
sorry you suck but that's my opinion now
Daniel I'm going to ask you to do one
thing to turn your life around fire your
crew for 1 month and genuinely try to
run the farm by yourself prove that
you're doing that and then maybe I'll
respect you as a cowboy but I will never
respect you as a husband or a father hey
and if you love this video hey all I'm
going to say is Please Subscribe hey man
I for real love I love Di here listen
there's no calories in it what's the
problem oh oh There are studies that
suggest overweight people drink a lot of
diet drinks yeah it's because if you're
overweight and you're trying to lose
weight you're going to drink diet drinks
doesn't mean that it's not good doesn't
mean that I should just start getting
regular ones with the calories in them
when I like it so much when it's diet I
love diet root beer everybody say with
me right now diet root beer diet root
beer diet root beer diet root beer diet
root beer diet root beer diet root beer
