oh hey how's it going
school [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] sucks am i right hey me
and a couple of guys were gonna go over
to Matt's house and subscribe to Eddie
Berbick what you don't subscribe to
Eddie beurre back but people who
subscribe to Eddie Verbeck are cool
stuff you just fell victim to peer
pressure you don't need to subscribe to
me to be cool you have to subscribe to
my podcast as well that I run with Gus
Johnson then you're cool because you are
such an idiot and fell for the pure
pressure it seems like you need a lesson
in something very personal to my
childhood it's time to learn about the
drug abuse resistance education program
otherwise known as dare
[Music]
explaining what dere is is a little bit
weird because a lot of people had dare
in their schools and learned a lot about
it when they were children
and I'm sure a lot of people also
watching didn't have to deal with it at
all because it's not in many schools
anymore either way we're gonna hear me
talk about it a little bit so let's
learn some things also obviously I'm not
an expert in this because you know look
at me but I will be linking every
article I use in the description below
just you know so you could support the
actual research that was done that I
didn't have to do so there was a program
started in 1983 in Los Angeles
California the Los Angeles Police
Department and public schools came up
with an idea to have police officers
come to the classroom and teach kids
about not doing drugs the sole reason
for dare is to make sure that kids don't
abuse drugs which is just a good
intention all around I want to get that
off the bat first because we're kind of
gonna be trashing there for a lot of
this video but I want you guys to know
that the original intention was good
so the Washington Post article I found
for it said the program drew bipartisan
praise and spread like wildfire
politicians realized that by supporting
dare they could paint themselves as Pro
cops and pro kids President Ronald
Reagan proclaimed the first national
dare day in 1988 a tradition that
continued well into the Obama
administration now I have some expertise
in talking about this because in my
elementary school the DARE program was
huge before we get into the PSAs I just
want to reveal my personal bias against
dare now this might seem silly to you
but you graduated from dare and at the
end of sixth grade for me when we were
graduating dare the officer promised the
greatest night of our lives
he said that everybody from our school
would go to a bowling alley on a Friday
night and they would lock the doors and
we would spend an all-nighter in the
bowling alley
he said there would be laser tag he said
there would be arcade games there would
be unlimited pizza and soda slash pop
there's a small theater where movies
play the entire night so you could go do
that pretty much a 12 year old
three but when we got there things were
different it was still cool it was an
all-nighter in the bowling alley they
kept up with that promise but unlimited
pizza I only got one slice and there
wasn't enough food for everybody
I didn't eat dinner that night and I was
12 so I got one slice of pizza and then
it was like alright stay up until 5:00
a.m. until your dad gets here there was
absolutely no laser tag the arcade games
were to crane machines now I realize
that this sounds like the most
privileged thing ever
cuz I still had a cool dare program that
supported the kids in the community to
hang out and have fun but it wasn't as
fun as I wanted it to be so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] dare
let's watch some PSAs
[Music]
so yeah I lost the audio to the intro to
this get off my back dude
pretty much what I said is that dere
needed to advertise to parents and kids
so they would want to get it in their
schools so here's a commercial they ran
to try and convince people drugs some of
the big kids do them but my mom and dad
helped get this Dare anti-drug program
in our school
it's run by specially trained police No
[Music]
okay well one thing we know is the just
saying no initiative didn't work at all
so it's a little weird seeing that but
okay if I want dare in my school how do
I do it call the police department about
it ask them if they're willing to do it
[Music]
to get there in your kids school to my
visiting country style Donuts purchase
the Dare bear and show you kid proceeds
go to dare in your community oh wait
what go to country style Donuts and get
the Dare bear that seems like a really
weird way to get the dare program in
someone's school I guess you're
supporting it and showing that you'll
fund it but you got to buy country style
donuts to make sure your kids not on
drugs so that's a dare commercial and
it's kind of how they marketed
themselves but one thing I absolutely
love about the program is for some
reason they encourage kids to make their
own anti-drug PSAs let's look at one
from the mid-2000s about skaters
[Music]
okay quick sidenote that's the sickest
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] title card I've ever seen in my
life
rock on dude [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Mike is so cool guys
[Music]
what is it
nothing oh no she's gonna have to tell
Mike about the weed Mike's the coolest
guy around what are you gonna do give me
that I'm gonna be any good on your board
if you're doing this stuff hey Mike
what's it gonna take for us to skate
like that well first off this has
nothing to do with you
takes a lot of time and practice
dedication and oh oh what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Mike
it's it's not even weed it's a fruit by
the foot you're right Mike right on you
sell it man sweet girl yeah
honestly I can't even really make fun of
that one that's maybe the best anti-drug
PSA I've ever seen because I want to be
Mike so bad now not everything was
directly a dare program but even moving
into the 2000s there were still these
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] weird student made informational
videos that I don't understand it does
feel real when the game gets he makes
you do stuff I know doesn't it yeah here
we go
the smoking marijuana make you someone
special like part of a really important
crowd are you two going to try it I
don't know man game what do we need to
know about it so we can decide for
ourselves well I have some good news and
some bad news no no what is that tell me
what that is right now what was the
intention for this thing did they think
that they were gonna green screen
everything but his eyes and his lips and
they were gonna be able to do something
cool with it they're calling him the
game is he supposed to be a video game
what video game have you ever played
that looks like this guy good news and
some bad news
and while there is no good news about
kids in marijuana that's always bad kids
smoking marijuana hit a record low
there's some good news about kids in
marijuana I just wanted to prove you
wrong you [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] green screen monster
after we see this creature talk about
the dangers the health dangers of
marijuana they show a scene of these
kids after smoking and that their
conversation is absolute nonsense
I think I'll paint my room blue blue and
summer
yeah I can well I don't know if she'll
help I don't I think she doesn't like it
blue
well my parents said it was all right
with them strange isn't it
it's so hard to understand what they're
talking about it's really pretty weird
and they both think they're making
perfect sense yeah it's almost like
they're not high and they're just
pretending to say nonsense [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] cuz
that's what you wrote some people
actually go to class with this stuff in
their brains and then try to learn
things is that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] b-roll of a
mountain
who did the effects for this why would
he be a mountain I don't know I just I
can't get in the mind of the person who
made this and I want to it almost seems
like the person who made this was high
and finally to wrap up the bad news
about marijuana there is mounting
evidence to show that it can decrease
the production of sexual hormones and
you should know that the younger you are
the more marijuana could harm it and
right before I go because you probably
didn't pay attention to the rest of this
you can't [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] if you smoke weed also
what is the design happening on him this
whole thing is [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] insane so I
should say now that there were studies
done on dare that are pretty famous now
that proved that the original programs
for dare did not work at all there's
actually one study that suggests that
kids who were in dare were more likely
to do drugs so no matter what your
opinion on drugs are we know that these
programs did not work I think a surefire
way to get kids to not abuse drugs is to
make sure the bowling alley has a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] laser tag place if you're gonna
tell a sixth grader there's gonna be a
laser tag I love laser tag
I don't like bowling in the early 90s
when studies started to come out about
dare not working the director of dare
was shocked by it and I get why because
it was a new program and you'd think oh
all this information and all this stuff
is definitely gonna make sure kids don't
do drugs but that wasn't the case and
whether you like it or not what we're
kind of finding out is that it's very
hard to tell people not to do drugs
honestly not being an expert in any of
this I would think that the number one
way to get kids to stop would be to have
their local cop come to their
school and directly tell them hey I'm
the guy that has to arrest you if you do
drugs so please don't make me arrest you
but that doesn't work those kids go
directly into high school in that
neighborhood and still smoke weed and do
drugs but watching more of the videos
you can kind of get an idea for why it
didn't work this marijuana can mess you
up we've been good for what 15 years
nothing's ever happened okay
kind of an odd approach that I'm not
used to seeing in drug PSAs they're
saying that these two guys have been
smoking weed for 15 years and they're
just fine this does not match up at all
with the times I don't understand
anything in fact I'd say I'm exactly the
same as when I smoked my first joint
marijuana can make nothing happen to you
- okay so that's a really bizarre take
that I've actually never seen before
what his name is Eddie which doesn't
really make sense because I'm kind of
the only one I understand what they're
trying to do there's a real thing of
kids in high school not all of them but
certain kids who start smoking weed and
they do it too much it hurts their
grades and their productivity and their
friendships abusing any substance can
result in negative actions but if you
make an ad like this people who smoke
weed just want to say [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you to that
because they might be productive and see
that and it might make them want to do
it more because [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you for telling
them not to and that was a big thing is
that if you look at the timeline for it
the late 80s crossing into the early 90s
is when dare was in full swing and
that's where parents and police officers
and teachers were telling kids don't do
drugs don't ever touch drugs but that's
also the time that rap and punk rock
were becoming mainstream and the
attitude generally from kids in the
early 90s were [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] our parents and [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
our teachers and
as said in the popular song so directly
telling kids that they couldn't do
something in a time where culturally
that generation wanted to do the thing
you're telling them not to do I get how
it wouldn't work that well but maybe
dare would have worked if they gave me
more than one slice of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] pizza at
the all-nighter
that's all maybe nobody would do drugs
if you gave more pizzas of the kids you
promised unlimited pizza that's like not
even possible that why would I believe
that I'm so stupid
[Music]
so I forgot to film one more thing give
me another break dude just to start the
positives off I forgot to mention their
anti cigarette campaign just from
personal experience I think a big reason
I didn't smoke cigarettes as a kid was
because of the lessons dare taught and
there's no direct study saying dare
specifically brought smoking numbers
down because there was a lot of factors
to it but smoking is definitely way
lower than it was in the 80s so it looks
like they had a large hand in dropping
the cigarette smoking numbers now the
cool thing about dare you know cuz
there's really cool is there were some
lessons that had nothing to do with
drugs there was some that were teaching
you not to play with guns you know they
would give valuable info like if you see
a gun and there's no parent around call
the police or get a parent never pick it
up never assume a gun isn't loaded just
things you know to make sure that kids
didn't hurt themselves but the way they
would do it was so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] weird here's
a series they did called retro Bill's
safety tips what should you do if you
find a gun what should you do if you
find a gun that I say gun I sure did
guns and other weapons are dangerous and
should not be handled by kids which is
you I hate how fast it moves it's it's
everything's too fast never touch guns
or bullets but never touch other weapons
such as knives if you find a gun or
other weapon don't touch it tell your
parent and trusted adult or the police
about it right on hold on retro bill
you're going too fast
you're so cool and the cameras are
moving so fast I can't bring it all in
you're not cooler than Mike though
that's for sure don't even [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] try
retro bill look at you you'd never be
Mike if your parent or guardian keeps a
gun or weapon in the house follow the
safety rules that you've set up with
them but remember don't touch her play
with a weapon that is kept at home
actually you're winning me over retro
bill this is some fun you're giving me
info like keeping it light I like this
did you know that every day
approximately six children and teenagers
are killed by gun shots no way way and
if every eight children who die before
the age of 21 one child dies because he
or she was shot Jesus Christ dude what
else are you gonna tell me hey guys
retro Bill here do you know everyone you
know is gonna die one day did you not
get a four-year degree and you make
youtube videos in your
you're really scared that it might end
one day and that people might just
decide that you're stupid and give up
and your entire dream dies in an instant
because people finally decide that they
don't want to watch you anymore and it
just crumbles in front of you whoa so
after like a decade of research against
what they were doing dare finally
decided to change their tune they
rebranded with a new program that was
called keeping it real in the article in
The Washington Post it says that on
their tax filings they actually changed
themselves from being an anti-drug
program to just helping kids make good
decisions and that's what the keeping it
real program is actually about it's not
about scaring kids about drugs but it's
trying to teach them how to make safe
and good decisions throughout their
childhood which is good but the thing is
there's just no real research yet on
whether that's working either way though
just for the conversation it's a better
approach to treat kids you know with
respect and not try and scare them into
not doing something because they'll
probably just end up doing it anyway but
recently this young cool handsome dude
came with a new plan that's even better
than keeping it real it's called the we
have actually laser tag and unlimited
pizza and arcade games initiative and
it's a hundred percent effective sure
there's no research on it yet but I can
guarantee you that this is the right way
to go so dare if you would please just
contact me or maybe state publicly that
I was right and that you're sorry for
not giving me unlimited pizza and laser
tag and arcade games all will be well
and kids will stop doing drugs forever
so um I know you're welcome America
[Music]
thank you to Justin Madison Derek Duncan
Aaron business vulture Kelly Colleen
Bernard Sophia Leah
Anthony Carol Anne Damien Gabrielle Tom
Bell Kenzie Mallory amico Jackie Lindsey
Aurora
Dianna cold brewskies Alex Lisa Megan
Chiara zou Miranda Reese Amanda achieve
on Haley Cara
Kat Brian Jasmine Josie / masta voila
Reese Dave and Janet and Cody thank you
guys so much
