the conservative view is just that like
the winners are the winners and the
losers are the losers and that's fair
because that's based on competition and
competition is its own process of
fairness for those on the left it's like
well we should make sure that if people
do lose they're protected in some way
and that actually they have more
opportunities to become winners and that
the winners pay a little bit more to
make sure that Society Works a little
bit better whereas the Marxist or the
Socialist view should be there shouldn't
be winners and losers and people to make
that make the rules it should be we all
make the rules together it's a
completely different way of organizing
[Music]
Society the game is rigged that's
something that people on the left have
been saying for a decade obviously a lot
longer but that particular phrase really
goes back to the
mid-2010s and for a long time it felt
like if you said it you were shouting
into a void nobody was listening fast
forward 20123 and virtually everyone in
politics on the left or the right
accepts that the game is rigged that a
tiny Elite benefit while the rest of us
lose from the status quo The
Establishment does so well at the cost
of everyone else if you
will but even though there's agreement
about the game being rigged that doesn't
mean there's agreement on what to do
next clearly people on the left and on
the right have very different proposals
going forward and I think the reason why
there is a gap between those two sides
is basically because there's a different
Reon reading on what power is who has it
and how things change now for people on
the left financial and economic power is
directly translated into Political
social and cultural power it might be
comforting to think we live in a
meritocracy or that political
representatives are there on Merit and
they represent the will of the people
but fundamentally they're there to
reflect vested powerful economic
interests and that is exactly why we got
Grace Blakeley on for today's show Grace
is in a Economist she's a writer she
also does loads of Media stuff from talk
TV to the BBC and Jeremy Vine she's a
fantastic young Economist and her
interests have always focused on finance
and the kinds of Power which emerges
from it Grace welcome to Downstream
thank you so much for having me I have
been waiting for this conversation for
so long I have missed you very very much
too it's been a while it's been a really
long time it's been a really long time
we haven't I feel like I haven't really
seen that much since Co yeah well I mean
I went away you went away you've been
writing a book yeah I wrote a book I
went away to write a book partly
although I didn't spend that much time
writing my book I spent a lot of time
just wandering around Central America
surfing um making trouble and yeah I got
back like two months ago and now here I
am back in the melee and you were
obviously my first priority number one
call Navar media first exactly the today
program
second you're obviously very leftwing
obviously so I've been told yeah verying
in terms of your economic
commitments but you're a well spoken
Oxford graduate from basing Stoke yeah
from the home counties um what happened
between you being a fresh-faced Oxford
graduate who went onto work at
KPMG and then having the kinds of
political economic commitments you have
now was it something you had as a as a
young person did they intensify when you
into the labor market was there a moment
of of of intellectual revelation
how does this trajectory look I think
it's a combination of a lot of different
things so it does kind of go back to
when it definitely goes back to when I
was growing up because I'm obviously
from like a a posh well-off background
um but my mom was you know grew up on
the council state in basing Stoke and
her dad was a hardcore communist Trade
union organizer for the
tgw um he was like you know going over
to Russia we had little busts of Lenin
in the house my uncles are called Carl
and Kier both with a K like you know
properly
into the whole um you know inter leftism
from a very young age um and my mom kind
of took those values definitely along
with her she had also like she was the
first in her family go University went
to Cambridge had a terrible experience
of Cambridge because everyone was like
you know treated her terribly because
they were all she was like I arrived
everyone was like oh what school did you
go to and she was like I went to a
comprehensive and winklebury and they
were like what so kind of that I think
Consolidated her leftwing values and my
dad ended up just kind of falling into
that sort of sort of field as well they
ended up doing things like you know they
traveled around the world and did the
Nicaragua solidarity campaign and
eventually ended up doing very boring
kind of professional things no offense M
dad I love you uh doing kind of boring
professional Executive coaching and that
sort of stuff but retained those like
left-wing values and always raised me
along those lines I mean if they hadn't
my Grandad was still there all the time
and he would have been like what are you
doing like what are you talking about um
so I was always like really into
politics we had a very political
household old I did things like you know
I wrote for the new Statesman right that
was something that I did like three or
four years ago um maybe a bit more than
that five years ago um and when I was
like 14 I had a letter published in the
new Statesman talking about like I can't
remember something to do with you know
the transition from brown to Blair and
like what needed to be done and that was
like my granddad had that framed and put
on the wall so there are all these like
political values that there were in our
household um but I think the second
thing was that I was always in trouble
so like I was like you know I went to
all these fancy schools but I was
expelled from two of them um suspended
like constantly just was constantly in
trouble like with everyone and I mean it
was relatively easy to get into trouble
if you go to private school I'm not
saying that I was like you know this
tear away but like I did some pretty
crazy stuff and like I never really
never really kind of understood the
boundaries of what I should and
shouldn't do always kind of felt like
you know rules are stupid and that gave
me that kind of rebellious spirit I
think that went with like the the
leftwing values um but I was never like
I was always like oh I'm going to I
don't know go and like work for the UN
or like um I don't know maybe like be a
politician or something that was fairly
like middle of the road it was only um
after I think you know I so I did this
PP degree Oxford and it was very like
you know I I think I learned more in my
African studies Masters about like the
way the world actually works and I did
my PP degree the PB degree was very
liberal very down the line just for
people watching PP is the is the degree
that all the sort of opinion makers and
politicians in the UK do from David
Cameron
to pretty much every majorc Nick
Robinson and whatnot politics phos and
economics yeah it was created um to
educate the kind of the people who would
be going on to govern the British Empire
basically it's supposed to have
everything that you need to be
inculcated into the values of like the
elite basically and all of the kind of
reference points that you would need to
be able to kind of Converse with with
those people so it's you know not par
ularly it's obviously not radical at all
it's like very mainstream middle of the
road education um and as I said I wanted
to kind of go work for the UN or doing
something in the kind of international
sphere liberal do goody stuff so I went
to do an African studies degree so you
were a lib yeah basically yeah I would
have said I was like a left lip I was
like you know like I want to like do
things to change the system and make
things work slightly better for you know
those who don't come out make poverty
history oh 100% I was totally into all
that sort of stuff yeah that was like
totally my identity um did my African
studies Masters realized how utterly
screwed up that entire world is so like
I did a bunch of um of research and like
you know traveled quite a lot and met
lots of people in the UN and in Nos and
whatever and realized how dark um things
really are there and quite how you know
how when you are in a job that is
working to kind of pick up the pieces uh
from A system that is fundamentally
messed up at like the very highest
levels it can only create kind of
disillusionment
um so then I was like right okay well we
need to change the system I started
thinking about politics I initially was
like I'm going to go organized for the
greens and I did a little bit of that
when I was uh in my masters then the
2015 election came around and I think
that was when a lot of stuff started
changing for me I remember like sitting
in an Oxford College uh when Ed Millan
lost I hadn't even voted for Ed Millan
i' voted green and just being like what
is going on like how can we be how can
this happen like how can we be going
down this road of just like more and
more it when it's just so obviously
wrong and you know the the whole
ideology that it's built on is so
obviously kind of corrupt um and then
Corbin ISM happened it was actually my
boyfriend at the time who was like oh
have you heard about this Corbin guy he'
be he he seems quite cool wow so this
guy's actually a pivotal figure in your
in like your career personal political
trory amazing who knows maybe it would
have happened anyway but he was like you
should look into this I looked into it
and then was like this is amazing
started going along to all the events um
and and like and getting much more
involved in the labor party and then
that was kind of when I was like right
okay this is what I want to do like I
want to get involved in this world see
you know how I can be useful and that
started by doing policy um so after I'd
left University I had this stint at KPMG
um and yeah that was working in their
like management consulting um doing kind
of public sector work uh and what was
that what was that like it was
interesting right because like the
projects I was working on at the time um
it was in Greater Manchester and um they
were kind of doing like loss leading
work so the idea was that you would you
know not make huge amount of profit you
would work with these new um combined
authorities and try and like develop to
product develop a product that you would
sell elsewhere so at the time it felt
quite interesting I was like learning a
lot about it was all to do with Service
delivery so it was you know like um
everything you know there was a lot of
work on like people with complex needs
and combined dependency and how people
who interacted with lots of different
services like you know Children's
Services social care the criminal
justice system all these different sorts
of things like how you needed early
intervention to kind of deal with those
those sorts of issues and obviously it
was all couched in the language of like
how you could save money but me coming
into this as like completely green I was
like wow this is fascinating like this
is how things actually work eventually I
kind of realized oh no we are literally
developing a product that we are going
to be selling to to other combined
authorities as a way of making money and
it just kind of started feeling more and
more alienating also I wasn't very good
at it I was good at the research like
all the kind of looking into like what
works and how we should be designing
these things but I wasn't very good at
selling and I wasn't very good at client
interactions or any of that sort of
stuff um I don't really know why
probably for the same reasons I kept
getting expelled but anyway I then left
um decided I wanted to go do think tanky
work so I could go into policy maybe
from their politics started ippr had a
great time that was when you know I met
you guys and um started yeah like doing
more media doing more writing like like
getting much more involved in like
actual organizing and it was just kind
of like you know all uphill with a lot
of downs as well from there did you ever
subscribe to tatler I never subscribed
to tatler no never you never have have
you ever read an issue of tler I don't
think so I'm not saying that I've never
read like a fancy magazine I'm pretty
sure I've read like Vogue or whatever
but I was never really that that into it
Cosmo Horse and Hound no I'm not that
posh
are like upper middle class are there
any people in your sort of you know your
Ambit like your your parents friends oh
I mean at Oxford yeah I met some of the
like poshest people that you could
imagine at Oxford like just unimaginable
amounts of not just like wealth but also
privilege and um you know when I went to
Oxford I was like because you know I
went to these private schools but ended
up going to sixth home College like you
know obviously had friends who went to
state school that sort of stuff I was
like oh yeah I'm really Posh and then I
went to Oxford and I was like oh my God
I am like a commoner to these people
yeah like they're all being like where
did you like where did you go to school
um Eaton chelam ladies dich like all
they all knew each other that was like
this massive group of people all knew
each other even some of the people that
go to those schools are view as common
because family was the first in their
family or whatever it is amazing it's
crazy I remember once I was reading
something in the Ft this was it was just
maybe no was a telegraph in fact and it
was like a it was like um etiquette
guide yeah for Christmas and you
shouldn't cheers and tap glasses and the
author of the article said that was LBC
little bit
common so you shouldn't like especially
with champagne glass you shouldn't tap
right what you should do is when you say
cheers you should lift the glass go
cheers and and then but the idea of like
touching is just like very vulgar that's
hilarious and I'm like these people live
in a different world so true I once
heard someone say um at Oxford I think
they were discussing like I someone got
a new boyfriend and they were asking
lots of questions and one of the
responses was oh don't worry darling
he's PLU which was People Like
Us very very concerning yeah I mean it's
it's weird like it was funny because I
spoke to my mom about this about the
same experience that she'd had she
actually came overtly from like a really
working-class background going to
Cambridge and just found the whole
experience so utterly alienating that it
was like outside of her comprehension
whereas for me I was kind of like oh I
see where I fit in in this hierarchy and
I'm like here and then there's all these
people who know each other who are like
here and there's this like I mean I
remember at the time reading um all of
these like novels like you know um like
Fitzgerald and EVN war and stuff about
like class systems in in the US and the
UK and being like Oh my God I suddenly
understand this this like from the
outside looking in at this world of like
Glitz and Glamour and everyone seems so
like um put together and very aware
about how to play with power like in
Friendship groups and like you know in
the world more generally and it's really
like um it really hooks you it's really
interesting to notice that happen um so
yeah I definitely kind of you know
experienced that when I was Oxford but
never kind of never really fully inside
never really fully outside I guess do
you think the left struggles to explain
that like I I feel for much of the
public you know I I say I'm middle class
because I like John Lewis and drink M&amp;S
gold brand tea and I think most the
public was I I you know I joke with my
wife and I say you know if the weit trow
is near us closes we're moving right and
I I say it mockingly and I but I view
those as like benchmarks of middle class
life they're nice things but I think for
most the public that's the case they
they they they can't comprehend there is
this quite big laay of people who
culturally economically socially just in
every single aspect of their lives they
inhabit a different thought world yeah
um think you think left us failed to
communicate that a bit I the way I think
about this um and this is actually
potentially going to be something I'm
going to be writing about in the future
is that you know we we think of
ourselves as living in this Society
right that is characterized by you know
winners and losers and we debate the
boundaries of that game and how you know
the winners should be taxed and how the
losers should be supported and everyone
has a sense of where they sit in that
game you know whether or not they're
like doing well whether or not
successful attractive what ever and
we're all kind of competing on with one
another to to succeed and we have a view
as to who's above us and who's below us
but there's actually a a set of people
who are outside of the game altogether
because they're basically the ones that
make the rules um and they are neither
winners nor losers they are in a very
real sense kind of much more in control
of actually the game itself and how it
works and a lot of our um educational
and cultural systems a lot of the the
educational and cultural systems that
these people come through are designed
to make them comfortable with the idea
that they are the ones that are in
control and that set the rules um so
you'll often hear and I have heard this
from from these people this idea that
they are the kind of you know def by
default the benevolent rulers of society
whether that is just because they are
genetically better or it's just because
they happen to have been you know
inculturated into this uh this
particular way of being that allows them
to be the kind of Guardians of society
they do see Society has divided into
between people who kind of make the
rules and those who just play the game
um and I think that's probably something
that maybe most people have an in like
some sort of intuitive sense of um you
know the idea that we can you know vote
different people into power but
nothing's ever going to change um but I
I don't really think it's something that
we talk about overtly and I don't want
it to sound kind of conspiratorial
because I'm not saying that like you
know we live in a world that's kind of
governed by a few people sitting in a
room deciding who gets what but
obviously um the institutions in which
we that kind of govern most of the
interactions that structure Our Lives
whether that's kind of Corporations or
political institutions Public Services
educational institutions there are
people in positions of power and
authority and as our society has become
more concentrated as larger institutions
have come to govern much greater areas
of social life the people in positions
of authority within those powerful
institutions have gained more control
over what happens for everyone else so
we talking about power let's get into
nuts and Bs sure and this is a talking
point which the left hasn't really
focused on I feel like we've left a lot
of it to the right um and often you know
there's this thing which is oh if
something's right coded then the left
has to think and say and do the opposite
I love that because it's always really
fun like going on TV and people will be
like right we've brought you on to have
this perspective on this subject and you
come in and you're like well actually
the entire way that you've structured
this dichotomy is completely wrong
they're short circuit don't they yeah so
I want to talk about ESG mhm ESG for
those who don't know stands for
environmental social and governance uh
it's meant to represent the standard for
investors to monitor how socially
conscious
businesses for some that has made it a
kind of a wokeness scorecard for
investors you know ESG is like uh yeah
woke top trumps for for various
companies what's your read on ESG maybe
we should actually maybe it be helpful
to kind of go back to that um that kind
of tricot toy set up a second ago which
was like winners and losers and people
who make the rules I think um left and
right often divide themselves based on
different ideas about how we should
treat winners and losers right so you
know the the right-wing view would be
like we live in a free market society
and the only thing that should matter is
which company makes the most profits so
we shouldn't be forcing them to consider
things like environmental social
governance objectives whatever the
market decides who wins whereas those on
the left would say well that's fine but
actually the Market kind of doesn't
account for all the the different
factors that we do want to account for
we need to change the rules a bit to
make sure that you know if you win um
you don't do it at the expense of other
people or if you lose then you're not
kind of just left to starve or die or
whatever um so we need to make the game
you know played a slightly different way
um and you know that's basically the
difference I suppose between kind of
neoliberalism and more Progressive
liberalism um the thing I think that
socialists should come in and say or
that maybe we don't often we always do
this um is actually to point out that
the entire game is being played based on
rules that have been you know developed
by someone else and in which you know
working people are always going to be
designed to lose so ESG the right will
say no you want competitive markets this
makes markets less compe competitive the
left would say it helps us to deal with
you know negative externalities that
actually make Society more Progressive a
Marxist would come in and look at this
and say well this is a way of Shoring up
the legitimacy of a capitalist system
that is fundamentally not based on free
markets is actually based on the
governance of society and control over
Society by huge corporations that are
able to exploit their workers and wreck
the planet without any um really any
kind of push back from the state
whatsoever because the state itself is
also largely influenced by those
corporate interests so ESG comes in as
this kind of autoc critique by the
people who govern the system as a way of
saying look we know what we're doing and
we're responsible and you can trust us
to be able to look after this system in
your interests but there is absolutely
no way that we will seed any of that
control to you we will look after the
system maybe in a more enlightened way
we will consider some of the things
you're talking about but you're not ever
going to be able to actually be in the
rooms where we make the rules and I
think that's like what should
differentiate a Marxist and a socialist
from a progressive liberal or you know
whatever it's actually saying we don't
just want to make the system a bit
fairer we want to give people
power just on ESG as well it's a it's a
huge money-making opportunity so black
Rock's ESG aware fund charges fees five
times higher than its core S&amp;P 500 fund
and ESG investment funds have 43% higher
fees than conventional investment funds
so they make more money these we'll talk
about the kinds of companies involved in
this they make more money around these
products and like you say it also
fulfills a really important political
role but it also means there's there's
tremendous power that's now being
concentrated amongst the financial Elite
and like you say before that was a
concentration of Economic and political
power based upon the idea that greed is
good you know Gordon Gordon gecko as the
kind of main character archetype of the
1980s that was what our society was it
does feel like in the last well since
the GL financial crisis as as anglophone
Elites are trying to resurrect political
legitimacy consent they're having to
change that archetype a bit more to
caring enlightened Capal now do you
think they've been compelled to do that
uh is it just them trying to exploit an
opportunity from you know do Gooding
liberals who who would like them to be
like that what what where's it coming
from because it does get that criticism
from the right as well and they would
say I don't agree with it I don't agree
with the point behind it but it's
coherent which is well look private
entprise is designed to First Look After
customers secondly look after
shareholders thirdly look after workers
forget the rest of this crap yeah so so
where has it come from and why has it
become so prominent in the last say 10
years so to understand where it comes
from you know I think we need to look I
we've been talking kind of or I've been
talking kind of quite abstractly in
terms of structures and like you know um
and and classes and that sort of thing
we need to think about how the people in
positions of power you know who have the
capacity to kind of make decisions that
will affect everyone else what they're
thinking about when you know developing
and implementing things like ESG
now it is obviously very clear to anyone
with eyes that capitalism has at least
since the global financial crisis if not
really since 1980s been suffering from
both a crisis of kind of legitimacy and
um and really kind of a crisis which is
pitting capitalism against democracy on
the one hand and also um a crisis of of
kind of of reproduction of of
accumulation basically um in which um it
is becoming harder and harder to produce
the stuff we rely on um to survive and
that you know capitalism re relies on
for for constant growth either because
of you know climate imperatives or
because of uh collapse in productivity
or because of you know escalating
inequality all these sorts of reasons
that that play into the kind of
long-term productivity crisis that we've
had and the associated Financial
breakdowns that that have come alongside
that so there's this kind of legitimacy
crisis and a kind of uh you know a
crisis of of the reproduction of
capitalist um productive relations and
social relations um and if you are a
member of you know the ruling class
let's say you are I don't know Larry
think and you're the head of Black Rock
one of the world's largest asset
managers um and you as you know the head
of one of the world's largest asset
managers have a portfolio well you don't
have a port you will have a portfolio
yourself but you govern a company that
has lots of portfolios that invests in
asset classes across the whole economy
that has a stake in pretty much every
you know large firm in say the S&amp;P 500
um just by virtue of the fact that so
big you have to be that Diversified and
it is almost all of them right yeah yeah
totally yeah um you're thinking right
well if my business is going to continue
to grow I need not just not the kind of
you know um the Dynamics that you might
want if you're a hedge fund which is
lots of uh you know massive up and down
ups and downs lots of crises that can be
exploited to um you know make use of
Arbitrage strategies and make clever
quick trades that are going to make you
money in the short term you want really
kind of long-term stable growth you want
Corporation to grow you want corporate
profits to grow and you want people to
be able to accumulate savings that they
can invest in your your assets and more
generally speaking you know you want a
society that is characterized by
relative stability and that is true
across a whole range of Industries it's
true across you know the political class
in general who if you were to look at it
from a kind of marxist perspective would
see their role as um not just like
maintaining individual capitalist
Enterprises but actually maintaining the
broad conditions that allow capitalist
social relations capitalist reproductive
relations to to reproduce themselves um
then yeah you know you are going to be
worried about things like climate
breakdown because that threatens you on
all of those levels it threatens the
legitimacy of the system because people
are going to get scared people are going
to die it threatens the um the relations
of production it threatens um you know
the relationships between different
social classes I mean if you look at the
the global economy and the way in which
uh climate breakdown is like to affect
different parts of it we're going to see
see breakdowns in Global Supply chains
of the kind that we saw during the
pandemic much more frequently um and um
it threatens the kind of very
foundations of accumulation just because
like it's going to be harder to get
things out of the ground and like um
create the crops that people need to
survive and all those different sorts of
things so that's one argument which is
that ESG is about like a long-term
rational self-interest on on the behalf
of the capitalist class but the
companies with the best ESG scores in
America and I find this fascinating and
it's right now it's a right-wing talking
point but on this that correct the
companies with the best DSG scools in
America are Google Microsoft and the
Bank of America meanwhile Tesla which
produces literally you know electric
vehicles and you might agree I disagree
obviously with their labor standards and
we need to have a conversation about
using recycled lithium for EVS but
whatever EVS are clearly better we want
more public transport EVS are clearly
better than the cars that people would
producing you know 20 years ago and for
for the century preceding that and the
idea that Bank of America has a much
better ESG score than Tesla yeah and
that's a rightwing talking point and I'm
just like yeah but they're kind of right
even if you don't like Tesla Tesla has
accelerated the adoption of electric
vehicles by 10 15 maybe 20 years and
it's really it's really accelerated the
process for for Detroit car
manufacturers all around the world China
so like the idea that that somehow gets
like middling ESG scores I think it's
quite fair to say something's not quite
right here it's not it's not just about
the rational self-interest thing you
know well I think there's two things
again going on which is the the the
rationale behind it and the rationale
behind any climate policy that a
government will Implement will come from
this we need to protect capitalism
basically and you know this kind of the
Keynesian idea Jeff man wrote that book
that was like you know the Keynesian
philosophy is basically like protecting
capitalism means protecting civilization
and there is an argument you know that
these people will view themselves as
these
enlightened um you know platonic rulers
whose job it is to basically make sure
that they have this view over society as
a whole and can put in place the the
like the conditions that give rise to
the the continuation of of capitalism
itself but and this is the m the the
interesting thing this is where things
actually get interesting if you're
looking at say the state as um a set of
Institutions or you know a mechanism of
organizing power um it is not staffed by
enlightened technocrats or platonic
rulers who can just make policy based on
what they consider to be the interest of
society as a whole they say it is you
know you ask a politician why they're
doing what they're doing they say they
govern in the general interest this was
Ralph Milan's famous critique of the
capitalist State and the way that the
labor party got sucked into it it was
because there's this idea of State
Elites as governing the general interest
which is very hypnotic it's like yes of
course we'll give these people power
because they're doing what's good for
the rest of us but actually the state
isn't that um it's um you know broadly
speaking as we think of capital it's a
social relation uh in the sense that
what goes on within the state and the
way that state power is exercised
reflects social struggle that take place
within society as a whole that's kind of
abstract but you know you can broadly
think of it as like battles that are
taking place within State institutions
whether that's in within you know the
treasury or any government Department um
the players in that battle will be
linked to wider groups um that will have
support from uh different you know
corporate uh institutions historically
unions um think tanks basically
different groups that are that make up
constellations of class interests that
structure all capitalist societies and
they will influence state policy not
just in a way that is uh is meant to
kind of protect the interests of that of
their class as a whole but in a way that
is meant to protect and promote specific
interests so like look at like Biden's
climate policies for example he comes in
and says we need to save the planet for
all these very good reasons he's backed
by capitalist Like Larry fin who say Yes
actually we do need to save the planet
for the sake of capital and yet because
because of the power of these different
groups these different specific
interests as opposed to the the general
interest of capital as a whole you end
up getting this hodge podge of climate
policies which actively undermine each
other in some senses even though the
narrative is we're doing something about
climate change everyone can see that
Exon Mobile still has a huge amount of
power can still see that you know all
these CL like these banks that are
funding climate change still have a huge
amount of power and so you have this
weird like um not only like the weird
fact of policies that go against each
other but the weird show
of politicians saying we're doing
something in your interests when it's
very clear that they're actually acting
on behalf of a very specific interest
yeah I think it and it leads to really
messy policy yeah which neither the left
nor the right can really understand so a
really good recent example is this
recent house building Announcement by
Michael Gove what does it look like well
they're saying that legislative changes
which result really from an EU dictat of
course in 2017 have led to fewer housing
starts and completions first all that's
not true we completed more houses in
2018 than 2016 16 but park that for a
moment the solution therefore is to
basically allow people building homes to
um to have those homes put more crap
into local waterways that's fine you
know it's you know called sediment but
they basically mean effluent and garbage
and rubbish that we flush down our
toilets now okay you would think that's
bad if you care about clean waterways
you might think it's good if you think
well actually know building houses are
more important but here's where it gets
really interesting because it isn't just
a regulatory change they like to say we
know we take a step back and we're we're
cutting red tape no 700 million pound of
taxpayer money is being spent how
hundreds of millions of pounds are being
given to house builders by the taxpayer
by the state hundreds of millions of
pounds are being given to private water
companies apparently they're private
they pay dividends to their shareholders
and yet the taxpayers having to pay for
for stuff here so what we're doing is
we're paying 700 million to allow some
people to stop polluting some people to
start polluting and apparently so we can
build more homes and you think hold on
couldn't we just use the 700 million P
to build to build our homes do you know
what I mean yeah but it's just it's like
and it's really messy chaotic and and
like screwed up yeah and I think that's
a big part of the political debate right
now it's it's why the left and the right
struggle to get a handle on anything and
it's why look nobody could administer
anything and I think like you say it's
because you have these competing
interests and also competing
ideas which because they're not governed
in a in a coherent structured way which
they were let's say until 2008 or if
you're being really you know
skeptical you know maybe the
1990s it's just a mess well I mean I
think this is the point right because
we've been stuck in politics for such a
long time in this sterile debate between
left progressives or liberal
progressives and neoliberals or right-
Wingers um and the debate is basically
like the state needs to do stuff on the
left you know the state needs to do
stuff we need to protect people from the
markets the free market is fine but it
needs to have some regulation over it
and the right saying the free market is
good State intervention leads to
corruption um you know we need to get
rid of like you know Nanny State and and
bureaucrats and these different sorts of
things and we have the same debate we've
been having for a hundred years and no
one's any the wiser and of course that's
because we've lost what should be the
Socialist or Marxist critique of all
this which is that we don't live in free
markets not only are the markets that
you know do exist under capitalism not
free but most of our lives are
structured by decisions that are made by
big corporate ations financial
institutions States politicians who are
insulated from democratic accountability
precisely because they're in the pockets
of of big businesses and what is really
missing there is just an understanding
of the way that power actually works we
have these big ideological debates and
the people who do PP like to have about
Freedom versus competition versus you
know protection and actually none of
that matters when it's just the brute
fact of power that is being exercised by
people who are in positions of authority
over everyone else who basically like
live in a game that has been designed so
that they lose no wonder you get people
you know going for these kind of
conspiracy theories which are like uh
you know the the world is being run in
this one room by like the world economic
Forum it's like that isn't true you can
understand why they think that because
there is this like fairly
coherent um network of Institutions and
actors that govern those institutions
that whenever a crisis happens do seem
to get together in a room and say right
this Bank gets bailed out that one gets
to collapse in the pandemic this company
gets a bail out that one gets to gets to
collapse and at the same time you're
being told oh we live in a free market
and if you go out and work really hard
and compete in that market and do really
well then you'll come out on top but
also if the company that has been
exploiting you for 10 years gets you
know extremely
over-indebted and need a bailout then
you're out on the street like of course
it sounds like the system is rigged
you're told you live in a free market
system and actually you live in this you
know it's like the Iron Fist of uh of
the powerful versus like the the
Invisible Hand of Adam Smith yeah this
was really brought home to me the other
day I was watching GB news with Darren
Grimes my regular Saturday viewing and
uh I was watching because I was about to
go on actually and I was preceded by a
guy called John rental who's this sort
of new labor you know the Russian
Soviets had a great word for this
ideologist yeah not an ideologue and
ideologist and PP PPE the job of pp by
the way is to train ideologists yes
totally um of of Market Capital um and
he was on there and Darren Grimes this
is what worries me because Darren Grimes
is talking more sense than John rental
Darren gri says well look there's this
massive difference right now between
savings rates and um and things like
mortgage rates or or credit card debt so
the base rate of interest is 5.25% at
the moment we all know it's been going
up for 18 months what's the base rate of
interest it's the it's the it's the it's
the rate of interest at which the bank
of in gives money to private Banks
obviously they have to make profits
because they're private Enterprises so
they have rates slightly higher right
now their savings rates I think the
average is about 2.6 2.7% the average
mortgage is almost 6% 5.7 5.8% so
there's this huge difference right so
they're basically skimming profits
they're charging far more than they
should be with regards to you know if
you want to take out debt from them but
if you're depositing savings they're not
really giving you enough so it's clearly
unfair Darren griam said that in his own
way and John rental goes no no and he
said should politicians be doing
anything about this and by the way
Jeremy Hunt called this a problem Jeremy
Hunt and John rental this Blair right
ideologist says oh there's no problem
with this the it's the free market we
shouldn't be getting involved oh bless
him it's the free market that's so
stupid it's so stupid like like the UK
Financial system is so far from a free
market it's been like accused of
oligopolistic behavior and like loads of
reports going back like years and but
he's it's the free market so first of
all first of all first of all we're
talking about monetary policy that's set
by the bank of England it's set by like
a bunch of people in a room there's no
invisible hand they arbitrarily
I mean they would say this is the
interesting because historically they
would say oh they are just setting the
current interest rate to align with the
long-term natural rate of interest which
is set by the market and actually QE and
the policies surrounding that have kind
of done away even with that idea so it's
now become obvious that actually Central
bank's just set interest rates there's
no natural long-term rate of interest
but then Darren grah says something
really interesting he says but hold on
you're saying it's the free market we
bailed out the banks in 200 that wasn't
the free market and I'm thinking oh God
he's got him and John rent goes no no no
no that wasn't we made money from that
it wasn't a bail out of of course it was
a bail would exist anymore if we
hadn't used taxpayer money to guarantee
their liabilities they would they were
insolvent and you know I that's where I
get and we're talking and it's really
important to disaggregate let's say
progressive liberalism from the left
what John rental was presenting there is
Progressive liberalism and it makes no
sense yeah and the right take
from Darren Grimes makes immeasurably
more sense and that's where as you say
people like yourself come in with with
something a little bit different well I
mean this is the point right because
there's two ways of responding to that
once you kind of once you peek past the
veil of of capitalist ideology once you
take what is it the red pill or the blue
pill are you supposed to take I can't
remember what is it they say they red
pill I just know black pill is the
really bad one okay whatever once you
take the pill that lets you see how
everything works um there's two ways of
dealing with that right um the the way
that I think most people learn to deal
with that is by um just being forced to
deal with this deep sense of
powerlessness right you peek past the
curtain you see that there are basically
structures in place that mean that even
though you're told from when you are
very very young if you just work hard
and do well your life will be good
actually you are playing in a game that
has been designed so that you lose and
you come back come out of that with with
a disillusionment with anger with a
sense of you know righteous indignation
basically which lends itself to the
right and it lends itself to that kind
of fascist ideology that kind of you
know this is a bit nerdy but like the
nian res that feeds fascist movement
Google that yeah pause Google
that um which basically says like okay
well I'm in this system the powerful
control it I can't touch the powerful
I'm just an individual so all I can do
is elbow all these people around me out
the way with this knowledge that I have
about how the system works in order to
get myself on top um and a step further
than that actually which you're seeing
in some really rightwing movements in
Europe particularly it's just burn the
whole thing down yeah it's like climate
change is coming um immigrants are
coming the end of the world is coming
basically like let the whole thing Burn
Let the elites Burn Let the system come
crashing down and let's just build this
little island for the worthy for you
know the like the way we consider our
group to be able to stay alive on um and
that is where we're going because that's
the way that individualism responds to
that realization of of of powerlessness
basically the other way is the way that
we would have historically is that you
would organize as part of a movement of
other people who share your interests to
change the system and actually not even
just to change the system but to bring
down the system as it is and in the
process of bringing down that system not
just allowing everything to crash to the
ground but constructing new institutions
in the process of Revolution really that
are based on different values that are
based on community that are based on you
know Collective struggle that are based
on social solidarity and support
um and that allow you to survive whilst
challenging the interests of the
powerful now because we live in such a
brainwashed individualistic Society it's
basically impossible for people to
imagine what that would look like like
if you ask someone how are you going to
you know like react against Injustice
they'll say oh I'll buy a tote bag or
like I'll tweet something like there's
no sense of how you might get involved
in a collective project to actually
challenge the structures of of the
system as a whole and that's the legacy
of neoliberalism and individual indiv
individualism that was the very aim of
like thatcherism was to destroy our
sense of of social solidarity so I think
for the left the biggest challenge is
yes firstly exposing the fact that the
system is rigged but I think most people
know that the system is rigged right
like this is basically what my
forthcoming book is about about all the
ways in which the system is rigged
what's it called it's called vulture
capitalism vulture capitalism corporate
crimes backd door bailouts and the death
of Freedom um so death of Freedom well
that's going to really go down by the I
can see I can see tu
saying the death of Freedom interest by
a
Marxist yeah um and yeah so that's kind
of what that that book is about it's
basically about all the ways the system
is rigged and and the beginnings of kind
of how we could think about building
something new but I think the real
challenge is actually speaking to this
nihilistic individualistic
conspiratorial um like resentful
response to that realization with a
politics of Hope rather than basically
like a politics of death so true like I
think one of the I thought in the second
half of the 2010s it was a huge win for
the left that you know we would you know
we'd go on the radio waves and on TV
2017 election um and we'd said the
system is rigged and you know we were
like wow so powerful Bernie kind of VI
it was working you know labor get
increased their vote by 10% you think
there is momentum here towards a
different kind of politics and I
remember talking to Jake bar at Tor MP
and he talked about you know what was
the the line they had for ter May um
strong and
strong stable and then I said she she's
not a strong woman I said she's strong
against the weak and she's weak against
the strong you exploit you exploit the
weak and you get on your knees in front
of the power so that ain't strength my
friend and he was like he oh go you know
inverting that little thing anyway so we
thought that was like a moment where we
were really cutting through with it and
like you say that's now the common sense
of everyone everyone says the system is
rigged it's only like these 5% of like
Libs by the way who were all in the
media yeah and like they're the only
ones who don't say the system is rigged
everybody everybody says the system is
Absol they might not be you know angry
but they might be saying like look for
now I'm doing okay you know I'm managing
which is many people right I'm not
saying they're all ready for revolution
this like everything was fine before
brexit or everything was fine before
whatever like if we could just go back
to normal sensible politics I don't want
to have to think about politics anymore
I'm politically homeless that sort of
yeah the sort of you know your new
balance um the rest is politics listener
kind of person but what what I mean what
I want to say is here that you're right
we thought in the in the latter half of
the 2010s that like wow there's this
huge political progress for the left to
say the system is rig people are buying
it there's an elite an avaricious Elite
who are screwing the rest of society
that is now the music coming from
everywhere that was also what Trump said
right frankly in many ways and you're
seeing a lot a lot with the right who
have obviously a very different
political message and like you say for
me you've got like the two archetypes
here which is like mid 20th century n
Evan okay you you you're your
your loved one or your sibling they have
tuberculosis or they have some you know
horrendous disease that's why we need a
National Health Service right okay well
something similar in the in the 2020s in
the United States oh you know a family
member can't afford insulin in the US
who are they watching Andrew Tate yeah
and he's saying it's the Matrix out to
get you the establishments out to get
you but what's he saying as the answer
he's saying get rich yeah you know Screw
lots of women um work out you know get
good at fighting and that's and in the
absence of Alternatives that's really
alluring for lots of young men yeah no I
totally see that because you're
basically you know again and this is the
massive ideological success of
neoliberalism more so than anything to
do with convincing us that you know we
live in free markets is to convince us
that we are individual competitors in
this big old game and that everyone has
broadly speaking the same chances to win
the game or if they don't then they at
least have the chance to better their
lot in life if they just you know work
hard and get to know know the rules of
the game and exploit their competitive
advantage against the people around them
um and that is the natural result of
putting Market ideology onto every area
of social life because you come to look
at yourself as like a commodity so
you're like why how can I win the game
better I need to you know understand the
rules and the rules are hidden so
someone like Andrew take can show me
what the rules are and then I need to
get strong and powerful so I can beat
everyone around me and then I'll be at
the top and maybe you know half the
people are think thinking well when I'm
at the top then I can do nice things for
my family or like make the system better
maybe they're thinking then I can take
control maybe they're thinking then I
can burn the whole thing down but
everything is structured on the idea
that you need to get to the top you need
to win you need to beat everyone around
you and only then can you start to think
about social change which is actually
the absolute opposite of how any social
change will happen it is how you make
yourself easy to control basically is by
buying this ideology that you can be a
winner in this system where there are
other people who will set the rules and
always shift the goalposts and where
there will always be losers and where
those losers will largely speaking
always be the same people and probably
you are part of that group that will
always be trapped in this constant
struggle and that will never really
escape the only way out of that is to
recognize that you are part of a group
and that your interests are not in
beating everyone else around you which
is ultimately impossible and you're
never going to be able to do anyway your
interests lie in kind of creating
communities that can work together to
firstly protect each other and support
each other and then actually start to
rebel against the people who are
actually in
charge we're going to clip that put it
on Tik Tok like Sig Sigma Sigma male
music the real Grace Blakeley on the
real Matrix it does sound like the
Matrix it on the real Matrix are
liberals our people are they part of our
movement and I I mentioned you know John
rental earlier on saying that you know
you know they leave the free market
alone and of course the banks are doing
nothing wrong when we bailed them out it
wasn't a bail out blah blah blah and the
sort of the formula political strategy
that you hear Time After Time After Time
Is that the left needs needs him to do
anything right he's one of our people
you know the left and and people I don't
think he's liberal but whatever you know
the center yeah which is very few people
numerically but obviously has tremendous
agenda setting power in C more generally
are they part of our movement are they
part of our Coalition or does the
inclusion of of establishment liberals
within our coalition
actually foreclosed the possibility of
broader class-based politics um you know
I I've got this question here do you
know do you think it's weird that the
Ford foundation and the Rockefeller
Foundation are viewed as somehow
advancing Progressive courses you know I
I I um I saw that Think Tank recently
what's it called more in common oh yeah
more in common we've got more in common
and they wrote this uh piece they had
this this poll rather and it showed that
if Jeremy Corin was leader of the labor
party lab he would only be lab would be
one point ahead of the the Tories and
obviously this was being R shown hold on
this is a poll brought to you by like
the Rockefeller foundation and the Ford
Foundation why do you think people
funded by people like that would ask
that question ask yourself and and it's
precisely those kinds of groups the sort
of liberal
NOS that we have been told I believed it
for a long time I mean you said earlier
you you wanted to work in that kind of
world they were part of our Coalition do
you think that's true or not I
think that
there are two questions one of which
relates to do we need to build a
Coalition in which the average person
who is maybe not that politically
engaged but probably Falls somewhere
around the in inverted center of the
political like Spectrum needs to be
involved yes and then what we do with
the hangover of blism and neoliberalism
and you know years of of this kind of
warped style of public debate that we
have had which is all of these people
who think they're very important and in
some ways are very important and don't
like us um and there are a number of
different answers to that and I think it
varies from person to person broadly
speaking I think these people are
rudderless and that's why they are
coming out and saying all of these wild
things you know they were thrust to
power on the back of a movement that
didn't threaten the status quo but which
still was kind of covered in this image
of progressiveness and change and hope
um and they still see themselves in that
sense they see themselves as kind of you
know vanguards of sensible compassionate
politics um who are protecting the
center ground against extremes on all
sides of course without realizing that
the very reason that the extremes have
grown more powerful as precisely because
they were in control but that's you know
besides the point um the question then
is I suppose you know how can they
either be engaged or neutralized and
that rudderless is in some ways um an AS
because um if we are able to kind of
basically build our own movement um
which we're still very much in the
process of doing that can
provide the fulcrum around which
political debate um is organized then
they have to pick a side we don't have
that power at the moment we don't have
that agend set agenda setting power at
the moment we are as the left as
socialists still in this kind of
confused position with regards to like
mainstream political debates like
sometimes people like me are on TV but
most of the time the issues that we're
talking about aren't the issues that
we'd like to be talking about we have a
limited amount of power to actually
shape the way that that process um
continues and it is actually those
centrists who are in these positions of
authority who are able to kind of set
set the terms of the debate if we're
going to be thinking about neutralizing
or engaging those people in a positive
way basically we would need to have more
power ourselves right and that is the
challenge I think if we're we're able to
kind of build this project back out
fight back against the narratives that
are being pushed by the far right build
institutions like Navara that gain some
level of agenda setting power those
people then have to start talking about
the things that we want them to talk
about and as soon as they're starting to
talk about the things that we want them
to talk about they then have to pick a
side and the sides are defined by us
right whereas at the moment we're going
into their institutions and we are put
into one of these two sides which are
defined by them this is why what I was
saying at the beginning about how you
know they'll bring me in and say you're
taking this side of the debate and then
be shocked when I don't argue the line
that they want they want me to argue um
so yeah you know I think to as I say
co-opt or neutralize them there has to
be a position from which we can exert
Authority and at the moment we don't
massively have that although it is
changing slightly I think actually you
know the slow implosion of mainstream
media and the the growth of of um online
platforms and and you know platforms
like Navara they are paying attention to
that whenever I go into to mainstream
media Studios there's all Panic about
like how are they going to adapt to the
digital age and you know the BBC I don't
know if you saw that BBC feedback thing
was like Radio 4 is losing listeners
what do we do crazy yeah so I think
there is a sense of like they know that
they're kind of rless they know that the
questions they're asking don't really
attach to conversations that are taking
place in like Society more generally but
they're still in control of the way that
those debates happen and that's not
going to change until they AR
so I don't really know if that answers
the question Grace just mentioned
organizations like Nara media yes and I
want to take this opportunity to say
that you can help us grow and you can
help us change the political debate in
this country and change politics by
supporting our work so if you go to
Environ media.com support you can make a
oneof payment you can become a supporter
I think we have 12 13,000 supporters
these days you know I I I'm from bouth
you could fill the Vitality stadium and
more with the people that support Nar
media that's great one don't you join
them and go to navaram media.com support
and make ideally a monthly payment or
whatever you can you know our our
catchphrase back in the day used to be
New Media for different politics and I
was thinking about this recently I
didn't come up with it so I can say this
is brilliant right okay because it's
showing a problem and it's showing a
solution and it's showing how to get
there in one simple sentence what's the
problem politics what's the instrument
to improving it media how do we get
better Med media to inflect politics us
yes and obviously not just Nara media
Tribune jaab innumerable Outlets out
there but I think you're right to say
it's probably the lowest hanging fruit
in terms of pushing politics this
country left is taking on MSM yeah and
like it's it's happening whether we like
it or not that crumbling it's about you
know how is it going to fall how the
piece is going to land so like I said if
you want it to land in a good way go
toy.com SL support I endorse this
message I'm very I'm very glad you do
you know you said earlier on you were IP
yeah and I I was doing some work with
them I remember I remember and I
remember we did a I made a video with
you so some people might not know this
but I don't I don't just write stuff I'm
also a very bad videographer no I used
to sort of dabble in it and I made a
video with you um and I remember at the
time you had like 5,000 followers on
Twitter and I was like what is going on
Grace how and now how many do you have
like 180,000 or something yeah still not
good enough but still I just I hate I
hate it no but you're such an eloquent
voice and you're so informative on on
finance stuff which obviously is you
know is quite hard to penetrate for most
people I think it's obscured
intentionally of course you know they
don't want it to be easy to understand
for most people and I think you know
it's great you're finding an audience
why quickly why do you hate Twitter you
said don't you hate it really like you
know all of what I've been talking about
so far
has been to do with these ideologies
that keep us subjected to
control
um and that we reproduce inside our
heads all the time right and so being on
social media and having lots of
followers and being on TV and being like
successful in publishing books it like
we are supposed to
be we are talking often to people who
are losing out as a result of of the
systems that over which they have no
control and you are speaking from the
perspective of someone who's winning as
part of all of those systems and I see
this now you see yourself as winning
yeah I think so and I see this now you
know like the the the most kind of
aggressively um neoliberal marketized
way that you can look at this you can
look at like the value you have as a
human being is to do online dating right
because that is a market in a sense you
know historically you wouldn't have a
market for for partners you'd have a
community you'd meet x amount of people
over the course of your life you pick
one you you know you go with them now we
have this hugely liquid Market which got
loads and loads of people in it and the
more liquid a market the better the
price mechanism works so the better
you're able to see you know based on the
force of supply and demand what your
price what your value is in the market
um and even though they don't tell you
where exactly you sit in that hierarchy
you can tell by the number of matches
you get or like you know the way people
respond to you in that game and if you
are attractive if you have lots of
social media follows people are obsess
messed with social media followers and
fame and influence and if you like have
a good job and you're successful then
you have a high price in that market for
human beings for partners um and I find
myself in that position whilst also and
you know benefiting from that position
whil also really
disliking the idea that it is possible
to assign a price value to a person
based on these metrics of success over
which we have no control and also having
to accept that like according to all of
those metrics of success over which we
have no control I'm winning because like
I was born into a relatively well of
family in a rich country in a rich part
of the world and went to Oxford and like
played this game well um and it just is
I think basically it poisons you if you
identify with it it poisons you because
you start thinking I'm a winner I've
come out on top I'm better in one way or
another and it's not even conscious half
the time it's kind of unavoidable it's
like the adoption of an attit ude that
you take towards what you're doing and
the people who are around you and if you
can't take off that identity and like
leave it at the door and be like that's
something that has happened because of
the screwed up way that our society
exists and I have it and that's great
and I'm going to try and use it the best
way I can but then say I am just a
person I don't have a value that you can
correlate with the number of social
media followers I have or the number of
matches I get on ning I have you know
friends that see me for who I am I have
like Hobbies and things that I do that
have absolutely nothing to do with that
stuff I am not playing this game most of
the time I'm just being myself unless
you can do that you become your brain
melts quickly what hobbies do you have I
really like surfing okay so I wanted
something more like Warhammer or
something um no gy
weightlifting I think
there's you know you were saying about
how producers expect you to have formula
X sort of because you're on the left
liberal values I actually have a major
critique of dating apps like I I
genuinely think there's a huge downside
to how we're socializing young people
who've never known anything else so
maybe people a bit younger than you um
and I think we need a proper
conversation about it and I I'm
considering doing an article about this
actually you should yeah I mean I and
I've had this conversation many many
times I go on TV and they expect you as
the Lefty you know oh should mobile
phones be banned in schools I go of
course I should of course we should have
limits on social media for young people
what are you talking about we we're
literally incentivizing addiction to fun
to fund the world's largest wealthiest
companies of course we should but like
they don't view that as a leftwing
position because they think the left
wing position on everything is let
everybody do everything that they want
yeah well some government too so like
yeah we should have the you know the
government should oversee like uh there
should be like an inquir no like no I I
think that there shouldn't really be I
fundamentally think kids below 11 12
shouldn't have a smartphone and they
certainly shouldn't be allowed in
schools you know it's interesting that
Bill Gates and and Steve Jobs didn't let
their children have smartphones
precisely these reasons but I I think
dating apps is a really similar thing
where you know maybe it's my S there's
an authoritarian impulse there I am
actually I am really and look we'll find
out in 20 30 years time right it's like
smoking in the it's like smoking in the
1950s what are the long-term impacts of
this stuff and I I think there might be
some really big ones actually oh yeah
totally I think yeah unless you can
actually you know learn
to disaggregate yourself from these all
of these systems that surround our lives
and it's so prevalent now with the way
that we use social media um and with the
way that the labor market is constructed
based on you know the gig economy and
like mini entrepreneurs and stuff if you
cannot like learn to take your identity
out of these settings where you are
being told that you as a person have a
value based on the things that you do
then you will make yourself miserable
and mentally ill and even if you win
even if you're at the top you're going
to make yourself miserable and
especially if you lose this is why I
love having an Iranian
dad why because he well maybe maybe it's
the same with your parents he has no
idea what I do no my parents know what I
do they so he why do you go on TV like
what you have a YouTube how the hell
does that work don't you have to like
don't you have to work in TV to go on TV
and I'm like no he's like Christ he has
no idea he has no he has no bless him
yeah he has no idea what Navar is oh
he's like you employ I like yeah there's
like 25 of us we have like a place in
leads no it's really grounding it's
great because sometimes my wife go oh
it's so impressive what you don't I was
like you know what my dad literally
hasn't got the first it's really
useful like you say like so you don't
get like you don't believe the smoke
that you know might be blown up your own
ass on the um on the liberal thing are
they part of our Coalition so this was a
this was an issue which I I thought was
really key within that which was the
farage de banking Saga oh yeah so this
was really fun actually because I got
have the the only kind of different line
which was so obviously it was like he
should have access to a bank account or
you know he shouldn't because he's a bad
person liberals versus progressives
whatever I was like farage says that we
live in a free market capitalist economy
and in a free market capitalist economy
a private bank has every right to make
decisions based on what it considers to
be its interest and its profits and
therefore he should have no problem with
a bank deciding whether or not to give
him a bank account I personally believe
that firstly we do not largely live in a
free market economy we live in an
economy in which the heads of private
institutions have an immense amount of
power to make decisions without any
Democratic accountability whatsoever
that isn't very good and that we should
be moving towards an economy in which we
have Collective Democratic public
control over all of our institutions
including Banks so that everyone gets a
bank account and we all collectively get
to make the rules as to how those bank
accounts are administered and everyone
was just
like that doesn't make any sense alth
they just ignored me and kind of carried
on talking around the issue well he I
mean it was interesting with him was he
was saying because for people watching
this watch fake news he didn't get he
didn't have he wasn't given a business
account where he was which was CS which
is a subsidiary of nat West and he
wasn't offer a business account a bunch
of other Banks he was offer a regular
you know current account but presumably
n Big Shot n you know he probably wants
to use it in the US when he goes support
Trump later this year and whatnot and
that wouldn't have been wouldn't have
been sufficient and um he himself said
you know until quite recently we had
post office and everybody had a right to
get a post office Bank bank account I'm
thinking what you support you support a
nationally owned bank which is going to
be the banker of Last Resort for people
in this country who can't get bank
accounts any anywhere else but what I
mean what I suppose what they would say
is it's an issue of it's a matter of law
so um whether or not somebody should be
able to access banking should be should
be a matter of civil rights and law
rather than policy and it's this is a
big difference now I think between like
some parts the than others I think as a
civil right that should be in tried in
law lots of people liberals think no
well it's you know these should be very
flexible and one policy can apply here
and another policy can apply there so
what farage would say is it should be
illegal to debank people below a certain
threshold right that's what he would say
but like you say once you get into that
terrain well okay if we're going to talk
about the law as a constraint on the
free market okay let's have Capital
control you could you can argue for
anything frankly do do you think that do
you think they've always live with those
inconsistencies I mean the right the
sort of thatch right right or is it sort
of becoming more pronounced because now
they've got more exposure you know there
the inconsistencies are perhaps in the
spotlight more or was it always there
there are two sets of inconsistencies
that I think are important here one of
which is inherent to the neoliberal
movement and the other of which stems
from the necessary alliance between
neoliberals and kind of far right like
extremist basically um and the first
inconsistency is the inconsistency with
a neoliberal thought which says that um
this is an ideology based on kind of the
need to promote human Freedom um that
accepts that we are all kind of equal
individuals playing this free market
game um and the job of a kind of good
politician is to set up the rules of
that game so that they are fair so that
you know as a society we we think
basically that they're fair and such
that they prop up the kind of norms and
rules of Economics so we have to have a
legal system basically that kind of
supports the functioning of of the
economy and make sure that everyone
knows how to play the free market game
fairly right um so that's the kind of
neoliberal idea about what the state
should do their critique of the way that
the state is is that it's taken over by
vested interests by bureaucrats who just
make policy in the interests of you know
um their little kingdom building or
thiefdom building and the problem with
the neoliberal theory is that they never
say how do we get from here to there how
do we get from a state that's governed
by vested interest to one that's
governed by neutral technocratic
enlightened bureaucrats and of course we
don't we just end up with the neoliberal
agenda basically being used to um push
into Power people who Veil their naked
desire for power with a spiel about the
need for free markets and competition
whereas actually the free market game
that they are going to to construct and
set up will be rigged in their favor
it's just that the only um impetus the
only kind of um the only Power that they
end up having is the power to crush
people who interfere with the game from
a particular perspective so you see
anti-competition law for example in the
US being used to break up unions but not
being used to break break up kind of big
firms and and big Banks and stuff so
there's this like uh this
inherent um problem at the heart of
neoliberal ology which is its
orientation towards the state basically
it's like the state should be used State
policy and the legal system and law
should all be used to construct this
Fair good free market economic game and
the fact of life under capitalism which
has never been a pure free market system
it's always been a system of kind of
private government by capital and that
private government is exercised both
within the firm and over the state as a
whole um and there's this kind of what
you know some theorists have called this
like double truth what haek called
actually the double Truth at the heart
of neoliberal philosophy which is tell
everyone that we want less State
intervention and kind of you know a
cutting of red tape and a removal of the
state to make space for the free market
and the actual neoliberal goal which is
creating this apparatus from within the
state that supports the functioning of
the free market under the influence of
capitalists who are actually rigging
that game in their favor so this whole
like big State small state thing again
is that that's the massive biggest lie
of the half neol liberalism and then
there's the other thing that even if you
didn't have all of that even if you just
accepted the fact that neoliberals do
think there should be this big state
small state free markets versus State
intervention dichotomy there's this
problem that's come with their from
their alliance with the far right which
is as I've said basically composed of
people who consider themselves to be
losers or on the verge of losing from
the the free market economic game and
want protections put in place against
people who they consider to be Outsiders
to preserve what remains of The Spoils
of that game for their group so you have
basically the allance between
neoliberals who set up an economy in
which people were permanently divided
into winners and losers with people who
have ended up losing and now think that
we basically need to kind of on
immigrants and like you know put women
in their place in order to preserve
their special status within a game where
they feel like losers and that creates
obvious sources of conflict which we saw
most clearly with you know the The
Divide between Johnson's brexiteers and
the kind of extreme
um neol liberal libertarian wing of the
conservative party that descends from
kind of Thatcher I think David Graber
called it the iron law of liberalism
yeah which is like when government tries
to reduce need for government in this
hamfisted way of just like salami
slicing public budgets and so on they
increase the need for government um
that's not to say that you you know some
things maybe couldn't be done by the
government of course of course you can
have that conversation and you focus on
the things that are really important so
for instance a pacifist would say we
could spend less on arm spending for
instance uh but I I think his insight's
really interesting and it's it's
fascinating what you say about that
being a fundamental inconsistency and
contradiction within neoliberalism about
here what you think here are your values
here's where you want to get and a can
never lead to B it's like that Meme
there's a video of like Shawn D and Pep
Guardiola have you seen this no and you
got Shawn Das is going keep the ball out
of that end but put it in the goal on
that end and then you got Pep Guardiola
saying we have the inverted right back
we play the F nine we bring him in it's
like so you've got two reads on football
right one is like very basic brexit
football and then there's like you know
sexy Total Football pep style and like
neoliberals love to say cut the state
free markets Free People free government
blah blah blah and it's like no like you
you end up in the most Arcane we'll do
this subsidy here and we'll cut this
here and we'll create this new quango
and this new agency we have this and
we'll lose money here but we'll tax
those guys like going back to I said
earlier on with that this housing policy
from Michael Gove they'll be allowed to
pollute more but we'll have this change
here and we'll give more money here and
taxpayer money can go to this private
company here and even though it's
privately own they still have
shareholder dividends if they don't pay
the dividends we'll give them money to
pay the dividends you hell just
just bring water into public ownership
and bring and build some social
this this whole system and the most
ingenious thing about this right is that
every new piece of Regulation creates
opportunities for profit making yeah
because there's regulatory Arbitrage you
can like you know use the gaps in
existing regulation to make sure that
you're winning against your competitors
because I don't know you're like using
profit shifting or like other forms of
regulatory Arbitrage which basically
just means exploiting differences
between laws or gaps in regulations to
like create opportunities for profit you
saw this with the financial crisis right
like there was this explosion in
regulation of the finance sector um in
some ways especially at the
international level going up to the
crisis of 2008 and we're talking about
how assets were classified and
categorized and how Banks were supposed
to Value those assets um and the way
that they were supposed to kind of
assess risk and actually that ended up
creating opportunities for profit making
um it for example incentivized the the
parceling up of all these different um
mortgages into these mortgage back
Securities that looked really safe
because they were supposedly Diversified
um which actually obviously had you know
within that process there was this
constant risk of kind of massive
catastrophic meltdown um so that process
of setting regulation ended up creating
opportunities profit making that also
caused the financial crisis and this is
always the case like whenever you get a
new law there are ways of exploiting the
existence of that law to make money um
and private interest will always do that
it's the same with as well with like um
you know carb
um carbon credits the ways that those
were set actually ended up making money
at the European level for for some
companies when they were able to sell
those so regulation creates
opportunities for profit making so labor
keeps saying that they'll smash the
class ceiling when they're in government
they'll smash the class
ceiling what does that mean well it
depends on whether or not you are a
Marxist or um a liberal to me smashing
the class ceiling means dissolving the
distinction between the people who own
the means of production and those who
are forced to work for living on pain of
destitution by socializing the ownership
of and control and governance of all of
the assets that we need to produce the
things that we need to survive it means
dissolving the very existence of class
as mediated by ownership basically to a
liberal it means making sure that the
people who start life as losers maybe
get to be winners for a few minutes at
some point in their lives so you know
the whole liberal imaginary is about
making sure that rather than actually
dissolving The Divide between you know
workers and the owners of the means of
production between capital and labor um
it means making sure that there's more
sortition amongst labor and maybe the
capacity every now and again for some
people within labor to get into the
position of being capitalists um but
again very rarely so it's about yeah you
know social Mobility or whatever it's
not about changing the structure of the
system there's always going to be
winners there's always going to be
losers and Lar speaking those winners
and losers will be the same people
generally pretty consistently throughout
throughout history although there will
be periods of of of change and of of
shift um and the liberal viewers just to
say that change should happen a little
bit more frequently people like us
should be in charge exactly let's have
social Mobility so comprehensive kids
like me and the first of my family to go
to university and I'll not stop tweeting
about it let's have more people like me
in charge you know we did a great
interview with Dan Evans and he has a
brilliant critique of social Mobility um
as really a sort of justifying veneer
for a dysfunctional economic social and
political system which also by the way
increasingly can't even produce any
growth or improv to living standards and
like the veneer on that is sure we've
had zero growth 15 years living
standards are falling but I'm the first
person in my
family what the hell are you talking
about I think this actually comes back
to the point I made at the very start of
this interview right about the
difference between winners and losers
and people who make the rules right like
the the conservative view is just that
like the winners are the winners and the
losers are the losers and that's fair
because that's based on competition and
competition is its own process of
fairness for those on the left it's like
well we should make sure that if people
do lose they're protected in some way
and that actually they have more
opportunities to become winners and that
the winners pay a little bit more to
make sure that Society Works a little
bit better whereas the Marxist or the
Socialist view should be there shouldn't
be winners and losers and people to make
that make the rules it should be we all
make the rules together it's a
completely different way of organizing
Society
Grace on that note we'll leave it there
when's your book out for people who
perhaps coming to you for the first time
though I find that very hard to believe
no I mean I'm sure I've been away for
quite a while I hope that there will be
people who coming the time the point of
coming on I guess when was it when is it
coming out the 7th of March I think next
year yeah so early March next year and
if people want to follow your work where
can they find you they can find me at
Grace Blakeley Blakeley has two e e l e
y on Twitter on Instagram even on Tik
Tok oh wow Tik Tok and you write for
Tribune you got I write for Tribune yes
great well thank you so much thank
[Music]
you
