you've been asking me for several years
to talk about Steven W's Theory of
Everything I haven't done that because I
don't understand what he's doing but
recently I've realized that I don't know
what I'm doing either indeed when I look
at my news feed I don't think that
anyone knows what they're doing and so
I've decided to just tell you what I
think he's doing wfr is a computer
scientist and mathematician probably
best known for the math software
Mathematica but he also has the ambition
to explain well everything and he wants
to do it with computer code his theory
of everything is basically an attempt to
put the simulation hypothesis on solid
mathematical basis he's looking for C
that will produce fundamental physics as
we know and like it with gravity and the
particles in the standard model morr is
a curious case because he's not your
average crank he understands the
mathematics he's using just fine and yet
physicists have paid basically no
attention to his ideas I'm not sure why
that is but I have a guess his basic
idea is that the Universe operates like
a computer program it has very simple
rules from which the laws of physics
emerge and from those laws everything
else that we see follows it's a more
difficult version of cellular autometer
which you see here that's code which
produces two dimensional patterns lined
by by line these patterns can become
quite complex so maybe if you did it in
four dimensions you could explain the
entire universe that's the idea I met
wol from once at a workshop about 10
years ago he gave a talk about his
theory of everything in front of a group
of
physicists I describe their reactions as
polite skepticism you know like when
you're Aunt goes on about how she's met
Elvis Presley in the subway and you're
like oh interesting yeah it was like
that and I have to admit that I
understand the skepticism the idea that
the laws of physics are sort of
computation has a rather basic problem
it's incompatible with Einstein's
theories of gener Relativity and it's
not a small mismatch you see any type of
computation Works in steps if it doesn't
then calling it a computation is really
just a weird way of talking about loss
of physics that we already use a
computation has some sort of update rule
like you see in these cellular automatan
calculations they update step by step
row by row this means they introduce
some increments of time and space in his
22 book A New Kind of Science wfr says
he wants to describe space as a network
mathematicians also call them graphs
both of these terms networks and graphs
refer to the same thing that's Dot
connected by lines if you describe space
in that way it's a sort of
discretization bufr then says that the
laws of physics are rules to update the
connections in the network that so the
idea can both describe space and matter
in it the problem with this idea isn't
just that Einstein's theories don't use
graphs but that we know you can't use
graphs to even properly approximate them
the gaps in the graphs and the updates
in time steps can't be hidden away
they'll always be observable and we
haven't observed them to see why that is
so imagine you have a photon a single
Quantum of light with some wavelength
the wavelength is proportional to the
inverse of the energy what's the energy
of the photon if you don't know the
answer then you're right the question
doesn't have an answer the energy of the
photon depends on how you observe it
suppose you observe the photon at say
color green an observer moving towards
it will see the color shifted to the
blue so at a higher energy and an
observer moving away from it will see it
shifted to the red so at lower energy
what's the real energy of the photon
there's no answer to that all these
energies are equally real the energy can
be arbitrarily High and the wavelength
arbitrarily small or the energy can be
arbitrarily low L and the wavelength
arbitrarily large the reason this
happens is that in Einstein's theory the
motion of the Observer changes what it
means for something to be large or small
or to have a high or low energy and this
is the problem with all discrete
approaches to space and time so you
insist that space is indeed described by
some sort of graph that doesn't have
structure below a certain distance that
you might say is kind of the plank
length well now consider an arbitrarily
large structure for each structure
there's an observer for which the size
of the structure is well below the plank
length so it shouldn't exist on your
graph as a consequence you can't
approximate general relativity with a
graph while respecting all its
symmetries you can do it if you depart
from these symmetries between observers
but this departure will always be large
for some Observer indeed are people
constantly got the is wrong annoyed me
so much I wrote a paper in which I
proved that it can't be done there's no
network approach to space time that will
be compatible with Einstein's theories
doesn't exist so maybe you can see now
why I wasn't fun of warr's ideas now you
could say all right but it's good that
you can't reproduce general relativity
because then we can test the idea yes
and this is why some people go and look
for small deviations from from Lawrence
Symmetry and claim that they're testing
the simulation hypothesis that makes for
catchy headlines problem is that we know
that if you take Quantum mechanic
seriously even the smallest deviations
from that symmetry would spill over into
observable particle physics phenomena
and they've long been ruled out this is
why I dare to say it's totally
unsurprising that these experiments
never find deviations from Lauren
symmetry at the workshop where Wolfram
gave his talk 10 years ago this was also
the major concern that physicists
brought up what's with Lauren symmetry
how do you make this idea compatible
with observation and I think that
Wolfram took this criticism seriously
because a couple of years ago he
published together with some
collaborators a follow up work in which
they were trying to address this issue I
read this when it came out and meant to
talk about it but this just so coincided
with the first covid lockdowns and I had
other things to do such as trying not to
go insane it also didn't help that
rather than just publishing a paper like
normal people wfr had his PR team put
out a press release in which he explains
that he may have a path to the
fundamental Theory of physics and it's
beautiful this is probably part of the
reason why physicists most ly ignore wfr
he doesn't follow standard procedure I'm
not saying that this is good I'm just
trying to explain what I think is going
on a lot of eye rolling basically the
new wolf approach uses what they call
hypergraphs instead of just using graphs
to describe space time and particles in
them they collect these graphs into
groups so the hyper graph is really a
collection of graphs the points in these
graphs describe space time and can also
describe matter in the space time
depending on their properties but the
lengths in the hypergraphs are not
physical they have no length they just
quantify relations between the points
and since they have no length there's no
problem with them becoming shorter or
longer for different observers it's
actually a clever idea I had an exchange
with a guy who works for wol from
research who did most of the work I
think John Jan gor in 2020 and I came to
the conclusion that this is indeed
possible but it's been done before this
is exactly the idea of an approach
called causal sets put forward by Rafael
sain as the name suggests in this
approach SpaceTime is a set of points
like the points in the hypergraphs and
these points have causal relations which
you can depict with arrows so that gives
you a graph and this is indeed respect
the symmetries of Einstein's theory if
you look at what they've been doing
after that announcement from 2020
they've worked more on the relation
between wolfram's hypergraphs and the
causal sets most of this research has
been done it seems by Jonathan gorah
he's also looked at how to use that to
do general relativity and how it
prevents singularities which the caes
sets people never figured out how to do
is it a Theory of Everything
well not yet certainly for one thing I
don't understand the stuff that wfr has
written about quantum physics it doesn't
make any sense to me there are a lot of
problems with doing quantum physics with
a non-quantum algorithm that he doesn't
address and he hasn't provided specifics
about how to reproduce the standard
model or Elementary particles however
the caus sets paper already show that
it's possible to put discretized
versions of differential equations on
these graphs so maybe it isn't as
difficult as it sounds so when I look at
this today I honestly think this
research program is going very well and
I think it's about time that physicists
pay a little more attention to it if you
want to get started on your own Theory
of Everything or brush up your physics
knowledge I suggest you check out
brilliant I like working with them
because they have high quality courses
that fit very well with my own content
brilliant.org offers courses on a large
variety of topics in science Computer
Science and Mathematics all their
courses have interactive visualizations
and come with follow-up questions some
even have executable Python scripts or
videos with little demonstration
experiments whether you want to know
more about large language models or
Quantum Computing want to learn coding
in python or know how computer memory
works brilliant has you covered and
they're ready new courses each month I
even have my own course on brilliant
that's an introduction to Quantum
Mechanics it will help you understand
what a wave function is and what the
difference is between superpositions and
entanglement it also covers interference
the uncertainty principle and Bell's
theorem and after that you can continue
maybe with a course on Quantum Computing
or differential equations and of course
I have a special offer for users of this
channel if you use my link brilliant.org
Saina you'll get to try out everything
brilliant has to offer for full 30 days
and you'll get 20% off the annual
premium subscription so go and check
this out it's an easy way to learn more
and to support this channel thanks for
watching see you tomorrow
