go through it and I'd love to talk about
eruption Theory and and the thing you
were saying the other day about um you
know the information that's Lo that's
not lost and all that stuff yeah right
right yeah and and we can also if if we
have time we can also talk about this
this issue of how how far down it goes
and all
that yeah ideally we want to have a
measure right like a operationalise
Criterion for that so that's this this
is exactly what what this is about let
me just see what's the best way of uh
sharing this I
think um
is it okay if I put it on my second
screen I will be a little absent looking
to the side maybe if you're record be
better like if I have it in the
background well it's mostly G to be the
I mean just just share the I don't even
know that we're going to see you we're g
just gonna see the slid so it's fine
just share that okay okay all right yeah
because so that I can see you basically
it's easier that way yeah it's fine
okay all right um Safari entame share
how's that looking perfect yeah I can
see it great okay let's put this over
here yeah great okay so so this is the
the new paper that just uh recently came
out and uh it's a more mature version of
eruption theory that now both considers
not just the mental causation or like
the agency part but also the other
direction like how does something U
non-mental become part of the mental
part of subjective experience part of
mental content and so now now it has
these both classic problems which um you
know come in many varieties um but I
think uh now in this paper for the first
time I see a way in which we can do
science with them which is getting me
very excited so I'm going to take us
through like the main figures because
they kind of encapsulate the different
stages uh of of the
argument so me start here okay so the
human version of the Mind Body problem
um so you know we're asking here the big
questions how is the Mind related to
matter and vice versa um and uh you know
analytic philosophers have been banging
their head against this problem for for
a long time and uh if you read Kim's
kind of like final book account of this
I quite enjoyed it for for its Clarity
of showing that even if we solve the
problem of mental causation by going
kind of a reductionist route and just
basically saying that you know the
mental is the physical and therefore the
physical can cause the physical you know
you lose a lot of what is nice about
thinking about the mind in terms of the
qualities and Theology and and you know
your intentions and free will everything
goes out the window but you might save
causality right so you still might get
mental causation saved that way but the
problem is that if some of our things
that we do depend on conscious
experience then the problem is not fully
solved because that would mean that you
also have to have an account to solve
the high problem of Consciousness to
have a full account of mental causation
and so right from the start I want to
say I want to be realis about this in
the sense that you know I I do think
that our experiences make a difference
for how we behave right and if someone
wants to say that our experien don't
make a difference to how we behave we've
kind of like have two different premises
you like the conversation already kind
of stops there but to my mind you know
it's a very hard cell to try to argue
that our experiences don't make a
difference you basically lose most of
the population of this planet basically
just you know exits the conversation
right so we should do our best not to go
down that route um but what that means
is that we also have to solve the
problem of Consciousness so these are
interlocked right and this is the big
problem um it gets worse because you
might think well that's just for people
you know because that's the problem of
Consciousness you know what if you talk
about rats or you know even more basal
cognition then this might not be an
issue um but what I propos is that
actually there's a more General Mind
Body problem working in the background
um so on the left hand side I call this
the hard problem of efficacy which is
that for any mental property um let's
say a representation a goal state or
whatever you have um there is a problem
explaining how that state as such as
being a mental state makes a difference
to the physical state so it's a
generalization of the problem of mental
causation um so it's not good enough to
say there's a supervenience relationship
or something like that but the cality at
the bottom level maintains um you know
what I want to say is how do we say that
the goal as being a goal as being an
intention as having normativity
conditions as being able to to succeed
or to fail or to be better or worse and
things like that the whole normativity
of it that also somehow needs to be able
to accounted uh for in this kind of
account right um and that's a hard
problem of efficacy and then we have the
hard problem of content which is how
does anything even become part of the
Mind in the first place um and so
representationalism for example just
kind of brushes this away a little bit
but let's say even if we gave
representationalists um half of this and
said okay let's not worry about how to
naturalize content in terms of its
Origins let's say some future point we
have a story of how you go from
something purely physical to something
that has semantic content that has
mental content that has aboutness
conditions or normativity let's assume
that problem is solved then we still
have the problem of how does that even
make a difference to something physical
you know take a thing like um uh I don't
know like a neuron in the brain that's
supposed to represent uh I don't know
your your in a maze or something like
that your classic uh you know play cell
stuff well the fact that it's
representational that it has
representational content which is kind
of like Nobel prize winning material
right so this is you know exciting stuff
we find the correlation but then where
in our analysis of the neural activity
itself does the content enter the
picture all right so so so we we we when
we look into the brain and say Here's
this neuron and we know it's correlated
with this you know content outside out
the BR like being its position in the
Maze but hey you know like the rest of
what we're seeing here is just physics
it's just biochemistry it's electrical
potentials right it's like you know
membranes opening and closing and
molecules floating around there's no
content there there's no normativity
it's just physics right so so there's a
kind of sense of Disconnect here where
um how do we even work across this Gap
and my feeling is that this is not we
can't just you know talk it away my
feeling is that we should face head on
and say yes there is a big gap here
right on the one hand we can talk about
content and Consciousness and the mental
and intentions and Norms Health you know
being you know worse or better and so on
terms that have no frame of reference in
the purely physical
sciences but they do have an existence
and we know they make a difference so
we're realists about it so why don't
they show up when we do our best science
you know and one of the things that you
know already should come out of this is
that just because they don't show up as
such doesn't mean that they don't make
any difference okay so that there are
two different things here one would be a
demand for observability and even maybe
intelligibility so I observe something
and it makes sense as a content and the
other one is to say well I maybe that's
not what I can do here but I noticed
that something else is happening that
wouldn't happen otherwise you know if
the system wouldn't be in such a state
and so on so you know that so so far
most people have demanded that the
mechanism should be observable and
intelligible but why should we assume
that right there's a big gap here and
and we know already from other fields
quantum physics a prime example that
demanding intelligibility and
observability can be a big stumbling
block right sometimes you just have to
get in and say yeah you know we don't
understand why it's happening but
something's happening and we can measure
that and we can work with that you know
um but so far cognitive science hasn't
done this this you know allowed itself
to conceive this
possibility so let's go down so what I
want to propose is that we do need to
make this room for this conception
that's why I call it a black box
framework let's just for a moment accept
that we don't understand this
relationship so we have two versions of
this let's stick with the the the human
one for a moment because it's easier for
us to relate to so we have mental
conation the scenario is you know
putting our Neuroscience hats on or
whatever you know looking inside an
organism okay if something mental makes
a difference to its material basis of
the space Behavior you've got an
unobservable mental cause right like I
just said we just have physical stuff
happening we don't see the mind as such
when we go inside the
organism causing an unintelligible
material event and it's unintelligible
because we cannot directly observe what
caused it what made the difference okay
that's outside of the scope of our
observation when we make quantitative
assessments and the other way around is
the same so you know we we know that
some things happening in the brain make
a difference to mental content or make a
difference to subjective experience but
we can't measure subjective experience
directly inside the brain it's not there
it's not something that we can actually
quantify directly so that would mean
that to the extent that something is
making a difference to experience you've
got a cause without an observable effect
okay so you've got an unintelligible
material effect event here that
something is happening some some change
is happening but we don't understand why
it's happening
Okay so we've got these two categories
and what's interesting is that they
point in different ways so that already
suggests that you know the signatures
for these kinds of relationships would
be different
ones um and so this is then where I
introduce my proposal for how to work
with this kind of situation and this is
the eruption Theory where if we have the
mind and the matter relating to each
other and we don't know how okay this is
the hard problem of efficacy or mental
causation or the high problem of
Consciousness we know that they're
related somehow but when we Trace one
domain into the other it escapes us okay
so let's just go through this one more
time right I have an intention of saying
words of moving my hand to make a point
and I can notice that my intention is
making a difference to my body right if
not it would be crazy right so you know
I I I have the experience that there's a
coherence between what I want to do and
what my body does except that I don't
know how my body does it okay some
something gets lost along the way I can
see the effect of my atttention but I
don't have access to how it has that
effect so that's one aspect of the black
box right and it also true of on the
other side so now imagine I'm a
neuroscientist and I look at what's
happening in the pathway from my brain
to my arm to make my arm move if it's
really the intention as such that's
making my arm move well the
neuroscientist has doesn't have access
to that he can't measure intentions
using his you know I don't know EG
apparatus or whatever he's might be
using
so again something gets lost I can go
work backwards from the behavior to all
the activity in my body but at the end
something gets lost I cannot actually
make the jump to the other side so
that's what I mean with the black box we
know these things are related but by
some reason Maybe by necessity we can't
trace properly transl like transparently
across and so that's why I propose the
way to think about this is in terms of
absorption And Eruption absorption means
that on the side of mental when I inject
my intention to do something um it
basically there's a compression effect
you know drus talked about this in terms
of absorbed coping right so when I'm
really engrossed in my activity actually
you know there's a narrowing of my
vision you know there's a the world
disappears a little bit into the
background I lose myself and so on
there's a kind of like compression of
the variability of my experience as it's
invested into the activity of my
behavior but what happens on the other
side okay now you're totally involved in
generating your behavor Behavior but
that involvement is subjective
involvement it can't be you know
Quantified it can't be translated into
something happening purely in
quantitative terms so then that means
that there's a hidden variable okay now
now there are factors making a
difference to how your behavior is
generated that cannot be you know traced
to causes at that level of description
That's What I Call eruption now there's
a kind of diversification an increase in
variability that in principle would
remain unexplained at that level of
description and you know we can't trace
it back to the higher level and that was
the original proposal of eruption theory
in the first paper and I like elaborated
on that part a lot and there's many
examples that we can talk about of you
know how this fits with some of the
empirical data when we talk about neural
entropy and complexity and all these
kind of things um you know and why
organisms are such noisy systems in the
first place you know like a lot of this
starts to make sense from this point of
view um but then let's talk about the
other side first for a moment that's the
absorption that's a new part of this
paper
which is to say that um if there's a
cause that has an effect which can't be
observed it's a little bit like a
reduction in variability now difference
that would have been made is now not
being made because that difference is
appearing in a domain that I cannot
directly measure in the one that I'm
currently observing so there's a
reduction in variability so two things
kind of collapsing or canceling each
other out there's information laws of a
different kind um as things are getting
kind of translated into the to the other
domain um and so right now what I'm
working on is more on the right hand
side trying to flesh out out out that
part um and you know it's coming
together quite nicely with with the
things we've been talking about like B
time motifs and things like that which
are very nice ways of cancelling out
things um I think that's pretty much it
so I just let me just end on one final
note which is that in my mind this is
just a first step of something much more
General and so what it looks like to me
now is that um this is just one special
case of an interaction that crosses two
ontological domains or Regional domains
Regional domains of being or if you want
it could also be considered as crossing
different scales of agency right going
from the scale of agency of inside your
body and all the agents that are working
there to your agency as a person um but
basically as long as we have a
transition between ontologies of some
kind then this kind of framework
probably will apply too and that could
even be true for cellular biology first
example so when I was reading uh your
work on how is it that the higher levels
you know um transform the lower levels
uh and and how do they get incorporated
into the higher levels again you have
very similar Notions actually as
eruption and absorption already so with
eruption uh the way you phrase it is
that there's a deformation of the energy
landscape of the of the lower level
right so suddenly you know these guys
are happily doing whatever they're doing
but now there is an unexpected change in
the kind of in the game that they're
playing and they would have to St adjust
and from their point of view well they
will never be able to figure out why
that happened you know what what just
happened that's out outside of their
scope right so it's a little bit like an
eruption in that sense there's an
increase in a change uh unexpected and
it can't be explained at that level of
description okay it just goes beyond it
and at the same time when you talk about
how the components get integrated into
the larger hole you talk about something
like a loss of identity or something
like that right so for example the
molecules produced produced by one cell
well you know they're not tagged with
the name right so so if another cell
produces it you know they can't
distinguish where it's coming from so
they kind of like you know the identity
starts to merge between the different
little components so that's you know
that's very close to what I'm talking
here in terms of absorption um and so
one thing that would be very nice to to
contemplate is whether this kind of
framework gets a quantitative grip on
some of things that are happening at
those scales so not just talking about
the Mind Body problem or mental
causation but just talking about
multiscalar integration to some extent
um so principles that would apply to the
left hand side the eruption side would
be you know increases in noise uh
increases in Hidden variables
dimensionality um you know entropy these
kinds of things so so there's an
expansion of variability and that
expansion is unexpected and to some
extent irreducible to to the things that
are happening normally in that domain
and on the right hand side you have
things like compression Maybe synchrony
symmetries um order parameters this kind
of thing where there's a kind of
information loss as multic components
that could be behaving differently
normally don't behave differently um and
that's the maybe the bow TI motive and
things like that fit into into that
category um so anyway that that's kind
of the mini overview of of what the what
the paper Pro
proposes cool yeah very very interesting
um what what what's your thought on um
uh is there do you think there is a
similar problem in the case of so let's
say let's say we have a some sort of um
classic computational device uh it's
running some sort of algorithm you know
and then there's the there's the physics
perspective where you can see the
electron shuffling around you don't
actually see the algorithm whatever you
know whatever it's doing do you think
there's a there's a similar uh Dynamic
going on there or is there something
unique to the biological case that isn't
captured in the software Hardware um
dichotomy if if if there is I think it's
a really good question it's one that uh
I started exploring now with some
colleagues at UNAM and um I think I'm
changing my mind about it so I used to
be very resistant to that idea but I'm
slowly coming around to it especially on
the side of absorption it's almost like
computers are the perfect absorption
devices you know all that variability
that you have at the level of electrons
and so on computers are designed such
that variability does not matter for the
kind of algorithms that are being
implemented right so so if if anything
you know like that that is you know the
ex the most excellent example of of the
right hand side but here's the problem
it's like one-sided right it's like I
don't want to put it this way but it's
like we created devices that are super
rich in experience possibly right so
they've got lots of uh you know
variability that they're absorbing and
possibly creating experiences for them
you know but they can't do anything
about it you know it's the eruption side
that's BL
because if you do have things that are
acting on on those things well um that's
like you know the old school Windows
blue screen of death kind of stuff like
suddenly you've got an unexplained
change that can't be reduced to the
rules at that level well you've got
error correction right so either gets
thrown out or if it can't be thrown out
uh well then you just got a system
failure so it seems to me that you know
the the issue is on that side it's like
if you wanted to make computers that
could fit into this framework work the
question would be how do we loosen them
such that the higher levels can make a
difference to the lower levels in their
own terms yeah yeah yeah um so so we
have a we have a weird example uh that
might be relevant to this and that's
that's maybe you know this this so so so
I'm very interested in uh higher order
behavior that uh seems to be in in some
important sense decoupled from the M um
either the algorithm or the mechanisms
underneath in that it is not not just
not just emerging complexity because
emerging complexity is easy you know you
get that with cellular atom whatever
that that that's easy I'm talking about
um more interesting emerging goal
directed behaviors uh and uh you know
you You' you've seen this this this this
pre-print of ours on the um on the
Sorting algorithms you know I purposely
wanted to to start with the dumbest
simplest system that is transparent
deter istic it's you know six lines of
code everybody you know thinks they know
what these things do and these these
sorting algorithms and it turns out that
they have some really interesting
behaviors uh including this clustering
thing which is by itself nowhere in the
algorithm and so I wonder now now
clearly super primitive but that was
kind of the point we wanted a very basil
example of this but I wonder if if it's
related to what you just said where
uh they on on the one hand on the one
hand yes in in our current architectures
they can't do anything with it on the
other hand there seems to me and I think
this is all over the place in biology
too there seems to me um that even even
though constrained by a deterministic
algorithm that that you know there's no
magic it doesn't screw up you know it
follows the algorithm uh correctly
there's no there's no error in that
sense but it also manages to do them
some things that are not so to speak in
the
algorithm and I want wonder if and I and
I think biological things are super good
at it in fact I think that's probably
what we call Biology or systems that are
really good at this but but
fundamentally I feel like it starts very
very early I don't think you need much
to start seeing these things appear and
you know where do they come from is a
whole other thing you know we we face
that question with our various um
synthetic uh you know xenobots and anthr
robots and things where they've never
existed before there's no evolutionary
uh long history selection that would
explain why they do you know why they
have certain properties so so where it
comes from and I mean I'm I'm pretty um
uh sympathetic to this to this kind of
blackbox approach because I think
looking for mechanism and and looking
for explicit representations in terms of
how it works and where things come from
I think may may not always be tractable
but uh but yeah I you know I think I
think already we have some of these some
of these issues in a very minimal way
with with even just very simple stupid
computer
architectures um and and and then and
then there's the whole there's the whole
poly Computing thing right so this is
this is what Josh bongard and I have
been working on on this notion that when
you have a physical process what it is
that it's Computing is in the eye of the
of of an observer and multiple observers
in fact Josh has some some some amazing
his student atusa uh has some amazing
actual um you know data on this showing
that the same physical processes can
look like very different computations
depending on how you look at them and
what is it that it's really Computing is
is uh is up to is up to an observer's
interpretation which I think in biology
that's what's going on is that every
every subsystem is interpreting every
other subsystem however however it can
um and and then and then that that also
gets to this issue of like mental
content uh and and the subjectivity of
it which is you know what what what is
it what is it really what are these what
are these um me you know these mental
causes and so on uh what what what is
their actual content and is there a
privileged one answer to say okay that
that's the content of that you know that
mental state or or could we could we do
this kind of poly Computing thing and
say
well there are modules inside and based
on what you were telling me before there
may be even ex physically external uh
other beings that that you may be
coupled with in some way that will'll
also have an interpretation of what the
what any given mental state is so you
know um yeah I think I that this is this
is partially why you know we were
talking about like how far down it goes
I I think these issues are very deep and
they crop up very early you know I don't
think they I don't think we have to wait
till we get brains before before these
deep um questions come up you know of
interpretation and I've heard you talk
before about this you know poly fun
functionalism or
what you call it but isn't it the case
that was it putam was someone who used
the argument that you can read any kind
of function into physical process as a
reduct you at observant for
computationalism in the sense that if
you want to be realist about the
implementation of the
algorithm then then you know it
shouldn't just be the The Observer who
you know determines what kind of
algorithm is being run right because I
don't know what this argument was but it
was basically like you know if you take
any bunch of molecules and you just
subselect you know the right kind of
properties they'll be running Windows or
something like that you know like
because there just such a mind-blowing
degree of Freedom that you know there's
enough there that you know you just have
to be selective and then you know you
get whatever you want but you know but
the question is like does that have
Downstream consequences for for the
process right and and so there you don't
want necessarily the Observer to be the
one who
determines um what it is that's uh
what's there right I you know I so so I
don't know what the IO there is maybe I
need to look it up but but but it seems
so far I I it seems fine everything you
just said seems completely fine to me
because what I think happens in biology
is so so in computers we're used to the
fact that there's somebody who wrote the
algorithm and we sort of we tend to take
that interpretation as the privileged
like I I know what this is I wrote it
that's what I'm telling you it's a it's
a bubble SW whatever it is but but in
biology you don't get that and so every
every subsystem with cells subcellular
components tissues are looking at all
the stuff going on around it and they
don't you know they don't get a manual
to say what what the hell does this mean
there's signals coming what computation
is this and I think what they have to do
if you for adaptive Advantage is
interpret it however they can so they
form their own internal model of what
the computation is and they say oh I see
what this is this is this is telling me
you know that the metabolism is going to
shoot up five minutes from now and
somebody else some other module is
looking at that no no no what I see here
is that this set of genes is going to be
expressed and therefore I'm going to do
this and that and right and in that case
uh and and and and in Josh's um in
Josh's work you can see there's like um
it's this particulate material and
depending on how you look at it you see
an and gate or an orgate and there is no
privileged answer to well which one is
it really I mean there is no really and
I think biology has that uh takes that
to to to to an extreme wait a minute
wait a minute hold on for a second maybe
I should read this but you know if I a
computer built and like you know there
was an ambiguity whether an anate with
an anate or an orgate would the computer
work no right I mean like you have to
depend on that it does a particular
translation of its inputs to its outputs
and if it it doesn't then then you know
well then you have a kind of prop listic
machine or something like that but you
you know it would be some kind of other
kind of system well so so so so let me
let me push back on that I think that uh
that's true if you stick to one Observer
and an idea and and the idea that I um
there is a definitive one thing that I
that that Observer wants it to do and
and then yes if if the Observer can't if
if one Observer can't tell what it's
doing that's a real problem but um I I
don't think it's a problem if you have a
physical device and there are multiple
observers and one Observer says oh this
is this is this is great this thing's
generating prime numbers and somebody
else look looks at it and says yeah
whatever I what what I is that it's you
know I don't know it's doing it's doing
some other fun function now you know for
us I mean it's it's statistically very
unlikely that you can say oh look it's
running Windows and somebody else says
oh no it's completely different because
it's it's hard to have a process that
matches both those descriptions at the
same time but but but I think what
happens in biology because there's
there's noise there's there's a high
tolerance for for fuzziness and all that
there are lots of systems that that are
looking at the same set of events and
interpreting bu building internal models
of those events as completely different
different things and it's like um you
know what okay but I agree with that but
that's from the point of view of you
know looking at it right so if the if
the point of view is that there are
multiple interpretations possible and
that diversity of points of view is
helpful in some way for the systems
around it I can I can I can totally
agree with that and I think that's
interesting to explore but that's very
different than saying that those
multiple possible perspectives make a
difference to the process itself which
is lending itself to be interpreted in
this multiple ways well what I think
what I think then happens is so the so
the SEC the other side of the equ and I
think you're absolutely right in in how
you divide this right into the two the
two sides so the other side is Tenon
bombs have you seen this his paper um
the child is a
hacker a child as a hacker it sounds
familiar it's it's it's really good and
it's this notion overall I mean we so so
like I I sort of expand that Beyond I
mean he's he's studying you know brains
and and human development and so on uh
this the notion of hacking is where
what's fundamental there is that you the
you you don't know or care uh what the
correct way to to interact with a system
is you are going to exploit it however
you can right that's that's kind of this
notion of and so so I think what happens
in the in the biology is that part of
interpreting these things however you
want is that you are also going to use
that to control them however you can so
you try find ways right so so I think
that's basically what's happening in in
in biological material is that every
both within levels and across levels you
have systems that are constantly hacking
each other and try no completely agree
so here we're on the same page actually
like you know this is something that
also follows from the framework I was
proposing because if you if there's a
black box yeah basically components at
different levels have to have a high
level of Tolerance of uncertainty and
they have trust they have to have trust
to some extent you know sometimes from
their point of view it doesn't make
sense what's going on around them but
that doesn't mean that they should
disengage or kind of like you know fight
it or or try to resist it or counteract
it because what it could mean is that
actually it's a different level of
agency a higher level of agency
rearranging things aligning things and
you know you need to just roll with it
even if you don't have everything that
you know is required in order to
understand where that's coming from and
but if because of that there is a gap
for you know Free Riders or pathogens or
something like that to take advantage of
exactly the same trust trusting nature
that you know okay today I'm producing
this other molecule I don't know why I'm
producing it yeah it turns out you're a
hyra by a virus and it's not you know
the higher levels that are kind of like
you know messing with you so um but yeah
that's kind of built into this so so you
can't avoid it you know that's because
it's such an indirect architecture that
which allows the multiscalar integration
is also that which allows like you know
bad things happening to some extent well
absolutely and and and my guess is and
we're now starting to EXP explor this
experimentally is that systems have
probably way biological systems probably
have ways to try to determine uh whether
something that's happening was caused by
Me versus versus nice I want to do the
same for the brain yeah there should be
probably some frame of reference in the
background that tells you how much
unexpectedness should you be expecting
at each moment what rate of unexpected
events for example and if it exceeds
your expected rate unexpected events
something else is messing with you yeah
yeah that's that's right right so so
it's the question of there's there's a
couple ways to pose it like am I
learning or am I being trained that
that's that's an interesting distinction
right because how much agency is there
in my environment is there another
agenda that's responsible for my
learning process and if if you're a cell
so the way we're going to do it is
basically to look at uh uh our readout
is going to be stress response and some
other things but you know you can
imagine a cell or a group of cells and
you can imagine messing with it in
progressively different degrees of
internal uh targeting so so here's a
signal that comes from the outside of
the cell fine here's a signal that we
generated you know in the second
messenger pathway right under the
membrane here's something that we did in
the nucleus itself like a right at what
point at what point does the cell say
yeah that's cool that's what I'm doing
versus you know oh no this is clearly
coming from from outside and yeah I I
think so this has corresponds like in
brain stimulation so I want I want to
get into that for our lab and one the
reason is that if eruption the is on the
right track you know doing TMS to the
brain or whatever stimulation is
basically eruption simulation right so
suddenly you have an uncaused
fluctuation in activity but from from
the point of view of the local
components in the brain they're used to
that that's the always that's already
how they always get impacted by higher
levels of organization so then it's kind
of like we're speaking the language of
the higher levels of organization uh by
injecting this you know you know
external variability
and and that's that's nice because then
we can actually play with this like you
know we can say what's the rate you know
of agency that the system is currently
expecting and there's all kinds of
interesting things like you know why why
are is deep brain stimulation helpful
for overcoming I don't know uh obsessive
compulsive disorder or or maybe like
helpful in depression and so on so
certain conditions where our agency
becomes constricted somehow compressed
or limited are help by what otherwise
look like kind of crude interventions
like you know why should just putting
this kind of like you know around random
stimulation somewhere in your brain you
know have the same effect as you opening
up your space of agency possibilities
that's that's very strange but if the
way in which agency of a personal level
connects with the subpersonal level is
only indirectly through this deformation
of the state space in unexpected ways
basically well then all you have to do
is deform it in unexpected ways to mimic
to some extent the signals that they're
expecting from the higher levels yeah
that's a that's a really uh that's a
really interesting point I wonder if
I and this is like totally beyond my
expertise but but I wonder if some
aspects of plasy and psychedelics and
things like this can be understood by
what what you're really doing is
lowering the vigilance of the system to
to hack from the higher levels right so
that so that you're more willing to uh
sort of not resist I mean this issue of
resistance right knowing that you're
being hacked whether right whether
laterally whether by a parasite whether
by a Mis like a malfunctioning component
or from above by some you know some
higher level of
organization uh that resistance like
biomedically this is huge because one
one reason I think why why we have such
trouble um designing new drugs that
actually fix anything I mean we have
almost other than antibiotics and
surgery We have basically nothing that
fixes anything right these drugs hold
down some symptoms best case scenario
but they don't really fix and I think I
think part of it is that uh we we are
operating in a way that's very easy for
the cells to tell and try to fight back
I like it yes I think that's the limit
right the limit
of I know that someone else is messing
with me that's not coming from the
higher level of organization yeah
because because it's such
micromanagement and the cell like what
is this there's this you know receptor
that's being targeted by some that's why
you know you see you see all these drugs
and then there's like a list of a list
of potential side effects that are a
mile long that you know your head will
fall off and your go blind yeah I know
you're you're actually on the right
track here so I'm thinking that there
could be a spectrum of possibilities
because we're now we're separating mind
and and and and matter a little bit just
a tiny gap between them it opens up two
possibilities imagine we have a
reduction in agency like dementia okay
so people stop being able to express
themselves language goes away they stop
being able to you know take care of
themselves and so on but in that case it
could be that the brain itself is no
longer you know flexible enough to be
able to receive these kinds of
perturbations and let them percolate
through the system and scale them up in
the right kinds of ways could be the
agency is almost intact to some extent
like the mind is still there but it just
cannot find the channel to express
itself on the other hand maybe in some
other cases like say depression it could
be that you know the brain is fine you
know it's actually ready to receive
whatever you're going to send it but
there's something happening at the level
of motivations and will and like
experience which the person is
overwhelmed or for whatever reason it's
not sending the the kind of you know
impactful interventions that would
normally make the body move in the right
kind of ways so both might from the
outside look similar in the sense that
there's a reduction of Engagement with
the world but the physiology of it could
be very different so you know so I like
that because it feels more natural to to
have these two possibility access you
know it's not always everything in the
same place yeah and what you're saying
about the fact that we need to be a
little bit more clever about how we
interact with that I really like that so
that makes a lot of sense so and what
you're saying about you know intervening
in the different levels we're starting
to think about that too in terms of
humans right so we can trigger muscles
directly you know by applying you know
contraction to your ner fibus here
that's you can grasp like that and that
also can feel like you're actually doing
it if it's doing in the good way but
what if we do it like you know from here
or what if we do it by doing something
here at which point you know is there a
sense for hey this is not me doing it
anymore or or something like that yeah
yeah that's that's very interesting I
was I was actually trying to look up
some papers on this um related to
confabulation and you know people people
with like like I've seen um you know
examples where somebody has an electrode
in their in their brain and and and and
it triggers laughing and so push the
button and and your mouth starts
laughing well the patient doesn't report
that's weird I was I was having a
serious thought and then my mouth starts
laughing that's but they say I had a
funny you know I thought of a funny joke
that's what they say so so so this issue
of confabulation and to what extent uh
does the system as as you said does the
system uh take this on as okay I'm going
to tell a coherent story of why it was
me versus no I'm going to accept that
and actually um the dementia and another
I just wanted to um say another quick
thing about the dementia and those
things um I have a uh a collaborator who
is a um a hospice nurse and she cares
for she's not a you know not a scientist
but but she's a she's a a longterm
hospice nurse with a lot of experience
and we're actually writing a paper on
case studies where what seems to there's
this phenomena called terminal Lucidity
which is really interesting where
basically you have somebody that has
been in a very debilitated state for a
really long time and and it's just you
know progressively been going down they
don't speak but you know all that stuff
and you think okay you know that that
that's it like it's all gone and then uh
I think I forget the exact amount of
time but I think it's like a couple days
before they actually die it it it all
comes back and they have a lucid
conversation with people and they you
know they remember things and they give
some you know some some instructions and
whatever and like there's this like
sudden sudden burst like and you know
and it's and it's I I don't think
there's a good clinical understanding of
it because if it's just the fact of the
of the hardware degrading then you know
that that's that's nice yeah so having a
slight Gap in our account would allow
for that you know make sense of that
possibly exactly yeah yeah I like it
yeah so I I think you know I think
there's that clinical component I think
it would be cool to um study some of
that stuff from from the perspective of
the of the model that you're you're
putting forward I think that could help
here here's another interesting example
um clinical example which is uh if we
think about the absorption side what
would be the maximum version of it uh it
would be if almost the whole brain is
you know uh in synchrony okay so that's
like you know all the local variability
every you know each neuron has tens of
thousands or connections coming in all
the variability suddenly they're all
like firing in unison right so it's a
huge reduction of complexity lots of
information loss when you do that agency
goes out the window okay you collapse
okay that also makes sense because now
you you can't have any more eruption
right everything is ordered everything
is regimented there's no possibility for
you know injecting spirous variability
anymore it just gets you know there's no
room for it okay so no more agency but
the model would predict that experience
might still happen in fact it might even
be more happening than in a normal State
and so I started you know just a little
bit investigative but for some people
indeed having an eptic uh uh uh fit can
come with all kinds of experiences you
know even like divine intervention kind
of experiences right so you know like
you know having a you know something
that changes your life kind of
experience can happen under under those
States so that's that's interesting in
the sense that it fits again with this
model that you know on the one hand
although it knocks our agency now your
your experience channels have been
opening up uh you know on the other hand
um and so it's and and some something
you know like there's something there
that uh you know there there's lots of
this kind of thing that you know he
mention p we didn't talk about this but
you know it's like the other way maybe
it's actually loosening things up so so
it becomes easier um to integrate with
with your brain and that fits very
nicely also with other um work that
shows that if you're under anesthesia
you know if you measure neural entropy
complexity diversity of signals um it
turns out that if you're doing a
cognitive task while you're slowly
falling unconscious um if you're doing
the class well your neural entropy is
higher than Baseline okay so even though
you're falling unconscious your neural
entropy goes up more than expected but
if you're actually falling unconscious
and you sto being able to do the task
then it goes down so assuming that both
groups of people actually you're losing
Consciousness then this kind of entropy
is not tracking the state of awareness
it's it's tracking your cognitive effort
how how involved are you mentally in
what's happening um and that's going
back to dementia like one of the best
things you can do for preventing onset
of dementia is learning extra languages
you know like you know engaging in extra
normative framework works you know
becoming able to respond in a much more
multifaceted way to your environment and
if you think about the way in which we
live before you know modernization to
some extent we were embedded in a
symbolic world you know everything had
meaning you know nothing happened just
by chance you know like the fact that
this cat crossed the road might mean
that my mother will die or I don't know
something you know so so everything had
super significance and this kind of
sotic framework was overlaying in all of
our perception and if if involvement uh
m involvement in our behavior is
actually causing eruptions well then
that has very loosening effects on on on
everything so it makes sense to me that
the best way of preventing your you know
like things freezing up so to speak is
to actually become more involved
normatively and and it's not just about
you know autopilot stuff this is
important right so it's not if you're
just an autopilot you know your body can
take over and maybe that's also a little
bit about what you were saying in terms
of stimulation and then you know this
kind of um fabulation happening right
it's kind of like the Habit The Habit
takes over it's not like you're really
freely willing the words coming forward
it's just that your body has a already
made response to the situation that's
kind of like you know unfolding in that
moment um and I think a lot of our
behavior is like that um and and what
I've been speculating a little bit that
the success of large language models to
some extent hints that you know even
when we talk like this conversation
right now a lot of it is actually habits
and our body's predispositions just
unfolding themselves with the
affordances in the environment and
that's why they can be modeled you know
by just looking at you know linguistic
patterns and so on and so this is
another consequence of the eruption
ideas and if you have this little Gap it
also means that we're no longer directly
in control of our Behavior right we can
set the intentions we can open the space
of possibilities we can make things more
flexible for example but then you have
to be in the right context uh you have
to have the right affordances you have
to have the right history of
interactions you have to have the right
body for that behavior then to also
Express itself in the right way and if
some of these things start crumbling or
deteriorating or or something like that
then maybe intentions don't connect that
well anymore with your behavior or with
your regulation um but when things work
well it looks like we're in control
because you know the body just makes it
happen like like magic almost um but you
know all we can do really is to can open
spaces of possibilities but to turn
those into actualities is coming out of
our embodied history of interaction with
the
environment so it's a different take on
Free Will it's interesting because yeah
you're free in the sense that you still
have the choice of opening possibility
spaces but you don't have the choice of
how to close them the only way to do
that is to cultivate the right kind of
environment and the right kind of skills
such that you're always poised to
respond in a way that you want to be
responding yeah yeah yeah I I completely
agree with that I I I like a notion of
free will that basically extends it to a
longer time scale to the idea that
exactly what's what's free is is
modification of self and environment to
enable you to exactly in different ways
in the future that's that's where you
get to really exert it right yeah yeah
yeah and it's a bit it's bit strange to
think about that in the first place like
I mean just thinking about like you know
hey I can't directly control the next
word that's coming out of my mouth I
just have to trust my body that it will
choose the right word otherwise I get a
Freudian slip or something like that you
know um it's yeah but uh you know once
you're okay with that then you know your
focus shifts and says well what can I do
today such that tomorrow it will be
better you know this kind of thing yeah
yeah yeah I I think that's a much more
useful view of it yeah yeah and I think
it's true of all of biology this go goes
the same way so um you know there's a
slight indirection which which is
basically the higher level of
organization can't directly control what
the lower level is going to do right it
can set the conditions for it you know I
gu I give you more possibilities to do
things or I give you less um but you
know within that space you know I I just
have to trust that the the Tendencies
are the right
ones
yeah excellent yeah uh thanks so much
this this has been very helpful uh yeah
I think I think it's a really
interesting framework so um yeah lot
lots lots to talk about great yes thank
you I look forward to seeing how you
work with this experimentally when you
start intervening at these different
stages I think that's going to be very
insightful yeah yeah well we'll we'll
we'll talk more because I I want I want
to get your thoughts on some of the um
you basically using some of the you know
brain clinical uh data to inform how we
do some of the things in cell so so yeah
yeah I think there you know there's a
new horizon opening up with this way of
thinking you know suddenly we can
quantify these things and then
everything changes yeah yeah
