interview there we go I think it's
working Tony
how are you good and you yeah I'm good
thank you it's so great to have you here
it is
um yeah just like thank you so much for
reaching out to me and asking me to this
interview because like I was just saying
this is like my way of bringing together
my two passions of like actually you
know interviewing and surfing it was the
last time I did a interview live for for
the Instagram I'm not maybe it's like
the first one I think really yeah I
think so oh my God I'm so honest to be
the first person like a conversation
with kind of like a
ever
like
the internet just
yeah yeah is that okay now yeah and and
I don't even know what you're about to
ask me so I know every even schedule my
questions yeah I'm like trying to find
all my questions on my on my thing okay
I'm gonna try and find these questions
but my first question I remember anyway
um which is that you obviously grew up
around surfing you grew up around big
waves or nothing
um your dad uh was a big wave surfer
um you grew up in Portugal uh what do
you think basically that big wave
surfing chose you or did you choose big
wave surfing oh that's that's a good
question I think the answer that big way
of Surfing kind of like choose me you
know because yeah since I'm a kid I've
been watching my father going like in
like traveling for for surfing big waves
coming for Nazareth for for a long time
you know and I grew up in fragrance and
is known in Portugal like the best Big
Wave Riders from from Portugal they are
from Prague you know uh so I grew up in
there in that beach and like I was my
kind of like Idols they were serving big
waves they are like from the same place
I am so basically like growing up in
that environment I just got like okay I
think that's it you know it's kind of
like it was meant to be like this way
yeah
the brother of my godmother is like one
of the first big revisers from Portugal
wow you know then my father he is one of
the pioneers of Towing in Portugal you
know so everything is just like okay
you're meant to be this so I'll say that
big website choose me yeah did you ever
it was always going to be big wave
starving for you was it you never
considered like you know going on like
the the CT or like doing any any other
kind of Surfing like that I mean when I
was a kid I was kind of like yeah the
city but then I don't know since the
first big web session when I was 12
since I I tried like the the feeling of
adrenaline the feeling of going out of
your comfort zone I was like no I think
this is it you know so since I'm 12 I
put my mind into like bigger surfing and
I just like kept going yeah yeah 12.
that's crazy yeah I mean I like I'm
gonna get onto asking you questions
about Fair later but for me like
learning is an adult even going into
like six foot surf in the Pacific and
like getting in the washing machine and
experiencing my first hold down I was
like oh my God this is terrifying like I
can't imagine how you did that at 12
years old but the thing is that I don't
know the feeling of being Turf like
being scared and going out of the
comfort zone and then kind of like whoa
I survived it's just like
and it's addiction you know yeah yeah
yeah
I can imagine
so okay I have my questions now and the
other the next thing I wanted to ask you
was other than your dad were there any
other Surfers that you really looked up
to
um but either big wave Surfers or just
um service in general when you're
growing up
in speaking like National there's uh
Jean Messier that is like the brother of
my godmother uh kind of like started
Surfing With My Father and on his surf
school when I was a kid and then like I
was a kid and he was always telling me
stories about Mavericks and like a lot
of crazy stories and I was just like wow
that's amazing you know yeah there's
there's jubon there's my father
obviously
and then there's Lucas shumu and kalyani
like right now they're like the best in
the world on bigger surfing and having
the opportunity to self like to Surf
with them that's the same the same ways
like on the same spot and watching like
what they're doing it's just special you
know so right now
those are my my Inspirations amazing
yeah so you obviously started surfing as
you said really young it's like a big
wave surfing really yeah
um and you were I think the youngest
person nominated for a billabong XXL
Award right
um not to the finals but I think yeah
for the nomination just being eliminated
yeah yeah how did that feel I was like
15. well I I didn't even remember that
they're going like like they're all yeah
I just remember that
um yeah I mean I remember like the day I
got the nomination uh the cameraman sent
me a photo just like congrats you're
nominated with one photo he did and I
was just like I know that it wasn't like
a really important nomination like in
terms of the big wave world but for me
it was just like
no I just got nominated you know yeah
that elimination was when I decided I
realized okay like
I'm one of these four years of my life
you know because I started at 15 I was
like well I'm getting elimination that's
15. so if I just keep doing what I'm
doing I mean in five years I know I can
meet the world surfing big words
[Laughter]
um what change do you think in 2020 when
you had that big breakthrough year it
was obviously just after the pandemic
there have been a time presumably when
you weren't able to serve so I think it
was bad unfortunately for a while
um and then you kind of came out in 2020
and you had that we'll talk about it
later but the 101 foot way
how did what change during that time
what made you come out so strong
that year was a bit weird you know like
with all the coffee things like everyone
was like I mean why is coffee what is
covered you know and then there was the
moment that we got forbidden surfing
Israel for like almost two months I
think because we had like one of the
biggest swells we we ever had here in
Ezra and the crowd on the on the cliff
was just crazy we had like more than 10
000 people there yeah there's a there's
a crazy photo that is like like hundreds
of people the police trying to stop
everyone everyone trying to go down to
see the waves and therefore this kind of
like scary and like on the pandemic like
situation and because of because of that
we got forbidden to serve in Ezra but
that wave I mean
um it changed a lot like in terms of
media let's say like that because after
that wife I managed to to get like into
the national media and international
media and all of that uh but for me
personal like I don't I don't know if it
changed that much because
the way I I ride the wave it wasn't my
favorite you know because we spent I
spent all summer working I didn't I
didn't train that much I was like okay
The Season's about to start so I'm gonna
train you like as soon the season starts
and then on the beginning of the Season
we had that swell and that's well I mean
I wasn't like 100 ready so that whatever
I served a bit like with fear you know I
didn't serve but I didn't serve the way
I wanted to so it's kind of like a wave
with that way I have a love and hate
relationship something like that because
it's like okay it's a huge one but then
I see it I was like I could have served
this way better you know yeah and with
that well I mean I think was because of
that wave
that right now I am where I am you know
yeah I think a lot of servers are like
that with those like the biggest wave
ever that goes viral like um Garrett
McNamara famously was like with that
massive wave like it wasn't a real wave
it didn't break like whatever exactly
and then the thing is that when that
happened
um I was I don't know 80 maybe yeah 18
when I got the wherever I was 18.
no yeah 18 exactly I was 18 and then on
the media I started to see like a lot of
good comments but a lot of bad comments
and like 18 years old kid I was kind of
like
oh this sucks yeah catching the good
ones like okay this is nice but then
like the bad ones they were like really
bad ones and I was just like
uh this sucks so after that I kind of
like I didn't forgot that wave but
it's just not not like on my main list
about
you know yeah I know exactly what you
mean in terms of like it's hard getting
into the spotlight and then having to
deal with yes negative attention and
like you're doing what you're proud
we just need to get used to it yeah
exactly yeah
um so you mentioned there that you
didn't really start the wave in the way
that maybe you would have wanted to
because you still had a little bit of
fear and I'm super interested in how you
deal with it because as a big wave
surfer it's almost like you're just you
just live with fear like you must never
really get over it
so basically the fear
um I mean I'll see that I see that
there's two type of fears there's the
one that is like you're scared but you
manage to overcome that and go out of
the comfort zone
and like kind of like you overcome that
fear then there's one fear that you just
get blocked there and you you can't do
nothing like those fear that you just
stop you freeze and you're like I can't
move you know there are two type of
fears I already had like both situations
on bigger surfing already saw waves that
are spelling with these big boards right
here and I saw the wave you know and I
just freeze I was like
you know but I already I already had
sessions I was scared but then I was
watching the wave and I was like okay
I'm scared but let's go and basically
like dealing with fear you just you just
need to get used to it you know the
beginning all right but then like if you
feel that what you're doing it's what
you really love you're gonna find a way
to to overcome the the fear and that
like the The Passion of adrenaline
because the truth is that I don't know
how to explain well I what I feel when
I'm surfing big wires I know it's a mix
of adrenaline happiness fear like
everything together and that makes our
feelings is so like it's an addiction so
good so that
you know like it's it's bigger than the
fear yeah so just like I want to have
those feelings so I just try to turn off
the fear and go for it
here helps you a lot on being more more
focused in the water you know yeah and
the truth is that if someone tells you
that he's not scared of seraphimic waves
or he's crazy
or it's crazy you know there's I think
it's impossible to be out here in Israel
in a huge day and don't be scared like
it's it's impossible and looking at it
is scary even looking at it online is
scary just being on the cliff yeah
no I haven't I really want I need to
come I need to come an invitation if you
come here I'll take you out on the jet
ski amazing oh my God oh my God okay
right how can I turn that down
and the things that just being on the
cliff on the huge day when the waves
break you can feel the cliff kind of
like
shaking you know so I mean yes it's
impossible to don't be scared with that
and when you're scared like when you
have fear you're doing everything like
200 focused you know okay I need to do
this this I can't I can't do mistake
here I can't do mistake there so I would
say that I mean it's important to be out
there with fear but like choose the fear
not the good fear not the one that you
just get Frozen that's it that's a
really interesting point because like
presumably if you have that fair
response which is just like freeze
you shouldn't go and it brought to mind
watching 100 foot wave when um Maya was
out being towed in and she kept holding
on and not going and then when she did
go she almost died and that was almost
like the the fear response being like
don't do this you're not ready like have
you ever had that sense of I actually
shouldn't be here I'm not gonna go
um I mean about Maya I'm I'm not gonna
say that she she wasn't ready because
the truth is that mine is like she's uh
yeah
uh water woman in amazing big world
Surfer but I believe kind of like in in
faith in faith you know like in that
everything is already like meant to be
and the expression of Maya I see it like
that you know like was meant to be and
she got scared obviously but the truth
is that she managed to overcome that and
now she has like two Guinness World
Records yeah yeah yeah exactly well and
then she beat the one she had and now
she's have another one you know so
basically what happened on that day with
Maya was kind of like okay you need to
go through this
to now be like here you know and that's
kind of like how how I see it and I
already had like one situation like that
was in
January 12th of
2022 yeah exactly
um I had a crazy Wipeout on the on I
hear nursery on a pedal session like one
of the biggest players I ever caught
cuddling wow and I got really really
bounded like I got I stayed like I don't
know maybe 30 seconds under underwater
on that one and like 30 seconds there
doesn't seem much but when you have when
you have like your knee behind your neck
and your like on your yeah I know I know
for my five second hold down that feels
like a minute and then I got bounded
with like more six or seven waves and I
got off the water a bit like
boom I almost drunk like yeah and that
one got in my mind for for a long time
but then the truth is that like with
training and like a lot of mental like
training I managed to overcome that fear
but that one got me like scared for I
was like almost one year something like
that yeah you know so but yeah if it
wasn't that I mean like I said I think
that was meant to be because if it
wasn't that
probably I wouldn't be like traveling
the travels I did I would be catching
the weapon out of Portugal like I went
to Chile in Mexico I wouldn't be surfing
those places like I served if I didn't
have that experience you know so yeah I
just believe that everything is meant to
be and everything happens for a reason
I'm also really interested in what you
say about fear as an addiction because
that's something that's repeated by a
lot of
um a lot of athletes and extreme sports
as well and it seems like that goes one
of two ways yeah either it becomes like
okay I have this relationship with fear
I'm going to try and overcome it I'm
going to meditate on it I'm going to
like go Inward and try and figure that
out or it becomes I need to keep chasing
that high and that rush and in some
extreme cases you know you've had
service that end up you know they take
drugs or they have extreme injuries or
like bad stuff happens because they
can't manage that relationship with fear
because it's actually an addiction so I
wonder how you deal with that how I deal
with that that's uh that's a good really
good question the thing is that
that addiction sometimes is like way too
strong and when the auditions were too
strong is more most of the times is when
you get injured you know
um because there's like there's the
addiction but like you also need to
listen to German and if for some reason
mine is kind of like telling you like
okay maybe don't go today like rest
today you search like big waves they
Towing for one week sit straight like
maybe it's better if you rest today or I
don't know like something happens then
you don't feel like really really
confident like you you need to have like
the capacity the mentality to be like
okay like I don't feel about surfing to
them or conserve today you know and
there's the problem there's a lot of
people that are like no I need to be out
there all right because of that uh
because there's my sponsor because
there's cameras because
uh because like I didn't catch the where
I wanted yet you know but actually I
manage I can't control that like I'm not
gonna say easily because there's days
that I want to be out there but I have
like a bit of pain on my back or my or
something like that because I searched
like for too long the the last week and
I kind of like I go out but I stay on
the jet ski or I do like one or two
waves and kind of like control myself
but yeah is that you just you just can't
you know like it's funding like it's
everyone out there it's Good Vibes in
the water yeah
yeah I'm gonna have to I'm gonna have to
go
um I was gonna ask you next
uh uh okay yeah so let's talk about the
world record attempt okay so I know
we've spoken a bit about that about that
wave we don't have to talk all about
that wave but it is you know as you say
something that brought you really a lot
of media attention yeah
um and I guess just for the listeners
who aren't really very familiar with the
way that this works can you explain what
happened why there is this idea that
you've claimed to serve on 101 foot wave
but it's not been verified why it takes
so long to verify these claims why it
actually matters both to you and to like
big wave Surfers generally so the the
world record attempt was kind of like uh
like I said was kind of like to put my
my name into the world of bigger surfing
because like honestly I knew that I was
not gonna get like the record because
even if like the web was the biggest one
like it wasn't like the the most
critical one you know uh because I
didn't serve like the way I want if I
surfed the way like the way I wanted it
could have done you could have done but
I didn't served the the way how I wanted
so
uh I put on my head okay I'm gonna do
this more to be like not not famous but
the thing is that nowadays it's really
important to be strong in the media if
you want to find sponsors if you want to
travel all around the world to serve
like you know the media is kind of like
really really important and I had that
wave uh that fell like from the
Portuguese team I was the one that got
like the the best and the biggest wave
so I was like okay so in Portugal no one
no one did that so yeah I'm gonna do
that I mean it's kind of like part of
the yeah you know
we tried we didn't get any answers
um they just said like okay we we're
checking this then I managed to the
professor Miguel Murray to measure the
wave he measured my wife and the in the
wives of the other Surfers and on his
like method
uh my wife was like the biggest one uh
so we kind of like use that to to send
to all like the the television channels
and everything and actually I can say
like I'm proud like a really good job I
managed to go through all the main like
channels in in Portugal
uh but if I knew that the wife was not
going to win yeah I knew you know it was
more about like and it was that I don't
regret doing that because right now I'm
just here because of that you know yeah
yeah so
that was kind of like what happened and
right now we have the record is
Sebastian is bastard a German guy
with like 86 foot right uh yeah
something like that I think onslam I'm
not sure the size
yeah something like that I mean like
some listeners will probably find this a
bit weird because they'll be like
obviously why is it so hard to measure a
wave but like as you know
one problem only we're surfing seems
like bigger surfing is this yeah there's
this way but then one guy said that that
way is not the best place so then
there's this way but then there's the
other way there's another way so it's
kind of like
you know it's just like yeah
too much it's moving all the time like
where's the bottom where's the top like
where is the biggest Point like yeah
it's not like measuring something that's
static like on that wave I tried to
measure the way because I knew that it
was a big one and I wanted to do all of
like this media work uh to get recognize
the big wave world because
if you don't if you don't go out of
Portugal like of of your place of your
Beach it's going to be hard for you to
be recognized on the big world surfing
world
so because of that I managed like to
find a new sponsor that managed to start
traveling so that was like what kind of
like helped me do doing that but the
thing is that now like the world record
is such like a big thing that every
season there's guys yeah during the wise
now my wife is the biggest one my word
is the biggest one and it's kind of like
a bit a bit too much you know like yeah
I did that I'm not saying that I didn't
I did that but right now like mentality
a hair is just like
go go surfing have fun and then if you
have a big one
I can't hear you I think the sound's
gone
take it back yeah and yeah then
I kind of kind of like just go out there
surf your ways and then if you see that
you have one of like if it's really like
one of the biggest ones then you do that
it's kind of like
if you know that is not the biggest one
don't do the same as me you know don't
do that but I did what I did
um because like straight I just did that
to have like the recognition of the
video because I knew that my wife I mean
it would be really hard to win because
one of Sebastian and shumbu they will
they like they served away from the
critical spot and I didn't yeah yeah but
it sounds like you've got very a very
good attitude towards it and I another
question I have is as you said like to
be a professional staff for now you have
to have sponsors you have to be in the
media you know you have to kind of build
up a brand it's similar to a lot of
professions really it's kind of I guess
like similar to what I do like you have
to be able to say yeah this is you know
this is me
um do you find that stressful like
having to maintain a certain level to
keep sponsors to like put yourself out
in the media or do you actually like
being out in the media
I mean
yeah
if you ask me if I prefer to be to get
pounded on the big Day in Israel being
in front of a camera
they like getting pounded yeah
but the thing I'm getting used to it but
still like it's kind of
it's not it's not annoying because I've
been doing it for so long that I kind of
like used to it already and I kind of
like it sometimes but depression of like
okay I need to I need to have a good
image uh everywhere I go I need to have
a good image on the Instagram uh on the
interviews I need to be careful with
what I say uh at the end of the moment
that's like too much and we just we you
might get a bit crazy but then you just
take like one one week off two weeks off
and then everything gets back to normal
but like like we just said like it's
it's part of the game if I want to leave
from Big we're surfing
I'll uh I have to do that yeah that I've
been doing that for so long that I'm
kind of like I like it already so that's
good
um the other thing I was going to ask is
so lots of people say about surfing that
it's a very selfish sport it's like a
completely individual thing that you're
just out there and it's just you and the
waves but big waves are things different
in that sense isn't it because you have
to have a team you're having someone
who's turning you in someone's taking
pictures like do you like that kind of
team aspect of it and how did you kind
of put together your team
um yeah I mean there's a huge difference
between normal surfing and bigger
surfing because we were surfing if you
don't have like a team that you can
trust and like a strong team you're
going to be out there and you're not
gonna do nothing you know you're not
gonna feel safe to go on the bigger side
of the day or something like that you
know
uh so yeah I mean I don't see people I
mean because surfing can be a selfish
sport but like kind of like to to the
family of the surfer yeah you know
because you're putting your life in Risk
the people you love and the people that
love you but you're gonna be worried
about you because you're surfing like
the biggest states in the world on that
on that scenario I would say that's
selfish but then when others married I
wouldn't say it's like a selfie sport
because you need a team you know if you
don't have like a guy that drive drives
well that you can trust versus you need
a spotter with a radio to be on the
cliff to help you uh you need like to
have a good feature because like Towing
surfing
it's like one of the most intense like
things for your body ever you know in
hours on the rope and it's just and like
cold because Nursery during the winter
is really really cold yeah
um so then like a good physio
um the spotter a good safety guy we need
like a good driver to put you in the
waves and then a good safety guy to have
to be on the extra jet ski to save you
when when's huge
um you know so it's like there's a big
thing behind it a lot of people think
that just like you grab the jet ski with
a friend you go out you do a few wives
and that's it but no like there's a huge
kind of like structure behind it
and if you don't trust that structure if
you don't trust that team like you're
not going to be out there safe you know
so and it's kind of hard to find to find
people
because basically that's what you're
doing you you trust in your life on on
other persons
the connection went a bit funny there
but I think are we back now oh yeah yeah
okay cool good
um so yeah the other thing I wanted to
ask was like
yeah my phone just went down oh okay
fine
yeah we're back
how like the culture of big wave surfing
differs to the culture of you know like
mainstream serving for example so you
know we think about like surfing culture
we think of like you know localism maybe
like a bit of kind of competitive nurse
maybe like
um you know yeah that that kind of like
Bros like emptying and like pushing each
other around in the lineup
um I'd also like the friendliness and
you know like the whole idea of being an
assertive and having fun
um how is big big wave surf culture
different to that because it must be
quite like a small world where you guys
all know each other
to normal surfing it's like a really
really small world
um and like the the main ones
we all know each other because I mean
I'll say for me because because of
misery you know because everyone comes
from Israel yeah probably in
other places I don't know like
France or something like that
um it wouldn't be the same so here I
basically like the biggest ones of
people surfing because of Nazareth and
actually like on that thing it's kind of
like the same as normal surfing you know
there's the Good Vibes like in the water
Good Vibes like good waves but there's
also like the competitive part you know
like because we are out there and all of
us like we all want like the biggest one
or the best one you know and the time
was almost serving you on the session
and you want the best one you know so
it's kind of like out of the water
friends in the water friends but
different yeah
um but on that I would say that is the
same as a as normal surfing yeah except
there's obviously a lot riding on it
there's a lot on the line yeah true
um let's talk about Nazareth itself now
what do you think is so special about
that wave
is special because like it's one of the
only places in the world that you can be
on the cliff and you see the wave like
in front of you it's not like you're on
a cliff and the wife is like
I know far away in the ocean you know no
it's like you literally like the waves
they're surfing they're breaking on the
place that you are you know the waves
are breaking on the cliff and you're
here on the top watching everything and
that just makes like misery a special
place and then there's also the the
canyon yeah and the canyon is like what
basically
Nazareth I have the waves that we have
because of the Kenyan you know when it's
like the right direction the waves came
like from from the canyon that starts in
some islands they call it like bird
language that's where the canyon starts
and then when there's like the right
direction is when we have the famous
A-frames the famous Peaks from nezer
and there's not like a lot of places in
the world with that like from that
effect of nature uh Nazareth is like one
of the the only ones you know and like I
said having the opportunity to have one
life like that and you can see it like
first row is just
it's just amazing like it's something
that honestly for everyone that loves
Sarah for bigger surfing I I say that
they need to come to another on a big
day to fill the because you can really
feel the energy you know uh you can like
well while you are in the water you can
hear like the crowd screaming when you
when you catch a good one but if you're
out and the surfer like screams because
you got a good one you can also hear
that you know yeah so just like feeling
all of that energy it's like
and special
and it's also what makes it so crazy and
so dangerous right because most of those
big wave service books they're not sure
breaks yeah they're like wreath breaks
way out somewhere like there's a channel
like
like driving the jet ski nature on the
big day is like a nightmare so it's
scary like a nightmare because you have
waves coming from everywhere you have
like normal wave you have one wave
coming from the cliff because the the
wave feet there now it's gonna have one
life coming from the other side you have
sometimes you have backwash coming from
land so driving there like I'm telling
you driving in Israel like on a big day
as soon you arrive like to the lineup
your heart is like
like the adrenaline is huge huge I think
the adrenaline of driving in Israel is
bigger than surfing
really yeah
because like while you're surfing you're
like okay I'm surfing my driver needs to
pick me up yeah you know if you're
driving you're like okay I just throw
this guy into like propose the biggest
step of his life
and then I need to pick him up so
basically he's left his life and my
hands yeah you know that's like I don't
like it's not like you're safe when
you're on the ski because we've seen so
many clips of like skis flying in all
different directions and like is there
it you're safe or you're at the beach
understand
and you went to the beach or you're like
far far out like when the waves didn't
break and where we choose but in the
middle between the lineup and the sand
there's like there's not like a safe
Zone you know you need to be all the
time like paying attention on what
you're doing because like this you can
lose this key and then you go to the
beach and
you lose the session might like lose the
jet ski that's not like a ship it's not
like a ship thing
so yeah it's kind of like hardcore to
drive the jet skis here yeah no kidding
um is Nazareth still your favorite wave
in the world and what are the ones what
are the other ways that you particularly
like
um so in terms of figure surfing I
didn't travel that much yet I served in
Basque Country here in Spain uh I serve
in Mexico and I served in Chile uh I
love like put the logos the left I
served there in in Chile I just love
that left just love that way
Mexico this year was my first year there
and what a year yeah
and that place was just like amazing you
know and was the first time surfing me
where it's like with warm water on
shorts and not like wet Foods gloves
Woody everything
uh but I mean Nazareth
yeah like there's I mean just having the
feeling of doing a good session at home
is just impossible to to have something
better than that you know so it will be
always be nicer and my favorite place
for sure of course
um what was Puerto like this year then
because I saw all this amazing footage
coming out including some very scary
wipeouts like Nathan Florence liking
that terrified hold down was it was it
cool yeah a bit after the swell of
Nathan the one that happened uh
and Puerto like is a is a special place
you know in terms of
uh crowd in terms of local in terms of
everything because the lock was there
they are like real lockers you know and
it's totally totally understandable
because they need to
they they want to serve those like their
wives yeah and they need to be surfing
their wives with
50 guys like from outside
and some guys respect Sometimes some
guys that don't respect and that
sometimes it's normal like they they get
mad you know because it's kind of like
it's understandable it's the same it's
the same here in Ezra with me like I'm
I'm from here and there are sessions
that there's way too much people that
you need to say something because if you
don't say it you're not gonna serve yeah
you know but I mean the wife
I mean the wife is just amazing you know
like being out there and seeing like a
huge huge barrels like with sun warm
water it's just amazing I mean it wasn't
I didn't score like I wanted but I kind
of like already had that mentality
because I know that's a really hard wife
to start and it's a really hard way to
catch waves because of the crowd so I
kind of like went there to to win some
some knowledge about the place and not
like with the mentality I'm gonna
arrived there I'm gonna score I'm gonna
do this this this no I arrived there
okay this year's gonna be kind of like
to get juice to the wave and then on the
next years I'll like I'll probably have
mentality to score you know yeah you see
that I went like there with death
mentality in the trip and went good you
know
um I didn't I I cut like a really good
one but I I felt uh on the way out of
the barrel
uh but still just like that wave my my
my my whole trip like worse amazing and
yeah that that was my my season in
Mexico I spent one yeah
something like that nice
is that anywhere right now that you
think I really want to go there
yes there is
oh no he's cut out almost
the internet
the internet stopped for I did it
I know yours
yeah like I can oh no yeah no is it
better I don't know if I don't know if
you listen what I said no where do you
want to go
oh of course yeah because like I'm a
goofy footer and it's a left so yeah
right now I know I've been watching yeah
um oh yeah okay the other questions
asked about Nazareth is
um how do you think it's changed over
the last like decade or so and do you
think it's changed for the better or the
worse because obviously it was only kind
of discovered not that long ago yes so
Nazareth I mean like I said there will
be always haters so there's a lot of
people that say that Nursery change for
better and a lot of people that say that
there's a change for worst you know
um I because I'm not like our original
from Nazareth but I'm originally from
from sintra is a bit more solid but I've
been coming here since I'm a kid and all
the local guys from here they all they
all already consider me as a local
and I remember to come here during the
winter when I was a kid and Israel was
empty like no one no one and now with a
big word surfing Nazareth is full during
summer during the winter like during the
whole year nether is full of people you
know and that obviously for like the for
the business here in Israel for like the
local business and the economy it's it's
good you know because they had like a
lot of they had like kind of like good
uh economy during the summer and then
the winter arrives and it's like kind of
like a ghost City yeah you know how it's
big wave surfing
we have days in Israel that is like the
the big days in Israel it's full like
you can't even drive in Israel yeah
it's amazing you know and but the thing
is that with that like it's good for the
um economy but then like for us Surfers
I mean it's kind of like hard because
there's more people arriving and more
people that want to prove themselves and
they want to serve big wives and they
want to serve the wife of Nazareth and
with that sometimes there's people that
there are people arriving here that that
they're not really ready like for the
waves of misery you know yeah and that
happens it's like when us surface we
start to build kind of like yeah maybe
it's like maybe it's a bit too much yeah
you know we have specials like that we
have people out there that most of us we
know that they're not ready to be out
there but on their head they feel ready
so they just go you know and that's kind
of like
not really good yeah no kidding
do you feel you know as like a community
around Nazareth do you feel some sense
of responsibility when people go out
there and they're like they're not ready
would you ever say to someone like look
I don't think you're ready for this I
love to because like I'm Portuguese I'm
from here like I live in Nursery
basically like I have I have Network on
my backyard and I have an amazing
connection with that but if I mean I
have something that I do that every time
there's kind of like big waves
I need to go I need to go there and
watch device and I spend there like
medium like one hour just watching the
waves you know and when I see someone
that's out there and I know that that
person is not ready I kind of like I I
try to warn them
and most of them they just went like I
don't care I know what I'm doing and
then stuff like Okay so
I don't say nothing more but then if one
of those people get like my team in yeah
because the truth is that if you see one
someone
like passing a bad moment we're not
gonna leave him there you know like one
of us like if he's not my team from the
other team uh he's gonna go there he's
going to save the guy uh but the thing
is that if some of your team like gets
in danger because of fun people like
that I mean honestly it's really hard to
don't kind of like yeah in South Africa
out but don't say nothing to the to that
people you know like it's because
imagine I'm Surfing With My Father
and be a really close friend of mine the
French guy
and imagine I'm watching like one guy
that's like a brother to me or my father
going to decide on a big day because
that guy was there and he shouldn't be
there
although it's hard to don't get mad you
know yeah of course yeah
so
so yeah kind of like feel that I I feel
that a bit Yeah so that is a message to
anyone who is listening to this and
thinking like if someone in the lineup
it's like Tony comes and says to you
chill out listen to him
oh no
connection's got a bit dodgy
oh no
I don't know if this is me or Tony and I
don't know if you can still hear me but
I'm trying to work out what's going on I
think it might be Tony because I think
my internet's still working
um in which case
I mean I was going to end it in like a
few minutes anyway but I just want to
see no we can't hear you Tony
um
no
just
a few more questions anyway if you can
come back I mean maybe if you want to
leave and then reconnect we can try oh
you can
you can hear us oh that's weird because
I can't hear you
um Tony do you want to maybe like try
and leave and then come back in
um
let's see I just literally have like two
more questions that I really want to ask
there we go okay
hopefully he's gonna be reconnecting in
a second there he is okay good I don't
know what's going on there I think it's
my connection we've been going for like
nearly 50 minutes now anyway so it's
already quite a long interview I
um
I'm like at my warehouse where I have
all the words oh wow oh my God that's
why everyone watching this now is
insanely jealous
everything
okay I'll just do a last okay last few
questions
um is there anyone in the surfing world
right now that you look at and think oh
I really admire them I really want to
surf a bit more like them yeah it's like
Lucas shumu and
those those are the ones that I look at
them and I kind of like
kind of like
not like beat them but like being I mean
the goal is is to be to be the best one
so yeah
yeah and what like drives you to keep
going and to keep trying to be the best
and keep trying to get come out on top
what drives me to keep going is like the
the addiction the addiction the the love
of being out of your comfort zone and
just like I mean big way of Surfing is
part of my life already you know I think
like for me right now it's impossible to
to live without bigger serving because
I've been like previous surfing has been
in my life for a long time now so just
kind of like give up like this is not
it's not gonna happen you know it's
already kind of like
is that all my family well my family is
like involved into that you know so you
kind of like we breed we were surfing so
yeah probably that's that's something
for plans
do you have anything well obviously you
really you want to go
um you want to travel a bit more like I
mean the plans are to
travel all around the world surfing like
the biggest and the best waves like ever
uh like a normal beavers there for like
once
and I have like the personal dream and
goal to win the Desiree Towing challenge
because the the thing is that black
Desiree was like where everything sell
for me like all the love surfing like
um all the efforts that my family put
into that like here in Israel and
everything like we moved to Nursery
because of me
um so my family has been supporting me
like for a long time on the big red
surfing thing and having the opportunity
to win the contests that like it's on on
my beach let's say like this uh with all
the people I love like watching him
watching me like all my friends and
everything and having the opportunity to
bring the trophy like home after all the
effort my family did for me you know
yeah so that's that's like the main
dream the main goal and I cannot wait to
see you do that
very excited for you
um yeah that's everything that I had to
ask you so I just wanted to say thank
you again thank you for coming to me to
allow me to interview you despite the
fact
I have a very inexperienced Surfer but I
hope a slightly more experienced
interviewer
you get the invitation to come to
Nursery oh my God you've got to go on
the jet ski okay I'm slightly terrified
but I will obviously take you up on that
perfect great thank you so much and
thank you so much to everyone who has
been listening
um we're gonna record this and put it
out as a video on various different
platforms and I also just wanted to
quickly say and I'm sure Tony does as
well we're all thinking about everyone
in Maui I've said that at the beginning
of the show
um sending all all the love and like
obviously I put some links in the
description so if you can donate even
yesterday
um I was speaking with a friend that
lives there and she just told me that
it's yeah it was like so all my prayers
to tomorrow yeah
yeah
