how you doing oh not bad yeah
what time do I start you've got to 510
feet hips up okay
cover a lot less today
jeez
we're jonesing for a drink have you
cried the Samana by the flag it's good
time all right um
do you guys many of us myself oh well I
had jokes playing - so okay you just do
your thing and I'll do mine better
so the ladies and gentlemen our next
presenter last year graduated with his
MA here from the University of Georgia
he's currently doing his PhD work at the
University of Arizona but we've all been
really excited to have him back this
week all of us to show the members it's
been really great to see them and I know
that at least Rachel Kim is very excited
that it's a very temporary visit
well it's nice to finally for those of
you who don't know I was the guy
emailing you so you know I'm that Luke
just like this you know now you know me
yeah yeah that too
so anyway what I want to talk about is
so I I'm told I'm a sin tactician I
don't have handouts but I'm told that
I'm one so I'm gonna talk sort of about
syntax but really about how much I don't
like it so we'll just start actually
let's um Veeran Tim aren't here right
okay good okay well quick poll uh who
here whose first experience with syntax
in a syntax class was an enjoyable
experience which enlightened their view
of language and you feel like you
actually look okay that's it you got a
good some people in here that that's
more than I expected
other question how many people actually
under can look at a syntax article and
actually understand what's going on
without reading out like five times okay
okay several Liars so anyway so you know
you get into syntax class and you see
all these magical trees and you have
these magical concepts like functional
categories covert movements specifiers I
don't I don't even know what a specifier
is no one does exceed commanding a bar
movement Quidditch Horcruxes feature
checking Death Eaters and you start
wondering like what is science and what
is you know like it's when you step in a
syntax class it's like stepping into
some sort of seance or something like
that so that's the feeling I get at
least now one of the problems I think is
that syntax has been burdened with some
very unfortunate books like syntactic
structures aspects of a theory syntax
cartesian linguistics and a couple
others now i have no idea what the
common denominator behind all these
books are but i I think they all share
the same sort of muddy headedness and
I'd like to sort of elucidate what I
think is a problem with all of them so
that's what I'm gonna do here
most of the flaw what's the flaw so
there's this diagram that I show in
every presentation because it's like a
really annoying one and it's called the
reverse y model of grammar and basically
the idea is that syntax is the core of
language syntax produces a bunch of
strings and language and it becomes
sounder meaning so on one side it
becomes the the vennett
string it goes to the motor system and
it becomes phonetic what you enunciate
on the other hand if it goes into part
of the conceptual system it becomes
meaning now the problem with this I'm
not going to even talk about sound and
meaning here the problem is that there's
nothing up here that is there's nothing
that feeds into syntax and that's a huge
problem that you might not necessarily
you know realize so classic generative
grammar models language as a random
generator that's to say that it they
think of it as a machine or it's not
even people think about it it's just
it's a modelled as a machine that
produces random sentences from a
grab-bag of words and the objective is
to make a system that can produce all
grammatical utterances of a language and
rule out all ungrammatical utterances so
first off this is obviously not how the
mind works
so what happens when you produce
language is that you have an idea and
your language faculty has some way of
embedding this in syntax and eventually
enunciated words but if you model it
like this you end up with a bunch of
problems that you don't actually need to
solve just a you know run through a
couple of them they're these things
called selectional constraints like the
harvest was clever to agree the boy
elapsed sentences like this
traditionally these were huge problems
in syntax because no one really knew how
you're supposed to solve for them and
generative grammar because of syntax is
the very core how do you rule out
anomalous sentences in the objec and the
idea was well maybe there's this part of
the syntax called selectional
constraints that weed them out later in
the drive of derivation or something
like that so the actual answer is that
no one says these sentences because they
don't make any sense why would you try
to produce the sentence like this
there's not a derivation that's
beginning and crashing its it can't even
start because no one wants to say this
also if you look at different categories
of one of another Smith and not me
one of my colleagues at Arizona has done
this work on C selection saying that
basically C selection which is thought
to be this arbitrary aspect of syntax
can be boiled down basically entirely to
semantics and other things like that so
you don't need all of this sort of
machinery and syntax ends up just
recapitulating parts of meaning so what
what ends up happening is that you have
this
semantics syntax does stuff that other
parts of the mind are supposed to do
like you know make sense of the world so
to isolate the error there's a very good
article very clear article called well
it's wrong but it's still clear by house
or Chomsky and Fitch 2002 this is the
language evolution particle and it does
well to distinguish what's called the
broad language faculty from the narrow
language faculty so the broad narrowed
language faculty is everything that goes
into play in our production of language
like our vocal apparatus or you know
understanding of events you know
everything we need in language well the
narrow language faculty is that extra
element that makes humans capable of
producing you know sentences and the way
at ways animals can't sew bio
linguistics and syntax are sort of in
the search for whatever that narrow
language faculty is what that extra
element is so it's just an issue of yeah
so you have a chimpanzee what do you add
to it to create a human besides the
bowtie it's like what extra mental
element do you need to create sort of a
human-like cognition so and how so
chomps can fit Fitch identify this is
what's called recursion or merge or
generativity a bunch of different words
and their ideas this element called
merge evolved in the human psyche or
something like that and what merge does
it is it combines different mental
elements so you have conceptions of
apples and Sally and eating and so
monkeys presumably have concepts of
those things too you do as well but the
unique thing about humans according to
Chomsky is that there's this unique way
of binding them together to produce sort
of new sentences new expressions and
it's not just as soon as 2002 if you
look back this is from Cartesian
linguistics Chauncey's has sort of the
same thing linguistic and mental
processes are virtually identical
language providing the primary means for
free expression and thought and feeling
as well as for the functioning of
creative met imagination so the idea is
basically everything in our conscious
mind comes about from this operation
merge and merge is tied into language so
anyway why is this obviously wrong
that's the main question now they can't
tell us
pretty much all evidence shows that
animals do have merged like thought and
see our gala still has interesting work
in this showing that really animals do
have a conception of argument structure
of direct and direct objects patients
stuff like that of dices of basic
numeracy there are at least equivalent
to people who have you know languages
with the primitive quote unquote
numerals and in fact when you think
about it what's the use of having
concepts of things if you can't merge
them together so if I have a concept of
Lisa what uses that concept if I can't
think of Lisa eating something or doing
something you know you have to to make
use of concepts you have to be able to
combine them together
oh yeah and Jenna that I like this
example so generativity is all in all
human behaviors so if you ever work at
Waffle House you don't have actually
have to be taught the 22 million ways to
make a burger at Waffle House what
you're taught is a generative out
operation you perform a set of tasks in
a recursive way to produce this
hamburger to good specifications and
animals can do this too I mean maybe
they can't make hamburgers but they can
do similar generative things they can
understand argument structure etc etc um
and one of the things I like talking
about this house syntactic structure
mirrors semantic structure so this is
something really weird if you assume
merge because merge so it combines in
linguistic elements but it doesn't
specify how they have to be combined but
there's actually a lot of rules as to
what can be combined in language so the
weird thing is that the structure of
syntactic and semantic derivations are
you're really similar as barbiere puts
it there's one property that makes you
know generative grammar particularly on
a economical namely the fact that x-bar
structure itself does not contribute to
the semantic interpretation so the idea
is well we have all the structure and it
looks like a semantic derivation why
don't we just put semantics in it
because when we do when you take a
semantics class and you do do these
relative clauses and you know
Dependencies they look exactly like
syntactic dependencies why don't we
think of these are the same thing well
they are the same thing so let's talk
about cartography which is similar
so of course Cinque and other linguists
have gone into the sort of semantic
structure behind languages and pretty
much all of them show the same things
there are very detailed semantic
categories that appear in particular
orders and all human languages so what
was traditionally called CP TP are
really very expounded categories that
have very specific meanings in them noun
phrases in adjective orders have very
specific orderings prepositional
structures the same thing and if you
assume merge just puts things together
in whatever order this is a really weird
coincidence so oh well here this is just
cartography sub so you know these are
like you know adverbs are in this
particular hierarchical order manner
adverbs are going to be lower in the
structure than perspective adverbs stuff
like this and this holds you know
chinboys original stuff is you know
unlike 75 different languages and they
all show the same order and stuff like
that and you have for argument structure
etc etc so the problem is that merge
recursion as the narrow language faculty
is too powerful and too complex it
implies that animals basically have to
be cretins that they don't do anything
like they can't really have any kind of
thought behind them and as cinque notes
use i hate this word universal grammar
because no one understands what means
but we'll just say the language faculty
has a relatively rich content far richer
in fact than most people are used to and
perhaps willing to assume and he's
referring to this complexity here
there's an enormous amount of complexity
that it's seems to have come from
nowhere if you assume assume that merged
generates it all so
emerge camp merch doesn't need just need
to combine it has to know all of these
orders so it's not just one operation
it's actually a very complex operation
so my answer and I think the answer of a
lot of people but to put it in words is
this is that you don't need an operation
called merge you need an operation
called externalize that's the say that
we should assume that these semantic
structures that we use to analyze the
world exists not only in humans but in
non-human animals that are cognitively
similar to us so they have recursive
ability to understand events relative
clauses they don't have them explicitly
but you know they have mental ions and
it's an Apple phenomenon on how their
brains are arranged this is you know
just you know speculation like this you
know speculations are working into but
what's unique about human cognition is
that we can externalize this structure
so our brains have been arranged in this
way what the language faculty is is a
mechanism which links these sort of
lower these lower mental processes into
you know conte the conscious mind so we
can externalize them and stuff like that
so well time for the green smiley faces
which happy you guys have seen already
um so my deep idea is basically that you
know there are cartography in your brain
and when you want to enunciate a DP or
something like that you really just have
this externalized operation just go up
it and say okay what do I want to say in
all of this so it goes up and the
adjectives are arranged in a particular
order depending on what they are or you
know which ones you need whatever and
again the same thing is true in
morphology this is a Korean example if
you have you know agglutinative
morphology you see the exact same thing
same order it's just an issue of an
externalization so so in a nutshell all
animals have evolved a series of mental
and heuristics for making cognitive
distinctions and recursion so I'm just
gonna say the animals are not stupid
animals have basically similar cognitive
apparatus the operatic it's a fourth big
collection is an apparatus that would be
the proper plural anyway I think
it is so animals pretty much have the
same cognitive repertoire as us the big
difference law and this repertoire is
mostly non conscious when they analyze
events in things their mind of course
addresses them in this way and they make
decisions at an unconscious level and
react to them but our language faculty
is an externalization scheme and I guess
it's sort of like what you would call
synesthesia
so synesthesia is were used like you
know hear colors or smell tastes or
something like that it's it's a it's a
merger of this sort of cognitive
processing system with motor and naming
systems so you sort of have this merger
of these two systems and what you get is
that this lower portion of cognition is
sort of sort of bubbles up into the
conscious mind and we can actually
externalize it so this allows otherwise
non conscious thoughts to be
externalized into the world and
importantly in our brain so we can
actually have like metacognition and
things like this that's one of the huge
advantage as Chomsky notes this is one
of the huge advantages to language we
can actually think about language in our
head contemplate events and things like
that and that's a huge benefit of it so
the end result is that I feel like this
sort of Rican ception has pretty much
all the desert errata of you know a
theory of grammar again the narrow
language faculty is mechanistically
small meaning it's something that can
actually have evolved over the past five
million years or so that we need it's
not like merge which has to be
incredibly complex and has to basically
have all the cartography Zim bedded in
and implicitly stuff like that and it
also implies that animals are sort of
stupid and syntax I think in my idea
syntax becomes the study of the
cartography of structure so like what
order do you have you know these kind of
adverbs prepositions etc etc and
importantly in some way this is a window
into human cognition because it's
showing us that our mind has a set way
of analyzing events and that can
conceivably tell us how mental
algorithms have evolved to address the
external world so if you go back to the
cartographer which I I'll do later if
you go back to the cartography there
might be a particular reason
they are in a certain order it might be
because they have evolved in a
particular way or because of natural law
constraints or something like that and
one of my favorites is that because
syntax is tied to a set structure it
suddenly becomes falsifiable that means
you can actually make scientific
statements about syntax you can't just
say oh well this doesn't work let's just
Oh ap this is at ap you this is a X P
this is an F P they're all these
structures that are just mean nothing so
that that's a nice benefit like actual
falsifiability that's new so that's um
yes so that's the jet how much time do I
have
okay well fine so that's about it I was
going to go into more but yeah so it's
good to quote your colleagues when they
cite you so I'm gonna do that
you know merchants yesterday said hey
Luke we're gonna be moving to my house
stop working on your presentation and
come join us so I'm gonna leave the rest
of the time for questions because you
know that's all I got and I hope that
made at least a modicum of sense so
that's it
yeah basically yes so if it's not clear
what I was trying to say is that over
the course of the Gillian's of years of
evolution we have developed algorithms
for addressing these kind of semantic
things and the order we find them in is
just a sort of an emergent property of
the fact they're being externalized
based on their sort of ordering that
makes sense that would be very hard to
find evidence for in terms of like the
actual ordering but I think again Gallus
tools work which he has a lot of
interesting stuff he can't I mean I
don't know how you would do actual
ordering here but it is sort of clear
that they do have things like argument
structure and they might have the
similar categories so I don't know how
to test that unless you have some
brilliant idea so mr. okay Doug yeah
okay so yeah so they so yeah well there
are two ways you can interpret interpret
that you can say on one sense their
reactions are just behavioristic they're
just learning okay I'll make these signs
and you know I get a response that's one
possibility another is that they have
they can develop gradually this sort of
relationship between meaning and
externalization but it's not or you know
some kind of phonetic realization but
it's not like there's an actual
algorithm like the green smiley face
that's going through all of the
structure you know forcing it out so
it's not it's
if they can't can yeah yeah then what's
preventing them forming structures well
if we did that we'd out that wash us and
water burn well because if you don't
have it externalizing you know sort of
algorithmically you can't have I mean
you can't have particular orders of
objects and direct objects and you know
the stuff like that you can't really
have you could theoretically have the
externalization of individual words but
it wouldn't necessarily have any rhyme
or reason to it I mean it okay there let
me put it this way the brain does a lot
of things and we're not always
consciously aware of them you know what
I mean so my whole point is that this is
something you know that this sort of
quote unquote syntactic processing is
happening in all animals but we just
have this extra algorithm that you know
computationally externalize system okay
so in the same way it's like the
difference between a first and second
language learner there are different
cognitive processes that are working on
this to address similar problems and the
output is totally different and it's a
lot more salient in this example yeah
yeah
yeah so they discuss
yep they can say we quit words together
to be able match
generalize
humans with this extra ability
yeah
so I are you thinking of vervet monkeys
is that what you're thinking of okay
yeah soso vervet monkeys vervet monkeys
you don't have set calls for predators
depending on their location and I would
say sort of what I said the Dougs that's
probably a behavioristic response it's
not like their calls have specific
truth-functional you know content you
know what I mean so it's not really the
same thing it's something that looks
like language to us because we're humans
but it's probably just some other I mean
it's as related as be communication you
know what I mean
well they I mean the human difference is
we can externalize that I mean I'm I
would say that what they're doing is not
related to this at all I would say it's
just like you know they have a reef they
develop a reflex sort of cultural reflex
based on you know sort of behaviorist ik
things so it's not really the same yeah
Jason
yeah it's it might not be yeah yeah yeah
yeah so I will say you know one of the
big differences for Chomsky you know
Chomsky's ideas that language exists not
for communication he'll get its really
pissy when people say that he'll say
that the purpose of language is to
organize thought and even my model does
the same thing because yes you have this
semantic processing but it's actually
bringing it into the realm of like
metacognition you can actually think you
can analyze your own thoughts and sort
of think of them again so that's what
you mean who is Ocala still gala still
he no it has nothing to do with
cartography he was he was the one who
said you know basically animals have
merged like structures like specifically
is that like Chauncey said okay the
language faculty basically gives us the
ability to count argument structure
things like this gala still says the
empirical evidence says that's not true
so this is Cinque this is like Cinque
reach see I will Yap on to you for ages
about this if you ask me later sweet
yeah yeah well you know parts of speech
might be totally up a phenomenal you
know it might die who I don't believe in
a mouse I don't believe in grammar have
us yeah yeah the why nothing about yeah
yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
yeah
okay the lexicon yeah
yep
so the lexicon is an input to syntax
it's something feeding into it but I
mean like in the sense that syntax in
this model syntax is the thing that
generates what you want to say basically
so what I'm saying is that what you
really need is this I mean I mean think
about whenever you say something you're
saying it for a reason you don't just
mumble a bunch of sort of like
postmodern diatribes of sentences you
say thanks with particular reason and
Chomsky models this the wrong way
because he's sort of implying that
meaning is generated after syntax or
something which doesn't even make sense
so yeah there is something visually
above syntax but that that's something
different that's just like feeding into
the syntactic system yeah yeah
yeah
yeah well my point was simply their
model has to account for why the harvest
was clever to agree is ungrammatical but
in reality you don't even need that
because you wouldn't even want to say
something like that you know and the
problem with the sentence isn't Z
selection or something it's it doesn't
make sense it's the semantics not syntax
you have any questions
