[Music]
oh yeah that's right EJ in the house
well actually we're outside right now
we're outside of the house you know you
know what I mind okay I wish that I
could run fast enough to cut a bird I
wish I had a better B to scar the L my
bird I wish I didn't get a trouble when
I ate the shoes I wish I didn't have to
sit just to get a treat I was told when
I was older I would still be cute but
Toby got another puppy I have to every
single one of my
treats cuz he was younger say
he and sometimes he eats my food before
I come get
see back
time did a good dog days I Bo not yet
because he's to B but we could turn back
time oh to the Good Dog Night
when the boo boo was not yet because
he's still bur smaller than you think
for the big cute t Daddy he stupid but
he's almost as smart as a brick so
that's looking on the Bri side which is
what I want to do sometimes a certain
small will bringing back to the puppy
when I can mark my territory and any
will take it from me and I will take you
back but booo GL is bigger than me when
boo please it never runs out of it I
could probably un mine he SE my brother
cuz we have the same and same caller Le
hang a b used to H and remind me of when
I didn't hop to share all the bed and
and treat if I could hop them
all my name
is
beating own I'm grabing and I'll be on
you love
you a turn back
time I do the good dog days I burn
people Bo is not alive yet because he's
to B but we could turn back
time to the good
dog when the boo boo was not yet because
he's still pet give me all the different
treats I would see a stupid girl and I T
tree I would sit next to your feet while
your sing and L back up you need to be
funny you used to G me pets give me all
the different treats I would see a
stupid squir and a te
tree I would sit next to your feet while
sing little up you need to be but that
was D which make a turn back
time did a good dog days I bur voice not
yet because
he make a turn back
time to the good
dog when the boo boo was not in love yet
because he's still the song cuz I don't
get the lyrics I don't understand the
meaning of the lyrics I have extremely
limited understanding of language we
need
a you always give me pets give me all
the different treats if I see a stupid
squirrel I can Chee the to of three and
I sat next to your feet while you made
this parody but I just canot tell if
it's
[Music]
funny subscribe Scarlet Johansson was AI
she wasn't even a person yeah AI EO U
sometimes why those are just vows
there's nothing to do with anything else
Toby good morning how are you well that
was a weird flicker of dark dude I look
like ominous that's better okay so I've
been posting I'm posting live stream
videos directly to this channel just to
test it out uh you want me should I
change this all right have no idea
they've never felt boning of the likes
of this it's going to be crazy there's
going to be six balloons six balloons on
the house but what are you going to do
now crazy come
