wo
[Music]
W all right boy oh boy all right where
did we start here let's
pre-establish how much of a fan I am of
the first film a couple years ago I
actually was driving through Oklahoma
and I had the opportunity and visited
Wakita the actual town from the first
film there's a memorabilia store there
there's a storefront that has props from
the movie that was actually donated by
Bill
Paxton a man who was revered as being
one of the nicest men in Hollywood and
even still today when I see a film with
him I just think how much he's missed
and I I wish he were still in films yeah
we're going to get into this film we're
going to get into Twisters the
2024 remake that's what it is let's call
it what it is it is a remake it is not a
sequel if it were a sequel
you wouldn't have these younger
characters using the device of Dorothy
at the offset of the film in the opening
scene and there's no mention in the
dialogue that this is from particular
people that they knew that developed
Dorthy it has no connection to
characters from the first film
implementing that into this remake all
right let's talk about this for a second
all right the first film has often been
referred to as a dumb film well no wait
why I resent that statement I resent
that comment that movie has
intelligently written characters with
backstory that Twisters does not have
the level of well-rounded characters
cannot be outmatched by the writing in
Twisters look I may have walked out but
at least I showed up in the first place
you never had the slightest idea you
never had the slightest idea about
commitment but being married means like
like stability and supportiveness
twister is a greatly acted film by
Paxton hunt and all the other tertiary
characters and actors that are involved
in the movie It's beautifully shot it
has iconic cinematography that wasn't
done before in that way I mean that was
something that was interesting about the
film is that movies had never shown
tornadoes in that way before yeah you
have Wizard of Oz showing to but this is
like that was a static shot and the
Twister was in the background and it's
not a main antagonist in the film like
this one 10 commandments would be the
other cinematic example that got the
closest to a tornado slw Whirlwind but
it's made of fire so not really among
other props I want to give twister is
Markman Cena's score is [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] glorious
it that score is in circulation and has
been for years at this point for me and
it's directed terrifically well the
visual effects a lot of them they still
hold up the only one that really doesn't
is when Jonas's car gets flung into the
air in the third act and it comes down
which is a funny sound effect that they
decided to use you're going to make the
villain's death uh comedic beat all
right fine and then it's like the it
didn't look like it belonged didn't
blend well with the environment and the
Twister that one is the did not age well
okay let's acknowledge some things that
are weaknesses in the first film okay
one of them is the Simplicity of
labeling Jonas played by Carrie elways
as a corporate shill and he's a bad guy
because he's in it for the money he's a
corporate corporate kiss butt man
corporate kiss butt man so he wasn't
that much of a villain who is the
villain in twister it is the tornado
there is a huge examination that needs
to be looked into when it comes to the
antagonists of both the original and the
sequel it keep saying sequel It's not a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] sequel it's a remake calm down
crazy do the tornadoes work as
antagonists in Twisters I say no part of
the reason is the visual effects of how
they animate them is they don't stand
out in a defined way they kind of
intermix and blend in with the sky and
the greyness around the clouds and all
that with twister they had defined
tornadoes they were different colors
especially in the third act you had the
EF5 you had the definition and the
dimensions defined of how big this thing
is the original treats them as if
they're these serial killers they never
Ed the term monster and all that stuff
but they might as well I mean even
Paxton said that if he were to do a
sequel which by the way it's a shame
that that never happened 10 years ago we
could have had a sequel that involved
Paxon and it's a shame that that never
happened yeah I always thought there was
a kind of a Jaws version of that that
movie a little bit of a darker more more
even more suspenseful version and uh
Helen and I I think we'd have to have a
teenage daughter who's run off with a
college guy and they're out storm
chasing I I don't know I have to do
something he possibly could have
directed it as well when Paxton directed
Frailty he showed how Gothic and dark he
can get and he could have brought that
Essence to a twister sequel which would
have been probably fantastic oo that
would have um uh the wha ifs of Life the
original had this anticipation prior to
leading up to the tornadoes appearing
they were these killers in Waiting
coming out and you don't know like a
slasher film it is there's a buildup
there's a suspense that the original had
there's none of that here in twisters
and it's a shame and it's a let down and
they should have done that
differently damn another aspect that
makes them less characters is that there
aren't animal sounds enough apparently
the director says that they use
different kind of animal sounds and I
think his line that he said in the
interview was I hope that you can hear
them so it was wol seals and it was
horses hopefully people feel it in some
visceral way that this tornado has a
voice you hope there's a chance that
audiences will pick up on the sound
effects that are hidden underneath all
the wind and the yelling and vehicles
growling Etc yeah speaking of growling
toward
you it showed this menacing Persona that
the Twisters had I didn't get any of
that here the tornadoes came off as this
indifferent occurrence that had no
presence it was just this thing that was
happening in the background part of it
had to do with the way it was shot they
weren't shot in a way as if they were
characters they were just this oh this
thing that happening on the periphery
and the characters you're chasing after
them I didn't get it I didn't feel it
the director Lee Isaac Chong does a
great job at pacing the film is not slow
it doesn't overstate it's welcome I
think it's under 2 hours the film moves
very well he did a great job when it
comes to that okay so what is this
remake
about structure is very similar to the
first film to the original there you go
Twisters is the meeting of two size of
the same coin one is a thrill-seeking
team led by Glen piles Tyler and the
other is Storm Stoppers led by Daisy
Edgar Jones Kate who wants to use
polymers to dispel the supercell's
activity and wants to save small towns
in Tornado Alley so let's look at that
for a second coming up with the idea of
using sodium polycarbonate to dispel a
tornado I really think is a creative
idea some people are going to call it
stupid like they accuse the original
being which I mean the sensors that go
up in the original basically they just
put on cut up pieces of
garbage onto the top of them and
expected them to suddenly that makes
them fly you're just putting an extra
weight on top of them that has no
aerodynamics to it whatsoever they're
just shards of metal anyway that part is
silly in execution so the thought of
using polymers to stop a tornado I think
is a great concept it's something that
advances the idea of the original kudos
to that person who came up with that
idea yes yes yes yes when it comes to
Glen Powell listen I like that guy but
it's not that interesting to watch him
hooting and hollering
for the beginning scenes that he's
involved in which he does he does that
quite a bit and it becomes kind of
irksome for him to be hooting and
hollering W woo wo wo wo wo wo yeah yeah
bless that country
music Chas the
tornado you on drugs this is something I
do want to bring up since I bring up
music right there there's a contrast
here when it comes to the tonality that
the music has in the original what is it
okay so whenever there's sourced music
it was always like rock and roll 80s 90s
hair metal squealing guitars in the
midst of also man Cena's traditionally
beautiful epic anthemic
[Music]
score with themes imagine that people a
movie with themes that you can actually
hum yeah I can whistle the theme from
Twister I can whistle that can can okay
please anyone tell me please anyone
offer is there a theme in
Twisters that you can hum that you can
whistle not talking about the a
Noom not that song not talking about the
soundtrack The the songs from the movie
I'm talking about the score please let
me know can we bring that back by the
way can we bring back themes to films
can can you composers please do
beautiful scores again I'll try so Glenn
Powell as
Tyler he's essentially playing hangman
from Top Gun to just with a cowboy hat
this
time there's not a lot of dynamism to
his performance he's doing a lot of
grinning and smiling
yeah tip of the cap and Okay girl okay
Kate Hi Kate it's that type of stuff and
first of all he doesn't have an arc
there's no Arc he's the same throughout
the film it's just that Powell grin and
good for him the thing that I encourage
and wish he would have is the this
Nuance in between his lines and I you
know he showed some dynamism in Hitman
and I appreciated his performance in
that when it comes to summer
Blockbusters and that type of stuff he's
really going to have to grow and
hopefully with Top Gun 3 which I have a
theory have a sense that it's going to
place him as the lead and Cruz they're
going to have a storyline together and
I'm up for that when it comes to him in
Twisters it's just he doesn't have the
dynamism of a performance that say Bill
Paxton did in the original Paxton played
so many different shades of that
character in a combination with the
right F in and the situations that play
out when you compare Paxton and Powell
there I'm sorry but Powell has not
matched near the likability and the
idiosyncrasies the charm and Charisma
that Paxton had yes he had the everyday
man looks but that's the point that's
part of the appeal of Paxton of what he
had I mean he started off as a quirky
character actor thick
weed and then came in
to starring in a 100 plus million Doll
summer blockbuster from Steven Spielberg
produced by him he [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] owned that
film he and Hunt did such a great job
it's a shame that he didn't get to star
in a lot of other films one underrated
movie that i' loved as a kid that he did
star in um or well he co- started is
Mighty Joe Young he's really fun in that
I wanted to I wanted to be that
character too and it would didn't hurt
that he got to kiss Charlie sterin you
know that was as a kid that was
certainly an aspiration Paxton was
vulnerable he was stoic he was sometimes
even quirky and he had you remember his
character he's called the extreme like
he has this backstory of possibly being
this drunk you know when they met him as
Philip sear Hoffman's character Dusty he
talks about seeing him throw a Jack
Daniels bottle into a twister and he's
naked I mean that's that implies that
okay maybe there's a reason why he got
out of this group because he was a
little bit too wild and they don't play
into that heaviness because there's
already the heaviness of Joe Helen
Hunt's character having the trauma from
her past with her dad dying from a
twister point is Bill Paxton had more to
play with Glen Powell has little to
nothing he's a YouTuber who likes
to yeah wo oh Kate oh she's hot oh and
she's smart all right we got to go after
her yeah it's like yeah he socks her he
just shows up to Kate's mom's Barn
Uninvited he explains away how he knew
she was there I heard about uh this
incident that happened years ago when
your friends died oh so he had to look
into it even further then I mean hey
when you look like Powell you can get
away with stuff like that stalker
Tendencies don't ignore me because Tyler
is a thrill seeker and doesn't have any
scientific Ambitions the scenes where
we're watching him chase after tornadoes
are not as interesting I'm going to
shoot up some fireworks okay that's cool
for like one scene okay the coolest
thing about that character though that
they I love that they did underneath the
truck Sid skirts that he could drill
into the ground when the tornado is
coming through their path I thought that
idea was fantastic and it actually
brought about my favorite moments in the
film and it doesn't involve a tornado
we'll get to that Daisy Edgar Jones
she's fine
she she's not a standout she's not a
standout like how Helen Hunt was hunt
came from working on TV and then was
bolstered by twister into A-list and
then soon afterwards won an Academy
Award for As Good As It Gets Twisters
showed that she had she had the wildness
she had the Charisma on screen she had
an everyday woman quality but yet was
beautiful and had a feistiness wasn't
trying to overpower her team trying to
show oh I'm better than you cuz I'm a
woman didn't have that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] there's a a
little bit of that here and I don't know
if you guys noticed the ones who have
seen this film but there is a beat in
Twisters that shows there's a little bit
of Neo feminism going on here who's the
standout is there a standout actor in
Twisters yes and it was a surprise to me
I think it's Anthony Ramos he brings
Nuance to the scenes that he's in that
surprised me he brought like a gravitas
and a naturalism to his performance that
I really appreciate it he's very good in
the film yeah so the one of the issues
with Twisters is that it doesn't have
the rich history that Joe and Bill had
in the first film you believed it I love
the the the texture Tyler and Kate are
meeting up for the first time ever so
they don't have a past that they can
share even if they didn't have a past
Tyler and Kate what you could have done
was create a harder animosity between
them as it is the movie is just just the
the light dislike for each other and a
little bit of banter back and forth and
oh she gives him a comeback to something
that was said to her and he
just that was good that's passable it's
not as interesting as it could have been
though you really want to show a little
bit I mean similar to what what happens
in his own film earlier this year with
anyone but you they actively dislike
each other and that's a more fun Dynamic
to watch so you could have brought a
little bit of that to twister
Z come on like come on guys it's just
light competitive verbal sparring that's
all it is and it only lasts for like a
third of the film and it's over then
they're buddy buddy afterwards their
chemistry is fine it's the writing
that's lacking to provide moments that
in which they could play out that
chemistry it's just not enough you
needed more you needed a little more
flirtation some sensuality between those
characters it's kind of platonic anyone
but you did it well that's what made
that film Sizzle Paxton and hunt in
twister got their asses handed to them
Powell and Edgar Jones they walk through
this film squeaky clean most of the way
to the point where they could have done
an Amber cromie and fit commercial in
between shops they needed to get down
and dirty muddy Dusty cuts and scrapes
not enough happened here okay put me
down for 20 I'm good for it as it comes
to cinematography that's another story
there are shots in the film that are
composed oddly the tornado is kind of on
this side of the frame and you have the
road that's in the middle it's kind of
some of the is is awkward some
compositions the framing is too close in
some instances I've talked about how
action sequences are filmed too closely
when I talked about the Fall Guy and it
sometimes happens here where the truck
is the camera's at a low angle outside
of the truck nearly underneath it and
the tornadoes in the background we too
close to the truck it's the truck is
taking up so much of the frame you're
not seeing enough of the space where the
tornado is and what's around it you
didn't have that problem in the original
shots in the film that are too close to
vehicles too close to people's faces too
close to the tornadoes where are the
wide Vistas in the iconic cinematography
that the original had people that didn't
grow up with the original are going to
enjoy Twisters at this point the film is
a success at the box office and that's
good the movie is okay I don't think I
want to watch this movie again I can
watch the original back to back and not
get bored with it why it's the chemistry
it's the actors in the film it's the
banter it's the mood the environment the
the score the direction it's topnotch
summer blockbusters film making you're
damn right I'm going to get to the
climax of the film The Third act
involves a town about to be hit by a
giant tornado Kate and Tyler go to try
and help people
okay I'll look past how a metal beam
Falls onto Powell's legs and all he gets
from it is a light limp okay the thing
that made me realize how egregious the
way that it plays out
is because let's look at this for a
second right as they're hiding out in
the movie theater in town to get away
from the
storm Kate decides on her own to run out
to Tyler's truck and steal it she
doesn't say hey Tyler anyone hello I
need to do this Tyler you can't walk no
he can cuz he's got a light limb so he
could have gone with her no she steals
his truck and essentially the entire
climax plays out on her own which is
really uninteresting because she has no
one to interact with meanwhile Powell's
Tyler is standing by the double doors of
the movie theater as the rain and wind
crash against his face and
he's as he's being pulled back as my
friends at hard cut would say the
extreme cocking of your main character
he gets to save like one person but you
you just don't get to participate in the
Fulfillment of all this work that you've
been doing with the the main character
of Kate now she gets to steal the truck
not tell him about it and she knows all
the gizmos and the gadgets in the truck
she struggles a little bit like apparent
maybe they don't open right this is how
I think they should have done this you
have Powell go with her so they can work
together why because you need the leads
of your movie to be together in the
third Act of the action sequence the
climax of the movie you need someone to
open the barrels in the back for the
polymers to get released because the
remote doesn't work anymore that's why
you need a second person they didn't do
that no it's Kate on her own sisters are
doing it for themselves I'm going to do
it myself I'm not going to tell anyone
where I'm going no and I don't care that
they're now friends okay friends don't
do that friends tell each other things
especially when it involves the other
person's property and everyone comes
running oh that was a close one oh you
you did it you did it Kate good job
you're so awesome you gave a
substandard less effective third act the
ending the very last scene when they're
at you know they've saved the day well
Kate saved the day Tyler didn't do [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
when they're at the
airport Kate's going back to New York to
look at all this data and look at what
we can do now to tornadoes and all that
great um Tyler is about to let her go
but he has a hesitation he's in his
truck and he's about to leave there's a
parking attendant at the airport that
tells him to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] off get out of here he
activates the augers and it drills into
the concrete I love this moment I think
it's the best moment in the film it's
badass it's romantic it's it's fantastic
writing it's the best [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] scene in
the movie and it didn't involve
any Twisters that's what's unfortunate
about that the best moment of the film
had to occur in the at the very last
scene I think you guys needed to do some
rewrites here and the talks of that kiss
that they originally had a kiss and they
did film it there's footage of it okay
it kind of doesn't matter if they kissed
or not because of all the other stuff
that I explained they don't delve into
enough of the chemistry between them
with the scenes that are written for
them the fact that that was left off the
table is a simp symptom of the
underdeveloped relationship that they
had yes they could have done both you
have the kiss and after the kiss the
sirens go off and they
see there's there's another twister we
got to go chase let's do it babe oh it's
it's not important it's not it's not
about them kissing it's about the shared
love of the chase of the
storm yeah I get it you can do more than
one thing guys audiences are not that
slow we can still pick up
on the subtext of things of visual
conveyances and we can also see the hero
kissing the girl yeah that can happen
too the thing that I can say that's an
upside to the way that this one came out
is that I'm grateful that this version
of it exists one of the reasons that
pushed me to want to go see it is this
headline I read that the director said
he's not going to put any climate change
messaging into the film and that
actually pushed me to the point of
wanting to go see the film
other than
that I'm going to go watch the the first
one
probably it's not the first one it's the
original it's not a sequel guys I I
don't agree with that if you can
convince me that Twisters is a sequel to
the original by all
means but I don't see any proof so far
and that's it I'll just leave it at that
man the '90s were a different time they
were so much
better oh
