uh thank you all for coming uh my name
is chane CIS we're going to have a Matt
brand give a talk on artificial
intelligence then we're going to have
four five minute Show and Tell slots uh
where you can show something you're
working on something you think is cool
whatever uh who wants a slot I do you do
you do one more slot
more okay good we got our four slots and
uh yeah that's it Matt take it away
thanks all
right so I'm here today to talk about
artificial
intelligence and particularly artificial
intelligence in games because that's my
experience with it um so I just a brief
bit about me I graduated Champlain
College in
2012 um it was my second bachelor degree
I went back to school because I realized
that I was programming a lot and I was
not passionate at all about what I was
programming and I realized that I wanted
to be passionate about what I was doing
so um I kind of put the two together
passion is coding and gaming and uh went
back to school for that um and I formed
burningwood games with a few guys few
people um at the end of the school and
then we launched out of school hit the
ground running with uh we we made two
games proprietary games lock and
pathogen and then um we we became Game
Theory and we have since transitioned
into uh contract games um after our
second game did well publicly like it
had awesome reviews and was uh is really
well received it hit it hit uh the App
Store well it was in like the the top it
was featured it was in like the top was
this pathogen yeah it was great yeah it
was a great game hit the top like 10 in
board games for a while and we just
didn't see the enough revenues to keep
going as a game develop as a game
developer so we just switched over to
contract gaming and now we build games
for higher um so that's what I do my
specialties are uh 2D turn-based games
so um uh uh you know games
where one person takes a turn changes
the state of the board and then the next
person takes a turn um and then
especially uh board game translations so
I've done pathogen is somewhat of a
board game idea um but I've also done
actual board game translations from GMT
games I made leaping Lemmings into an
app um and now I'm working on dominant
species so what I don't do
is uh provide instructions for world
domination um or on how to go go back in
the future to prevent world domination
so if you're here for that kind of
artificial intelligence you're you're
not in the right place
unfortunately so AI in games um in in 2D
games is is really about
creating Behavior that's believable so
you want you want behavior that feels
like you're playing against someone that
has Intelligence like a human player um
but I I didn't do it with machine
learning I didn't do it with um more
complex aspects of AI I did it using
simple behaviors that when you put them
together um it it feels believable um so
if you put a few simple things together
like uh a few kind kind of very simple
decision factors when put together it
feels like there's this complex decision
being made but really it's just a few
factors that are being weighed um if you
if you try to make too much complexity
to it it actually can feel convoluted or
can um Drive the behavior into very
specific channels that gets very
stagnant or stuck in certain ways um so
combining simple behaviors is is the the
main aspect
um and then what you do or what I do in
general is I assemble a list of all
possible moves or strategies um and then
you you pick one based on certain
criteria right and I'll get into this
later um and and then a couple important
factors for creating fun play are ruling
out the bad options in using some random
factors because really you if you if you
create a list of all possible plays and
then you pick one just based on numbers
it could be the worst play possible
because you're not weighing certain
other
criteria um to see if it's if it's just
a bad move that a human would never make
so you have to rule out certain bad
options and then Rand random factors
just thrown in just make it fun because
if you don't have randomness then if
you're playing against an AI that
calculates s things relatively similar
every time you're going to get a very
static
experience so pathogen is a term-based
strategy game it came out
in
2013 and early 2014 for Android um and
basically I don't know if you guys have
played it but um you it's like you try
to take up uh most of the board and so
at the end of the game Whoever has has
most of the board uh taken with their
with their color wins and so you you put
down pieces you put down cells and if
you put the same type of cell on top of
itself it it replicates and spreads out
in the board so you get these kind of
very cool like spreading
behavior um
and so the way that I I designed the AI
for this is that I would take a look at
the layout of the board and for each
color I would assess a point value of
what the board is at so for blue like it
would uh calculate all the blue for the
different types of
cells calculate a point value and then
subtract the other players colors from
that and I would get an overall value
and then what I would do is I generate a
list of all possible moves so so blue
can only play
a cell and B cell and the and the virus
so it can't play the B cell so I I would
look at where on the board it can play
these two pieces I would generate a list
of all those plays and then I would
project into the future what would
happen if I played this piece here this
piece here and so just every single move
I would project in this giant list and
then I would take all those projections
and calculate the score for each of
those and then I would say What's the
difference I would say do I lose points
or gain points and then I'd sort that
list by from top to bottom and say okay
this is the best move and this is the
worst move right and then for and then
like I said before you have to rule out
these bad moves because there's there's
certain moves that may give you a better
score but will set the other player up
to just dominate right so there's
certain moves that I have to say Okay
does this move leave a tactical
Advantage for the opponent and if it
does take it out so I'm left with this
list of possible good moves and then I
say okay
for um for hard if you're playing a hard
difficulty you take the best move and
for Middle uh like medium you take like
the top 30% or something something like
that and you you pick a random value in
there and then for the top for like easy
you take the top 50% and pick a value in
there and that gives like a nice spread
so sometimes e makes a really good move
and sometimes it makes a dumb move and
then you also throw in some random
factors so sometimes e will just do
something totally dumb and
random and um yeah
so and the the one of the complexities
of this project was that it was done in
Flash so it was done with action
script so that was that was one of the
technology uh uh tricks challenges that
I worked with um so the game I'm working
on now is called dominant species and
what it is is is a much more complicated
game um where you have uh you have
phases in in the pl you have a planning
phase and then an execution phase and in
and in the planning phase you decide
what you want to do in the execution
phase and there's all these different
kinds of turns
and in the execution phase each one of
these actions does something pretty
different in the game so I couldn't just
go in and do like a board assessment
like I did in pathogen I couldn't
calculate like a score and say like okay
if you did this what's the difference in
score there were just too many weird
random factors going on and too many
nuances um so what I did was was I took
each each
behavior and I and I made kind of like
its
own um its own decision making process
for each behavior and said okay what are
the possible moves for this behavior and
does this um result in a in a in a
better move or Worse move and then I
take the the best move for hard or
whatever same kind of idea
um
and and the other weird thing about this
game is that there are these cards that
do pretty random out there things
so you'll be playing and then this and
then the AI will do
something really really kind of random
with the card like uh all of a sudden
all your population of animals basically
the the the the goal of the game is to
have the most territory occupied by
animals and each species has different
advantages there's insects arachnids
amphibians Birds uh mammals and reptiles
and and some of the cards will be like
eliminate all the
species down to one it just be just kind
of like a kind of a random rule you know
just thrown in there
which is which is weird when you're
actually playing the game I found it was
kind of annoying and weird because it
just felt so random but but when
designing the AI it actually was ADV
advantageous because it was this weird
random factor that the AI would just
play a card and do something really
devastating all of a sudden that you
couldn't counter because it was just
this kind of weird random rule so that
made it it kind of fun um this game is
actually coming
out um
very soon I just submit it to the App
Store um and it's
got AI so you can play up to six players
and and it's it's going to have
multiplayer too which I'm now working on
so that's fun too and this is in unity
and C so it's a much easier technology
technology to work with
um I'm blowing through these slides um
so
next what I'm working on is um and this
may incorporate deeper aspects of of
machine learning I'm not we're not quite
sure what we're going to what the scope
of the work is but we we're uh working
with a dialogue system to track um
assess how interviewers do in their
interview
process so it's like you know a a person
comes to a house and they start um
talking with the family and doing an
interview process and and you get to
pick the the questions and the responses
that the interviewer asks and then the
responder will have their generated
dialogue and I don't know if you guys
have seen it but there's an awesome talk
on gdc's website from 2012 based on
dialogue systems um and the way it
worked is that it um the guy is is just
a genius idea basically he said that the
more complex of a system that you build
the harder it is to actually develop
anything of use so he he created this
really simple system that was then able
to use for these very complex looking
things um and the way that he did it was
he created a a dictionary of responses
for particular dialogue and it um it had
weight of criteria that you met and so
the criteria check was a boou just
either true or false and so you you
threw in this like chain of criteria for
the state of the world or the state of
the person you're talking to or whatever
and it would just say it'll evaluate
like like if I'm going to a house and I
if I've already talked to this person it
would check that and so that's true or
false and then it's like if they have
been in a fight since I've talked to
them that evaluates to true or false um
and so you go through the dictionary and
it and it goes through and says true yes
true yes true yes and so you give a
weight to the to the question it has
like a weight of four and then the the
one with the best score you just pick
that answer and it's pretty genius so
we're pretty excited to implement that
into our interview stuff and and
hopefully some maybe even more complex
Behavior like Mach some machine learning
like you know
um that the responder would would
learn uh something about you based on
previous conversations and then would be
able to respond with that kind of stuff
a question yeah so this is for a a
future game it's for a game that we're
in the design phase um we're we're
starting actual development in July so
this kind of combat kind of the the
problem with like you're a role playing
game you go to somebody's house you have
the exact same you know talk with them
every time right totally yeah well and
and in order to deal with that we'll
have random factors again you know like
the um when you start the game it's
actually going to be State based so
you'll like if you're using it in
Florida you can say like has have you
seen an alligator lately or you know
something kind of very geographically
based um and then using all those random
factors piece together a scenario that's
that's very specific and unique you
know um so are you guys going to be
doing any natural language processing or
no I don't know what that is what's
natural language processing um is when
you
um uh take the words that are given and
you um you again it's it's a machine
learning thing where you again have like
weights to certain words and then the
relationships to each other and then
your program can understand what the
sentence is based on all those things
and actually a lot of times it's based
on a huge parallel a set of parallel
data or like a huge set of dat a huge
set of training data right um that's a
cool idea we we're weighing all these
ideas right now so I'll bring it to
language
understanding nwor
Lang cool kind of different there's a
lot of
mark off chain in natural language but
there are some like like a little bit
simpler ways of doing it you know what I
mean like the like the way that Google
would do it for example is like not
within the region most of us right but
um in there but there are some simpler
ways of doing it cool yeah I'll bring it
to the table I don't know if there are
the the lead designer is is um margarit
my coworker and she's working with this
company to develop everything up front
you know and then and then we'll
obviously use
um uh we'll obviously use development
that that iterates too so yeah any ideas
would be awesome
thanks um
so yeah I mean that's all the slides I
have I hope that wasn't too
quick question okay um so you're you're
looking at this uh board game which we
call the the space right all the
possible moves how deep do you go how
deep I go how many how many moves ahead
do you look I in pathogen I only moveed
one look one ahead okay but but then
looking at what the uh what the possible
response could be yeah at least at least
one has so I guess two two moves ahead
okay yeah but I I found that just doing
one move ahead and looking at the respon
was enough to get a a prettyy tough
system like I I have a friend actually
he's playing it on hard and and he came
to me it was like a few months ago and
he was like man I still haven't beaten a
few of these levels strong that felt
really
good so that kind of speaks to like what
you're saying about complexity right
that more complex isn't necessarily
better right although it depends on the
game like with in chess you need to look
a certain amount of head have anything
that can compete well you
know would you say that the turn based
um this mechanic of of board games uh
leads to a better understanding of
artificial intelligence or the way to
design
it because like larger scope in
artificial intelligence how explain it
um with the previous question about how
far deep you're looking forward um I
would I would assume or at least to my
knowledge with with war games you really
have to look at not only what's the next
move but what is the response going to
be or may be and beyond that is just way
too many possibilities to even be worth
putting into the coding for artificial
intelligence so um that's where my
question comes from you think that the
turn-based mechanic leads to a better
understanding
of or at least simplifies the process
would you say yeah I would say it does
um and I think depending upon what
strategy you take it would lend itself
to the more deeper aspects someone
actually suggested for dominant species
that I do machine learning so that as
you're playing it it kind of learns your
behavior and then protects against
certain things we just didn't have the
budget to do it
honestly there's a few games that do
that and those are
hard that's tough yeah but oh sorry oh I
was just going to ask U for testing your
AI like do you just put it have users
you know uh go for it beta testers like
how do you feel confident about it and
that you haven't don't just have some
like blind spot where you're like oh I
haven't seen that situation I didn't
account for it and it it the whole you
know thing that I've crafted where it
seems smart it seems humanish just falls
apart because you see something idiotic
right well honestly with pathogen we
didn't have a big tester base so I got
really kind of I guess I got lucky that
I designed a system that played out
really well well with dominant species
GMT games has a pretty big following
base they actually had already two
companies try to make a digital version
of this game and fail the first one put
out just a terrible version of the app
that people hate that actually their GMT
games is giving our version as a free
update just just to like appease their
fan base
um and then a second company stepped in
and tried to make another port and
failed completely and didn't even put
something out so we're the we're the
third company working on this project um
so they have this big following that's
been waiting for this digital update um
and so they got like 30 people to sign
up on iTunes connect for the uh the beta
so I've just been putting out like
weekly releases um and I was ready to
publish it like a month ago but the the
head of GMC games so let's just wait and
let's just keep like putting it out
there and and these guys are really into
the game like so for me like playing
this game was kind of ridiculous like
when I get a few turns in I was just
like okay I'm done but these guys are
hardcore you know they want to go all
the way and they want to see all the
nuances of it so how many how many
players do they have on of their ex
board game how many what how many people
are playing their board game you taking
this from a board game too yeah I think
they have a pretty pretty strong
following I don't know the specific
numbers but they they produce these
these hardcore nce strategy games that
people just love
yeah and I one more thing I want to say
about that is that iTunes has made it
I'll just I don't know if you guys know
but iTunes has made it harder to beta
test it used to be that test flight was
so easy and you could just put something
up and it's boom it's out and now iTunes
is just kind of a pain in me
ass I hope they
you have to review it has to be reviewed
a beta thing has to be reviewed we
updated our we just updated our our half
store game and we just wanted to put you
know change some uh loading screens like
really trivial stuff right we fix a few
bugs and I'm like man no it's got to go
through you wait weeks takes yeah weeks
so there's no none of this rapid turnar
around the beta review actually is
shorter that's the good thing but but
yeah Google you just throw it out there
man Google play this could be kind of a
follow up on the testing question I
guess one thing that occurs to me is
making AI you've built a sort of test
rig like have you ever pitted AI against
each other anded the games got things
out of that totally and that's that's
really kind of fun to do um yeah like
with dominant species you just set it up
with with six players and then you can
kind of work on a project and kind of
like watch
like there's a there's a great paper
from it's probably 20 years ago now
called TD gam and this guy developed AI
to play back and it brought itself to
the Master's level by playing itself
just back and forth and uh it's very
cool and it's actually a hard game to do
a yeah because it's all based on well
did you win at the
end so you look up TD pretty cool
successes that's cool one followup thing
to that like when when you're having
multiple players that's particularly get
the idea do you ever um it's not going
so far as like machine learning but do
you ever have concept of like a
personality for your AI so ones that
play aggressively ones that are
defensive maybe like have more
continuous strategy totally random
totally totally actually I'll just go
back
[Laughter]
to yeah if it giv you grief it's like
you suck
for for this game in particular there
wasn't as much personalities as strategy
types yeah so like about three turns in
um like I have a a basic early game
strategy that the AI all the AI will do
and then about three turns in I evaluate
like how the players are doing in the
state of the board and say okay what do
I want my real game strategy to be and
there were like four different ones and
depending upon what strategy they chose
they had different actions that they
would pick and it made for some really
cool play because like um there's like
you can see the snowflake there that
means that the that AI has Tundra
strategy so it's trying to um it's
trying to take the most Tundra and get
the most species on the tundra tiles and
and it will be very different from other
strategies so so like they're they
compete really well and interestingly um
but I I I my teacher
developed R the um the PS2 version of
risk and he said what they did was they
had like um they had like world leaders
that they kind of simulated behavior for
yeah yeah so
they the more um the more like
protective and defensive leader and the
guy who was like super gungho and just
like tried to attack everything all at
once and and that sound Co
too so um a question about the different
phases of dominant species yeah um did
you just end up giving the different
phases different weights of what they
scored in relation to each other and
then tally that up to something to
determine what kind of phase your AI
wants to take or what I did was I took a
a preferential list because each of
these phases has like so there's three
slots in adaptation there's two slots
slot in regression there's only one slot
so so um it's it's really strange how
how you play um but basically not all
the choices are always available okay
right so what I would do is in the early
game strategy I would say um this is
number one adaptation is number one
domination is number two speciation is
number three and I would have like a
list of preferential behaviors and I
would go through the list I say would
say is number number one available no
bounce to number two is number two
available okay take it so there always
perfect moves in the G um no no there
and there's some random factors too so
okay what I would do is I would say is
is so so if adaptation wasn't available
would look for Domination right and if
domination is available then I would
calculate a percentage chance whether it
would use domination or not okay and
then I would throw a random roll and I
would say do I hit that so if if the
chance to use domination is only 50% and
I throw a 30 then I don't use domination
then I go to the next choice and that
way it gave it some like uh some
Randomness but it was like a a good feel
too you know it made sense why they
wouldn't use it okay so for for all
these AIS um I guess the focus is never
to make your AI Play Perfect Games
because that doesn't necessarily feel
good feels pretty good it's boring
really and and you don't want the player
to get crushed yeah you want them to
have fun playing right also I guess
these games um have complexity that's
just too huge to really calculate out
everything this did yeah this
particularly was it is actually a really
difficult game to design AI for it took
me way we're way over
scope and and I'm like I I'm happy with
it but honestly like I could put another
couple months in and refine it to a
pretty awesome degree right now it's
it's it's good it plays well and like I
have a feeling that the hardcore players
are going to kill it but that it's going
to it's going to play well enough that
to give the average player a good chance
and maybe they'll come back to you and
have you redo it maybe that' be
cool um uh I don't know if this game has
any uh hidden State like uh you know
like in poker you know nobody can see
your hand uh but when you're riding the
AI sometimes you know you Avail yourself
of everything that's available to just
get it to do the right thing so did you
have to do anything that you know made
you feel unclean or like oh
cheating oh that's good I can see your
cars
think I don't think there is I think
everything is laid
out cleanly in this game
no there's no hidden information and the
it's the same with
pathogen so but that would be
interesting to play with too give you
know make hard harder you
could fedge
fact if you knew what cards everybody
had right yeah the only cards here are
are like public cards so everybody can
see all five cards that are available
and you just
magic something
any other questions comments yeah do you
have any um existing games that are like
Inspirations to you or things you
studied like other game implementations
of AIS in in games that are out there
they're somehow publicly available I
don't know I haven't done reading about
it that's a good
question um tips and tricks I mean most
of the the stuff that I've really been
inspired by hasn't been along these
lines honestly it's been like you know
my my favorite games are just like kind
of Hardcore Indie platformer games like
Super Meat Boy spelly bit trip Runner
that kind of stuff where AI it's really
difficult um but I
I I played a lot of these kinds of games
as a kid but I didn't I haven't played a
lot of strategy board games like this
this kind of came out of nowhere U for
me pathogen our designer came up with
and I was like okay I just stepped into
the the role of of creating the I on a i
on it without much um personal passion
for it but it's it kind of grew out of
that so did the fact that so back to
pathogen fact that you were only
thinking like one play ahead um was the
fact that you had random factors coming
in make that work better because
otherwise I would think if I were
playing I could guess what the AI was
how how the was going to wait something
right like you do right you start you
you know how the you start knowing how
the game is programmed totally totally
and like I I would use more uh random
factors early in the game because early
in the game you you you have so much of
the board available you don't want it to
always pick like the that if if it
always picks that one when the board is
empty you're going to notice it yeah
right but then later in the game it
usually never looks the same it usually
looks different based on what the player
does and and if there random Factor what
the AI does so later in the game if it
has very
specific choices that it makes that's
okay because the state of the board is
usually very different from game to
games it was really based on visual not
on game play it yeah it's about
believable it's like what what is
believable to the player like I would
play it against the AI and I would be
like oh it keeps doing that one thing I
don't want it to keep doing that one
thing and then I would kind of look at
the code and say okay that's the
decision that is making how can I make
this more fluid and more flexible more
believable is this does this somehow it
seems to somehow parallel the game
ancient game go yeah that was a really
big inspiration oh yeah yeah the other
one looks like uh Settlers of Katan
right totally yeah definitely
inspiration for for both yeah my uh my
coworker Zach he actually works for
Disney designing games now which is
awesome he kind of moved on um but he
came up with this I I love the game I
feel like it's it's a it's a really
genius idea and it's really simple you
know really simple and
beautiful anyone
else cool all right great thank you very
much
I want to say that you explained um
statistical theory in a way that was
much more sucessful and interesting than
I've ever heard before right like all
the weights and everything that usually
that's not how it's explained that was
much more interesting in decision trees
you explain that much thank you I hope I
didn't like I was hoping I didn't gloss
over too quickly that people weren't
following me I thought I mean that was a
really like you you know statistics
professors to take
some use something like pathen to like
you know use a game explain statistics
contextual examples just go a long way
yeah well thank you so a quick overview
uh we're making me that's Zach and
another guy and then two other guys that
aren't here so our company not here the
coffee shop um where we make mobile
games so this is our latest game we're
working with some other designers from
Champlain College who recently graduated
we also just graduated uh since the last
meeting um so it's a puzzle game um
about lining up lasers uh it's called
Vivid Grid it's kind of like I I'll kind
of like hold it up real quick so it
looks like this is like the level select
and then you go into a game and it's
kind of got a grid and then there's
buttons on the side that you tap that
rotate turrets that are in a line and
then so there's like a starting point
but the laser comes out the lasers
aren't visually in the game yet so you
just kind of have to like follow the
arrows so this is about three weeks in
development we're hoping on finishing it
up the next week or two and just kind of
throw it out there so it's good it's a
quick project it'll be like 50 levels
it's kind of based on uh visuals and
sound and colors um yeah so it's it's
being developed for iOS in unity 5 uh
once that's out we'll look at anro how
you doing laser lines do you know yet
like visually so like right now it's a
pretty uh it it's basically just like an
array that keeps track of everything so
the the visuals and the the data model I
don't know about the the the visuals yet
it shouldn't be too complex we used
something called vity
vity that or Unity to draw lines in
glowing lines and are so that's good to
know cuz lines are hard yeah no I I yeah
I've been looking for a way to like do
shapes is it like is it just a vector
kind of drawing basically like a stct
upgrade to the line okay cuz like that's
the biggest issue that I have with unity
is like there's no way to just draw
shapes like if you want like a nice
clean Circle you have to have like a
really high resolution circular
spray yeah it might be a little too late
for this project for future like that's
the biggest thing it doesn't have but
uh so um and unlike I guess you had bad
experience of the test flight I've never
used the old one but I love test flight
like we just uploaded our build
yesterday got approved to iTunes connect
yeah so we got we put it up yesterday
and it's available now and then as far
as like we used it for senior project
and every time we had an update we just
said no there weren't any big changes
and then it just goes through
immediately so I I mean you still have
to like invite testers and stuff I don't
know how the old one worked for that but
um I could throw a link up on the the
page if anybody wants to sign up um we
have up to a thousand Spa so it doesn't
really matter so if anyone has an iOS I
think it's eight and up that's the other
big issue is it only works on iOS 8 or
higher so that's I mean at this point if
you have a recent device you should
probably be upgraded but if you don't
then
sorry so I'll pass this around real
quick
as well it it the the build runs as low
as six but test flight um requires the
test flight app which only runs on iOS 8
or higher so once it launches yeah so
once it launches it'll be available on
down to iOS 6 but for the beta testing
period we're locked to 8 and 9 so um
yeah so well the next person's coming up
I'll pass us around you guys can kind of
check it out real quick and then I'll
post a link and if anyone wants to get
in on the beta over the next couple
weeks post a link in the
comments I'm gonna have it's be I'll
post
it when you
them this one all of them
[Music]
wow okay what's
camera right so um this is a strategy
game it's actually a good followup to so
your name my name's
coryy and this is a game I've been
working on for almost seven or eight
years off and on so the name is SSG and
that's it's actually the working title
but I got to know it really well and the
kids know it as s so I decided
to deploy so it's on the Android store
and iOS
today um it's like Risk I'll just show
you so I got random uh random
maps and just
to so are you blue there or is yeah I
was blue Okay so I decided I had a
really hard time with easy Med even hard
difficulties because there's just so few
moves you can make because it's such a
simple game I had to go with two very
predictable AI which aggressive they
just attack whoever's weakest and
honorable they attack whoever's
strongest you actually can't lose on
that it's actually very it takes me like
two or 300 moves to win and strategic
was my attempt at a human type AI which
does okay sometimes but I know it's
really difficult how did you create the
AI U very similar what he said I guess I
think it's called heris or
something yeah so I just look one turn
ahead I evaluate the board see what the
best uh make a list of all the moves
choose the best one based on you
know different variables
yes I guess that's
it any
questions did you say that you released
this yes released SSG so this was on
flash and then yeah so how did you get
it on to Android and um
Usos that how do you get it on to
iOS U yeah use Flash develop
yeah no this is all free I didn't pay
for you know I use this Flex which is
free
[Music]
thing what are you cool what's that what
are you using flash develop oh flash you
use flex yeah well I action script yeah
it takes I think it's flex but does it
behind the
yeah El cool so are you done with it
after eight years or
uh depends on how well it does I have a
lot of ideas things I want to put on
different AI options to work
with but it took so long I actually
worked on I have two other apps out so
this is just something I keep going back
to just figure out how I wanted to set
up so how long has it been out in the
store just a couple days oh have you had
any feedback so far uh I did a beta test
so I have a lot of feedback from that
okay
how was the feedb on uh they found it
difficult
so show you I
added handicap
here or
[Music]
noral has anyone play dice Wars
that was
myir are the maps uh
constant
okay they pred generated or are
they
yeah not sure exactly I just yeah I pick
a point and then
just one territory at a time get
actually it's playing the game itself
right now yeah the computer's going so
uh and so you're going to you're going
to lose you start taking terms right
yeah well on a large map it's usually
pretty easy to win against agressive
it's a smaller map
that that's it all right cool thank you
[Applause]
sort okay so we're ready to go um we put
uh Cubo which is our robot game out on
Google Play and the App Store um a
little more than a month ago I think um
May 17th so we put it out there we've
had about uh 7 800 downloads we had
eight or 10 people actually pay money
not many not enough to put my kid
through college on she she's halfway
through um so one of the things that
came up is that people said oh you got
to have a trailer you got to make a
trailer you know that make a big
difference so um so Aaron and I said
okay we're going to make a trailer so we
made a trailer in one day and I'm going
to show you the trailer and see what you
think and um one thing we did learn
though is that like the trailer's a
minute long but if you want a trailer
for the App Store you know it's Apple
again right 30 seconds not a second more
that's your trailer life they dictate
that so if you are going to make a
trailer for your game think about that
uh I'll talk about what tools we use to
do you may recognize it let's try to get
this full
screen
okay where's that full screen on this
thing oh
here I thought there was one down here
though okay let's see how this works
[Music]
the
[Music]
[Applause]
I so I I had a a former coworker who's
who's in Malaysia and he watched the
trailer
and he played the game and he
went nothing like the trailer I mean it
is but it's like he's expecting like
Rogue robots to be breaking
in so so that's our trailer um I think
that's funny though right like it's
super like it's an act it's like Mission
Impossible it's supposed
to it's very tongue and cheap right I
mean come on it's a game with CU in AED
to like a big
spy launch so um some of you may
familiar with the tools we used um or I
used iMovie and they have um trailer
templates so this is one of the trailer
templates and that's why we could do it
so quickly because the trailer templates
gave us um sort of a script and told us
how long we needed to make um each clip
there's 21 Clips in here and most Clips
last two seconds to two there must be
more than 20 because it's yeah it's a
minute long we have stuff in between 22
23 clips and then I edited them down in
iMovie and then put them in I never used
iMovie before so in one day we an iMovie
got the template there it have all the
effects oh yeah yeah it has all that
stuff in between and you just put text
in for that because it would have been a
month otherwise and I
never and stuff are nice did it have the
music too yeah the music's in there too
and um you're allow to use it yeah just
just took everything and it's all it's
like since I guess under creative
comments or whatever from Apple and the
only um thing you may run into is if you
do use these templates when you put them
on YouTube you might get that copyright
noce but if you look online there's a
guy who's already written to YouTube
about it so you cut and paste his letter
and send it to YouTube and they'll clear
you so so we have we what we do with
ours um just to show you kind of how we
do this go to
sleep come on baby oh the video's over
um
and then I I will yield the
floor but just to show you what we also
done and this is because you know you
you look at the numbers right and you go
oh great 800 downloads and not enough
money to buy lunch um so created a a
website k.com I mean our company is Zer
right so we start with this thing and um
you know it's just sort of a l or you
can do here go like this and it Scrolls
up and then we have our trailer right
here and then you can play the trailer
right it leads you back to the website
which is where you are but hopefully
you'll you'll make your way to the App
Store and um the um Google play so we
have this thing and this is really meant
to be sort of on tablet or phone so the
screen's kind of big for it right but
just some of the stuff that that we're
having to do just to try to get some
attention you know and then the trailer
leads to this and this leads to the App
Store um we put our videos on Vimeo we
use Vimeo we don't use YouTube we will
we'll put copies on YouTube but it's
easier to serve your stuff from your
website without advertising all that
crap that YouTube puts in um so that's
it so where does your marketing strategy
go here yeah well that's where we we
really need help and we're we're about
to enter phase two with National Science
Foundation to do our full robotic game
so believe it or not Cubo was just
something we threw out there to test
some of the robot ideas it wasn't not
meant to be our commercial game so we
have to decide oh do we spend time
marketing this or do we get back to what
we're supposed to be doing which is
we're supposed to be making robots walk
and get up off the floor um in a very
natural way so so you're going to cut it
but anybody who wants to work on
marketing come to because it's not my
special not that I want that's not what
I'm raising my hand yeah um your
graphics look so great compared last
time I saw your game oh right right that
was um I'm not sure when but yeah
probably like six months ago or
something yeah I'm really I did the
graphics for the game and and I since
hired well I hired one person to work on
a 2d game and all of our stuff in the
future will be done by a professional
graphics person great yeah oh thank you
but that's as far as I can take it um
that's really important for games though
right is the visualization and getting
an artist on board little Cube smile
like face the personalization thing is
really nice like you had a a decent
personalization before but that's like
so much better yeah the cubes so we're
going um next week we're invited to
Rosy's girl to the camp so this is a
camp for teenage girls who trades and
we're bringing Cubo along but we're also
bringing real cubes with little faces on
them in colored in Orange and so I'm
painting Cubes at home get this done and
and so we're going to have them actually
do the stacking of the cubes themselves
blindfolded while somebody else is
guiding them so they can understand what
are the limitations of movement with a
robot arm and then they'll go through
the game and try W that's a great idea
that's a great merchandising angle too
but I'm starting to think that we might
have to make more money on the cubes
robot sell the
cubes like cubes like um cuets and stuff
like that yeah yeah the cube Dynasty
somebody has sunglasses here from Kid
Robot I tried to talk to him but he's so
busy I can't get in
the speak of U marketing and promotion
and everything if anybody has any you
know companies or any places they use uh
I would love to hear about it cuz you
know I don't know um if you just try to
on publisher for that or what uh anybody
has any experience meet up right yeah
that should be a meet up in itself and
if anybody wants to give a talk on that
I would love to you
know for pathogen I we used a publisher
called
Gambler um out of the Boston area and
they hired a publisher okay and they did
a really good job what was the name of
good Gambler g e v l y
r gu solid guy
so they're Publishing Company they're
they're the publisher and they hired the
market marketing they H the
marke they they actually gave us cash to
finish development of pathogens so we
got actually paid you know and then they
took U Mo we we got a certain cut of the
sales until until a certain amount I
mean marget was talking about that
talking you were here for it and she
said that you know that things have
really changed and that around no one's
giving you cash to do a game anymore you
have to come with the game finished and
then maybe they'll look at it yeah that
was this was two two years ago so only
two years ago the
change I think Publishers were were
throwing out money for the next you know
big idea and now they're much more
conservative yeah yeah oh so uh the
first Meetup that we did I told you guys
about a crazy idea where you know maybe
you could do some sort of like
essentially a marketing angle but
instead of like going through and doing
something Global doing something where
you you know advertise
AdWords um you know doing something
different where maybe you did something
you know cheap and
local and you know the idea was to have
some kind of a self-sufficient game uh
demo station and told you guys about a
kit so I actually got one of these kits
and uh put it together and uh it was fun
and it's it's really cool you know it's
um it's got the old kind of like uh you
know arcade feel to it
and Che they kied
right you know I don't know look like
old maker bot right yeah yeah um so uh
this thing right now runs off a
raspberry pie
uh and um it's basically supposed to
like run like old ROMs but you know the
vision that I have for this is that this
could run you know uh locally made games
and I went and I talked with the guys at
tilt and you know presented this idea I
was like you know you guys do local food
you guys do local beer how about local
games and they were totally into it they
were like oh this is great they were a
little bit surprised about the size of
this we're like it's it's smaller than I
expected
it's easier to carry so uh actually
don't have anything going on here
there's a light did it happen there's a
light on the top on the
side oh well D it doesn't matter um it
works at my
home so um so anyway they're they're
totally into the idea uh which is great
um I told them I would uh get uh the uh
the game I'm doing ready probably in
about you know A month's time um it's
going to have a different face plate
instead of having uh this you know which
is you know great it's going to actually
have uh you know the leap motion kind of
embedded into it you know so it just be
uh that and that'll actually then be
two-player there are kits that are
two-player kits um but anyway the the
other thing that I suggested to the uh
the guys at tilt was you know maybe I
could get like kind of a local game of
the month happening like something where
you can have your game instead of being
presented for a day at like a demo day
but actually get like a month's time
like counter space attention you know
maybe I'll do a uh an event with this
group you know we all go out to tilt we
all have some beers and you know
celebrate whoever's game it is that's
you know being uh shown that month I
don't know how much uh you know work
this is going to take for other people
to do this my thought is you know this
can offer you essentially a you know if
you can do give me some device that will
you know fit in the back of this thing
with you know an HDMI out audio out and
accept essentially a USB keyboard that
says you know up down left right you
know AV um you know whatever then you
know your game could run on this but you
can run the game on the Pod no uh
depending um you
knowbe uh you know so the P
Linux um it it all it all kind of
depends uh in order for me to be able to
do my game which is on Unity uh and
requires Elite motion I'm going to have
to have something that runs essentially
an Intel chipset um and I refuse to you
know pay for a Windows license uh
because that would be like half the cost
of this the whole thing right here um so
it'll you know be running uh some you
know some lense free join bisar bisar
Microsoft I don't know I don't know free
free software
three
years yeah have you thought about just
uh streaming the content to a screen
just on the pie and then have it yeah
you could do that I mean you could also
like you know do some tricks and just
have you know just take the the cable
you know have the HDMI cable reach under
the you know have theual machine
somewhere right exactly I mean I've
already kind of I already I did a test
run with that just to have the you know
the screen doing its thing and it's was
like yeah it's halfway there but um
because the p probably runs mobile games
and old RS well I mean there's there's
lots of uh it could do lots of stuff cuz
you know you could also like load up
Android so then all the Android you know
uh games could be you know available to
run on on this kind of a thing um other
question is like physical power
limitations imply like how powerful game
this um yeah uh don't have a graphics
card well let's see um I mean so well I
wish I wish
this it runs yeah I mean this this will
run like do it RS um you know this runs
Doom it runs you know all the uh
emulators for different old systems and
that's basically what this thing is made
for like you have a catalog of old games
that you can play with you know uh
hopefully you own all those games um
uh what's the difference between like
making like a cool box and just like
sticking an iPad in
it um I I know that just sounds we next
to seven or something yeah I mean you
can do it however it is that you you you
want um but I just mean if you want it
to be kind of more of like a public
physical thing you know to give it like
a little Fan Fair you give it like its
own little home sort of I mean it's not
as much fun CU you don't have buttons
and stuff you're actually like using a
touch screen sure sure I mean you there
there are uh kits out there that
essentially that do that um so oh that
you can your iPad in and yeah yeah uh
but uh but all told uh this is uh this
option is cheaper altogether than one
iPad so you know yeah so yeah anybody
who's interested in possibly you know
trying to host their game on a a system
like this uh you know uh send me an
email I'm not sure exactly
like this is for me is a marketing
effort uh this is about like getting the
game that I'm making like the name out
there trying to sell it locally um but
uh you know so I'm not trying to uh take
on too much of a burden myself of like
doing a different kind of business where
I'm essentially selling game advertising
but um yeah uh let me know if you're
interested and yeah uh what's your game
about uh my game is a Quadra sumo I did
a demo of it a couple times
back you tried to knock the other it's
kind of a uh King of the Hill thing
where you control a robot using the elap
motion uh which is a uh hand track yeah
hand trackers so basically what your
hands what your fingers do the robots uh
legs uh mimic so you try to you know
knock the other guy
off yeah yeah
exactly so again not to critique that
which is very cool but if a bunch of
people did want to participate in this
maybe everybody could like split the
cost of like one iPad M you know what I
mean to just just to simplify being able
to present the games just because that's
cool but it's a lot more complicated to
get your game to show potentially that
true yeah well so my my my position here
isn't to try to like take a monopoly on
uh you know what tilt is going to
present if you have a like different
attractive option uh in which to present
your game in the way that's you know
best for you that's easiest for you like
if it is like creating something like
this with a easily accessible you know
touchscreen iPad underneath like great
like it's you know I don't want to be
the middleman like uh in in you know
interfering with everybody else trying
to like present their games I just want
to start you know getting uh tilt and
other people to start like thinking
about ah support locally made games I
just think it'd be super fun to have
these in like a whole bunch of different
bars like over town like you know in one
game a month that would be I think it's
a great idea yeah absolutely I mean yeah
well the people that are interested
should should get together and talk
about it yeah I'm definitely interested
I don't know my game won't run on that
Hardware
though extremely slow yeah mine mine not
so yeah we we'll see what this actually
looks like you know when uh I'm sub
substituting out the Raspberry Pi with
an Intel Nook and you know we see might
even like get somebody at generator to
make like a nice case for you m one
thing I wanted to show youbody else I
bought a 17 in Android
tablet and just to bring it to so that
you could be in a room with four or five
people and show to them and not worry
about having to hook everything up onto
the monitor or it doesn't work that's a
sweet
business
really was cheap I comparatively
considering you pay on on how much IP
right
700 anybody interested I'll
bring cool all right all right great
well uh thank you all for coming to uh
the four fourth one fourth for mon game
developers Meetup uh yeah we're
officially done you can mingle and do
whatever show other stuff you got
[Applause]
I love the man I know they're totally
arcade quality right
