the Skyrocket and cost of living I was
skipping meals because I was struggling
to afford my food and my rent two
million Canadians had to use a Food Bank
in one month alone no wonder crime is
rocketing after 8 years of Justin
Trudeau Canada is worse than you think
just 2 years ago a simple two-bedroom
apartment in Toronto cost on average
2400 Canadian dollars today that's 3,300
an average increase of 25% per year year
and that's not an outlier I just found
out my rent's going to be increased from
$2,100 a month to $2,400 a month for a
one-bedroom condo in Toronto in most
Canadian cities you would need to earn
at least double the minimum wage to
afford a one-bedroom apartment and you
can forget about buying in major cities
like Toronto and Vancouver the minimum
income that's required to qualify for a
mortgage is double or triple the median
household income this makes buying even
unattainable for the top 10% of earners
there is a housing crisis a cost of
living crisis and now even a immigration
crisis this is a real change from the
Canada I know and admire what has
happened it's time for a change in this
country my friends a real change this is
how living in Canada became impossible
with hindsight
Canadians from all across this great
country sent a clear message tonight
it's time for a change in this country
my friends a real change Justin Trudeau
was first elected in 2015 with a message
of positivity this is what positive
politics can do he built his campaign on
Hope and the media often Drew
comparisons with Obama in the United
States I want to say this many of you
have worried that Canada has lost its
compassionate and constructive voice in
the world well we're
back on his first day in office he
entered a Montreal Metro station to take
selfies with commuters The Exchange went
viral the atmosphere was exuberant there
was a feeling of Hope and positivity
trau had the second highest approval
rating of any new prime minister in
Canada's history to understand how his
approv ratings have turned around so
dramatically while Canada is in a
housing crisis a cost of living crisis
and most surprisingly is now struggling
with immigration we need to go back in
history Canada is a nation of immigrants
in the mid 1800s the population of
Canada was almost entirely concentrated
on the east coast along the St Lawrence
River and the Great Lakes to its West
and North lay a vast and sparsely
populated area that they wanted to
populate they used immigration as a tool
to build their country they attracted
new people with a comprehensive
marketing campaign Build Your Nest in
western Canada was the message calling
it the new
Lorado bold loads of prospective
migrants arrived in Canada and were
vetted by migration officers they were
particularly eager to attract talented
Farmers they could help Canada's
Westward Expansion by settling un
inhabited areas they built Villages and
turned them into cities attracting
Commerce and Industry overtime
strengthening Canada's grip on the west
by 1920 population centers had emerged
all along Canada's Southern border they
grew from 3 million inhabitants to 9
million these immigrants were selected
on Merit but also on Race Canada wanted
to maintain the status of a white man's
country but after World War II these
discriminatory practices came under
scrutiny Canada started to build its
modern immigration system this was based
on a points system prospective
immigrants were scored based on their
age education training and language
skills the basic philosophy is that
immigrants are selected based on their
Merit and what they can contribute to
the country this system is still in
place in Canada today making it the
oldest immigration system of any country
in the oecd
an early challenge was that an
increasingly large percentage of
newcomers were family members in 1971
economic migrants made up 73% and family
members
21% but a decade later this had turned
around family members were seen as
unproductive consumers of welfare
benefits and this prompted the
government to make entry requirements
stricter by 1995 the percentage had
dropped to 36%
Canada vested a lot of power in the
federal executive branch of government
which makes it possible to respond
quickly to unwanted flows of migrants
they kept identifying weak spots and
making improvements and by the early
2000s the system was healed around the
world as one of the best even Donald
Trump had good things to say about it
Nations around the world like Canada
have a merit-based
immigration system but what was most
impressive were Canada's exceptionally
high level of public acceptance
immigration until recently wasn't a
controversial issue in 2018 2ir of
Canadians believed that immigration was
a good thing for their country the
highest level of any country in the oecd
but that wouldn't
last Canadians are almost
universally positively inclined towards
immigration we know that immigration is
a source of strength and resilience and
growth for our communities and that's a
wonderful thing we should be very very
proud of public opinion on immigration
has shifted dramatically during the last
years from people feeling overwhelmingly
supportive to most people feeling
concerned during the first four years
under Trudeau the population grew at a
record Pace mostly because of
immigration and it slowed during the
pandemic and that's where the problem
started Canada was facing a host of
challenges one of them was a shortage of
workers there were difficulties in all
major sectors from construction to
healthcare companies were just unable to
find the people with their right skills
it's simple to me Canada needs more
people this was the new minister of
immigration Canadians understand the
need to continue to grow our population
if we're going to meet the needs of the
labor force Fraser like many before him
saw immigration as a tool to fix
specific issues the worker shortage but
also demographics you know immigration
and Canada is not just something that we
do it's it's who we are it's it's who
we've always been all across the Western
World the population is aging and that
is an issue but in Canada it is Extreme
in 1971 there were seven people of
working age for each senior in 2012 this
was down to 4 the projection is that
there will only be two workers for every
retiree by
2036 the number of Canadians that are
over the age of 75 will double over the
next two decades while fewer people are
entering the workforce if we don't do
something to correct this demographic
trend the conversation we're going to
have 10 or 15 years from now won't be
about Labor shortages it's going to be
about whether we have the economic
capacity to continue to fund schools and
hospitals and public services that I
think we too often take for granted this
inspired a radical new immigration plan
in 2022 Canada has set a record
population growth and they announced to
welcome 465,000 permanent residents into
a 23
485,000 in 2024 and half a million in
2025 and we are staring at one of the
greatest economic opportunities of our
time when people around the world are
looking to move and Canada has become
the world's top destination for people
who are thinking of leaving their
country of origin to pursue Economic
Opportunity elsewhere they saw
immigration as a race for Global Talent
and they had every intent on winning
their target was to have economic
migrants make up 60% of newcomers an
ambitious goal and they particularly
targeted workers in sectors with the
highest demand like healthcare skill
trades manufacturing and Technology but
when these plans were announced
immigration offices were already two
million resident applications behind on
their work and there was already a
shortage of housing when you talk about
the housing crisis that we're facing
which we are facing um one of the limits
on creating more housing is the uh
challenges on having enough construction
workers and but Trudeau and his Cate
members saw immigration as the solution
not the problem and in 2023 Canada's
population grew with the fastest rate in
almost 70 years this was the fastest
growing population of any country in the
oecd more extreme voices like the
century initiative Lobby to grow
Canada's population to 100 million by
the end of the century the plan was
endorsed by a former prime minister
and lobbyists included several advisers
to Justin Trudeau and his cabinet
members we have a population that is
aging we need people to arrive with
their talents with their hopes with
their dreams with their capacities to
work hard to build our communities to
build our future public opinion was
shifting whereas in 2022 27% of people
believed that there was too much
migration to Canada in 2023 this was up
to 51% and in 24 to
58% all right well behind me is the
takeback Canada March against Mass
immigration in July 2024 there were
protests a lot of disaffected Canadians
here who feel like the government has
not been listen to them this was an
unusual site in Canada and what happens
to the election in 2025 is mass
immigration going to become the main
issue in the election or are politicians
going to try to run away from it like
they seem to be doing right now in 2025
there are federal elections in Canada
and Trudeau might lose his seat two
broccoli heads was
$11.44
$11.44 at Save On Foods in Langley like
we have a serious problem here in Canada
just came to
$218 how how the government likes to
publish figures that show how the
economy is growing this is technically
true but the growth is primarily fueled
by a growing population per capita
growth is down along with individual
living standards this apartment is 750
ft and I pay
$4,300 a month people are working three
jobs just to live in this city it's
actually crazy and they're still
struggling to pay their bills there is a
clear mismatch between how fast Canada's
population is growing and how long they
need to supply housing and service
infrastructures like healthcare and
school
this affects all layers of society but
this is most acutely visible in the cost
of housing okay we need to talk rent
increases because this is getting out of
hand would you pay 800 bucks a month to
share a bed with a stranger that's what
this Vancouver listing is
offering the most vulnerable people are
people with little to spare like
students a story broke about 25 students
that were living in one basement in
Bramton and it went viral the mayor of
the city responded that they've seen
cases like these on a regular basis like
this landlord who's renting out six beds
on the floor with dividers between them
for 325 bucks each the number of
temporary residents which includes
temporary workers but also International
students have increased dramatically in
2022 they numbered 1.4 million and in
2024 this had double to 2.8 million
public opinion had now turned against
Canadian immigration policy
and for the first time it had become a
controversial topic trau with elections
coming up needed to
act prime minister Justin Trudeau is
promising a massive Federal program to
deal with the housing crisis in Canada
so today we are releasing the most
comprehensive and ambitious housing plan
ever seen in Canada he put Sean Fraser
former minister of immigration in charge
of housing I know we're going to solve
the housing crisis because I know what
Canadians are capable of these decisions
were vilified in a comment section on
YouTube it's crazy that people believe
the guy that got us into this mess is
the guy that's going to get us out too
little too late you cannot be the
solution to the problem you created uh
the reality is different parts of the
country have seen different challenges
in addition to population growth there
have been supply chain constraints that
have driven up the cost of building
we're trying to address a 30-year la
lack of investment in affordable housing
and we're soon going to hit a bottleneck
with the productive capacity of the
Canadian Workforce to build the homes we
need frer is in an awkward
position perhaps letting in 9 million
new Canadians before homes were built
for them had a little to do with this
problem a majority of people now
disagreed with immigration policies they
were angry and frustrated by the cost of
living crisis and immigrants felt that
they were unfairly portrayed as the
cause of the problem they
miscalculated the how much immigrants
they want they miscalculated how much
housing they have how much they could
accommodate over here and now they are
blaming all it on us Trudeau's approval
rating dropped in September 2024 to just
33% and only 26% favored him as the
Prime Minister he had to turn this
around good morning everyone in a moment
Minister Miller will be detailing our
immigration Plan before he does I want
to say a few things Canadians are
justifiably proud of our immigration
system it has made our economy the Envy
of the world it's how we've built strong
diverse communities it's how we've
demonstrated that differences can and
must be a source of strength not a
source of weakness for communities and
society today we're announcing that we
will reduce the number of immigrants we
bring in over the next 3 years which
will result in a pause in the population
growth over the next 2 years Trudeau
announced that they'll change course the
lower the number of new arrivals to slow
population growth he admitted he was
wrong we didn't get the balance quite
right when he took office there was
already a three decade long lack of
investment in affordable housing there
were building challenges and supply
chain issues but as pm he Bears the
burden of responsibility it was his
choice to allow entry to such large
numbers of immigrants growing the
population and adding pressure to the
housing market the affordability of
Housing and the cost of living in
general are very visible signs of a
deteriorating living standard in 2019
19% of Canadians felt that Canada was
extremely unequal that is now up to
38% to the question whether the cost of
living is now worse the number Rose from
66% in 2019 to 84% in 2024 and I'm still
just scratching the Service Canada this
was a real change I hope that you
learned something or found this video
entertaining yesterday I had a call with
somebody from YouTube that helps me with
any questions that I have what I'm
trying to do here is build a strong
brand and to provide the best value for
you as a viewer but one of the things
that she told me is that
95% of regular viewers on the channel
are are not subscribed and I hate to ask
it and it's not really my style to ask
for likes and subscribes but it would
actually be very helpful if you would
subscribe to the channel to help push
these videos into the algorithm
