videos two videos in one month has
anyone done that before um I don't think
so
list one youtuber right now that is
uploaded twice in one month and I'll
give you $1,000 today's video is going
to be a little bit different from what
you're used to on the channel I've kind
of steered away from exposing things and
I just make what I want to make usually
you know stranger danger videos my dere
video by the way this is actually merch
and it will come in handy today because
the things you're gonna see are gonna
make you want to say stop a bunch of
times
well how am i arm shaking so anyways you
know stranger danger videos dare videos
sex education bad movies all stuff that
I've been super interested in talking
about but today is very different the
more I looked into this topic the more
sure I was that I needed to make a video
on it just because it weirds me out to
my core I don't know what I'm gonna
title this video yet I'm pretty sure it
has something to do with like YouTube
kids and Hulu but this story is much
more than that so strap in and get ready
to hear about the horrible world of
online children's entertainment
[Music]
before we talk about what kick-started
me wanting to make this video I do need
to stress two things one everybody knows
how bad YouTube kids is that's not what
this video is about you've seen me rant
about it before you've seen other
youtubers rant about it before and - I
just need to stress before I talk [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
about what this generation of kids are
gonna look at I have to acknowledge that
the last few generations have had really
targeted advertising to us oh what's
that mom Turtles and pizza and weapons
can we give that company a million
dollars dad look at me in the eyes
yep the car turns into a robot and also
um the kid from even Stevens is in it so
that's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] crazy right I think it
really kick-started in the 70s with
things like Star Wars were toys and
marketing were targeted at kids pretty
aggressively on TV but the Internet has
changed it into a monster that I don't
think anyone could have expected and
that's what today's video is about
profiting off children isn't that fun
isn't that a fun topic to talk about
don't you just feel good thinking about
that alright now that we have that out
of the way let's talk about Hulu
[Music]
so a few nights ago I finished
rewatching season 2 of Atlanta so I just
started scrolling through Hulu kids to
see what they had on there they had
things you know like regular show an
adventure time which were kind of you
know slightly past my time as a kid I
would still watch him but I was like
becoming a teenager and those are great
shows people that are a few years
younger than me got excellent television
but current kids today like young kids
have the worst entertainment of any
generation ever and that became more
apparent to me when I saw that Ryan's
toy reviews the YouTube kids unboxing
toys channel had a Hulu show and not
only that it was called Ryan's world
specials presented by pocket watch
so already my anti advertising the kids
brain thinks the name of the show is
sponsored even you don't want to see
Spongebob Squarepants presented by
autozone zoboomafoo presented by Dick's
Sporting Goods and especially because
Ryan's toy reviews is centered at very
very young children we're talking
toddlers - like eight years old now if
you don't know the channel Ryan's toy
reviews I'm gonna go and give you a
little voiceover backstory really quick
welcome back to Eddie's back story
corner so ryan toysreview otherwise
known as Ryan's world is a youtube
channel that was started on March 16th
of 2015 it stars an eight-year-old boy
and has over twenty 2.2 million
subscribers with over thirty three
billion YouTube views without fail
Ryan's channel uploads a video pretty
much every single day and you're
probably thinking what would compel a
set of parents to make their kid work
basically a full-time job on the
internet the answer is money when Ryan
was 6 years old between 2016 and 2017 he
was the eighth highest-paid youtuber
making eleven million dollars last year
he was listed as the highest-paid
youtuber making over twenty-two million
dollars that's more than the Paul
brothers that's more than PewDiePie
that's more than pretty much I don't
know all the money in the world I guess
but about two months ago Ryan faced some
controversy and when I say Ryan faced I
mean is
parents he's an eight-year-old boy he's
not responsible for any of this at the
end of August the FTC filed a complaint
against YouTube because of Ryan's
channel the FTC said that the channel
deceptively promotes a multitude of
products to millions of preschool aged
children in violation of FTC law - some
of the complaint basically what they're
saying is that over 90% of the content
on Ryan's channel is sponsored but it's
not clear enough for a four-year-old to
discern if it's an ad if you put
sponsored by McDonald's in the corner of
a video screen a four-year-old boy is
not gonna be like oh I understand that
Ryan is getting paid to give these views
and that his actual views may differ
from this because you know I understand
endorsement and he is endorsing this
product so it might not be as normal
views know instead of that they're gonna
eat play-doh and [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] their pants
because they're a four-year-old kid so
for now that's all the backstory that
you need about Ryan's channel
[Applause]
[Music]
so now that you're an expert in an
eight-year-olds multi-million dollar
youtube channel let's check out his hulu
show okay lots of presents I didn't see
you there most of you guys know how much
I love Ryan videos so immediately we're
greeted by this extremely poorly
animated panda and I know if you don't
like care about animation at all it
looks fine but it's super lazy I mean
look at this backdrop and already don't
you think it's a little unsettling to
have a cartoon tell you that they love
an eight-year-old boys videos especially
when it's voiced by a grown man just
like hey guys you know I love this
little boy don't clip that for the love
of God combo super awesome amazing crazy
cool red Titan comic book collection in
this show they have an animated version
of Ryan where he's a superhero called
red Titan now I know you're thinking
it's like that's kind of cool for an
eight-year-old boy to see himself as a
superhero but when you really think
about it it's kind of weird that they're
like creating this image of Ryan that is
completely out of his control as a child
right it's a little bizarre that he's
not only a multi-million dollar YouTube
channel where he unboxes toys but now
they're taking his image and just some
random adults are animating it there's
nothing to blatantly like illegal or
wrong about it but it just feels weird
right now don't worry his show isn't the
worst part about this entire video it's
gonna get worse but I still want to show
you a little bit more just how low
effort this show is when you watch the
episode you realize wait isn't this
exactly like those shitty animations
that were on YouTube kids videos that
everybody had a problem with there's
nothing blatantly gross or weird about
these but there's solo effort there's
not even really like a narrative and
there's not even voiceovers for most of
it it's just like oh here's this
character and here's this character and
they're playing whack-a-mole watch them
play whack-a-mole for a second what is
this
for generations upon generations kids TV
has been dedicated to at least
entertaining them but for the most part
educating them Sesame Street takes the
opportunity to entertain kids with these
lovable characters and also teach them
the alphabet teach them how to do math
teach them grammar and spelling which is
also kind of the alphabet but this is
just flashy garbage to distract your kid
on an iPad when you're going on a road
trip and you don't want to hear them
talk anymore I'm not a parent I don't
know what it's like to have an annoying
ass child just screaming in your
backseat but there's got to be a better
way than this
there's so much Ryan content that this
kid works a full-time job like I said
that was gonna be the main part of this
video until I started digging in to
pocket watch the company that presents
Ryan's show and showed itself at the
beginning of the episode so immediately
when I went to pocket watches Wikipedia
and I know some people are like well
Wikipedia is not really a source like I
know your teacher said that but you can
look at the sources right here it's not
my main source for the video it was just
the first thing I looked up but it says
pocket watch Inc stylized as Pocket dot
watch is a digital media studio that
specializes in extending popular kids
and family YouTube stars and characters
into global franchises gross that's
super gross why would you say that
they're not actively bragging about
turning children into global franchises
right that would be [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] insane so I
went to pocket watches website and it
says on the website right away
pocket watch is the new studio creating
global franchises from the YouTube stars
and characters loved by Generation alpha
those are their words they are bragging
about turning an eight-year-old boy into
a global franchise am I going [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
crazy like we already live in a society
whooped by the way we live in a society
we already acknowledged that we [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up
child stars by making them big and
famous but this is a whole different
animal because when you're filming
YouTube videos there are no current
child labor laws that are enforced on
YouTube channels and I was shocked
find out that Ryan's Hulu show is mainly
just repackaged YouTube videos that they
animated over as well which means it's a
TV show that was made with an
eight-year-old boys the star without
active sag or child labor laws that
sounds illegal also looking at pocket
watches website the first thing that you
see is a Ryan mobile Mario Kart clone
he's a real boy he's not like even a
character in a movie that they're
branding their branding this kid who has
no idea what's going on bores parents
who are they so on the pocket watch
website you can scroll down to a button
for press and they say see what they're
saying is in see what the press is
saying about our company and the first
article they listed the headline is just
a sentence that makes you want to scream
the headline is Ryan's toys review is
this generations Mickey Mouse ah no
please no oh my god Mickey Mouse is a
globally recognized trademark worth
billions of dollars and the fun thing is
he's a fictional cartoon character you
cannot treat an eight-year-old boy like
Mickey Mouse dude so I looked in more
two pocket watch and the surprises they
just kept coming first thing I want to
mention about pocket watch is the CEO
used to work at maker studios now if you
guys don't remember maker studios it was
an MCN that was originally started by
youtubers and then was bought out by
disney for i believe like five hundred
million dollars and actually some
personal history back in 2014 before my
channel took off i was locked in a maker
studios contract and it wasn't good for
me but then as a business maker just
started canceling contracts [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] over
creators and then shut down when i
looked into who was funding pocket watch
there was kind of a I don't know a stand
out name in there that I did not expect
to find in a children's YouTube media
company so reading off the list there's
this guy who's an Academy award-winning
producer of avatar and Titanic and
you're like huh that's pretty legit
entertainment you know go
into it but the main one that really
caught my eye is downy ventures which is
Robert Downey jr. 'he's investment
company Ironman is funding YouTube kids
Tony Stark himself is funding Ryan's toy
reviews think about that for a moment it
set him the main Avenger is paying for
the like exploitation of this
eight-year-old boy becoming a business I
don't remember that from Ironman so
reading into a variety article about
them getting funding there was a quote
there is no other funding team or
company better positioned to transform
the kids digital entertainment space
than pocketwatch said Allen a digital
media investor and co-founder of
machinima also somebody on their
advisory board worked at defy media so
we have three past company employers
machinima a company that made a bunch of
money then [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] over creators and
closed down maker studios a company that
made a bunch of money [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] over
creators and closed down and defy media
I bet you can [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] guess [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] over
creators made a bunch of money and then
closed down so we should totally trust
this company with children and their
professional franchises this sounds fun
[Applause]
now I had a video last June where me and
Gus Johnson My dear boy
he's not in his room but I'm sending
love toward the room so I can reach him
when he gets back we made a video about
Butch Hartman the creator of Danny
Phantom and Fairly OddParents and some
other shows that people didn't watch
compared to those two and he had this
weird Kickstarter where he was
complaining about how family TV is
trashed these days and we need more
Christian values and you know we should
give him a bunch of money so he can make
a streaming service called Laxus so
you'd think you know butch really cares
about what children are seeing he
wouldn't just work with a shitty immoral
children's company just to make a quick
buck would he pocket watch has one more
Hulu show called hobbykidstv and we'll
talk about that in a bit but the main
thing I wanted to show you is Butch
Hartman actually makes an animated show
for hobbykidstv
the family toy YouTube channel so I
clicked on it and we're just gonna watch
it together this is a paid advertisement
for Carl's jr. kids how many times do I
have to tell you no turning everything
we own into burgers
[Music]
I'll be kids okay so I want to stress
right away they did have the mom say it
was a paid ad by Carl's jr. and there
was a little subtitle thing there for
about 12 seconds but the FTC lawsuit I
showed earlier is proof that kids that
are younger can't really decipher what
an ad fully is so yeah the mom did say
it was a paid advertisement and it does
say it there for a second but then we go
into a fully animated show and they
don't stress that it's sponsored later
and that becomes a problem
that's your stomach hoppy bear what
breakfast was ages ago an early lunch
isn't such a bad idea
hobby kids are you thinking what I'm
thinking for real where we're taking
kids content and having your kids
favorite animated characters just go
Carl's jr. this is such blatant scummy
advertising to children if you are
making little animated characters for a
30-second spot on a kids show and those
animated characters say let's go to
Carl's jr. at least it's a Carl's jr.
app but not every episode of this show
is an ad for Carl's jr. there are other
animated episodes whoa the line for
Carl's jr. is long today
[Music]
I'm gonna order cheeseburger fries and
the yummy milk no one makes charbroiled
burgers as good as Carl's jr. and
everyone knows Carl's jr. makes the best
burgers in the universe it's so just
gross it's gross advertising and shame
on you Butch Hartman Danny Phantom was
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] great dude what happened to you
and I think you know before we move on
this is what's really bothering me about
it the YouTube kids stuff already seemed
super scummy but it was always just
parents kind of manipulating their kids
to make a ton of money which wasn't cool
and we all made videos on it but at
least it was contained to that what
pocket watch is suggesting is that
traditional media is now adopting this
really kind of in a way like abusive to
children way of modeling things these
kids are working full-time jobs as
entertainers and they have no say in it
it's already bad with child actors but
at least we have an established industry
to make sure it's cool for them I don't
know if there's anybody looking out for
these kids I don't know if it's just
this pocket watch company going to the
parents we're gonna make you millions of
dollars and the parents were like okay
take my kid for as long as you need or
in fact we'll shoot at our house and
just send you the footage because this
isn't just like Hulu making a show out
of it this is a company funded by the
biggest actor in the world in the
biggest franchise Hulu is a giant
streaming service with multi-million
dollar networks behind them and Butch
Hartman is a classic TV show producer he
created two beloved shows that were ran
on regular television pocketwatch signed
a deal with Paramount Pictures to make
an unboxing movie for kids this is a
real industry problem now I just I don't
know I'm worried that people aren't
gonna be as angry about this as I am so
I just really would like picture how
much you enjoyed playing with toys as a
kid I liked it for way too long like a
lot of people have talked to you I would
stow a bunch of toys under my blanket in
my bed and at night I would just play
with my toys and run through different
stories and use my imagination for years
like a little too long I did it until I
was like 10 or 11 because I loved it so
much these four and there
anymore children on YouTube having this
are getting completely robbed of a
normal childhood
they are not asking to be famous I know
I read an article where ryan toysreview
'he's mom said that he loved youtube
videos and he asked like why don't i
have a youtube channel and that's well
and good when you're making videos with
your kid but when he becomes the highest
earner on youtube you need to rethink
whether you can just use the excuse oh
it's ryan's passion because ryan has a
nick jr TV show and he has a hulu show
now and he has a line and target and a
line of toys in Walmart in a video game
coming out do you think he pictured like
oh I want to make 22 million dollars
next year he probably just wanted to
make a few videos with his parents I'm
almost sure that Robert Downey jr. cares
about kids but I don't think he knows
the extent of what this investment is I
don't know if Butch Hartman thinks it's
as manipulative as it is he might just
see it as a side gig but all these
traditional media people put all their
efforts in and the kids are the ones
that are harmed out of it so thank you
for watching the video and here's a word
from our sponsor
[Music]
hey guys sorry I wanted to see how tall
my tripod would get and it got stuck so
I got to do the ad from here Thank You
audible for sponsoring today's video
everyone say thank you audible let me
ask you something did you know that
audible has the largest selection of
audiobooks out of anybody ever including
audible originals and I know what your
dumb baby brain is thinking Eddie you
watch an audible original I have no idea
and I can't critically think at all put
it together there original audio books
documentaries and scripted shows made by
audible obviously you can listen to
these audiobooks on any device including
mobile and Alexa hey Google can you play
audible audiobooks Voice Actions aren't
available for that app you're an idiot
you're stupid idiot Google as an audible
member every month you get to choose one
free audiobook regardless of the price
and two audible originals oh what's that
you want a 30-day free trial you want to
start a free trial for audible because
it sounds good from what I'm saying then
go to audible.com slash Eddie
EDD why spell my name with a why stop
getting it wrong and spelling it with an
IE you can also text my name Eddie with
a why to 500 500 I'll say it one more
time you dumb dumb idiot baby that's
audible.com slash Eddie with a why or
text Eddie with a why to 500 500 and
while you're there
I recommend slaughterhouse-five by Kurt
Vonnegut it was a great experience and I
think everyone should listen the
slaughterhouse-five so go pick up that
audiobook and thanks for watching the
video I'm sorry it was so depressing
so click off the video now bye click off
the video good bye bye bye click off the
video do it click off the video before I
cut to the music
Thank You Carrie l Justin dwl Sammy
Derrick Laura Sarah Kelly Colleen Sloane
Bernard Rosalie Mel Olivia Damien Nick
Gabrielle Matthew the hanging judge Dom
Kenzie Mallory
Jackie Kimmi Aurora Ezra James Dianna
cyber case Brandon Alex tapir tamer
Megan player and bran the raisins Reese
Amanda Nietzsche Vaughn car wreck Haley
Elizabeth Peter
Malin Chelsea Josie Michael Tyler Dave
and Janet Marin Jeremy Cody thank you
guys so much
