you may have noticed I am not in Japan
you are correct congratulations for
those who don't know me and my say have
been trying to move to Japan now
for quite a while
four years
uh even just make oh God ow
even just making the choice to move
there was really difficult we obviously
would be leaving everything that we
built here behind all these amazing
friends but we just felt like we really
want to take on on this adventure while
we're still young
just getting the preliminary Visa just
that was a huge process but it didn't
matter because we wanted to go so badly
I counted all the emails with with the
correspondence and it's 700 emails like
we're not able to enter Because Japan
has been kept their Border close for
everyone uh even people going through a
Visa process during this most of this
time at least and you know there's
probably because of covet and and that's
the reason why I avoided making a video
even talking about this usually I I
share what's going on with you guys but
it just felt like uh I don't think the
world needs someone who's you know well
off complaining how covet is affecting
them and it's also a complicated issue
and I just felt like this is going to
complicate it more if I talk about it
and I don't want to read a bunch of
headlines I can already see them like
PewDiePie complaints about not being
able to enter Japan I get it it sounds
entitled but at this point I just wanted
to give an update and sort of talk about
what we've been through these past two
years make because it's kind of driving
me a bit crazy
I bother my friends and family about
this like 600 times and be like what
what did you think I should do
by the way what do you think I should do
okay
um because every day I swear at this
point because it's been so long it first
year was fine whatever uh every day I go
from we should just give up this is
ridiculous like it shouldn't have taken
this long you know maybe it just wasn't
meant to be they're not giving us any
updates on when they're planning to
reopen you know why should they change
their mind all of a sudden it's
obviously what if it takes another two
years like we can't just wait forever
and then we go from that to we spent
three years all this money we're all
these things we're gonna go we probably
and I just jump in between that every
single day and it's it's awesome it's
great and that's the thing like I feel
like I'm living a cautionary tale and I
don't know what the meaning behind it is
is it never give up or is it don't give
up because you never know how close you
are I wish I knew this is the hardest
choice I ever made and I don't know one
of the most difficult part about this
whole thing has been not knowing if I
knew that they were going to be close
for two years then at least we couldn't
have made some choices around that we
could have made trips to see our family
more we could have not stayed in my
office for two years we thought we'd be
here for a couple months Max we could
have avoided playing this guessing game
of oh the Olympics that surely they're
gonna open up for the Olympics they're
gonna have to have an audience okay no
um okay maybe maybe now the cases are
really low uh and they weren't giving
any updates it's just like maybe next
one okay well maybe next one maybe next
month and maybe next month and do that
24 times it's like maybe this is my
fault for being so crazy about it but it
is a big choice to make when you make
the choice to move to another country
and it's hard to get just strongly and
as it turns out I'm not alone in this
situation uh there was a New York Times
article estimating about 350 000 people
stuck in this limbo situation the same
as I am not people entering with
business Visa like I am but uh students
as well who have already paid their
tuition but they're not allowed in just
want to make it clear like it's not
tourists it's not people going uh
they're still closed
guess I'll have to re-schedule my flight
again you know it it's people who made
this difficult choice and and they don't
even have a choice at this point of them
having to wait and honestly reading
their stories online because a lot of
them have been trying to contact me and
send me messages it breaks my heart
because if this has been heavy for me I
can't imagine for all these people and
I'm honestly just so sorry now that they
close their border for everyone in
December I think that was the last straw
for a lot of people seeing messages of
people giving up it's just so sad and
another sad part is like all these
people riding me that are in this limbo
situation are hoping that I'm gonna like
urge on the Japanese government of like
do something but it they just closed
down for everyone like even not now not
even Japanese people can accidentally
turn you know people that were hoping to
see their family abroad can't do that
now and sucks for everyone so you know
obviously it's not gonna matter if I
talk about it that's just not the case
and I guess that's the point people are
so desperate that their their last hope
is literally some Swedish YouTuber
complaining online which I'm sorry I'm
not even doing I just wanted to explain
my situation I will say it has been
frustrating also seeing that other
Japanese people can travel to other
countries as they want but their own
borders have been closed for everyone
this entire time
kind of like that's there's no one else
talking about this should am I the one
am I the only one seeing this shouldn't
countries like call this out I don't
know if I'm allowed to show it but I am
approved to go for five years which is
amazing uh I would love that but I'm not
allowed in but as part of part of me
acquiring this I had to get an office in
Japan do you know how hard it is to get
an office Japan if you're not even
allowed to enter the country but thanks
to our friend sir we were able to do it
this is part of our view so I had to
have that I have a company in Japan a
business ready to set up I'm gonna pay
my taxes whatever I have an employee in
Japan I have a house in Japan I'm
approved to go but I'm not allowed in
and it's like damn we're still here huh
I keep meeting people here and they're
like you're still here and it's like
yeah still here I don't know what to
tell you I'm almost like sorry for even
making this video it feels it just feels
super lame I don't like talking about
this it feels like I'm complaining and I
feel entitled but you know I appreciate
being able to talk about my situation
and I hope that other people in my same
situation can find some comfort that
you're not alone and Japan if you can
give an update at least a lot of people
would appreciate it and that was it for
my update still not in Japan but I'll be
fine and I'm happy either way so thank
you for listening that's it bye
