[Music]
one of the great myths that our society
perpetuates is that if anyone is super
rich they must be a super genius and
this is not true and there's a few
reasons why this is not true that when
you start to peer in the Dynamics of the
correlation between wealth and talent
the whole idea breaks down and luck
plays a much bigger role than we are
told so the first thing to understand is
that some human traits are normally
distributed they have a bell curve to
them and some are not normally
distributed so for example if you think
about height height is going to be
clustered around a relatively narrow
band you're not going to find a human
that's 1T tall and you're not going to
find a human that's 200 ft tall right
and as a result of this you have a sort
of normal distribution around a relative
average but wealth is not like this
wealth is distributed on what has a long
tail it has this really long
distribution at the top and then a lot
of people clustered towards the bottom
so there's a large number of people who
have sort of average incomes and then a
few people who might be a hundred or a
thousands or even a million times richer
than somebody else on the planet and
this creates a mismatch because in order
to produce that longtail you need to
have some serious serious luck now my
favorite study that shows this was a
collaboration between some physicists
and an economist and they developed what
is basically a sort of fake world with
some crude relationships between wealth
and talent talent is normally
distributed you have people who are
clustered around a sort of normal area
the average of of human society and then
you have a small number of people who
are really talented and a small number
of people who are really not so talented
but nobody in the world is like a
billion times more talented than
somebody
else and what this means is that when
luck is introduced into the equation
when you have these sort of lightning
strikes that we can think of with luck
they're going to hit in the place that
has the most people because if you
imagine a sort of bell curve where most
people are in the talent Spectrum the
idea that the lightning is going to
strike the one person who's the most
talented in the world or the one person
who's the least talented in the world
it's just highly highly improbable so
instead what's going to happen is the
lightning is going to hit someone around
the middle value of talent now when that
happens it's going to increase the
chance that they become wealthy if they
get struck by lightning twice the odds
of them becoming extremely wealthy
increase right so what ends up happening
in these simulations they run is that
over and over and over the richest
person in their fake world is not
somebody of extreme Talent it's somebody
who's marginally above average on Talent
who happens to get lucky and I think
this is the way the world works I think
we have a lot of complex dynamics that
are producing these outcomes not to
mention by the way all the things we
can't control like whether you were born
rich which is highly correlated with
being rich in the future and also
whether you had a network that supported
you through connections and so on and a
lot of people who are super super rich
you know pretend that they have earned
everything that they deserve their
wealth and that they obviously are the
most talented person and I think this is
just something that is fundamentally a
myth it's not possible to become
extremely extremely wealthy if you have
zero talent but as long as you have some
and you get lucky you're more likely to
end up on those long tales of the high
degree of wealth and I think this is
something that our our modern world
infers backwards
that genius is something that always is
attached to the people who are wealthy
and sometimes they were just the random
byproduct of lightning hitting them
rather than somebody
else Elon Musk is one of these great
examples I think of someone who has some
level of talent but perhaps not as much
as everybody pretends and what happens
with Elon Musk is you know I think he
got lucky I think he got super rich and
as a result of that he inferred that
therefore he must be a genius and
therefore that his skills are
transferable into everything else that
he could possibly throw himself into
which has turned out to not be the case
so you look at some of the areas where
he has had financial success and then
you assume well the reason for this
success is because you're a genius and
Geniuses of course all believe that they
can control their own future and that
their talent will see them through no
matter what realm they enter now Elon
Musk has had some Success With Cars and
with rocket ships and so on and some of
that is due probably to his talent but
some of it is also due to the talent of
the people who work for him the
scientists who run the breakthroughs the
funding mechanisms that allow him to get
government grants and so on and when he
has been on his own which is to say when
he's acquired Twitter for example he
basically lit tens of billions of
dollars on fire and made that social
media site worth a fraction of what it
was before because his so-called genius
wasn't transferable to the realm of
social media and I think it's one of the
huge problems of of societies actually
there's a lot of things about
billionaires that are not due to luck or
to Talent they're due to their greed so
one of the things that I think about
with this as well is there is a degree
of overconfidence and a degree of thirst
for money that you have to have in order
to become a billionaire so with the
thirst for money for example if somebody
gave me $2 billion the first thing that
I would not do is say oh my God how can
I get $3 billion I would give away most
of my money people who are billionaires
they look at the 2 billion and they say
how can I have three and then they get
three billion and they say how can I
have four so what's happened is you have
a self- selection of certain traits that
make it more likely that these people
will become super super rich after they
have gotten lucky because they are
greedy and so you know I think there is
a lot of the mythology around
billionaires and a lot of the mythology
around people like Elon Musk infers
backwards this straight line between
talent and wealth and there's so much
more going on there and I think the
immediate assumption that the genius
must be embedded in the person who is
financially successful in one industry
is a great misunderstanding of how our
world works and the sort of arbitrary
nature and sometimes the unfairness with
which talent and wealth are not strictly
correlated want to dive deeper become a
big think member and join our members
only Community watch videos early and
unlock full interviews
