what would it take for a machine to
jam this question was first posed in
computer music journal in 1988 as a form
a musical touring test a way of
identifying human-like intelligence in
machines this test is very
simple blues and E flat 1 2 1 2 3
4 what would it take in this case for a
machine to convince me and you that it
was human well very quickly a number of
things need to happen in real time first
the machine would need to identify where
one was and entrain to my pulse using
not only auditory but visual cues we're
very good at figuring out if other
people are locked in with our pulse and
so I would need to sense that the
machine was feeling the
groove two the machine would need to
identify what it was that I was doing on
my bass guitar and then fit that within
the paradigm of a 12 Bar Blues am I
doing the quick four for example or am I
playing a two5 on the turnaround instead
of a 54 so am I playing a jazz blues
versus a Delta Blues versus a Chicago
style Blues it would then need to take
that information and respond in kind in
an improvised solo using meaningful
Blues
vocabulary now music is not really
really a language but it it certainly
feels like a language to those who play
music and so if I ask a musical question
does it feel like I'm getting a
meaningful answer in response does it
does it feel like I am I am connecting
with somebody that there is a real ghost
in the machine on the other side of the
algorithm I'm fairly convinced that this
will never happen no AI will be able to
pass a true musical touring test call
Ray kurtwell tell him he a hack
Singularity my ass now I'm not going to
Bull you in this video I'm not going to
appeal to some vague sense of the
uniqueness of human musical creativity
AI has no soul
because it's going to get there right I
mean Red Lobster is already using AI
generated music in its ad campaigns and
who are we to question the aesthetic
sensibilities of Red Lobster
bab you there have been some incredible
advances in generative AI from companies
like yudo and sun. they let you generate
full pieces of music from text prompts
just type in what you want and it will
do a pretty good job of giving it to you
and Tommy sha real late at night big Jo
flipping no Patty
fic
ch right
it's horrifying it's
like spitting on Muddy Water's grave
upon hearing these kinds of results many
techno optimists have breathlessly
extolled that the musical touring test
has been passed machine musical
intelligence is upon us daddy Elon is so
excited so why am I so doubtful here
right why am I saying that music AI will
never pass the touring test well I think
there's a pretty profound category error
that's going on here that we need to
always be aware of of going forward what
generative AI does is not
music let me explain this video was
brought to you by nebula hope of an
extraordinary aesthetic success based on
extraordinary technology is a cruel
deceit yanis kakis
1985 in 1950 Alan toring first wrote
about what he called the imitation game
what we now call the touring test in
this test an interlocutor asked
questions of two entities one machine
and one human and if at the end of a
conversation traditionally done through
a text prompt the interlocutor is unable
to tell which one is the machine and
which one is the human then we say that
the machine passed the touring test it
displays human level
intelligence now how might we take that
idea and expand it out into the world of
of Music well one scenario that we
showed at the beginning of this video
involves a touring jam session during
the improvisation among an interlocutor
and two musicians the interlocutor's
task would be to identify who is the
machine and who is the human I'm really
drawn to this test because Jam sessions
are a great way to like get to know
people know what they're about know
their musical taste they're a lot of fun
they're they're social activity but
there are other possible musical touring
tests Christopher arza Loosely
categorized them as either musical
directive tests which involve ongoing
musical interaction between the
interlocutor and two agents and musical
output tests which involve no
interaction The Listener simply judges
the humanlike quality of a given musical
output I have no doubt that generative
AI will be able to pass musical output
tests Red Lobster marketing team
apparently thinks so too but musical
directive tests where there's a
continuous interaction between agents
put the emphasis on process not product
alen turing's original Imitation game
envisioned a conversation between agents
not just somebody passively looking at
text and determining whether or not it
was computer generated whether chat GPT
did your homework in other words and so
to pass a musical touring test a machine
has to do what musicians do when they
make music the process has to feel human
one way that visual artists have already
started to push back at the flood of
generative AI images is to document
their process and tell the story of
making the art this approach will become
more and more common with musicians over
the next couple of years as a means of
pushing back against the inevitable tide
of generative AI
slop so back in 2008 Jack kti current
CEO of patreon was releasing music with
Natalie Dawn under the name pompus they
were releasing these YouTube videos in a
format that they called video song video
songs had two rules one what you see is
what you hear and two if you hear it at
some point you saw it now this seems
kind of like obvious now because this
format is so ubiquitous but back then
back in 2008 it was a revolutionary
approach to releasing art you were
seeing the music as it was actually made
an appeal that I imagine will carry some
resonance in the future in the face of
generative AI the music theorist William
oara expands on this idea of showing
your work for musicians borrowing a term
for the ancient Greek word for craft he
calls it the Tech of YouTube a tech of
YouTube performance then is a form of
Music theoretical knowledge that exists
at the intersection of analytical detail
virtuosic performance ability practical
instrumental considerations and an
awareness of one's audience and the
communicative Tendencies of social media
pompus has since expanded on this idea
of tech in social media musical
performance by releasing these short
form video things where you see the
musicians actually working out the music
in the studio and joking around you get
to see how the sausage is made so to
speak can we try snapping a tight one
let's try let's try a tight one you want
to snap a tight
one you also get to see what exactly
would be necessary for a machine
intelligence to do if it was to pass the
musical directive test it would need to
understand and respond to musical jokes
was just like we're feeling this in two
I just think about everything in one one
one one one one one one is a 400 bar
form you would need to understand and
take musical
Direction it would need to Vibe with
Jack kti so to speak I talk about him
all the time on this channel but the
musicologist Christopher small talks
about how music is not really a noun but
in fact a verb in his book musicing he
writes that music is not a thing at all
but an activity something that people do
the apparent thing music is a figment an
abstraction of the action whose reality
vanishes as soon as we examine it at all
closely singing Protestant hymns in a
church dialing in sick lead tones on a
quad cortex freestyling live on the
radio facing the Wall of Death at a
metal festival watching singers perform
o moo in a concert hall sitting in at a
jazz jam session streaming yourself on
Twitch producing music on Fruity Loops
it's very difficult to see what these
things have in common besides
somehow reacting to organized sound and
any one of these activities might be a
good candidate for a musical directive
test they are all different examples of
ongoing musical interactions generative
AI on the other hand is very good at
creating products musical recordings but
that product is only ever useful for
passing the output Test passing the
directive test though would require AI
researchers to treat music as a verb
like Christopher small suggests a
process a thing that two or more people
do together like in Alan touring's
original Imitation game and when you do
that you have to take a look at the
dynamic relationships between audiences
and performers and the technology they
use and the spaces that they make music
in and by the way all of this is just
for western music so
far the whole thing is a lot I am not
going to pretend like I know how AI
works I am but a simple based player I
have tried to read those papers and I am
just not smart enough I do recommend
Valerio ard's videos on AI music if you
want to get into some of the technical
Weeds about these things but basically
the way I understand it is that a large
language model will train on a bunch of
data and then use that data to try and
accurately predict what the next thing
will be in a sequence this is basically
what the computational cognition model
is for humans which says that we take
information in from the world through
our senses as input and then we process
it in our brain and then our brain
outputs Behavior this is a fairly
outdated model and one that I don't feel
like applies to how we think about music
and if the point is to pass the touring
test the machine has to think like a
human
[Music]
anybody who has ever performed knows
that getting stuck inside your head is
the worst possible thing thinking too
much means you cannot react with
meaningful musical ideas but your mind
isn't blank you're still thinking about
things it's just very fragmented one hip
new theory in philosophy of the mind
that accounts for this is called 4 e COG
ition after the four e embodied extended
embedded and enacted cognition they
represent a dynamic relationship between
the brain the body and your environment
the first of these is embodied cognition
your body shapes how you think when it
comes to music this means that if it
sounds good it's because it feels good
and this is backed by two decades of
Music Neuroscience research especially
when it comes to auditory motor coupling
the areas of your brain which process
movement through space are the same
areas of your brain that process Rhythm
and Music In general the vestibular
system that governs balance influences
your sense of downbeat where one is if
you're not physically balancing your
body you might lose the downbeat a very
common occurrence like what I just did
here in this jam with rum Savon and
James mushler you see me swaying maybe a
little bit too much there in the
background and then the Rhythm gets all
floaty
cool but maybe not intentional failure
is actually something that Alan toring
identified as a means of getting a
machine to fool people into thinking
that it was human if a machine is too
good at answering questions it won't
seem human to air is human and so to
pass a touring test an AI might need to
lose where one is the second form of
cognition is extended cognition where
the world is your brain
thinking requires a lot of energy
evolutionarily speaking your brain gets
tired sometimes and so humans have
figured out ways of extending our
thought patterns into the physical world
as a means of reducing cognitive load
the classic example of this is writing
we write things down so we don't have to
remember them anymore freeing up
cognitive capacity in our brain Plato
famously complained about this how
people are getting lazy because they
relied on writing too much smartphones
are the latest example of this extending
our brains into the world with
technology we could say that music
notation is a form of extended cognition
but letting us remember more music than
we would normally be able to with our
mere brains orchestral composers don't
have to remember every note for every
instrument that they have ever written
and so they are freed from the
constraints of their own memory to
imagine larger and grander musical
designs music shaped by extending our
brains past their limitations an AI
might need to show forgetfulness if it's
going to pass a musical touring test the
third form of cognition is embedded
cognition patterns of thought are
embedded in external systems one way to
think of this is how I have embedded my
musical vocabulary into a system of
tuning for bass forth tuning like I
don't have to think that much to be able
to express myself with my bass tuned
like
this the notes are just there where my
fingers expect them to be but if I was
to detune my base a little bit
to an unfamiliar tuning
system I don't know where anything is
anymore so my cognitive load has
increased as I hunt and Peck for each
individual note on my
[Music]
instrument anybody who's ever tried to
type with a dvorac keyboard knows what
I'm talking about the patterns of
thought embedded in the technology that
we use like the bass guitar guide our
musical in itions you can tell if
somebody wrote a piece in a digital
audio workstation versus Muse score for
example would an AI need to mimic this
pattern of embedded cognition to pass a
touring test I don't know but this is
how we do it you know the fourth form of
cognition is enacted cognition doing is
thinking you process the world through
action this basically says that there
are certain activities which are
meaningless if you are passive like
sports for example we don't say that
you're a good soccer player if you spend
a lot of time thinking about soccer
because you have seen a lot of other
people do it you know you kind of got to
get out there and actually run and do
the thing yourself the very first
question from this video what would it
take for a machine intelligence to jam
is like asking what would it take for a
machine intelligence to play soccer and
the answer is a body we need replicants
we need Androids out there on the field
otherwise it's just a supercomputer
thinking about Soccer without a body AI
Sports intelligence is meaningless you
got to have robots on the field
processing in real time what's going on
with their robot bodies without a body
AI music intelligence is meaningless you
get to have robots in the Band Stand
processing in real time what's going on
with their robot bodies as the great
jazz educator Hal galper said we
musicians are athletes of the fine
muscles and like athletes of the larger
muscles our meaning is created by our
our bodies doing things like our
siblings in sports we share in Vivo the
struggle the joy and the experience of
our lived selves moving through the
[Music]
world embodied AI uh is a long way off
but I don't see any technical reason why
we can't have musical Terminators again
I'm not an AI researcher so I don't know
any of like the actual nitty-gritty with
any of this stuff but you know it could
happen and I also see how it would be
possible to treat music more as a
conversation between human and machine
passing a musical directive test by
valuing and creating meaning in the
process of musicing so why am I so
doubtful why is the thesis of this video
that the musical touring test will never
be P we will never have musical machine
intelligence
[Music]
the presumed autonomous thingness of
works of music is of course only part of
the prevailing modern philosophy of Art
in general what is valued is not the
action of art not the act of creating
and even less that of perceiving and
responding but the created art object
itself you can sell a thing it's harder
to sell the process if the process of
making quality recorded music can be
made more efficient the market is
incentivized to make the process as
efficient as possible generative AI
creates recorded music
extraordinarily cost effectively
compared to the other ways you might do
it it fully automates a process that had
previously required human input much the
same way that industrial capitalism
automated making cars making food and
making things as long as those things
are good enough in other words as long
as they pass the musical output test the
process IR relevant only the product
there are billions of dollars now being
thrown at developing generative models
for language images and now music
because there are potentially billions
of dollars to be made in the market
Spotify is now in on the generative AI
music Trend there's just you know no
money to be made in passing a music
directive test you're just making the
process to get to the product less
efficient and I mean that very literally
too the current prize for passing an
improvisation based touring test is only
$1,000 and with such weak Market
pressure to do something like this I
mean I guess you could sell tickets to
see this as part of a live show there's
just no reason to spend that kind of
computational energy into doing this the
cloud computing power required to run
large language models uses absurd
amounts of energy energy consumption is
a great bottleneck for AI based on the
extremely intensive computational
demands of training the carbon cost of
image generation is staggeringly high
and raw audio generation is slated to be
much higher I mean just to I guess put
this in perspective I think a gigawatt
it's like around the size of like a
meaningful nuclear power plant only
going towards training a model who is
going to build the equivalent of nuclear
power plants so that robots can jam with
me it's just so much more efficient to
have humans do the jamming
I'm
old-fashioned and very idealistic about
that my feeling
is I'll outplay anybody using the ma
machine or I'll die I don't care I the
day that the machine outplays me they
can plant me in the yard with the corn
uh and I mean it I'm very serious I will
not permit myself to be outplayed by
someone using the machine I'm just not
going to permit that you know there are
people that I respect that use this
technology to make beautiful music that
somehow captures what it means to be
human in the year 2024 and I think
that's exciting but then there are
people that I do not respect like the
people who run companies likeo yudo and
other AI companies who have a very
accelerationist mindset when it comes to
this it feels like music is just one
more box to tick on the way to the
singularity music is a problem that
technology can solve there seems to be a
profound disinterest in the artistic
process why music sounds the way that it
does and so you get things like the
beautiful rich history of the Blues a
black American tradition reduced to
typing into a text prompt delta blues
about cheeseburgers that's why I refuse
to call this stuff music because the
technology behind it is so aggressively
antihuman anti-history anti-music and
that's why I also feel like the musical
directive test will never be passed
because the people running the show just
don't care you know one of the things
that I've learned over the years talking
about musicing on this channel is that
you can change your relationship to
music that You Hate by choosing to music
it differently and I kind of hate this
Red Lobster tune because it kind of
slaps up you got
me up biscuits
[Music]
iine got to have every single
time you SA
every
I'm
[Music]
yeah bab
I
pass it
last
fight
[Music]
the it's like a phrase extension
too
[Music]
[Applause]
disgusting now I owe a massive amount of
context for everything that we've talked
about here today to a video that I saw
from the science Creator tibes Toby
hendy where she goes over Alan touring's
original 1950 paper where he first
details his imitation game she
highlights just how visionary touring's
truly was like how he predicted that
machines would need a degree of
Randomness in them to evolve to have
humanlike intelligence this has actually
turned out to be an essential part of
modern machine learning she also covers
how touring thought of potential
objections to the idea that machines
could become intelligent including some
weird ones like touring felt like he
seriously needed to address the prospect
of extra sensory perception anyway this
video was a great one giving me some
extra context to about the history of
machine learning and you can find it and
many more like it over on my streaming
service nebula nebula is a Creator owned
streaming service that was originally
started as a means for creators to make
interesting videos and essays free of
the constraints of the recommendation
algorithm but it's since organically
grown into like one of the genuinely
best places on the internet for Curious
folks to find exclusive interesting and
enriching content like for example on
there you'll find Science creators like
tibes and Jordan Herod who does some
fantastic stuff with AI you'll find
amazing video essayists like the OG
video essayist herself Lindsay Ellis is
on nebula and also Jacob Geller if you
have never seen a Jacob Geller video
essay I highly recommend you check out
some Jacob Geller like some of this
stuff is so beautiful I think he's one
of the best people in the game making
video essays go check out some Jacob
Geller you'll also find some of my
fellow music creators that I deeply love
and respect like the queen of jazz educ
herself Amy Niti is on nebula you also
have the wonderful music theorist 12T
making videos over there I genuinely
love the community of creators over on
nebula they are such a wealth of
inspiration for me and I know they will
be a wealth of inspiration for you too
if you already on nebula we're making it
easier to find content for both new
creators and existing favorites there
are categories now news culture Science
History podcasts and classes each
category is kind of like its own mini
service like I have some classes over
there I have a class on vlogging which
you might enjoy I also have a class that
I did with Amy Niti on Jazz and Blues
that I know you will enjoy if you like
my nerdy music theory Channel if you
sign up using my Link at
nebula.com Neely or use the link below
you can support me and all the creators
over on nebula directly and get nebula
for 40% off annual plans which is as
little little as
$2.50 a month what's exciting though and
genuinely unique to nebula I think is
that now nebula is offering lifetime
subscriptions which means yes now until
the singularity the End of Time thank
you Ray curtz you can be enjoying nebula
and all it has to offer there are some
big concept high octane nebula Originals
to be excited for coming this summer
like identities the debut short film
from Jesse gender coming this June and
of course jet lag season 10 is now in
uction you actually might remember Toby
from season 5 of jet lag the game but
she'll also be appearing in the latest
season alongside Ben Adam and Sam from
wover I'm a fan of jet lag the game by
the way it's kind of like reminds me of
tour it feels almost weirdly comfy
watching them run around cuz it's like
me running around Europe anyway $300 get
you lifetime access to all of this great
stuff and everything that nebula will
ever produce from now until the end of
time I love reading that by the way now
until the end of time that's that's fun
I'm very excited for the future of
nebula and I think you will enjoy this
community that aims to engage the world
in a more meaningful human way thank you
so much for watching you can sign up
today for either 40% off annual plans or
$300 off lifetime access and until next
time
guys peace
