I have been racking my brain today I've
been thinking been thinking a lot uh
I've been trying to think of one single
justifiable reason for a person to use
either Mac OS or any Apple products and
you know maybe I'm just not smart enough
maybe I'm just I don't have the wisdom
but I cannot think of a single one uh no
offense but I just cannot think of one
now uh let's start let's start this way
uh Linux people like me are divided into
two general categories there are the
people who hate Mac but they really hate
windows and there are people who uh hate
windows but they really really hate Mac
and I am definitely of the latter
category uh because I can think of some
reasons that you might want to use a
Windows machine uh I mean I ultimately
don't you know want to rationalize you
know I don't want you to use one uh but
you know if you want to play a full
screen video game I can understand
uh you know you taking advantage of the
better support that you have on Windows
you can play a lot of these games on
Linux but it's easier to do on windows
so I can understand having an
alternative desktop for doing something
like that uh same thing you know if you
of course lots of people have jobs that
require some kind of proprietary
software that's written only for Windows
okay I understand that um but that said
those are the reasons you might want to
use a Windows machine I can't for the
life of me think of any reason to to use
MACC Os or to use an Apple device now
and I can additionally think of many
reasons to not want to use Apple devices
or Mac OS let's get into it now first
Hardware uh Apple makes deliberately uh
debilitated so uh Hardware that is
planned to be obsolete there it's a lot
of planned obsolescence uh you know a
lot of people will realize oh look
there's a new iPhone suddenly all of the
soft Ware or all of the hardware that uh
you know the last iphone is no longer
compatible with all of this new software
it's not because there's anything
principal behind that it's because you
are deliberately disabled uh from
updating your phone when they want you
to buy a new one okay just basic things
like that or for example let's take
actually repairing your Hardware right
so if you have uh a Windows machine if
you have a normal computer uh it doesn't
have to run Windows I have a ThinkPad
running Linux now if something goes
wrong with my ThinkPad let's say I
accidentally pee on the keyboard or
something like that it's happened before
I'm not I'm not proud of it it's
happened let's say I have p on the
keyboard and uh you know I want to
replace it well it's no no big deal I
send out for a $10 keyboard on eBay I
unscrew my old keyboard replace it
that's it that's all I have to do same
thing with the screen same thing with
anything else okay everything's easily
replaceable if I don't if I haven't
replaced something I can look it up on
YouTube it's super easy now Mac devices
on the other hand are built to be
difficult to modify you're not supposed
to make any kind of changes or repairs
now how specifically now for example um
Apple devices you may or may not know
have special screws in them uh that
normal screwdrivers cannot unscrew it's
not it's not Flathead it's not Philips
head it's um you know their own special
thing that's supposed to be difficult to
unscrew because they don't want you
going in there uh and that's not because
oh we just you know we're interested in
the user we don't want them to you know
mess anything up no no it's because they
don't want you to fix things if you're
open up if you're opening up a computer
you know what you're doing more or less
the other thing is of course Apple has
these licensed dealers they want to
constrain the number of people who can
modify these kind of devices um and how
that results of course is there's a more
constrained Market it's a lot more it's
a lot less competitive than uh you know
a repair industry for Windows machines
so that makes it worse for you as well
you're paying more for the the same uh
or the a worse product okay so now the
reason of course people have Max uh is
sort of an issue of social signaling
right um there you know there's a
certain brand that you are buying like
when you get a Windows machine so you
know and go to Walmart and get whatever
there are all these different brands
they're all competing uh they they all
look different but if you get an Apple
Mac uh they all look the same they're
all totally uniform and they're supposed
to be like that because you are buying
into a brand and nothing else you're not
getting anything special you're buying
into a brand and that's uh you know that
that's sort of the point they want to
advertise not the the hardware being
better because it's not they're trying
to advertise that specific brand now
correlated with the hardware issue is
the the kind of mentality uh that which
isn't a mentality it's a strategy that I
think is taken deliberately uh by Apple
and that is uh the fact that Apple
software and Hardware sort of conspire
for you it they conspire to take over
more and more of your life okay so if
you get an iPod for example do iPods
even still exist I don't know well if
you get an iPod whatever um they want
you to use iTunes to sync with that they
make it difficult to use other software
and in fact iTunes um Works in a way
totally different from other MP3 players
when you sync it with you know an iPod
or something right so normal MP3 players
back in the good old days they work like
any kind of USB device would You' drag
and drop your songs in whatever way you
want you can customize it uh usually
when you load them up you can also sort
them by artist or whatever that's fine
okay iPods aren't made like that they
store data in a very special way uh
special in the like a bad way of course
uh in that they the iPod only wants to
show information the way it wants to and
nothing else right so you can't sort
things by folder directory that doesn't
exist okay um and the thing about these
kind of Apple devices is that they're
all on their own wavelength because they
want Apple wants it to be more difficult
for you to actually use the products
they want you to have to um if you get
an iPhone they want you to also have you
know a Mac a Macbook or something
because they're supposed to sync with
each other uh better by making it more
difficult for you to interface with
other program
uh they don't want you using any other
music player other than iTunes uh or you
everything sort of conspires in a way to
get you to use the same stuff uh and it
of course it's a little ironic isn't it
it's a little ironic uh that you know
Mac used to be uh you know you remember
the commercial right when you know the
the girl is running up and she has a
mallet or a hammer I don't remember what
it is and everyone's watching Big
Brother and then she throws the the
hammer and it breaks the screen oh wow
so if you buy a Mac you're like a rebel
and you're against the system well now
you all have computers that look exactly
the same now you have everyone does
everything in the same way I guess some
people have different uh desktop
backgrounds um but every you know all
computers are identical totally
replaceable uh it's expensive to replace
but they are totally replaceable um and
all of the the actual choices that you
have are constrained and that's part of
the play it's part of the plan it's part
of the plan okay because they want to
control you I mean and don't don't get
it wrong don't get it twisted Windows
would like to control you the way Mac
does Mac simply is a brand uh no one
wants to be in on the Windows brand no
one cares people have bought Windows
machines because they work or because
they're used to them people buy MAC
machines because uh they want the brand
they want to participate in this and
again it's a slope you buy one expensive
overpriced Mac device you're going to be
buying more if you want them to sink
well now here's a dumb argument people
say uh this isn't so much of an argument
but it's like a justification of the
existence of Mac people say something
like oh don't oh Luke well here's the
thing you might know a lot about
computers or you know Billy on the
Street might know you know he might be a
a elite uh you know he's a hacker or
something like he knows a bunch about
computers uh but you know dumb there are
lots of dumb people that need a computer
that just works that's nice and simple
and Mac is that for a lot of people now
I don't buy that argument for a bunch of
reasons okay first off when you got to
put yourself in the shoes of a normie
you got to start thinking like them now
when they use a computer they don't you
know they don't really care about
operating systems they might in the
abstract if they fallen for advertising
but what they want what they want is uh
big buttons big logo go on the side that
have their browser and all the programs
they use and they want those big buttons
there and they want to be able to click
on them and they want a program to come
up and if the program takes too long
then they must have a virus okay that's
how normies think I mean we're talking
about we're talk when I say normies I'm
talking about people who don't even know
how to do private browsing like you go
to their web browser you go to their URL
bar start typing something in and all
the porn they watch comes up we're
talking about that kind of Normie those
kind of normies those kind of bottom of
the barrel normies they they don't care
about the difference between Windows and
Mac both of them are equally usable it
doesn't matter any kind of Linux de uh
desktop environment Ubuntu Unity or mate
or anything they're all equally usable
as long as you got the big buttons you
can click on okay and most people are
doing stuff in the browser anyway so it
doesn't matter now as it comes to the
Mac being idiot proof thing first off as
I said before Mac stuff is made to be
difficult to repair uh it's made to no
you're not supposed to whether you are
dumb or smart to you're not supposed to
be able to fix your stuff uh or change
your stuff or do anything okay now the
thing is Mac is not Idiot proof it's
actually smart person proof it's smart
person proof in a couple ways um they
make it deliberately difficult for you
to customize things uh you cannot easily
change stuff about uh you know your your
graphical environment in the way you can
even of Windows Windows doesn't have
that much but you can still shift things
around really easily you can get your
own setup when I use Windows I used to
you know do something like that Mac is
you know nearly impossible to do do that
kind of stuff you have to really know
the system um and you know people who
want to have their own have their own
sort of wavelength in their own machine
don't have that ability in Mac OS
because again you have to do everything
the Mac way and the Mac way is
infuriating okay so it is not Idiot
proof it is smart person proof and
that's sort of the problem and that
that's the point they're making devices
that are that you cannot improve that
you cannot actually make your own
they're supposed to be a product okay
they're supposed to and they're selling
a brand now what does a brand come down
to last and not least okay what does a
brand come down to it comes down to a
kind of social signaling okay now most
people in the country still use Windows
machines and they will continue to use
Windows machines okay um but where I
live I live at a university I live in at
a university um and most of the people I
see who are going to be upper class
people um you know all of them everyone
I know who doesn't use a Linux machine
uses Mac okay all of them uh actually
there's one token Republican in our
department he uses a window uh Windows
machine everyone else uh besides me of
course and a c a couple of the people
who actually do computer stuff have
Linux machines but Mac is the norm in my
socioeconomic class
uh and that pisses me off um it well
maybe it just pisses me off being here
that that should be what I say um but
what I mean is Mac is a way Mac has just
become the the brand of a particular
socioeconomic class uh to differentiate
themselves from the unwashed masses
that's all it is that it you can't I
think everyone sort of understands that
there is a status signaling uh aspect of
Mac because when it comes down to it it
has all the Hallmarks of conspicuous
consumption uh you are buying a product
that is worse that is more inhib
inhibited uh it all it is always showing
how Mac it is it's always showing its
well-known form you're always supposed
to know that it's a Mac device um and
that that's sort of the problem uh it
has all of these things they all
conspire and when it comes down to it
there's no rational reason apart from
social signaling to use these kind of
devices um so that's all I wanted to say
um but you know it's nothing you don't
already know so have a good one
