why do I code on Linux I keep getting
asked this question when I'm asking yall
should I stay with my dual boot should I
VM should I wsl2 my Arch Linux drro even
in my coding videos why do I code on
Linux I actually have two main reasons
why I code on Linux instead of Windows
and I also want to talk about the plenty
of reasons why Linux is better than
Windows which are not why I code on
Linux and use Linux but they're nice to
have they're icing on the cake if you
will
let's start off with a nice to Hales
privacy if you don't know windows by
default has every single piece of data
collection enabled meaning unless you go
in and change that they're Gathering all
of your data and also they have a
built-in key logger did you know that
they have now implemented the ability to
go in and disable the key logger as well
but even with disabling all of this do
you really know that it's actually
disabling all of this I don't know with
Linux I actually have privacy there are
some dros that may want to collect some
of your data but you can really go in
and actually disable these and if you
don't believe it you can actually go
into the code considering the fact that
Linux is open source there's no
proprietary software or anything hidden
in there that you can't access and
disable or remove so with Linux I
actually have privacy Linux is much more
reliable sure it has its quirks but I've
never had it crash my entire computer
and waste a whole day of work
reinstalling
Windows oh and speaking of Windows if
you're wondering why I have Windows on
my computer right now I didn't want to
be a fake and be like I only use Linux
no I also use Windows but I only use
Windows still because Adobe CC I've
tried every way you could imagine try to
get ADCC on Linux and it just doesn't
work how I need it to and gaming that's
really the only reason but reliability
why do you think the biggest tech
companies in the world use Linux and in
particular Linux web servers Facebook is
run on Linux Google is run on Linux
Amazon uses Linux even most
supercomputers run on Linux why Linux is
just much more reliable plain and simple
Linux is more secure than Windows and
there are two main reasons for this one
because there are fewer amount of Linux
users hackers don't typically Target
Linux and I'm sure it also helps that
Linux users are T typically more
techsavvy than Windows users two Linux
is open source
now you may be saying okay well that
could mean hackers have an easier end
because the more you know about a system
the easier it is to hack it right right
this is true but because it's open
source you also have more eyes on the
code monitoring for issues so what are
the odds that a hacker is going to find
a back door vulnerability and exploit it
before someone can catch the
vulnerability and Patch it themselves
Linux users don't have to wait for
Microsoft to investigate a vulnerability
and fix it they they can fix it
themselves Linux has lower Hardware
requirement so if you're running on an
old laptop or an old PC with not too
good specs install Linux it'll run a
whole lot better than Windows ever will
it's free so if you're building a new PC
or something you don't have to Shell it
$100 for Windows I know they're you can
get like Windows keys for cheaper but
I've always been a bit wary about those
actual Pro tip if you do have an old
computer a laptop that you were no
longer using crack it open there's going
to be a Windows key key somewhere inside
there that you can actually use when
you're installing Windows 10 or whatever
new windows there is but the cost it's
not too important to me because I don't
mind spending money on a product that
will help me out save me time or make my
life easier that is actually incredibly
applicable to this thing right here not
a sponsor or product placement or
anything I have no affili affiliation
with OtterBox feel like that always
needs to be said but we had the screen
protector on my wife's phone she dropped
it it cracked the screen cracked and we
were she was very upset she brought it
to me I'm like there's no like color
Distortion or anything like that so I
peel this off turns out this cracked and
the screen is perfectly fine so I bought
another one because again I don't mind
spending money on something that'll make
my life easier or save me money cuz now
I don't have to get a new phone or
replace a screen myself which also saves
me time now this isn't one of my main
points as to why I use Linux but I do
really like that there is a like a tight
Linux Community don't get me wrong it
can't get get kind of Stack overflowy
y'all told me that's some of y'all's
experience with Linux but it's not I've
never had that bad of an experience with
the Linux communities as I would with
plenty of coding or especially stack
Overflow communities and forms like that
if you don't know what I'm talking about
check my last video or two videos ago
and you'll see what I'm talking about
finally my two favorite things about
Linux and really the main reasons as to
why I use it it is incredibly
customizable that's what I like it's
open source it's customizable and I can
I can make it look and do and feel any
way I want if I want it to make it just
like Mac OS I can do that now there are
different dros where you don't have to
do so much work in making it
customizable but you can still customize
those I use Arch Linux by the way I
probably already mentioned that in this
video and people have already joked me
in the comments but it's an incredibly
customizable Linux drro and that's why I
like to use it I'm kind of in limbo
right now if you saw my last video where
I I haven't done much customization cuz
I deleted my old one for some weird
reason but it's very customizable and I
plan to rebuild my Arch Linux system in
like three
weeks so that probably means four or
five weeks software software development
time kind of how it works and two the
terminal like I know there's wsl2 I know
there's the new Windows command line but
I the the the Linux terminal is just
vastly Superior than Windows command
line or anything that Windows has to
offer and I'm also going to bunch in
with like the terminal the package
manager the package manager I can
install delete anything I want all of it
without having to worry about all this
random stuff that Windows wants to
install or how it wants me to uninstall
it and if I uninstall it it'll still
have all these other files that won't
get deleted it's very easy to use a
linkx terminal to manipulate your files
your apps and everything that you have
exactly how you want it so if you want
to remove everything you can remove
everything if you want to install
something you just type in a simple
command working with the code working
with Git all of that it's just it
doesn't feel right to me on Windows and
trust me I've tried again and again and
again the Linux terminal is just better
I bash putty I don't care it's it's not
the same um I hope you all enjoyed this
video please be sure to leave it a like
for the YouTube algorithm leave a
comment for the YouTube algorithm Plus
making some progress on the YouTube
leaderboard so some of these comments in
these videos May apply to something on
an annual basis maybe we'll see if you
don't know what the YouTube leaderboard
is watch my last video we do some coding
and I kind of give you an overview of
the YouTube leaderboard or project
engagement it's a really fun coding
project that I'm really enjoying working
on and meet creating and I think that's
all I have to say on the matter
[Music]
