AI is everywhere
ai ai but have you noticed that AI today
is also a complete mess so I can
generate some Tex in notion that's cool
I guess can I give it some data in a
file to recap nope for that I need to
use chbt well not chbt but I need chbt
plus if I need to search the web I need
Microsoft co-pilot which is inside bang
which was formerly known as Bing chat
which in reality is gb4 Turbo cool can
you recap me a YouTube video
well no come on don't be silly for that
you have to use Gemini Advanced powered
by Gemini 1.5 formerly known as Gemini
Ultra formerly known as Bard which
integrates with YouTube because it's
owned by Google AI today is a chaotic
mass of annoying popups that ask you to
please please try our latest AI feature
random chatbots and ass system popping
up everywhere in every app you use and
most of this is well totally useless
because you see there are four key
issues with the wild state of AI today
but not all hope is lost because there
is a solution and no don't worry it's
not another AI Gadget but first we have
to understand why everything is becoming
a chatbot it seems like today if your
app doesn't have a chatbot with AI it's
not a part of the cool kids anymore
Google is adding a chatot to their
search app after being a meme for 10
years Bing is now back in the search
game with well a chatbot and new ones
like perplexity AI are springing up
everywhere but it's not just search it's
everything your presentation tool now
has a chatbot Photoshop now has a
chatbot no has a chat bot figjam has a
chatbot Shopify has a chatbot Microsoft
even wants to replace the Windows key on
all new PCS with a co-pilot key that
brings up well you guessed it a chatbot
but chatbots themselves are not the
problem chg PT is what started it all
and it now has hundreds of millions of
users no the real problem is that for
most things a chatbot is not the right
way of interacting with computers
actually it makes things worse than they
were before let's take one of the main
things that all these chat Bots tell you
they're amazing yet planning a trip this
is the typical complex activity where
you go to different websites and blogs
and compare prices and you find the
distance between hotels and attractions
and an AI assistant seems to be the
perfect solution here type what you need
and get your perfect trip plan for you
except a chatbot sucks for this it gives
you a wall of text with no images no
Maps no directions no easy way to
compare air fars since I still travel
like a broke student I tried giving it
some pricing guidance but it completely
ignored it and and I'm not alone here a
team of researchers tested chatbots on a
thousand queries for travel itineraries
and they counted how many times the
chatbot actually proposed something that
met all of these criteria open AI gp4
model performed the best of the bunch
with six successful queries out of a
thousand and counterintuitively even for
things like search chat but in most
cases is not the right tool the most
search question on Google is simply what
to watch and many people use search
engines just as a way to open their
email as The Verge puts it AI is the
right idea but a chatbot is the wrong
interface but sure with the chatbot you
can ask it to make a rap song about your
vacation plans I guess so if chatbots
are not the right way to interact with
AI in most cases then why are they
everywhere well because tech people are
lazy sort of when chubbt came out in
December 2022 it took the World by storm
was the fastest product in history to
reach 100 million users and it started
the largest fomo run in Tech in the last
years where everyone scrambled the big
companies like Amazon meta Google
started building their own large
language models which is basically what
today we call AI and everyone else now
had to have some sort of AI in their
product and what's the easiest way to do
it step one pay up an AI to use one of
their models like gp4 so you don't have
to do anything yourself then well gp4
takes in text and spits out text so step
two let's build the simplest thing that
takes in text that spits out text which
is a chot step three give it a nice skin
colors and we're done chatbots are the
easiest and quickest way to add AI to
your app now you've seen AI features pop
up everywhere in the apps and product
you use every day but think about it how
many of these do you actually really use
my guess very very few a recent research
shows that 85% of all AI project fail so
why are companies scrambling to add
chots and useless features well they
caught a virus that has been around in
the tech industry for decades now they
CAU the
frenzy
new this is an ad from 2000 at the peak
of the Doom bubble where the internet
was the cool new thing and this is a
2024 ad for an AI gaming laptop what is
an AI gaming laptop it's a laptop with a
chest bot these are an example of what
happens in the Friendzy whenever a new
technology becomes mainstream this is
exactly what happens everyone takes this
new TCH runs like crazy to add it to
their product in 2000 just adding. comom
to the name of your company to show that
it was on the web made the stock price
jump during the last crypto Rush
everything needed to be on the
blockchain and have nfds this company
Long Island brand beverages made IC te
but they decided to swiftly change their
name to Long blockchain Corp and now
it's a turn of AI as soon as chbt hit it
Big Marketing people in tech companies
around the world were
like because now there's the AI
toothbrush there's the AI pet football
there's the AI candle scent and Tech
Giants are not immune to this Samsung's
whole campaign for this year's Galaxy
phones is Galaxy AI despite AI already
being in Galaxy phones for years now
because yeah in reality AI has been here
and you've been using it for years
Facebook has been using AI to serve you
ads for the last decade your phone has
been using AI to optimize your battery
life for years in fact AI doesn't really
mean anything the word artificial
intelligence was born in 1956 and
technically a GPT model with a 100
billion parameters and your email spam
filter are both a form of artificial
intelligence but ever since chbt came
out AI basically means large language
models because it's easier to say AI
than Transformer based deep neural
network for natural language processing
but this frenzy has created something
else it has revived a dream that has
beening Tech from science fiction for
decades Jarvis or dream of the omniscent
bot Jarvis is the digital assistant to
Tony Stark in the Iron Man movies an all
encompassing useful and sarcastic
companion that solves every problem and
that in one movie it tried to take over
the world science fiction has always
dreamed of the ultimate digital
assistant is Jarvis in Iron Man it's
Hall in 2001 Space Odyssey it stars in
intercell visit the original Vision
behind Siri Alexa and Google assistant
and as soon as chpt exploded the tech
World got infatuated again with this
idea and I don't blame them Lar language
model seems like the perfect solution to
create a real life version of Jarvis a
chatbot that finally understands complex
problems and has memory and many have
been so captivated by this dream that
they are focusing tons of energy and
resources on actually building this
companies like Humane with their AIP pin
but as these start to be released we are
starting to see why this is all a big
illusion look at this and tell me what
company it is the company is called
lift there's a gigantic problem with
wanting to create create the omniscent
chat mod and that's that in order to be
useful it needs to have access to
everything your WhatsApp messages your
inbox your embarrassing Spotify playlist
your work documents if the omnisense
chat bot doesn't have access to even a
few of these it loses the whole point so
say that you are a new company and you
want to build a universal chat bot you
have a great large language model but
now you need to make it work with all
the stuff that people actually use so
you go to Mark Zuckerberg and you ask
him hey can my Universal chatbot access
WhatsApp you know for for my users um no
and not only that Mark now says wait a
minute I can build my own Universal
chatbot and now Mark's chatbot in order
to be useful needs to access your work
documents which are in notion is notion
going to allow Mark's chatbot in nope
and notion CEO now has a great idea we
can build a universal chatbot and so on
and so forth you get the point all right
so this chapter is done let me allocate
some time to write the next one oh
you're wondering what this tool is well
this is a sponsor of this video akif
flow if you follow this channel well
probably your digital life is a mess
your multiple calendars Todo apps
productivity apps notion linear how do
you make sense of all this akif flow is
the ultimate productivity tool to keep
your life organized in one place the
thing I love the most is that I can take
a task and I can block some time for it
on my calendar I have an email here that
I need to block some time to reply and
voila I can drop it directly into my
calendar and so I can just go on and
plan my day in a few minutes akif flow
is the final boss of productivity apps
because you don't have to choose between
one app or the other it's just
integrates with everything so I can plan
my days from one single place and if I
HTE command k i can create tasks and do
everything with natural language you can
try akif flow today with the link in the
description and if you want to learn
more you can even book on oneon-one call
with the akif flow team again Link in
the description and now back to the
video because even if we don't want to
build the omniscent chatbot there is
another problem here a problem that we
actually already solved more than 40
years ago but that for some weird reason
now we have recreated the command line
problem so sometimes I use me journey to
generate my videos thumbnails and it's
really mindblowing what it can do but
when I use it I need something very
specific and this is where it starts an
endless back and forth of different
prompts and oh this doesn't work so let
me try a different order of words now I
have to start reading Reddit threads and
online guides and oh here's a mid
Journey prompting course wait wasn't the
whole point of AI that it's natural and
intuitive to use I'm back to reading
manuals well this is exactly the same
problem that we had 40 years ago when
computer first arrived they were so
powerful and so useful was almost nobody
could use them because the only way to
interact with a computer was with this
the command line you need to remember
complex commands and flags and options
even to create a folder open a file and
any typo results in an error and we
solve this with a graphical user
interface icons buttons Windows the
mouse all of these are basically a
substitute for text based command today
both on Windows and Mac you can open the
command line and do everything you do on
your computer with it but nobody does
this because it's clear that there's a
better way to do things you don't need
to write a complex terminal command to
see the latest Instagram story of your
friends getting wasted in a club and I
think you might be getting the point
already VII wave has brought back this
exact same problem because chat gbt M
journey and all these AI chatbots are
basically like command lines we are back
to writing text on our keyboards and
getting text back we are back to have to
learn prompt and having to use guides
and manuals it's like we are back in the
1980s but with unaffordable housing now
good design is where you don't need an
instructions manual have you ever needed
an instructions manual to figure out how
to use an iPhone or Google Maps no
that's because they are insanely welld
designed we ran towards chatbots because
they are easy to build but in doing so
we have thrown everyone back in the days
of command lines and I know what you're
thinking it's so easy let's just slap
some buttons and sliders on the screen
to control the chatbot well this is
automatic 1111 a graphical user
interface for the image model stable
diffusion and I don't know about you but
you're seeing it and I can tell you it's
even more scary than using a chatbot so
solving this problem is going to take a
while and so what now we have chatbots
everywhere we are pursuing this idea of
the omniscent Jarvis assistant and every
time I use an app I have to dismiss
seven popups to use their useless AI
features is this really it well no
there's a solution on the Orizon but
it's a counterintuitive one because is
not about more AI actually it's about
getting rid of AI making AI invisible
this is a mockup I made of Skyscanner
and you can see that instead of using a
random chatbot I created a customized
trip option so you can use the UI that
you're familiar with to search for
flights but still be able to create the
perfect custom flight search for you and
you know when you get those messages
that you forget to reply to well another
thing we can do is use AI to smartly
analyze the messages and remind you only
of the ones that you actually need to
reply to these are all examples of
invisible AI instead of saying hey look
we have a new chatbot it's cool new AI
although you're probably never going to
use it V take the opposite approach and
start from a real problem that people
have then apply AI to it because it just
can help solve it and if you notice in
none of these example are we telling
users hey there's fancy AI in here
because I'm sorry Tech marketing people
but users don't care if there's AI or if
there's Oompa Loompas writing responses
to the prompts they just care about
getting their problem solved today we
have these chat BS everywhere but when
Nobody ends up using them and the AI
hype train dies down designers engineers
and product managers will roll up their
sleeves and start to build AI in a way
that's truly useful and even though we
are still inside the frenzy we are
starting to see the first real examples
of this Premiere Pro the video editing
software is adding the ability to extend
your Clips by a couple of seconds if you
need some extra footage you're missing
and it generates those with AI YouTube
is working on adding automated AI
dubbing of videos
[Music]
browser automatically renames your tabs
to make them more easily readable in
less space without you having to do
anything and this is the AI I'm truly
excited about but as it turns out even
without AI the tech use every day hidees
secrets in plain sight like how the
iPhone icons are actually not round the
rectangles or how the Spotify Shuffle is
not actually random and you can learn
all about it in this video right here
I'm Eno and I'll see you in the next one
