CH and then so today I'm going to talk
about um The evolutionary transition the
my most recent comple simulation
demonstrating uh ETI um so this is a
part of the project um the scaling up
purpose in evolution funded by John tton
and the pi is Richard Watson so as we
already knew that e referred to the key
events in The evolutionary history where
organisms evolve new levels of or
organizational complexity this process
often involves the integration of
previously independent uh biological
units into a new and cohesive entity and
a classic example is a transition from
the Single Cell life to multicellular
organisms and also the evolution of e
sociality or E social super super
organisms and the program was set like
30 Years Ago by in the classic book
major transition in Evolution um so um
the the The evolutionary puzzle here is
that the classic evolution by natural
selection Theory um focusing on the
comination between uh self interest
units so it's it it's harder to imagine
how natural soltion can explain the
emergence of and evolution of new higher
level units from interactions among
lower level entities and here we are
facing um circular Pro or chicken and
age re reasoning because most existing
theories um often presuppose the
existence of higher level units um which
only emerge after the
transition and so the process of e can
be divided into two phases the the pr
transition phase or the group formation
phase
and and some key questions in this phas
is that how do individuals entity
initially come together to form
Cooperative or coordinated groups and
What mechanisms drive this agregation uh
is this P random or is there any
underlying bi biological
process and the second phras is what we
call Post transition phrase or the group
transformation so since the aggregation
of the group is formed there is a
transformation process of that group
into a more structure integrated um
organization uh as a new level of
individuality and some key questions
here is what processes guide the
transation of of this
transformation and
yeah so our plan is that today we'll
explore the mechanisms uh behind ETI um
talking about some limitations of
current theories and I will introduce um
my um approach
based on the combination of self
organization and emerging selection
processes and which should be
demonstrated in an artificial life
simulation so yeah several um theories
of C view points of ETI the first and
famous one is kin selection and this
says As Natural Selection favor is the
reproductive success of an organism's
relatives and some famous provent like
WD Harmon
so it has the strength of providing a
robust explanation for the evolution of
aristic behaviors in a closely related
group but is not adequate enough to
explain the Cooperative Behavior among
unrelated
individuals and the second one is is
more controversial one is what we call
group selection and the basic idea is
that natural selection will operate at
the level of the group rather than the
individual uh some proponents uh will be
like Dev SW Will Wilson and it has a
strength of explaining how traits
beneficial to the group can evolve uh
even if they are costly to individuals
but this theory is very debatable and a
lot of debates in the history of biology
like between Richard Dawkins and de
Wilson or even EO Wilson about this
and yeah so this debate encapsulate the
fundamental question in Evo bio so does
natural soltion act primar at the level
of the Gen is more reductionist view
individuals or
groups another Viewpoint is the fitness
decoupling and proposed by Richard Mito
and this is process where the fitness of
individual components is integrated into
the success of the entire group and it
has the strength of uh allowing for a
higher level of specialization and div
division of
labor um yeah but it's of course it has
some um weaknesses too and the the most
obvious one is that it does not explain
the initial step to forming these in
interdependent relationships between
entities and all these theories and
viewports are post transition
focus and it it highlights the gaps in
the research of e ETI because it does
not explain how the initial group and
there is formed what is mechanism behind
how is the dry uh of
it another viewp part is called
ecological scaffoldings uh uh this means
that uh environmental structures and
interactions
that facilitate emergence of new
biological
individuality by providing some SCA
foldings in the environment right yes
and this is crucial in the early stage
of the
transition some mechanisms of this is
like physical structures like it can
provid a boundary and to protect new
groups
and and and the N the concept of n
construction is here all also this means
that organisms modify their own and each
other's environment or niches leading to
new selective pressures for example like
it can change the environment in a way
that um reduce the uh selective pressure
that Foster more coordinated or
cooperative um behavior in the first
place yeah some classic examples of
ecological Scaffolding in bacterial biof
firms or eukariotic cell
Evolution yeah of course it has
limitations too is because it's often
presupposed extensive conditions and the
ecological scaffolding more effectively
explains how um certain environmental
structures can support the maintenance
maintenance of higher level individuals
once they are established and less uh
Clarity on
how um these structures in
merge and it has some both it has both
theoretical Gap and experimental Gap uh
in this
Viewpoint and a more recent view viewp
proposed um supported by my Pi in
Southampton and also with Mike in the
paper they call it connectionist
approach to ETI so the basic idea here
is that um they saw some analogy between
evolution and learning as an
optimization process or they call the
borrowing down here and so this means
that uh because evolution is analogist
to learning in Neo Network so the they
saw the similarity between the ETI and
the process of con hierarchical concept
formation in De
learning and the idea is that self
organization can drive adaptation
autonomously um without resulting to
Natural Selection as a primary drive in
evolution yeah so in the most recent
paper like they they call it natural
induction as spontaneous adaptive
organizm without natural selection is
very cool idea and but of course it has
limitation too based on my perspective
because um in there's biggest the
biggest difference here is that um the
the structure of most deep learning of
neuron networks is predefined by the
experimental rather than a spontaneous
emergence in ETI and there is no um
inheritance mechanism at the component
level and also the the production
process as a component level to say that
there is a transition
in individuality in that in sense so it
also means that Chism in level of
inheritance and
reproduction and it lacks as some it's
empirical support
too and so um it's it goes back to the
debate between self organization and
natural soltion as the main Drive of
um um biological adaptation like the
debate between sto kman and Mina Smith
years and years ago but I but here I
think that um self-organization and
natural s can be complementary rather
than mutually exclusive and for example
the easiest way to think about is self
organization can initiate uh the
formation of complex complex structures
uh which natural soltion then can act on
it by refining and stabilizing it over
time or another way the ability to
self-organize
is an evolvable
adaptation this means that we are
talking about the evolution of
self-organization yes
it's this evolutionary process can
promote the OT is the the emergence of
collective
self-organization as an Adaptive
response to environmental
challenges so I I I I propose that by
combining natural selection and self
organization we can study the spontanous
emergence of pre-transition group for
formation and also the spontaneous
emergence of group selection post
transition
selection
and yeah so I use an artificial approach
to ATI as we may know that a life is the
study of life as it could be than live
as we know it so we study the basic and
underlying
fundamental uh processes and mechanism
of life regardless of the material is
based
on so it it allows us to rewind the tipe
of life in the computation or by
artificial
chemistry yeah and think I think a life
is a unique platform in order to test
and observe how complex interactions and
evolution repress can generate higher
level of biological organizations as in
ETI right and actually there have been
many models of self organizations in a
life like um seller automat like model
or Conway gam ofly or Lon Loop or or
even the most recent recent and linear
so in that in all those models we have
the formation of patterns and the
replicating process of patterns over
time but is they are not adequate to say
that is an evolutionary transition in
individuality the same reason as in re
connectionist approach because uh there
is no inheritance at the component level
and no selection at a component level
also so um by this I mean that in order
to model an ETI in an artificial system
we need inheritance selection and
reproduction as a component level and by
some way these combination can give rise
to an emergence of the reproduction or
replication at the group level as if the
new level of individuality
emerged and then so I recently I
developed a a life model I call it
vitanova it means New Life in liting and
and in this um uh simulation there's no
explicit Fitness function so I we use
the fitness as an emerging property and
selection here is also an emerging
property from the interactions of lower
level units so it's it's closer to um
biological natural selection rather than
using the fitness function in um normal
evolutionary comp
computation and here's a design
methodology of vova so we have um 2D
square and some uh agents I called boys
yes so the green boy is the worker boy
and the blue boy is a soja boy and the
red one is a
predator ROM be distributed in the
environment and each boy is controlled
by its own new
Network which will moderate the C
steering behaviors of boys like we know
that it's separation alignment and
cohesion so it's different from the
classic Bo simulation of Vos when he use
um the preix uh parameters to um for
these um
behaviors the inputs to the new network
uh will include the relative positions
and velocities of near by boys and
predators and also the current en energy
level the output as we know is a
tendency for T separation alignment and
cohesion and also predictor avoidance
and the RO tendency the RO tendency here
is the likelihood of being a worker or
soldier in The Next Step this means that
in my simulation that we have plastic
division of labor governed by neuro
Network ex exactly the evolving neural
network and the prestor will the
behavior of the Predator is that to
detect and move towards nearby boyss or
reverse the direction if facing three or
more Soldier Boys this is the setup of
the
simulation here's the basic architecture
of the new network is the simple fit
forward neuron network with one hidden
layer
and uh equations for
boys behavior and here's a sod code for
reproduction and mutation so there is no
explicit selection so the pr production
here is so in this current simulation
there's no um um autonomous uh there's
no uh neural network output to control
the reproduction so when the boy reach
reaches a certain amount of energy it
will reproduce and reduce some
energy and the the ruction is uh a
replication with some mutation in the W
of the neural
network yeah so the neural network W are
the genotype of boys which are evolving
and the concept of Fitness here is just
an emergent
concept and here um video demonstration
of boys um of my vit Nova so initially
we we saw that um they are trying to I I
put some statistic on this so number of
flocks and average flock size uh some
are trying to form flocks but not good
enough
yes so most flocks are
destroyed uh until like one flock in the
corner
survives yeah so it moves toward the
corner
and here I think it starts growing or we
can call it kind of development until in
the door stage
um yeah so there is the ring structure
here it means like there is something
inside and on the
circle yeah it starts growing the
average flux size is
increasing yeah some predators around to
put pressure on it there are some blues
here to block the Predators from
attacking the
flock
yeah it's growing it's
developing and the critical moment is
around steps 2 thou 3,200 I
think
yes yeah are suddenly it starts uh
spreading into
two entities and a nuring structure
emerges here and also this reproduces
again a neing structure moves downward
the
screen yeah they move they move in
different direction and oh yeah sorry
yeah um
we can we we we we we can call that the
first uh flock in the on the screen is
flop zero and the first ring structure
is flock one and the flock one after
moving it starts reproducing again into
two ring
structures
right and also um you see it um the
second charge yeah it starts with
producing
again uh in the b in the bottom of the
screen okay so yeah so the result
overview is that we have observed ersion
of cohesive groups um the transition
from solitary boyss to organized flocks
um and the formation of ring
structures and exhibit exhibiting both
stability and capacity for division
um potential mechanism for group level
uh
reproduction and also um we have
observed um the adaptation and survival
at the group level
um and there is some uh a spontaneous
emergence of group selection because
some groups are formed but they are not
good enough to survive and the only one
who
the only one
survives then reprodu
itself as some snapshots of the screen
some critical moment and we observed
it um yes so uh yeah so it's a it's just
um statistics uh we observe that there
is um uh number of uh flock count over
time until the step of life like 2,000
times step only one flock survive for
more than 1,000 times steps and the
flock size starts increasing until the
critical point of the transit of ruction
it reduces the size because there's
there are now two
flows yes and again it support
hypothesis and OBS
observation and here we observe the um
um another we call it I put this figure
for observing the Road Distribution on
collected
adaptation so here we see that um um the
soldier and worker R Soldier and worker
Rao is inversely proportional to the
change in flux
size yeah why because the um remember
that the flock zero the first flock uh
it starts is reproducing under the
pressure of three Predators around so it
will in the until the critical point of
transition uh it will require more
soldiers for
protection and here is the same figure
for f zero the first uh ring structure
when it reproduces we see that it is the
social Ander ratio is proportional to
the change in flock size because we
observe that the flu one reproducing in
the less
threatened um environment or surrounding
so it will favor more
workers yeah so it's kind of uh
Collective adaptation at a collective
level
yeah we observe
it yeah so um we have demonstrated an
artificial ETI or a kind of ETI in an
artificial system and this process is
Ain to um the transition form solitary
to you social
superorganisms the whole process is that
we have the grp formation by a self
organization capacity which is an
evolved and SE which is evolved and
selected by natural selection and we
have observed spontaneous group
selection uh some groups are better to
survive and there is
interdependency uh within groups agents
depend on each other to survive and to
reproduce and this makes a a collective
Co cohesive
Collective and surviving agents present
productive plastic division of labor
because we know that the ability to
switch between Bros is an
evolvable ability because we are
evolving NE networks and Ne networks are
controlling that
ability and we have observed a
spontaneous group reproduction uh by a
process to Binary fion observed in
mitochondria we see that mitochondrial
DNA is a ring structure also
and some comparisons with other
Frameworks uh unlike in selection we
don't require genetic homogeneity for
groups formation and
survival unlike um multi-level selection
or group selection we don't presuppose
the formation or the existence of the
group but the group is spontaneously
formed from the bottom up
um there are some thoughts after my
simulation is that um we can ask some
questions like what are the critical
teso for population density and resource
availability that facilitate the
transition to use
sociality and also we can study how
there is communication uh within a group
evolve and facilitate the
organism of that you social super
organism and I'm more interested in how
and can trans generation and non-
genetic inheritance uh such as from
social
learning um can support uh The
Establishment and maintenance of your
social
structures uh and my whole research
before my PO my current Pro is about the
bwing effect of the interaction between
evolution and lifetime plasticity um in
the next step I will uh investigate um
is this buling effect can foster or H
hinder the processor ET especially when
the environment changes so we will
require some ability to learn to predict
the environmental
changes and here in this Cur simul
simulations the Predator is just
presented as um environmental challenges
but it's not evolvable so the next step
is let's say if we allow the Predators
to evolve also and
we include the self-organized ability as
an evolable trait like in boys and can
we observe an evolutionary arms race in
the transition this means that the
Predators should
evolve and should evolve the transition
into a bigger hole so that they can eat
the pr
and then the the ring structure should
evolve the ring structure of boys could
evolve into a bigger one which which
will be the next trans
transition and also that I want I'm
interested in whether the process of
self organization and natur chos invit
NOA can be generalized into other e in
nature
and yes so in this simulation I'm using
uh simple neuro Network
to simulate the transition from solitary
to us sociality but in evolution in
classic example of the transition
evoltion of multicellularity the cell
doesn't have Neo Network in it so how
can we extend right NOA to model
multicity and the first s is that I can
use gen reg Network in repl of NE
networks and yeah some other technical
stuffs
and especially how and I need to Define
more Matrix to measure emerging
Collective behavior and how can we
Define the collective genotype from V
Nova yes and measure the difference in
chain the chain in genotype at the
component level of boy and the change at
the genotypic level at the collective
level to compare uh it yes thank you
