[Music]
well thank you very much uh Peter for
that introduction and let me say what a
huge pleasure it is to come back to the
kolinska Institute the last time I was
here I think was about three years ago
uh for a meeting on systems biology and
cancer you know I'm always asked to talk
about subjects about which I have no
right to claim any knowledge
whatsoever um interestingly enough at
that meeting I think quite a lot of
other people thought exactly the same we
had a very interesting
meeting what what I'm going to do today
is to address scher's question which of
course was the question um what is
life those um lectures were given in
1943 at the uh Dublin Institute of
advanced
studies and they were of course the
lectures in which shringer first made
made his famous
prediction that the genetic material
would be what he called a non periodic
Crystal I still and I think many others
do too still think that's an extremely
good description of course of what was
eventually uh found in the
DNA he also though drew a
comparison between on the one hand
physic phys and on the other hand
biology and his idea in that book was
that they were really very different
because physics deals with order
emerging from disorder you have the
disorder of the random movements of the
molecules of a gas but you also have the
order of the uh gas laws and of
thermodynamics by contrast here are
biology is about order from order
because where is the order down at the
low level it is in that a periodic
Crystal and I think his idea gave rise
of course later on or helped to give
rise to the interpretations that were
made of the early results in molecular
biology of DNA uh when the double helix
was discovered and when people began to
work out what the coding was between uh
DNA and uh proteins um which was to lead
to the idea that there was in a sense in
the DNA a determinate program so unlike
physics you would go from particular
events in molecules to particular events
in the global property of the organism
that is uh the phenotype
now of course it's a hard thing to say
that perhaps heringer was wrong but I
think he was and I would like to
substitute that um The View that I and
many others now Express about biology
and it's certainly expressed in the book
um the music of life which is that
indeed physics uh deals with order from
disorder but biology also must most of
the time do the same because what do we
find down at the level of the individual
Gene Expressions we find find
stochasticity if I take the gene
expression levels in the ventricular
cells of one region of the heart and
compare them to the um expression levels
of those genes in an adjacent region of
the heart I will find that they vary now
of course they vary to some extent
according to the anatomy of the heart
and that is both well known and is also
important in the functioning of the
heart but they also vary stochastically
even between neighboring
cells stochasticity therefore has to be
a feature of biology as well as order of
course we have a little bit of a dilemma
which I'll refer to a little bit later
on which is that we know know well that
there are certain changes that occur
down at the molecular level particular
mutations uh which will produce uh uh or
be the cause of a major change in
function at the level of the phenotype
but what has emerged in the research
that's been done over the last decades
is that those cases are actually quite
rare I find that in my work on the heart
there are certain uh modifications
certain mutations of particular iron
channels that can produce a catastrophic
situation uh predisposing towards uh a
rhythmia but most of the time the heart
works perfectly well just as the
pancreas does just as the brain does
despite all the variations uh that occur
at the lower
levels so why should a physiologist be
concerned about the the question what is
life first of all to be concerned with
that you have got to be concerned with
the central theory of biology or the
central story of biology because I think
that what we call evolutionary theory is
actually a story it's a history uh which
of course is the central uh idea without
which any form of discussion of the
question what is life uh can't make
sense
moreover the dominant theory of
evolution over most of the 20th century
and into this century was of course the
modern
synthesis uh sometimes called neod
Darwinism and that of course was a gene
centered theory of evolution with its
determinate idea of there being a
program that leads to the development of
the
organism but in fact organisms are
extremely good
at immunizing themselves from variations
in their genomes we're going to look at
a few examples of that in just a moment
and some of the examples are discussed
in that article in the Royal society's
new Journal interface
Focus let's just give a little bit of
background from my own work uh as the
introducer said I was responsible for
working on some of the early uh
discoveries of iron channels in the
heart and that led me to put this model
of Rhythm in the heart together in
1960 here's the electrical potential
showing uh Rhythm that emerges as a cell
property not a molecular property from
the interactions between the various
iron channels in those days we actually
thought there weren't many more channels
than there are in nerve a sodium channel
two potassium channels and and the
background leak we now know there are
many
more in fact later on if we go now
through to uh about 25 years later in
work that I did with DAR de Francesco we
found were many many more uh potassium
channels than we thought initially and
of course by that time Harold reuter had
made his great discoveries of calcium
channels um and of sodium calcium
exchange we were also responsible uh in
the work with DAR D Francesco at
discovering a new non-specific cat
Channel which is responsible for this
phase of the Rhythm and also for
clarifying uh the role of the sodium
calcium exchange now that's all
technical detail and I don't want to
dwell on that um what I want to do is to
use that model to perform a very
interesting experiment
so what we're going to do is to use a
version of that model that was developed
for the Rhythm generator of the the
natural Rhythm generator of the heart
which is the sinus node and I'm just
plotting two of the uh channel uh
properties a background sodium Channel
and the non-specific cation Channel I
referred to earlier this one normally
contributes about 80% of the
depolarizing current it is therefore the
Rhythm generator if you like and as you
knock it down you can notice 20% 40% all
the way to complete knockout you might
expect a very large change in frequency
in fact the change in frequency is very
modest only about 10% and what is
happening of course is the system is
allowing this other mechanism to kick in
and to keep the Rhythm buffered as it
were from uh the change at the lower
level and you can even use the
physiological interpretation of what is
going on to work out what is happening
because if you draw a line along those
voltage traces you can see that the
traces at this end are moving into a
more negative range of electrical
potential and it's precisely that that
activates um the other channel to kick
in and to keep the Rhythm fairly
constant and that is a general property
of cardiac Rhythm it's a general
property of other other Rhythm
generators too for example of circadian
rhythm there are backup
mechanisms many more examples of what
you might call knockout that don't
actually succeed in producing a very
large phenotypic effect this is from uh
some work again fairly technical detail
but I won't dwell on the technical
detail other than to say that a targeted
knockout done in experiments first and
then by simulation prod reproducing
uh the experiments of Ken philipsson
targeted knockout of the sodium calcium
exchange produces almost no change in
overall uh electrical
function now is this a specific property
of some of Dennis Noble's work on the
heart uh or is it
General um I was delighted therefore
when I saw this systematic study by
Hillen Mayer and his colleagues in yeast
working through the 6,000 genes U and
producing what they called a chemical
genomic portrait of yeast what did they
find genetic buffering is General
80% of The Knockouts are silent under
normal physiological conditions that
doesn't mean to say that those genes
don't have a function far from it they
do code for a protein that protein is
produced of course what you have to do
if you want to reveal that function is
to stress the organism uh for example
with metabolic stress and then you can
begin to reveal the function there are
many more examples I won't dwell on that
other than to say that if you want to
understand Regulators in biological
systems which is part of an answer to
the question what is life life is a
regulated process then you don't get
that most of the time from knockout
experiments as I said earlier on
sometimes you do biology therefore is a
mix occasionally it is order from order
but often it is also order from disorder
in a sense just like physics though I
think there are some important
differences as well for those who want
to follow up on that question this
lovely article in BIO essays um is worth
reading
so what is going on
um and here I want to also digress a
little bit on the concept of a gene
because I think two things are going on
here first of all extensive buffering of
organisms against genomic change that's
now documented I think sufficiently well
to say that it's a fairly General
phenomenon but there's another major
concept that I want to introduce which
is that the concept of a gene has
changed and changed in a very
significant way indeed and it's Central
to understanding what is wrong with
current evolutionary uh biology theory
that is the neod darwinist
theory the way I explain this is to say
that we have DNA obviously we have a pH
type of course it's a bit artificial to
draw complete distinctions between the
two um as I will quote with Barbara
mclin talk later on the DNA is also
after all a part of the phenotype but I
think we all know what we're saying here
um here's the genetic material in the
sense that the molecular biologists
would use that term today here's the
interaction with the environment here is
if you like the complete phenotype and
what we know is of course that all of
these interact act in bidirectional
ways that's also important with the
biological networks the signaling
Pathways the filters the conditioners
and so on which actually generate the
function if we want an answer to the
question therefore for what is life it's
inside
here if I take the DNA out of a
cell if I could do just that and put it
into a petri dish I could keep it for
10,000 years would do
nothing it's the rest of the system of
course that tells the genome when it
wants to make particular
proteins it's the rest of the system
that gives the dynamism now I come to
the point about the definition of genes
when Johansson in 1909 first introduced
the word Gene of course following in the
footsteps of mendle who didn't use that
word but he had exactly the concept what
he actually meant was a discreete
inheritable
phenotype what we now mean of course by
a gene is a particular stretch of DNA
now the important point I want to make
is that not only are those two
definitions not the same that's obvious
on the fact that this only includes this
part of the diagram whereas this
includes the whole
diagram they are conceptually different
too
because Johansson's definition is all
inclusive he actually says that in his
article he says it's a something it
doesn't all it doesn't really matter
whether it was DNA or not of course they
did not know about DNA at that time and
incidentally Richard Dawkins uses
exactly the same
definition most of the time as
Johansson he also says it is as it were
a a general concept it is if you like a
catch all concept but of course the
problem with catch all Concepts that say
and include everything is that they
can't be tested it is a necessary truth
a conceptually necessary truth that a
gene defined in this way as the cause of
a particular phenotype characteristic is
just that it is the cause you don't ask
the question is it a cause it is so by
definition now the situation of course
with a definition of a gene that is done
in terms of a DNA sequence is that
precisely that question can be asked
there is an empirical question to be
settled which is does that particular
piece of DNA have a big effect on the
phenotype you can perform that
experiment with the kinds of knockout
experiments that I've already
described so the difference is
fundamental now where is the Deep
problem in the neod darwinist thesis
particularly as expressed by people like
Richard Dawkins in popularizing it the
problem lies here that if you want to
distinguish clearly and
unambiguously between the
replicator which is of course the DNA
and the vehicle which of course is the
organism that carries the DNA
then you must use this definition of the
gene if you use this one the one that
Johansson first introduced then it
doesn't make sense to draw a distinction
between the replicator and the
vehicle because this definition includes
uh much more uh than the DNA and I don't
think that point has been properly
appreciated in relation to uh knockout
experiments of course to represent
present the fact that most knockouts and
mutations are buffered but um knocking
out just one gene may not get through to
the phenotype because it gets absorbed
as I showed in those computations but
also in the experiments on which they're
based a bit earlier but two of course
may be enough to get through or you may
need to do three who knows that's um a
matter open to empirical
investigation so I want to turn now to a
few other aspects in which the answer to
the question what is
life taking particularly evolutionary
biology as absolutely Central to that
question and to answering it properly
poses today some very big problems but
what we need to do is to First go
through a very brief history of um
evolutionary biology and I start by
going back just over 200 years to Jean
Baptist Lamar who published the zoology
philosophic his great work in
1809 exactly 50 years incidentally
before uh Darwin's Origin
species Jean Baptist Lamar actually
invented the term biology biology he was
one of those who first as it were
therefore defined our subject as a
separate subject from other Natural
Science subjects
but he also did something else for which
he is very famous he um certainly
espoused and popularized and used uh the
theory that there was inheritance of
acquired
characteristics and many of you will
know that of course it is a clear
feature of the modern synthesis or of
Neo Darwinism that that process is
excluded for reasons I'll come on to a
little bit later um Darwin of course uh
published his Origin of Species in
1859 proposed of course the theory of
natural selection um of course neither
he nor uh Lamar or anybody else that
time had a theory of uh of of genetics
and heredity in that sense they didn't
know of mle's work until it was
rediscovered later now an important
point to make Darwin also assumed the
presence and function
of the inheritance of acquired
characteristics it's present in the
Origin of Species in 12 different places
unambiguous all documented incidentally
by Ernst mayor many years ago in his
great book biological thought in
1982
further Charles Darwin in I think it's
the fourth edition of the Origin of
Species specifically Praises Lamar as
this great biologist who championed the
idea that there was transformation of
species originating from a common
ancestor Darwin was not a Neo darwinist
that's a very important message we'll
come on to the significance of that a
bit later on so what gave rise to neod
Darwinism what gave rise to neod
Darwinism was of course the work um of
um
vican um who introduced the idea which
we now call the vicman barrier that is
the specific exclusion of the
inheritance of acquired characteristics
and the idea was of course that the
inherited material wherever it was and
of course he didn't know where it was at
that time um is immune from the rest of
the system the rest of the system
however it develops in the lifetime of
an individual cannot influence the
genome as we would Now call it and of
course that later became encapsulated in
um Francis crick's idea of the central
dogma of molecular
biology let me just also make a brief
explanation at this point in the paper
in which he defines the central dogma in
1970 Crick was actually very
careful he referred to the fact that of
course DNA sequences code for protein
amino acid sequences but amino acid
sequences do not code for um DNA
sequences in that sense there is a
unidirectional flow of
information but he did not make the
mistake which was made later by Dawkins
and many others of assuming that that
meant that no
information passes in the other
direction and of course if you ask the
question what makes your heart cell
different from your pancreatic cell
different from your liver cell it is
precisely the passage of information
from the system onto the genome to tell
the genome to make a completely
different pattern of gene expression in
a heart cell a pancreatic cell a liver
cell a bone cell and so
on so we know already even just from
that observation alone that there must
be information passing the other way uh
we'll come on to the significance of
that also a little bit later all of this
was put together by Julian haxley fiser
halane SE Wright and others to form what
was called the modern uh synthesis uh
and um it's the it's the modern
synthesis that is often also called neod
Darwinism now let's um look at the
popularization of it in the selfish Gene
I should say that I've interacted with
Richard Dawkins on these issues now um
ever since he published The Selfish Gene
in fact I've interacted with Richard
Dawkins from even before he published
The Selfish Gene what is it it is of
course a gene centered view of natural
selection that is what the modern
synthesis is accumulation of random
mutations by random here is meant not
related to function random compared to
function Then followed by selection that
means incidentally that physiological
science has nothing to say about the
variation in genetic material very
important because we'll see that that
view is actually
wrong then the impossibility of the
inheritance of acquired characteristics
a view of course inherited initially
from vican and the vicman barrier and
then later on uh butus and supported by
the more popular interpretations of the
central dogma of molecular biology now I
say that's miscalled
lamaris because actually if you look at
the history of the um idea of the
acquisition of characteristics that can
be inherited that idea was not Lamar's
invention many others before lamarch had
said the same thing Lamar like Darwin
himself just simply assumed it they
didn't invent it neither of them did the
other point that I've emphasized earlier
on is the distinction between the
replicator the genes and the vehicle the
phenotype and notice what I said earlier
on I just repeat it now the only way in
which that distinction can be clear is
if the gene is defined as DNA as what we
would now today call the replicator so
the vehicle is separate from the
replicator if as Richard also does you
see you define gene to be the original
definition by Johansson and implied of
by mendal though he didn't use that word
then you cannot make that distinction
there's no way of having it both ways
you either Define genes in terms of the
DNA replicator and then you have a clear
distinction between replicator and
vehicle or you define genes in the way
that Johansson originally did in terms
of phenotype and then you can't have
such a clear distinction and as I said
earlier these ideas were buttressed by
what I would call misinterpretations
because I don't think they were in
intended by Francis Crick uh
misinterpretation of the central dogma
of molecular biology now the main point
of my talk today on the question what is
life is that to answer that question we
have to realize that all of these rules
have now been broken in ways that I'll
just go
through first of all are mutations
random the answer is no and by a very
long way
in his book um recently published the
book by Jim Shapiro in Chicago uh
evolution of view from the 21st century
writes it's difficult if not impossible
to find a genome change operator that is
truly random in its action within the
DNA of the cell where it works but I
want to go a bit further than Jim does
Jim documents with very very many um
examples from the empirical literature
scientific literature the non-random
nature in the sense that uh there are
hotspots in the genome there are great
big reorganizations of the genome whole
domains as we'll see in a moment that
have shifted around in the course of
evolution um but I think he fails to
make an important distinction which has
to be added to this which is the big
question the big question that should
worry the neod darwinist is is some of
that nonrandomness functional in other
words can the functional state of the
organism influen influence the DNA and
we we'll see in a moment that it can he
also makes the point which I want to
emphasize that if you look at what
emerged from the first sequencing of the
human genome you find a very interesting
fact that for two major classes of
proteins transcription factors and
chromatin binding proteins the evidence
is that they could not have evolved one
mutation at a time in a gradual way as
the is the is in accord with the spirit
at least of the um uh modern synthesis
or neod Darwinism um this diagram is a
little bit technical so I'll just go
through it very very quickly all you
need to know is that these are
representations of um of particular
proteins in different organisms all the
way from yeast through worm
through to the human and the stars that
I'm going to put up now are whole
domains that is long stretches of DNA
that have clearly moved around in the
course of evolution as whole domains not
gradual accumulation of mutations um
point mutations or uh small mutations
and you as you can see there are many of
them and the same is true um uh for the
the other class of proteins that they
studied so
proteins not all of them anyway uh did
not evolve just via gradual mutation
something is enabling the system to
reorganize the genome so the question
I'm going to ask now is what happens in
this view to selfish genes and again I
come now to a deep conceptual error
the problem with the selfish Gene is
very
simple the book is written
beautifully anybody who's read Richard
Dawkins books must admire the skill that
he has in expressing The View that he
expresses and the way in which he uses
language they are brilliant
books but when he was asked the
question is selfish in the title of the
selfish Gene metaphor by the philosopher
Mary mitchley he wrote back that was no
metaphor I believe it is the literal
truth but then he went on to write this
very significant
qualification provided certain key words
are defined in the particular ways
favored by biologists and if you've been
thinking about the question what is a
metaphor a metaphor is
precisely taking a word from one context
and changing it and making it perform a
new function it is a way if you like of
redefining a
word clearly in writing this he didn't
understand the question that Mar mely
was putting to him was it a metaphor it
clearly is um he didn't think it was
I wrote about this more more recently in
an article published in the Journal of
physiology just three years ago and a
quote from it is that a metaphor does
not cease to be a metaphor simply
because one defines a word to mean
something other than its normal meeting
meaning it indeed is the function of
metaphor to do precisely this and so at
the heart of the neod
darwinist synthesis at the heart of its
popularization there are are a number of
major conceptual mistakes first of all a
mistake about what is the real
definition of a gene and it slips
between the two according to what the
question is and you can't do that you
can't do that and be uh
logical and second uh because as I show
in that article but I don't have the
time to go through all of that in the
lecture um it's actually impossible to
demonstrate any biological experiment
that would distinguish the selfish Gene
Theory from any alternative and
incidentally curiously enough Richard
Dawkins agrees with that in extended
phenotype he writes specifically I doubt
whether there is any experiment um to
prove my case so that aspect at least of
the neod darwinist approach to the
question what is life is simply not
falsifiable now we come to the big
question and the difficult one can
acquired characteristics be inherited I
discussed this a number of years ago
with John mayard Smith we were both at a
narst foundation
Symposium he published a lovely book
called evolutionary genetics in 1998 and
he made a very interesting
statement he said John mayard Smith
although he was working totally within
the neod alvinist view um he was I think
a great thinker and he said in that book
specifically you know lamaris is not so
obviously false as is sometimes made out
let's have a look he was absolutely
right although he didn't know that at
the time uh there are many examples now
um those who want to go to my music of
Life website will find um a page devoted
to what are called answers answers to
very common questions on this Central
issue of the theory of evolution and the
question what is life and although I'm
just going to give a few examples in
this slide there are many more on that
page uh Weaver's work uh looking at the
way in which you can mark the genome by
behavior in each generation and that can
work even if nothing goes down through
the germline Anway and his colleagues
looking at endocrine disruptors where
the process does go down through the
germ line and we think probably um
through inherited
rnas um this paper also showing uh male
transgenerational responses in the human
beautiful paper by yunga son and his
colleagues at the fish Institute in
Wuhan in China doing cross species
cloning I'll show that in a moment in
another slide and an extraordinary study
by Ravi and his colleagues in cell uh
published around three years ago um
showing not only transgenerational
inheritance of an acquired uh RNA based
uh response uh but also that it persists
for a 100 Generations they followed it
uh in C elegans for a whole year um the
usual reply of Neo darwinists to these
example is to say the effects die
out well they don't always die out and
then they will say well it's rare indeed
it is as far as we know at the moment
but remember also that speciation is
rare doesn't have to happen very often
it hasn't happened in our lifetimes it
hasn't happened in the lifetime of
humans um in fact we've tried very hard
with um artificial selection of dogs
cats fish and so on WE produce new
varieties but never new
species
so environmentally induced changes can
be inherited I think the evidence for
that as I said is now uh growing very
rapidly go to the answers page on the
music of Life website if you want more
details I said I'd say what happens in
cross species clones and then we come
towards the end of the lecture what
yungas son and his colleagues did in
Wuhan was to take um a carp which is
this one a goldfish and proceeded to
take the nucleus from a carp and insert
it into the fertilized but then
enucleated egg cell of the goldfish you
should get unambiguously a carp if the
neod darwinist view is correct what you
get is intermediate this is the result
it's one of the few examples where a
cross Speed Works in a sense that you
produce an adult and what it produces is
an adult whose Anatomy is intermediate
uh between the
two um you can even quantify that if you
look at the total number of vertebrae in
the goldfish is about
26 VAR is is up or down one or two and
the carp is about 33 in the cross
species clone uh you get a figure in
between um but it's closer uh marginally
to that of the
Goldfish there are other respects also
in which what they call the um
inheritance of cytoplasmic information
is clearly
occurring and I want to come now to one
of the greatest thinkers about genetics
and their a ation to the
phenotype I have a
lovely picture in my office in
Oxford of Barbara
mclintoch at the age of about 81 I
think receiving the Nobel Prize here in
precisely this lecture theater standing
exactly where I'm standing at the moment
and she was giving of course her Nobel
Prize lecture which she received in 1983
she was of course the person who
discovered what we sometimes call
jumping genes or mobile genetic elements
but she went much much further than that
until she was I'm sorry to say prevented
from publishing from 1953 onwards she no
longer published on this issue until as
far as I can recall um she was awarded
the Nobel Prize in
1983 she
wrote in that lecture in the future
attention will undoubtedly be centered
on the genome and with greater
appreciation of its significance as a
highly sensitive organ of the
cell the result of her work on maze was
to show her just how labile the uh
material is the genetic material is in
response to environmental uh events and
she wrote responding to those Often by
restructuring the genome here we come
back to what Jim Shapiro was drawing
attention to that clearly during
Evolution there have been major
restructurings uh of genomes movements
of whole uh domains uh corresponding to
various
proteins um so cytoplasmic changes can
be inherited and I'll deal I think I'll
jump straight to the next slide just to
give one example of how strong that
inheritance can be this is the article I
would recommend reading if you want um
the what I would regard now as the best
example of that published by uh Joe
nad's Lab at that time in Seattle in
pnas uh at the end of
2012 um they write I won't go through
the full details the the heritable
epigenetic changes persisted for
multiple generations and were fully
reversed after consecutive crosses um
through the alternative germline
image so my main conclusion
environmentally induced changes can be
inherited to the question are they
fairly rare I would give the response I
gave earlier on so is
speciation so when we ask the question
do we know what the precise mechanisms
of speciation were I think the honest
answer is that we don't
know not yet any way now I come to my
final conclusion if functional changes
in the adult can be inherited and
therefore a target for natural selection
then the analysis of function is highly
relevant to Evolution and of course
highly relevant to defining the question
or an answer to the question uh what is
life because as I said earlier on this
area of biology is Central to
understanding the answer to that
question I think what I want do is to
leave time for discussion I'll just jump
the uh remaining slides they just simply
summarize what I've already just said um
and the synthesis that I would propose
is shown here that we have to recognize
that selection is
multi-level that acquired
characteristics can be inherited to
quote Barbara mclin talk the genome is
an organ of the cell uh not its
dictator and uh that genomes are not
isolated from the organ organism and
environment those who want to listen to
another version of this lecture it's on
the music of Life website and on YouTube
um and the article there published just
last year in experimental physiology
also gives chapter and verse on almost
everything that I've presented today and
I finish with this lovely picture that I
Ed right at the
beginning some of you will recognize the
left hand picture as Conrad
woodington's beautiful picture from the
strategy of the genes in which he tried
to explain the way in which there is
plasticity at the developmental level in
the phenotype which is representing by a
landscape here as a consequence of
various Gene products
interacting in networks that as it were
are situated between the genome level
and the phenotype level I know that's a
bit artificial we can argue about the
exact definition of a phenotype and so
on but he's got the message he's got
exactly the systems approach to it what
happened to um Conrad wadington He was
largely ignored pushed to one side just
as Barbara mcclint talk was until she um
received the Nobel Prize so my f final
question is who pulls
strings in any multi level set of
interactions in any biological organ
organism the answer is everything can if
you take a three-dimensional Network
just put together some knitting and make
a three-dimensional knitting structure
you pull any bit of it the whole network
changes all networks do that so it
doesn't make sense to isolate one part
and say that is the cause if you have
networks as part of the definition and
processes in those
in those networks as part of the
definition uh of an organism then the
answer to the question what is life is
it lies in those processes in the
networks there is no privileged level of
causation and with that uh thank you
very much the end of the lecture thank
you
