HTML we've talked about HTML
already we've talked about markdown
already and I'm on um this is one of my
first videos on the road so here we are
right next to the highway so there's
going to be traffic the video is really
quick and somebody mentioned that you
really don't need to write very much
HTML in 2024 and I just want to comment
on that that's true you don't in fact
many ways HTML has gone the way of
something called postp
so if you don't know what postcript is
postcript is the language that PDF is
derived from so if you've ever opened a
PDF and you've seen a PDF is a bunch of
instructions about how to do the thing
nobody writes postcript anymore but
there was a time when people did write
postcript it could be argued that people
these days don't write a lot of HTML
even web developers don't write a lot of
HTML there's so many other Frameworks
that generate HTML that there's not a
lot of it right there is though there is
still I mean the high-end web developers
do spend a lot of time creating widgets
and components and things like that to
to do with HTML so they will definitely
need to learn it but but the reason I'm
making this video is to just say when it
comes to learning HTML you really only
need to learn how to read HTML so you
can manipulate that now that is not true
for CSS for CSS you're going to be
regularly styling things uh such as your
r that we're going to write and you're
going to need to know how to change the
styles of CSS and I mean if for no other
reason then when you go to a web page
it'll say you go to you know any web
page you might want to go to like skill.
and you might want to inspect element
and you'll want to see how to do these
things and I showed you already how you
can hack by changing password Fields
into text fields and stuff like that so
being able to read the htl that's over
here I mean a lot of this dib soup if
you ever had to really actually write it
it'd be insane right most it's all
written by by whatever it that it is
that has rendered that HTML so so don't
worry about freaking out because you
can't make a web page from scratch using
HTML you're going to use something like
pandoc or some other static site
generator or some other tool to generate
the HTML but you do still need to know
what is in the HTML and that's why the
videos about the HTML stuff are so quick
and fleeting and they just talk about
what they are so that you can understand
just by looking at it it's kind of the
same with assembly right you don't
necessarily need to learn assembly
because you're going to use it you're
going to need to learn assembly because
you want to be able to read it same with
C you might not write C but you might
want to understand s traces and things
like that when you're running against
the process and those are all written in
C so there are a lot of languages that
are sort of read only or read is
languages and you don't necessarily need
to to write in them you do however need
to know how to write in markdown that is
mandatory everybody requires it and
people keep arguing with me about that
and I'm like I don't want to be on your
team because you're going to be the one
who doesn't know how to write
documentation and then say I don't know
how to write markdown so guess I can't
write the documentation because nobody
wants to write the docs right don't be
that guy bye
