hey you want to see a really great way
to copy a file between two systems even
if those systems don't have SSH
installed yeah we found I mean it was
suggested to be completely Fair chat GPT
suggested it because I was looking for
alternative to Basin and they said ah
just use netcat so the answer is use
netcat and it's actually really cool we
actually had some contributions from
people in the community who suggested
that this is a way to I'll get to that
later you got to wait till the end of
the video um so anyway so NC uh- U we'll
talk about that later it stands for UDP
Das and then L this can be separate if
you want and then the port number 666
because we're going to be really mean
and nefarious this number is over was a
1024 so I don't need root access right
if I was anything under 1024 I don't
know say
53 uh spoiler alert then you could do
that and and then this says hey just
copy the all the outputs to slash to
tempu so to show you that it works let's
actually zero out tempu hey did you know
you can Zer a file out by just piping to
it like that yeah that's right or or
redirecting to it so now let's uh we'll
do our Command again we're going to it's
going to start up a listener it's
listening and over here we're that this
is a Mac by the way this is this is my
laptop and then over here I'm on one of
my proxmox servers with my case
controller and I actually was like
tinkering away on a script and I have
read only uh get cloning happening so
you know I wanted to be able to transfer
between and I could SCP it I could you
know start up an a SSH server or I could
I could run SCP from my laptop and I
could copy it over but what if I didn't
have SSH it's just so much cooler to do
in thatat so so I went ahead and checked
it out so I have this installer script
to install qvp which if you don't know
what that is watch another video um this
is install this is setting up a virtual
IP uh for my C cluster um and it's a
script I want to run on all of my nodes
all my control play nodes but I you know
I wrote it and compiled it here composed
it here and I was like I didn't want to
t-m copy it because then you get the
extra extraneous spaces and stuff in
there uh and and you know so how can I
get it over there without having to have
any problem well you just run netcat and
uh set it we're sending it to UDP just
for fun you could just leave it without
that if you want and then we we pass it
the IP number of my laptop and the port
and then we give it the file and and
then we can um we we can wait around for
that but when you control C it it
actually closes a connction nection down
on the other side because we're doing
UDP it doesn't close the connection down
if you if you want to leave that off
it'll it'll do the same thing let's try
it without UDP really quick just to show
you same idea uh a little bit less to
type and if you're just doing a simple
thing like this and then you can just
control C and when when you like it's
there and it will shut down both sides
because tcpip has this idea of a
connection and then and then you can
actually cat this file or VI this file
Tempo and you can see that my script has
come over perfectly uh and you know it's
completely binary compatible so that's
kind of a cool little technique uh but
I'm going to end you with this there was
this was suggested by somebody in our
community who is in the security group
uh in the security land uh space and
they you could do this uh you could do
this like here and 53 and then run uh
UDP uh- L and now you are sending you as
long as you put 53 on the other side and
you sudu um you're now sending your
traffic as DNS traffic so you can
complet your packets are completely
disguised as DNS traffic and you know
the the port 53 is likely not going to
be blocked on on any any path along the
way um you can just use an HTP server
and the source director you could also
do that yeah you can you can fire up an
AC there's a lot of fun ways to do this
this is basically just all completely in
the open and you don't have pay spin
available or you don't have eat.io which
got shut down which was my really that
was my favorite um and you're not you
know you're not you're not giving any of
this data out to any external entity so
um it's kind of a cool little way to to
to copy stuff you got to be careful
though if you're doing this in an
Enterprise environment and uh your
admins find out that you're opening up
you know you're exposing ports on your
login servers that's like a firing
offense be careful with that make sure
you don't do stuff like that but that
that's a fun little thing make sure you
learn about neat neat is good for all
kinds of reasons you can you can
transfer binary files uh yeah and and de
packet inspection will absolutely get
you uh any poo Alto Router won't allow
this we used to we used to use the trick
of like tunneling through SSH uh ports
you know port or https port43 uh we
would set up listener SSH servers on
port3 which is normally https web
traffic so that board students and their
School classrooms could actually log
into skill stack and do their their
their coding uh and stuff like that when
they were bored in their math class and
that got shut down soon as they got a
Apollo Alto router they started
detecting the traffic packets were not
they say oh this is an SSH packet so
packet inspection is is is it's getting
more common it used to be expensive to
have devices that would do that school
districts didn't have the money uh but
they do these days but um so so yeah so
if if you try to do this and you try to
just send random data over Port 53 and
and and there's a pal ala router
someplace in the along the line it'll
shut it down it might even flag you so
you know if you do that take you're at
your own risk bye
