might be a long video you never know and
I got on had a massive onslaught of
people asking me about Dr Alan Hillman
as
if I didn't know about a fellow Greek
translator I've been translating ancient
ply a lot longer than that used to be a
Russian translator
rki lived in Soviet Russia and post
Soviet Russia
really get doesn't pay anything I've
written nine books and an enormous
amount of Articles and a tremendous
amount of translations most of which by
the way are free in the description
below so I'd like to discuss Aman milman
but uh a significant portion of this
video is about a lot of parallels and
it's the same things I've uh been
encountering and
uh uh of course you know I'm heavily
tattooed and bold and turns out he is
too and that's probably where the
similarities kind of end not really but
I know a lot of people wanted me to
comment on helman's uh translation of uh
specific passages and uh the interview
that he actually did with another person
I won't name you know it was muted like
every 5 seconds I noticed in the
comments people were really upset over
the fact that the terms He was
discussing in the Greek uh specifically
in matth Matthew 26
46-56 and Mark uh 14:51 and some other
places they were really upset because
the words that were being used I mean
the whole video is like bleep bleep
bleep bleep bleep and the guy that's
actually interviewing Dr alond Hillman
he was
interrupting uh uh Hillman like every 5
seconds and that really upset people but
I I could see through all of that but
that's not what this video is about but
I mean that really upset a lot of people
um but he just wanted to get his point
across it was very unfortunate he was
interrupted so much um he's correct in
what he says Hilman that of course
Hebrew was not a living language at the
time of the historical Jesus rather
Greek and Aramaic and something that
I've literally been you know pounding
the table about for decades literally
decades and I've been debating these
so-called Buddhist Scholars for decades
literally and Dr hilm is a quote that he
says that I've been saying for decades
um he says my loyalty is to the texts
and uh the actual scriptures themselves
so what do they actually say you if you
actually brush away you know the giant
mound of uh of uh manure that's been
deposited upon these by clergy and
religious nonsense and religious
nonsense 2.0 and religious nonsense
3.0 and get back to the original what
does it actually say and they're saying
the same things about him you know his
mannerisms and you know you could tell
his mind was off in another dimension
and I do that too
especially translating ancient poly is I
mean it's been a dead language for over
2,000 years I mean this is some tough
stuff um my college professors I was
taking college classes while I was in
high school to go to high school and get
off and 3 days a week could uh go down
and meet with the professors they said
it was a prodigy on languages stuff
doesn't bring you any Glamour and it
certainly doesn't bring you any money
but if you've got a really really good
gift for it and you have a great love of
wisdom and when I can tell from Dr
Hillman he does as well uh he mentions
at the end of the interview and I've
been on his uh YouTube page and I've
read through part of his book there's
only one book of his that I know about
and then there's some other auor
articles out there but I mean he's
interested you know as a deep love of
what do the actual texts
say and when you get to that it's
absolutely nothing that passes itself
off uh for what exists uh today um I
should have brought that stamp in he was
on the stamp of India his son was my
friend of mine uh Dr ramaswami he was
the son of a nand Kum Swami who knew 27
languages wrote more books than you
could dare imagine countless thousands
of Articles and one of the best quotes
about original Buddhism and the term
Buddhism is rather modern invention he
says Buddhism today is most famous for
everything it originally never taught
and the clergy and the nonsense I either
the religious manure that's been heaped
upon the original text is completely
unoriginal to what the actual original
texts say and Christianity and so called
Buddhism which is a term that really
didn't exist until the 16th century
absolutely identical now since I'm not
interested in bleeping my own videos and
going on to and you could look up
Matthew 26
46-51 and Mark 14:51 I mean that video
is bleeped like every five or 10 seconds
and uh he's actually focusing in on that
what the U you know the New Testament
says and the situations I'll say that uh
uh Jesus uh was in but he said Hillman
and this is true of Buddhism as well he
said Bible
scholars uh essentially he said this
Bible scholars don't read anything other
than the Bible and what they're told to
believe in and this is true of all these
translations when certain texts are uh
locked onto a uh a Dogma a religious
pile of nonsense which of course
religion is the lowest form of
metaphysics it's almost entirely the
opposite of metaphysics something that's
even lower than that is of course
atomism or atheism specifically and
Atheism is not actually about the denial
of God true atheism is called
metaphysical atheism you should look
that up that's even lower than religion
so you get religion metaphysics here and
nearly the opposite of metaphysics way
down here which is religion you have
something completely below that but when
these are locked on to these belief
systems then there's this a mountain of
dogma and trash that is attached to it
and if you really love the truth logic
and rationality you're interested in
what the original text say and you're
not interested in any of these
horrifically mistranslated texts and
I've been dealing with this for decades
literally been transl ancient poly now
for nearly 25 plus years ancient Greek
for well what is it now 18 plus years
um yeah his video is muted every 5
Seconds um once again Hebrew was not a
living language at the time so he's
interested in the Greek text he's got a
lot of Greek I have Greek actually
tattooed on my Knuckles here and some
other Greek tattooed on me which I
thought was humorous he's got uh coin a
Greek uh tattooed on the side of his
head and all over his arm so I thought
it was interesting this guy's a
translator and he's bold and he's got uh
Greek uh stuff tattooed on him the same
way I do I don't have anywhere near as
much Greek tattooed on me not that that
is of any importance on uh this video by
the way like a week or so after that
Hilman interview the same guy I don't
want to mention his name that interview
Dr Almon Hillman he brought on another
guy that's
in a very very nutty religion I'm not
going to say which one to refute and
this guy is supposed to be a Biblical
scholar he brought him on to refute
Hilman but he failed so horrifically and
so laughably oh look it started so
horrifically and so laughably miserably
it's just and I thought yeah I got to
read the comments on this because this
guy didn't say anything they brought him
on to refute Dr Aman Helman and he
did absolutely zero% of that not my
opinion or feeling belief he absolutely
did
nothing
um whether it's the Bible or the stuff
that I've prary been interested in
translating uh like the principal of Pad
but very specifically the Nas and I've
not a lot of free and nian translations
in the description below a link to a lot
of texts that I written a lot of
translations that I've written the
Church of the clergy no matter what sort
of silly religion it's attached to you
know you can only translate it the way
they want people say well so and so is a
great Bible scholar you know this can't
be wrong it's like you know that a bunch
of uh religious
academicians are complet completely
brain locked in to the purposeful
mistranslation some of these people know
what the original says but they
mistranslated it on purpose I've come
across thousands of such examples in the
ancient poly I myself have never ever
been interested for very logical and
hyperraum uh Revelations I mean people
think you know it's like 666 is a um
reference to the be it's actually a
reference to the number of man actually
certain numbers in ancient Greek and
also too in Aramaic and same in English
are words you actually put in a number
and if you say that number you're saying
a word like say for example the English
number
1,022 if I said 1022 oh you're saying a
number so I am but just say that whole
thing together meant something like 1,22
just an arbitrary number uh 666 in
ancient Greek is exus in Latin it is
nearly the same exus and in English it's
nearly the exact same word excess every
form of ancient metaphysics says the
same thing excess is evil evil is excess
it doesn't actually say the number of
evil it says
exus um 666 Talons of gold by um I
forget which guy he had 6 but he
actually embraced materialism therefore
he was attached to excess and excess of
course led him into uh the path of hell
and uh
religious uh so-called Scholars and the
people attached to the Catholic church
and other churches they all interpret
this as you know the number for evil I
mean there just one example in reel I
can't believe I'm the one that
discovered that there's no mention of it
anywhere else but I found out of such
occurrences in
the these ancient poly passages that
have been purposely mistranslated um
I thought everybody kind of knew that
Jesus's disciples were not men with
beards as depicted by a Catholic and
Roman Catholic imagery these were very
very very young uh men specifically I
don't want to give the translation
because that's the reason why that
interview with Dr Alan Hillman is bleep
bleep bleep bleep every 10 seconds the
Greek word the nios it is 100%
mistranslated on
purpose uh by Christian translators I
mean do you really think anybody
directly attached to any church or
denomination specifically the Catholic
Church would translate this accurately
such as one word there's a lot of words
I don't even want to say in the Greek
because the algorithm that listens to
everything it not only understands
English it understands Greek but one
word for example neul I can tell you
definitively whatever you think about
the
mannerisms or the fact that he's bald
and tattooed which I'm bald and heavily
tattooed that man Hillman's uh synopsis
and conclusions as he said you know my
loyalty is the text to the texts and
I've been saying the same thing for a
decade that his position is
correct he's not interested in what XYZ
denomination or church or clergy has to
say about what they want people to
believe that that text says this is what
the text actually says and it's so
controversial once again that video
interview with him is bleeped out every
5 to 10 seconds seconds and it was
really upsetting people I mean there's
just few words bleep few words bleep his
translations and his conclusions are
accurate he's not interested in XYZ
religion and I never was
either the original is metaphysics but I
was never interested in translating any
Greek from the New Testament because
there are a million things infinitely
above that a far far far far greater
value uh as far as metaphysics and The
Liberation ontology thereof that's I
never had any interest in it at all I
did focus in on a few things like this
Greek number 666 like listen this in
Greek that word is exus it means excess
excess is evil I mean this is very very
simple this is Child's Play uh
translation but you won't read that from
any Christian commentator you know the
supposed experts in the text I mean that
was just giving me a superficial glance
like this is translated wrong um the P
translations that I deal with the same
way as him and the Greek I don't think
he knows Aramaic and the Greek are 100%
a scam the most prolific um uh poly
translator whoever lived was Caroline
Augustus Foley re Davis one of the
co-founders of the polych society I'm
also too a member at least I used to be
of the polych society um all these
translations are wrong uh they're just
false um by the way this is something um
that you don't know of course you said
Jesus was betrayed by Judas right well
Gama the psychophysical person made of
Flesh and Blood was betrayed by a person
called mahak kasapa he actually uh
murdered the what you call the
historical Buddha which is not a
psychophysical being he was betrayed and
poisoned by Sam uh it's unfortunately
translated in from the ancient poly to
English as sukara madava which be pigs
flesh and of course the original
so-called
Buddhists um sakuta actually is what
they referred to themselves as Disciples
of Saka sakuni by the way is also too
not a name of a person neither is Buddha
sakuni means in poly cian Sage Saka is
cian monei means Sage or Guru so it' be
a cian guru I don't know if you know who
the cians are but you could certainly uh
look those up um by the way regarding Dr
Alan Hillman and the position of uh the
Old Testament and the New Testament
Christianity a great video that you
should look at and I watched it a few
times it's called hidden faith of our
founding fathers it gives you an
enormous amount of quotations from uh
you know uh um George Washington and
Benjamin Franklin and on all the people
you consider to be founding fathers they
they did go to church and uh they did
communion with their fellow people as
was necessary to hold Society together
but they were not ones that uh were
Believers in the literalism as put forth
either by protestantism or the Catholic
church that's actually a really really
great it's not a position of feelings or
opinion this is what we think the no
these are direct quotes from our
founding fathers they did not believe in
that uh uh religiosity it's kind of a a
jingoistic word of uh you know the the
collective absurdity where you you know
you just need to believe it of course
it's completely insane illogical and
absurd but if you turn your brain off
and just believe in it then you know
you're okay and this is why religion is
the lowest form of metaphysics
specifically religion is secularized
metaphysics and that is keeping it
really simple sometimes that confuses
people when I say it's a secularized
metaphysics as so far as like
Christianity and uh original Buddhism
which actually he calls it in semun K
5.4 the only time he actually gives his
teachings a name was he called it brah
Mayana which means path of the absolute
but so-called Buddhism was not original
at all it was just a neosonic movement
of what had been lost there's uh no
evidence that the historical Jesus
taught anything different than what the
Torah taught but I'm not interested in
judeo-christianity at all and I was
never interested once again in any Greek
translations from the New Testament
because metaphysically it's just about
the most inferior thing I could think
whether you like me saying that or not
I'm sorry but I mean I mean that with
all my heart it's just metaphysically
inferior there's a million things a
million times better cyanis Theus procus
um iamus very specifically platinus very
very specifically cyanus we're talking
about serious hardcore metaphysics and
The Liberation ontology of dis
subjectification from the psychop
physicality of false identity you know
seeing yourself fears attachments and
desires I mean that's what the original
article bramana or what we call Buddhism
was it was a Liberation ontology based
in wisdom it had nothing to do with
morality or being good to your neighbor
and that's not my opinion that's a fact
and that is as I will quote Dr Aman
Hillman once again my loyalty is to the
texts U the nas by the way are the only
PR sectarian Corpus they were known to
exist in the 4th Century BC long before
those yellow Rob guys in Southeast Asia
came along long before Mahayana on and
on and on
the original article what did it say
once again loyalty to the original text
um but he was actually poisoned by G and
it's today is called SB odam or uh it's
a fruit that will actually very very
quickly cause you to perish but he was
betrayed by and murdered by mahak kashaa
so Judas was betrayed by excuse me Jesus
was betrayed by Judas and Gama was
betrayed by mahak kashaa who fed him and
what is the mistranslation they
translated to car madava as Pig's flesh
but they would never a disciple
intentionally feed him meat if you went
begging house to house they gave you
meat you had to eat it because it was
given as a donation and there's actually
nothing in the original saying you had
to be a vegetarian but the original
translation excuse me the original text
says Su which means juice of or extract
of uh the kadava plant which is this
green orange looking fruit that is
extremely poisonous that has a Milky
like secretion and very very quickly you
know cause you to Keel over permanently
and that's what goth was doing in his
final hours he was wretched doubled over
in pain you know was
upchucking you know and twitching and
you know very shortly after it was
lights out and uh he was betrayed the uh
in the Bible where uh this is where
religion destroys
everything uh Buddhism does the same
thing as original Christianity of Jesus
in the desert how he was tempted by
Satan you know do this do that and I
will give you this no no no no no as if
Jesus and Satan were two different
people in the desert they're not they're
the exact same person they're the exact
same thing found in Theos where go is
tempted over and over and over again by
Mara Satan of course is the adversary
the adversary there's two within us the
psychophysical which is at war with the
spiritual the spirit is always at war
with what is not Spirit that's an
ancient passage from ancient Egypt
countless
metaphysics but uh G marad dama by the
way way means uh the prity or the nature
of the psychophysical mara is not a
separate entity from G for example one
is a spiritual self and one is the
psychophysical self so this idea of GMA
and Mara Mara basically is the ancient
poly word for Satan has two different
entities is laughable it's ridiculous it
is the only the trash and filth that you
find being pushed by clergy and
religions but it is completely
non-doctrinal uh Jesus and Satan and
this is where is going to get upset but
this is a doctrinal fact uh Satan and
Jesus were not two different entities
they were the same ones it was the
internal struggle between the spiritual
that's not my opinion that's right there
in the
text period the struggle between the
psychophysical self and the Transcendent
self Gua and the Buddhists so-called
they actually do the same thing the
Christians do they think well Ms over
here is the embodiment of uh of evil
basically the ancient pre term for Satan
you I've got them over here the pure and
you know they're you know they're doing
this number and no they're the exact
same person this is called spiritual
polarization you know a stupid person is
not polarized at all yeah what is evil
and what is good is in perfect balance
it's like uh mixing two ingredients
together you know it's just it's one
thing now even though it's made of two
or more ingredients spiritual
polarization is when you separate thing
kind of like Coke um like my peanut
butter not my peanut butter excuse me my
sunflower butter or my almond butter
over there you let it sit the oil starts
to rise and it gets separated yes you
got uh the uh the uh buttery almond
butter or the sunflower butter down here
and you got the oil of up here that
would be the polarization you mix it
together it's all one single uh
homogeneous mix right they're not two
things they're one thing spiritual
polarization in enlightened beings
causes serious struggling the fool
who is in love with evil isn't there is
no internal conflict they're all one
thing when spiritual polarization occurs
you have the spiritual self here and you
have the psychophysical self and its
desires and fears and you know because
it's temporal you know and it's
constantly influxed then you have this
number going on spiritual polarization
so this idea that that Satan and Jesus
are two different entities is
metaphysical poock it's not what the
scripture says the same thing is true of
the nikayas regarding Guama
and Mara oh like you know goo is
battling Mara all these uh this
religious clergy based poppycock twaddle
absolute nonsense is purposely mistr
that's just the way it should you got to
translate it this way or you know we're
going to excommunicate
you these could be great religious
Scholars of the Greek of a Biblical
Greek or of uh scriptural uh poly
doesn't mean anything
they do this on
purpose these are really good
translators one of them I don't want to
say his name his initials are BB he
actually translated Mara dama which
means uh the dham or proerty of Mara
basically is Satan is subject two
because since they're Soul denying nists
they don't think that something escapes
the psychophysical like there's pure
psychop physicality which is not found
doctrinally but since they're Soul
denying nalists they will translate
intentionally mistranslate
dama as subject to so translating dhama
as subject to rather than prity or the
nature of Mara it refers to the psychop
physicality as madama in other words the
the N the nature of
evil but they can't believe that because
they think there is a pure filth or pure
psychop physicality since they're Soul
denying nalists and so they're so
self-contradictory and this is why all
religions are an evil trap amen ilman
whether it's uh you know the Greek the
New Testament or whether it's the stuff
that I mostly do of the poly and of
course I also do Greek they're saying
you have this you know manure pile over
top of the original Diamond that's been
buried and that's all people look at
that's all they see anybody with a half
a brain would look at so-called Buddhism
and be disgusted it's just like well
there's this morality based Soul denying
Oblivion ISM you know like liberation is
like fleshing yourself spiritually down
some sort of cosmic toilet into a me
nobody would want that unless you were
mentally ill it's like well that's not
the what the original says and there's
nobody on this Earth that's uh more of
an expert on that topic than I am
specifically the T manado Sanskrit or
poly makes no difference it's just a
common via negativa net netti not This
Not That subjective affirmation through
objective Nile uh objective denial
because you can't point to the subject
what you do is you self- assimilate to
the subject which of course is what
wisdom is through objective negation
this is called apophaticism via negativa
it is the dialectic of true
Theology and this is where I'm completed
agreement with him and his translations
are correct I have looked and actually
uh uh checked out Matthew 26 46-51 and
Mark 14-5 Mark 14 14 uh verse 51 they
they do say what he says in every aspect
of the Catholic church or Protestant
doesn't matter which denomination
they're all in agreement you know we
can't translate this stuff accurately
because that would really call into
question you know the legitimacy of this
uh you know kooky religion my friend
decades ago stuck with me he actually
summed up what original Christianity is
and whether you like it or not I don't
care but is accurate okay he called it a
Jewish uh mystery cult you know did he
rise didn't he rise did he rise or
didn't he it's it's a mystery cult and
it blossomed from there due to the
uplifting of uh
Constantine I mean none of these
religions would Prosper without some
great personage in the case of Buddhism
it should be called bramana it was king
asok without king of shul there's not
one person on this Earth that have any
idea what Buddhism is never heard of it
it's like some sort of like blip on the
radar radar screen 2 200 years ago we
really don't have any surviving texts of
it without King a
shock there is nobody on this Earth that
would have a single clue about this
thing that we call Buddhism the same is
true of Christianity if we hadn't
brainwashed some incredibly rich and
powerful people you know to uplift it
and put it on the pedestal I dare say
there's I don't know if anybody would
know what Christian ity is or ever heard
of it we'd have no clue about that at
all let's go on to section two of this
video okay thank you You Came Upon in
medieval times um you know somebody was
uh selling you classes and dragon
fighting and he's like you know you with
your wisdom and intellect said you know
dragons don't exist you've been wasting
many years and a lot of money learning
how to fight dragons these things don't
exist and you know the first thing would
happen is they jump upon you and they
would destroy you and tear you apart um
I don't know about one of my favorite
books I've recommended to you the
pitesan written by John the Scott um but
he essentially did the same thing I
don't know if you know how he met his
end but his students whipped out their
pens yeah not these kind of pens of
course and they took them
out they took them out telling the
truth like my analogy of the dragon
fighting School you you know you're in
danger you you just can't talk about
this kind of stuff because people people
have closed minds and they don't want to
hear that they've been wasting their
lives with nonsense you know I I don't
like to talk about these things because
it really upsets people most people
don't have uh you know rational logical
Minds I mean they just don't religion by
definition of course is uh profanity
what it is is that which is most base
and crude hence the term anything that's
uh popular as profane religion by
definition is profane the ancient pow
for puj it's translated as commoner but
what it means is profane because what's
common is profane it sounds like you're
spitting when you actually say that
ancient poly word
pjan it's profane well it's common you
know a lot of people yeah I know but
it's profane but you can't say that
because you have this herd mentality
well they'll take you out the same way
um uh the author of The pipian was taken
out by his own students with their own
pins um we need to have and Dr hman said
this towards the end of that interview
that was like bleeped every 5 seconds
and the interviewer kept interrupting
him like every 10 seconds which ticked
everybody off is we need to have a
Renaissance of true idealism of thought
of facts of logic and rational
metaphysics um way below that of
religion of course is something that
teaches niil X niilo which is the
Cornerstone of atheism the term atheism
is not about the denial of God which of
course is what you think it is the term
is Athos in the Greek it is not
adios yeah that sounds Spanish doesn't
it adios Amigo right it is not the
denial of God true atheism you could go
look this up don't take my word for it
is metaphysical atheism it teaches niil
xil or nothing from nothing comes
nothing and they believe that they have
one Divine prayer it's like oh let us
start out with energy they replace the
word god with
energy and uh they think the complexity
of life is just a a happen stance of
like a thousand rabid monkeys pounding
away thoughtlessly on a thousand
typewriters like you give a thousand
rabid monkeys and a thousand typewriters
four billion years you'll end up with
complexity in nature and life and beauty
and of course if anything is more
crazy than uh the very BAS of what is
antithetical to uh metaphysics that
being religion the only thing that's
crazier than that is atheism once again
true atheism is metaphysical atheism
people think that atheism is just a
denial of God it's not whatever you do
and I'll ever ever accuse me of being
atheist I mean that's kind of like the
ultimate insult to me um but I can't
actually talk about any of these words
like nean in the Greek and uh what Aman
Hillman is talking about that interview
because it's bleeped out every 10
seconds and you can go watch that
interview and you'll see you'll read his
lips and you know what of course is
being bleeped out and I found it really
funny that the same guy that interviewed
him like a week or two later brought on
that guy to try to refute him like this
guy's a brilliant biblical scholar and
everybody appreciates him and his whole
job was to refute Dr Alman Hilman and he
does the opposite of that he in no way
shape or form refused Dr Alan Hillman
because he can't he Absol absolutely
can't
um here's something else too the term
Buddha and Christ are not names at all
and people think well they so there's a
Buddha statue it's like no Buddhas in
scripture sticking to what the text say
is Akim a nonperson it's a spiritual
appalation you know this person could be
a Buddha I mean not the physical person
that person has attained to buddi you
know true dis subjectification through
the cultivation and ction of wisdom that
you can't point to a Buddha anymore than
you could point to Christ and Christ is
not a name and it is not a person a
psychophysical being that you could
point to I mean it's just completely
ridiculous but this is what religions do
they destroy things um I've come across
and like I said I got them in the
translations below you know the
countless things that I've found that
are just completely this doesn't make
any sense like well every po translator
and it's like no like
kararan and uh they translate it as
wheel
turner you know Goa is the wheel turner
it's like well that's really stupid it
doesn't make any sense metaphysically
well well the original poly doesn't say
that it says he is that which turns the
wheel I you the unmoved Mover I.E the
axle of course modern axles move on
modern vehicles ancient axles on
chariots and wagons you know there were
a solid a piece of cylindrical wood and
they did not move so what the original
poly says is he is the axle the unmoved
Mover that hole in the middle of the
wheel right in the case of The Hourglass
it would be of course sand does fall
through it but you have to imagine a 0
point non-cartesian Nexus of pure
potential it would be saying that Gua is
this part of The Hourglass he's not this
part of The Hourglass he's not that part
he's the part here that the sand
emanates from of course the sand isn't
emanating from The Middle on The
Hourglass but to take the true
metaphysical analogy of the kakar of The
Hourglass instead of the the sand would
be emanating from the center but you
couldn't see it at all and there would
be no Center to be visible you it's a
tiny pin prick here on this hourglass
but to take that analogy to its
metaphysical fruition that's what we'd
be talking about I mean that one
mistranslation after another
mistranslation after another this idea
once again of Mara and Satan he like
well here's Jesus and here's Satan it's
like no they
this you know Jesus is not having a a
fight not a physical fight with Satan in
the desert you know where Satan is
trying to tempt him that is the
psychophysical Jesus having war with the
metaphysical or spiritual Jesus the
exact same thing exists in the digim
specifically between Gua and Mara it's
like Mara basically being the poly order
for Satan no it's not Mar over here and
G no they're the exact same thing not
exactly I mean not in the absolute sense
one's a psychophysical self that is at
war with the spiritual
self and this spiritual polarization I'm
the only person I know of that's talked
about or got a YouTube video or a book
talking about spiritual polarization but
that's what wisdom is you know it's the
separation of two things from each other
so that there isn't a mix this is where
evil stupid people you know have a great
life of course it will eventually burn
them in the end but while they're alive
there's no polarization between the
stupid or evil person you know the good
side and that which they are
psychophysically are one thing and
they're they're happy in their own
ignorance and stupidity to bbop down the
street licking ice cream cones there is
no internal struggle of an ignorant
person and wise people however there is
and this is the exact same story of uh
Jesus and Satan which are not these two
things rather this one thing and go and
Mar and that's not my opinion that is a
hardcore fact
period
um yeah my I love that quote from
drumar Swami once again 27 languages
thousands of Articles dozens and dozens
and dozens and dozens of books they even
wrote a book that just lists all the
books and articles that he wrote he said
modern Buddhism is most famous for
everything it originally never taught
um here's another thing people think
well original Buddhism is against that
Hindu stuff well Hindu refers to a
people not a religion everybody's
completely brain dead here's a quote
from the Encyclopedia of Religion and
Ethics 6 page suit 712 Hinduism is never
prepared a body of kocal scriptures or
common prayer book it has never held a
general Council convocation y y y the
vas and upanishads and the babad these
are not Hindu texts in your mind they
might be but there's no such thing as a
religion of Hinduism it's just not
that's not it refers to a
people not a religion so well Buddhism
and every time you type in a not or a
noton which is what they think is the
denial of the the Transcendent Soul well
Buddhism different from that Hindu stuff
it didn't teach there was a soul it's
like there's no the same page as Dr Alan
Hillman here let's see what the texts
actually say I know all 662 occurrences
of the T manada I know every time it's
used how it's used why it's used all 22
compounds of the ter Mana it is never a
reputation of the Soul what if I said
this is not a soul that's not a soul
that's not a soul and you stupidly
concluded well said there's no such
thing as S no he did not he engaged in
apophaticism Via negativa objective
negation which of course culminates in
subjective synthesis I.E true theology
I.E proximity to wisdom of course wisdom
the self are one of the same thing I.E
the Transcendent self this is all hyper
logical hyper rational the same thing Dr
Aman Hilman is doing with the New
Testament and with the interview the one
thing the interviewer does get right
amongst his countless bumbling heirs is
that over and over over again when Dr
Alman Hillman says something the guy
goes W this makes a lot of sense all of
a
sudden when they talk about like what
the original poly says it all it it
moves together very synchronously you
know a ties to B ties to C it's all very
simple everything is connected to
everything else the center holds you
know if it's a logical and IR rational
the center doesn't hold at all yeah well
it can hold it
all um here's a passage they they they
they hate hearing stuff like this UD 81
there is an unbored and un originated
and unmade and unformed if there were
not oh
followers uh this unborn un originated
and unformed there would be no way out
for the born the originated and the form
here's the most uh paraphrase in the N
by the way whatever forms feelings
perceptions impulses or
Consciousness I the
psychophysical these he sees to be
without permanence on
as suffering d as ill plague boil sting
pain Affliction foreign otherness as
empty sh something is empty of something
else ain't no such thing as emptiness
there's no such passage by the way this
idea of emptiness no this is empty of
that there ain't no such thing as yeah
know ain't not a word no such thing as
emptiness in the as empty as selfless
capital S on so he turns the the spirit
of sanctum the CH The Noose pick your
language IE the non-aggregate away from
these and therein gathers the spirit IE
the chip within the realm of immortality
am am
immortales Realm of the realm of
immortality this is tranquility this is
that which is most excellent that's
benjimin 1.
1436 I am never ever interested in
religions I'm interested in what I'm
going to quote Dr Alman Hillman here
again my loyalty is to the text what do
the text say unfortunately even in the
text the New Testament holds no wonder
for me because I I have no interest in
inferior
metaphysics with the correct translation
whether that be Aman Hillman's and Aman
Hilman in conclusion is right people
will comment on his mannerisms or how
his eyes will like you know he's talking
you think he's you know he's thinking
about like 10 things at once and and
people uh they Noti those mannerisms but
I mean I'm fat Bal and tattooed and have
you know tons of tattoos like him I got
Greek tattoos like him we probably
nothing else in common well you know
some of these things we know that all
this religious trash that's been piled
on a diamond a little nugget at the
bottom when you look at it if you have a
common sense and wisdom even just a
little bit you're like this is trash
it's like yes all that's trash but B
buried underneath that pile of dung is a
diamond at the bottom and that's
Diamond's all I'm cared about that's all
I care about clergy and religious trash
and nonsense no no no and Dr Alman
Hillman accurately says if you knew what
the you know like for example um Matthew
26 verse 46-56 and Mark 14 if you knew
it said you wouldn't you wouldn't attach
yourself to these religions you know he
people want to know is this translation
correct on those and the other things
he's talking about I don't claim to know
about um you know ancient pharmacology I
I make no claim to that at all but his
translations on what those say are
accurate but no Christian wants to hear
that because they're like the people in
dragon fighting school like you know you
show up and you you're Lick in your ice
cream cone like how many years have you
been learning to fight dragons and how
much money have you spent on your dragon
for well you know 10 years and well you
know dragons don't exist right
rather than Analyze That logically
people are irrational and emotional and
they're attached to their silly little
beliefs and beliefs are opposite of
wisdom like 99.999% of the time they're
the total opposite of wisdom the
opposite they don't want to hear that
they want to you know put up your Duke
some's fighting
words literally that's the reason why
Society is so you know corrupt and
insane and awful it's because
everybody's attached to their silly
little
beliefs I like almond Hillman whether
that be the new testament which I have
no interest in at all for a million good
reasons
because literally let me do that
again I there's there's a mountain of
material a thousand thousand times
better life is short I'm not interested
in pointing out all the because Elman
hman you know bless his bless his heart
he's pointing out all the like whoa
that's what the original text says whoa
that's
bad and it's so bad once again every 10
seconds of that video interview is
bleeped out bleep bleep
bleep he's talking about what the New
Testament
says you know he sums up that interview
bless his heart say you know would you
really follow this stuff if you know
what it actually said the answer is
no I've had so many thousands of people
especially in last year you seen that Dr
Alman Dr Alman Hillman video like yes I
have I know about him before that
interview oh my God what do you think
about Dr alen
Hillman oh what do you think about
that I don't know him at all I don't
pretend to know him I'm not going to say
up here I know him you know I I don't
know him at
all you know he might collect my little
ponies and and um you know uh Pokemon
cards I don't know him at all but his
translation of the passages that he's
talking about is
accurate I'm not passing any judgment on
this guy one way or another I don't care
if you like him or don't like him I mean
the same is true of me I've been
debating uh the topic of original I hate
to say Buddhism because there's no such
thing as Buddhism that term is invented
in the 1600s Let's uh by the way uh biku
and bikuni don't mean monk or nun that
means devote from the word bakti meaning
to give a devote is someone that gives
of themselves towards a teaching that's
what the term means all the translations
are WR translated as Monk and nun this
that's religious trash that's where you
Heap dung upon a little dime a little
Diamond of Truth and wisdom you got
religion 2.0 religion
3.0 that's where all the dung gets
heaped on top of the original article
but everybody can just see the dung you
know how many people have it in
themselves to devote their Liv to
learing learning ancient Sanskrit
learning poly origin uh coin of
Greek not many it sure ain't making you
any money it's not making me
any I've been paid to do translations
before I got paid to write the
introduction to that uh book The monad
about Thomas Taylor's Greek
translations that it is not you know
it's a very thankless job
uh but the wisdom that's buried that
little Diamond at the the bottom of a
hill of manure that is very beautiful
and when you're the first person to see
that stuff especially if you're a
prodigy of specific ancient dead
languages like I am at least a few of
them huh just a few of them actually it
it's it's it's brilliant and wisdom is
its own reward and
uh I will point out at a last Point here
that none of these religions whether
it's so-called Buddhism or whether
so-called uh Christianity none of these
things would exist if it were we'd have
no idea they ever existed if it were not
for wealthy and famous and or wealthy
and famous and powerful people in
ancient times that uh weren't
brainwashed into believing it now the
original article uh of bayana passed the
absolute the it's just a neosonic
movement there is nothing in the
teachings of original uh
Buddha I hate to say that word it that
you can't find in the principal of pads
none of it what in
the S it's all there this idea that
Buddhism was a reputation of Hinduism
which isn't even a religion it refers to
a people is just absolutely baseless
it's it's religious
poppycock the truth is the truth is the
truth and that's the truth whether
people like it or accept it or not it
doesn't matter it's like well that's
what it actually says what what you
believe or I don't care you haven't
refuted me like that person that they
brought on to refute Aman Hillman isn't
an expert biblical scholar he asks all
these questions trying to refute Dr Aman
hman and he doesn't do it he very very
very miserably doesn't do it epically
doesn't do it anyway thank you so much
for watching a lot of my translations
are free and books below not all my
books are free but they're below and
many countless articles and lots of
translations
and uh that's my conclusion on Dr Aman
Hillman and she've asked me to talk
about him his conclusions and his
statements regarding what the original
says is
accurate I don't know him I don't
pretend to know him but what he said
about say is accurate I don't pretend to
know about the pharmacology thereof but
the actual translation what it says
correct
