this is going to be a hard video to make
um we got raid and it was fun and all
and we've got people in here talking
about right to repair but but it didn't
start out that way uh and I may be
guilty in bringing it up
because the actual somebody mentioned
very
innocently that they just got comti A
plus and it's free if you're work for a
governing agency in in uh Europe and and
that got me thinking about how far we've
come with the comp Tia thing and so I'm
just going to spit out my opinions on
this
um it like so many things it doesn't
matter what I or anyone thinks of what
is it's there's understanding what is
and then there's you know learning to
cope with with what is I don't have any
beer today I which is probably a good
thing if you go watch the drunk video of
me talking about red hat you it would be
appropriate for me to get extremely
drunk to to talk about
CompTIA um so what is CompTIA let's do
I'll try to make this video under 10
minutes I promise CompTIA is the
organization that has the Monopoly at
this point on
all government-based
certifications
and uh has very aggressively sought to
make it illegal to do things that most
it people do every day including working
on your phone in fact very famously the
right to repair movement you probably
heard about it it was all over YouTube
it blew up but Lewis Rothman and the
Gang were specifically fighting against
comti lawyers who were going City to
City local municipality local to
municipality seeking to make it illegal
for people to repair the hardware that
they purchase in fact arguing that they
didn't own the hardware that they were
just renting it even though they paid
you know $300 or whatever for that piece
of hardware and this video is not about
right to repair but it's important that
you understand the right to repair issue
and how big a deal it was and how slimy
CompTIA was in their approach to slowly
and quietly you know sending you know
disgusting lawyers into local cities to
quiet because they know how to make
change in America this is how you make
change you affect change at the local
level and then it bubbles up and it
eventually becomes National policy
that's that that is the same strategy
that's been well documented by academics
who have been studying political
influence for decades it's actually the
basis of something more positive called
represent us a movement a a you know
nonpartisan movement to increase the you
know the effect of our votes in America
and so compta has taken this and used it
to to make the world a really horrible
Place actually they they want to make it
so that you can't do anything without
getting them to sign off the worst part
of it is that if you've ever taken a
compta exam um they are absolute
crap and full disclosure I was actually
approached Once Upon a Time by CompTIA
to make materials to make learning
materials for them one of the reasons
that I'm streaming from the car and I'm
doing this literally Grassroots you know
drive around the country and promote you
know Tech skills uh for everybody for
for the people without getting all you
know socialist on it is because you know
you need to be able to understand these
things and nobody's going to tell you
this you know so so I have a couple
stories about this the first story is
goes like this um uh I
taught uh a bunch of people and one time
one time this guy came in really nice
guy and he he signed up his son and I
was like that's cool and he went to pay
and he he went to get a checkout and I
said to him this is a true story I said
to him do you know about PayPal and he
put his checkbook down he went oh yeah
I'm the CTO true story that actually
happened and I went oh okay well fast
forward after his son was there for some
time learning the Grassroots you know
skills of Linux putting installing Linux
running a lab at home learning python at
the time learning webdb enough to be
able to understand it all the things we
do in the beginner boost this guy this
kid who was the son of the CTO of PayPal
uh came to me and said and I I told the
story before but it's I have to tell it
again because it's related to comp he
said my dad says that I need to get a
CompTIA a plus
certificate and he's wondering why
you're not doing
it and you know the implication there is
he was question my efficacy as an as a
mentor and as a teacher to to help
people along without following the
standard prescribed comp ta sorts of
things and I tell you that story because
I want you to understand how deeply
embedded the LIE has become that CompTIA
is a valuable company with a valuable
service to offer it's a lie it's
absolute crap you can do anything that's
available on compta there's people who
have entire YouTube Channel dedicated to
getting your A+ to getting your Security
Plus to getting any number of compta
certificates and they're all trash
almost none of the comta credentials and
certifications require any kind of
performance you go in to this extremely
stressful test environment and you pick
one of four questions in multiple guests
and now you walk away and the government
will hire you because you know
everything about security and I don't
need to tell you all the problems with
that if you if you want want to do your
own research on this go Google how
effective are multiple choice tests at
predicting
assessment they suck they are horrible
they have been the worst things ever and
yet we still do them why because in
order to do true assessment which means
having somebody who knows a
master spend time with a person in sort
of a blacksmith scenario to see whether
they have actually made it whether they
become a master or they're not a podn
anymore you know or do the trials which
are actual you know like if you think of
Jedi you know they have to perform
trials in order to advance that is not
true for any any test where you have to
do multiple guests in fact when I did
the SAT prep back in high school the guy
who was doing the prep came in the room
this was after school program and the
first thing he told us is was says I
want you to understand that we are not
going to learn the material that's on
the SAT test we're going to teach you
how to beat the test and any system
where you can beat the test that exists
is wrong so what is the takeaway from
that the takeaway is CompTIA is making
billions of dollars off of a completely
ineffectual method of assessment that is
what is happening and they're forcing it
on everybody everybody you have to get
it if you're a government employee
especially you have to get Security Plus
in America you have to you cannot work
in government in America without a
Security Plus certification that is how
widely CompTIA has sh shaken enough
hands on the golf courses of with all
these upper leaders and they have made
it happen including the CTO of PayPal as
I told you in that story that person the
guy who's over the technology of all of
PayPal actually thinks that comta is a
good assessment and that we should be
teaching to that test because if you
don't have that credential you don't
matter you don't have the
skills I have overwhelming evidence to
the contrary overwhelming and so the
should you this so that that rant is
part of this that's the first half of
this video the second half of this video
is going to be okay well what do you
need to do what do you need to know
about it okay so the the first part of
this is very simply you are going going
to get um nothing from comti you're not
going to get anything uh from them in
terms of like learning you you might you
might if you pay all the money for all
the they like to sell you all the
training right so you can't take the
test unless you pay for our exclusive
training and then you then they lock you
into their training system and then they
pay a whole bunch of money for training
this the whole problem with the
certification it's a total scam it's a
toal racket the whole certification
racket is almost as bad as as the
college racket which which says that you
don't matter unless you have a college
degree all of this stuff is absolute
crap but here's the thing it doesn't
matter that's how it is it doesn't
where's my beer where's my beer where's
my beer I don't have beer it's probably
a good thing I have bourbon
wait okay Brandy I I just need one Swig
of this I just need one Swig of this to
tell you the rest of
this I promise I promise I'm not a drunk
I am just someone who has to learn to
deal I have to learn to deal happy happy
happy indeed happy happy
happy one of the things about being my
age and being a veteran in the industry
is I have seen things and heard things
and met people who have influence who
have no clue and all this other stuff
and it makes me very frustrated it makes
me extremely frustrated so much that and
I'll tell a story about this later that
I literally took half of my retirement
money took a 40% loss in America started
skill stack so that I could help people
learn what is the reality and deal with
it and navigate it so how do you
navigate the reality of this absolutely
horrible Monopoly that compta has on the
world how do you do it well the first
thing is you decide what you want to do
before you buy into their ecosystem of
non-educational
training I'm going to say that again how
do you fight against it the
Monopoly so you have to decide whether
you need it or not how do you know
whether you need it or not I've done
lots and lots of videos on this okay you
need to have already decided what you
want to do every day what careers you
want to do what are the titles for the
kind of careers that you're seeking and
what are the top five companies that
have that that fulfill that that that
they don't have to be the company that
you end up working for but which are the
top five companies once you identify
that then you identify people who are
either in those companies or who know
the skills that are required to work in
that specific position in those specific
companies everyone is doing this
completely upside down and I have to say
it every time over and over again
because the decision to go a comp
certificate is fundamentally dependent
on what you want to do you don't buy the
exercise equipment and then and then
start EXC and just randomly grab
whatever exercise equipment you figure
out what's wrong and what you need to
work on then you get the exercise
equipment right that's how you should be
doing everybody's doing it wrong they're
doing it backwards they have no idea
what they want to do and they think that
they sign up for comti it'll give them
some direction somehow and coma is
banking on the fact that you're going to
buy their useless exercise equipment
they absolutely are because they know
human nature and human nature is to not
have a plan human nature is to run
headlong into a thing and say oh I'll
figure it out eventually and pay money
along the way which is pretty much every
College if you change your major board
the three times we all need to go to
college okay well what are you going to
do with that college education I don't
know I'll figure it out when I get to
College we're gonna there's a separate
video about whether you should go to
college and we actually there's five
reasons and um there's five specific
reasons you should go to college if if
you want to go to college and what and
what college accomplishes and and make
sure you watch that video I'll do that
video next but compta is a very specific
horrible thing that you might need to
add if you are seeking employment with
the government specifically if you are
seeking employment in security with the
government absolutely if you are trying
to break into the industry and have not
had any proof of what you've done before
and have difficulty proving it such as
you want to put you know computers
together or something but you know as
usual there are always ways for you to
do that outside of compta right so um
you know that's that's that's probably
all I'm going to say for this video make
sure you know you need it or not I would
not get the bottom line is I would never
recommend anybody get any comti
certificate unless unless it is
literally blocking you from doing
something else that's going to produce
more trust for a specific career and
that is true of government positions
certain bank positions certain uh
insurance agencies places like that
usually the really stupid companies the
companies that have all the money the
companies that have money are the some
of the stupidest companies on the planet
it's really sad it really is the
stupider the company the more money they
have I don't know why that's just the
way the universe works having money
doesn't mean you're smart obviously um
so that is my suggestion that that is a
long video I want you to understand
where you're what you're getting into
when you get into a compta sort of
situation and only only go for comp if
you need it uh so what should you do
instead
the instead is we've already covered
this in another video so I I'm not going
to spend a lot of time on this what you
should do is you should build a lab you
should build a lab you should build out
you should do you should be spending
money on engaging so for example the
test cost I don't know how much right
five six hundred bucks take that money
and buy I don't know four Optiplex I did
a whole video about this buy four
Optiplex computers and network those
together buy yourself a switch practice
doing it practice installing different
operating systems install Windows on
there practice doing that because that's
all in compta set up the networking
understand how to manage viruses on
Windows you can look up the stuff that's
covered in the compta exam and that's
probably okay and you can say okay I'm
going to I'm going to Now set up my own
plan for doing this and I'm going to do
it in the lab and so when I am actually
interviewed for whatever position you go
for you can say well I don't have a comp
C plus but I've built I've built 25
computers and they're running in my lab
right now
which one would you rather
have the senior Executives of
Corporations who really get it actually
value hands-on experience above
certification and you will encounter
these people I have in my Stream So my
suggestion is take the money that you
would have sent for ctia set that money
aside and build your own lab build your
own networking lab build your own
computers learn how to use
virtualization experiment be Hands-On
about it as much as you can
everything including some of the red hat
I just found out is available for free
for developers so you can actually
install stuff that into a lab that is
always going to be a better experience
than and you can set your own your own
assessment criteria and if you're
working with a mentor which is another
video that we've done you should not
even be doing any of this until you've
at least found someone that can help
Mentor you through the decision-making
process and help when you get stuck so
let's say you get stuck you can't put
your you don't know how to set up your
vlans switch or something you know but
that that experience is always going to
be more valuable than some multiple
choice test from comp the only time a
CompTIA exam is ever going to get you
anything is when the specific job in the
specific industry that you're looking
for demands it that is it that is the
only time other than that it might give
some structure to what you what people
think you need to learn but the thing
about these about CompTIA as well as
Academia is they can't keep up there's
no way for them to keep up on the most
modern systems go look up how many how
many how much stuff in the come TAA plus
is regarding the arm chips and the new
Maxs and everything nothing because
accreditation takes at least a full year
and any change to curriculum has to be
submitted in advance there's no way any
of the formal training any of these
lumbering monsters can keep up with the
pace of Technology the only way to keep
up is for you to set forward your own
plan and to to maintain that inside of
the lab as much as fast as possible keep
your learning as just as minimal as
possible so you can learn learn just in
time what you need to do for the next
position or the next assignment or the
next thing so what I'm doing i' I've got
to learn open shift anible not just
anible open shift anible so I'm doing it
too and I'm putting I'm setting up my
laptop I'm putting a little lab on my
laptop with virtual machine so that I
can practice doing those very things and
also considering getting a redhead
certified engineer certificate because
it's a piece of paper and it's a
checkbox but that's a different video
