I I never know if it's starting or not
okay so we're going to make a video
about a very controversial topic when is
it okay for your company to say that you
need to stay here whether or not you
want to go home and sleep or not so we
were talking about this um we've been
talking about this topic somebody
brought it up they're like you know and
then somebody else jokingly said oh
you're making it bad for the rest of us
because you know hey some of us actually
care about getting a good night's sleep
and stuff and this video is going to go
under the skill stack beginner boost
section for a tech lifestyle because
what does it mean to be a technologist
what are you what are you committing to
what are you signing up for and in order
to to have this conversation I want to
start with one very important topic and
comparison the firefighter the emergency
responder right when someone signs up to
be an EMT or firefighter or even in the
military they know what they're getting
into they know that there's going to be
lots and lots of uncomfortable nights
and then that for whatever reason
sometimes less than others you know
usually in the case of emergency
responders the military people's lives
are at stake and it's not too hard to
justify working a 22h hour my my buddy's
a surgeon he's a very successful surgeon
actually and you know he regularly would
work 22 hours and he he gets you know
gets his sleep in when he can and that's
a part of the job so how does being an
IT person whether you're a developer and
an operations person how does that
compare and what are the expectations of
you that are you know Justified for your
employer to make of you and this is a
really tough topic because a lot of
employers would see themselves as people
are going to die if you don't work this
extra hours if you're just going to sign
off and say nope you can't make me stay
I'm going to go home and sleep and be
with my wife and I have a stories about
this the first one I have is when I was
working at nike.com so when I was
working at
nike.com my wife at the time was she had
two young toddlers at work at home and
she was trying to manage those toddlers
lives and everything and we went out to
a Sunday dinner we were supposed to go
to a Sunday dinner and I went in because
I need to pick something up from work I
can't remember what it was and it turned
out that my whole team was there at work
on the nike.com project and they had an
emergency that they hadn't been able to
page me for or something and they needed
me to stay this was when I was a
developer on the nike.com project and I
was building the very important um uh
the the the payment system I was
involved with the the uh specifically
the shopping cart and the payment system
for the tool and they needed me and my
manager saw that I was in and said
because I was there she said you need to
stay here you need to stay here we need
you we got to have you here I'm so good
to so good to see you and I was like no
I'm on my way out I'm going to dinner
with the family with my wife and her
family
and yeah I
know there we go someone bought a fart
in the middle of the YouTube video what
a
surprise that's totally okay I think
it's I think it's hilarious so so then
she my my wife came in at the time she
came in and she said where are you why
are you waiting why is it taking so long
she goes they want me to stay in for
work and and she ended up yelling at
them I mean like screaming at them she
had a total emot
meltdown and she was screaming at them
saying you don't know how hard it is to
be a mother it's blah blah blah and and
one of the person says I have a dog and
she go you have a dog do you have any
idea what it's like and my so my wife
just literally destroyed these people
these poor wonderful people on my team
and my poor wife too at the time I mean
she just wanted to have a nice Sunday
dinner and they were working me 90 hours
a week easily and they were only paying
me 30 grand a year which was absolutely
offensive because when I the I'll f
forward the story but it but so they put
us it was really tough right and they
let me have that time at so I said I
said fine I'm going to swear here it
wasn't Doris actually this was my other
wife um and I'm not going to say this um
because I mean the swear word so I said
and I was Mormon at the time so it
matters I said it I'm out of here
and I thought that was going to lose my
job right then and I left I walked out I
got in the car I got in the minivan the
transmission was flow blowing out and
that was apparently one of the things
that we yelled about during the time
that my my first wife that's what she
yelled about and the next day I came
into work thinking I was going to lose
my job my manager sat me down in the
middle sat me down and said we
understand your transmission is is bad
and you need a new one we'd like to buy
you a new one you got to understand that
was like $2,000 repair right so rather
than getting fired my manager said here
you go fast forward like six or seven
months nothing has changed they're still
working us just as hard as they ever
were they were literally teasing about
locking us in our cubicles with with
caution you know uh de you know like uh
crime scene tape and everything and they
would bring us really expensive you know
salmon and I remember you know uh ham
loocks and all kinds of good good food
because they were trying to make a
deadline that Phil Knight had promised
we were going to make on time and and I
was like this is not happening and so
and they put everybody in a room and
inside of that room they they told
everybody in it's a good thing I wasn't
there I probably would have yelled at
them they put everybody in a room and
they say look we understand everybody's
having a hard time it's just really
they're having it's just you know this
is this is you guys are struggling and
blah blah blah and this is what they
said we understand that this is true but
we want you to understand that nike.com
is a do com and it has a do com culture
and expectation and if this is if this
workload is too high for you then this
is probably not the right place for you
half the people in the room quit within
the next 24 hours half of the people
quit and and so you know I ended up half
the people quit and I came back in the
next day and I said what the hell is
going on why is everybody packing up why
are so many people leaving they said
they gave they told us that it was not
going to change it was going to be the
same thing as usual and and they decided
they told us to leave if we didn't like
it half the people left and one of the
persons left his Rec recruiter called me
within 3 days and the and the recruiter
said to me I he said I look I can't talk
I have a job I have families I have
todlers I can't give up this job I was
terrified I couldn't quit I wanted to
but I couldn't quit at least I thought
and the recruiter I said please don't
talk to me and bother me I need to focus
he goes well so and so who just quit
recommended you and here's here's you
know he says you're the best one of the
best people on the team and they we
should definitely go for you and so he
he said I should personally call you and
I said fine I said but I really can't
talk to you unless you can double my
salary I told him some ridiculous number
he said absolutely we can do that can
you fly to Dallas next week I F I flew
to Dallas I interviewed I got a job for
twice for more than twice the salary
that I was making at Nike on nike.com
And I signed on to IBM and boom had a
$80 perdum for a month on my first month
of training it was Sky limit my my wife
was like completely ecstatic and that my
whole future just looked totally
different because somebody actually had
the courage to tell me what I was really
making so the moral of this story is
that if you're going to if you're going
to go someplace you have to know what
the expectations are and sometimes those
expectations literally are you need to
work 90 minutes a week or not it's not
that I made more money it's that you
need to know what expectations are and
that particular job's expectation was
that they were going to underpay me and
they were going to work me 90 hours a
week now let's let's that's that's one
job and that's when I left and I reset
the expectation of working for a company
that didn't have the same expectation
they pay me double the money and why is
this important because you need to set
that expectation let me tell you another
job so the another job that I took where
they made me a system administrator um
after I my first job at IMM when I was a
system administrator the expectation was
that when the systems would get down you
stayed around until it was fixed up so I
did and stuff would go down and I stayed
until it was there it was fixed up and
the next day my manager sent a bouquet
of roses to my wife the same wife who
had yelled at the other people at
nike.com And and said we are so grateful
that you let us have your husband this
but he's been critical to fixing this
stuff this isn't a brag it's just to say
the expectation was different I was
expected to be there I was expected to
be there and to fix the problem because
I was being paid as a system
administrator to keep things running and
if it hadn't been that way it might have
been a different thing you know so some
Developer jobs they're going to tell you
straight up we expect you to be you know
we're going to pay you this amount of
money but we expect you to we expect you
to do like you know um whatever whatever
amount of time and energy in the thing
you know and and you just need to know
what those expectations are but in the
it field particularly in operations
there's an unspoken expectation that you
will stay with the job until stuff gets
fixed that means if system critical
business critical systems are going down
used to I have one story about this too
that's kind of fun so one of the guys
that I've talked about a lot who
actually gave me a thanks award for
teaching him Linux he he um was on a
comp on a what's called a bridge call
that's when you know stuff hits the fan
and everything goes down and we were on
this call trying to get the systems back
up production systems were down and
there was no there some jumps don't have
expectations yeah there that's probably
true too and but you know in this
particular job um expectation was that
we would keep systems running and and
there was literally nothing flowing it
was Consolidated freightways I can tell
you the account that we were on and
there was literally Freight not moving
and money being lost because the systems
were down and so we had to sit on a
bridge call no matter what until the
thing was fixed U and a bridge call is
when they get everybody they get all the
people and and they they they are
talking about it um and back in
management environments yes and so and I
just remember being on that call I mean
it went into four the we hours in the
morning 4:00 a.m. from my time and and
and and this guy he literally fell
asleep on the call and was snoring on
the call nobody could hear anybody
else nobody could hear each other we
were all he was totally snoring and they
were like yelling in the phone they were
yelling in his name Trent that was not
his name but they were yelling in this
in the phone they were like Trent Trent
wake
up and they couldn't get him to wake
up cuz he was like nobody could hear
like just just put the guy to bed and so
he could come back up because the
expectation was you were going to stick
around and you were going to contribute
to getting the problem solved until it
was getting solved so if you're going to
take up the operations field that's
going to be a thing if you're going to
take up the security field and you
you've been hacked I remember one time
the system am mens were up for like
almost three days trying to find how
they'd been hacked and they were tracing
I remember I remember that because they
had they had the police in and they were
like taking pictures of things and they
were capturing logs key logs of the
person that was doing the stuff it was a
big deal and everybody had be on site
until until the emergency was taken off
and then they went to bed same with my
wife my wife right now she has a
different expectation when they're doing
a show there's a big expectation to push
totally really hard but they have sort
of a sof expectation that you're going
to you know cool down and take some some
time off later this idea that you're
going to punch the clock and do 40 hours
is not a thing in it now so it's yeah
stand up meetings are like that so the
the point of it is that if you're going
to take if you're going to join into it
if you're going to get into it Tech
lifestyle you just have to know that
you're signing up for a different type
of lifestyle that does not work 9 to5 it
doesn't it doesn't work 9 to5 in fact I
have a relationship with my manager I
they know very well that I use the
daylight whenever possible for things
that you can do in the daylight so that
I can do things at night sometimes when
my brain works better at night when I
can focus in the family's sleep and
everything and I get a lot of coding and
I get a lot of systems you know
management API development whatever I'm
doing I can do it during off hours so
the lifestyle of a technologist do not
always punch the clock you do have to be
there for meetings and you do have to be
there um to interact now today I missed
a meeting completely just totally missed
a meeting because I wish was not
available and occasionally that's going
to happen but on the whole people expect
you to be at the few stand upy kind of
meetings that are there and um yeah and
yeah if you if you let the two cross
they can definitely control and you do
have to set up boundaries and I I got to
tell you that's one of the biggest
challenges being an IT professional is
there's really no rules about it right
so you kind of have to set up those
rules and those expectations with the
person that you're working with with
with the team that you're working with
and every team is different um some
systems administrator rules for a
particular job are highly critical and
people you know things will stop moving
Freight will stop and sometimes people
will die if you're like in medical Tech
so you know you have to kind of weigh
that and if that's the kind of if that's
the kind of thing you want to be
involved with um but yeah make sure that
you take care of your health make sure
that you get a lot of sleep because your
brain will work better when you get that
sleep we were joking about all the
different ways to get sleep on the job
um this is what led to this conversation
because people will keep you know
they'll some you know surgeons will have
a room they can go sleep in IT
professional a lot of us will keep a
pillow under the desk so you can take a
nap and get your brain up to speed so
you can do the things that need to be
done to make sure your job gets
fulfilled and all the expectations are
met that's
