======================
Glass House
by Max and Ariana Overton
======================
Copyright (c)2000 by Max and Ariana Overton
NovelBooks, Inc.
www.novelbooksinc.com
Suspense/Thriller
---------------------------------
NOTICE: This work is copyrighted. It is licensed only for use by the original
purchaser. Duplication or distribution of this work by email, floppy disk,
network, paper print out, or any other method is a violation of international
copyright law and subjects the violator to severe fines and/or imprisonment.
---------------------------------
         *_It came out of the forest ... and it's growing bigger._*
       "What is that?" James, back to the peak, facing the thick jungle-like
trees, leaned forward and put his plate down on the ground. 
       In the distance, a big blue-white light shone through the trees then
slowly rose lazily into the sky, hovering over the forest. 
       "It's not a star, that's for sure. It came out of the forest ... and
it's growing bigger." Nathan pointed at it, his hand shaking. 
       As the light rose higher, James stood up and the others, fixed in
place, watched it lift then hover over the crown of the mountain. Every night
sound abruptly stopped, the thick growth around the clearing falling eerily
still and silent ... waiting. Unaware of their actions, they all stood ... and
waited.
       The object moved slowly toward them, hovering for seconds in between
small advances. It seemed to be approaching cautiously, like a predator
stalking its prey. At a distance of about a half-mile, it abruptly stopped and
shot off to the left, heading toward the farthest Twin. It came to a halt
directly above the peak. Like a shutter going up, a beam of blue light shot
out from the bottom of the object. What it illuminated on top of the peak made
the group gasp with a collective shock of recognition. 
       The Aboriginal man they'd seen standing on the hill in Sapphire, bathed
in lightning and rain, now stood immersed in the light of the object hovering
directly above him. He faced the campsite and not one person in the group
doubted that he knew they were there. 
       The old Aborigine's eyes glowed brightly, piercing into every mind and
into every heart. He slowly raised his spear arm and pointed to the spot where
the light first appeared. He stood in that pose, arm and spear fixed inline
and one foot planted on the opposite knee, an aura of light backlighting his
form, for what felt like hours. When he finally turned his head to look at
them once again he began to fade, a smile on his face the last image to
disappear. With him, the light went out and the night, still silent and poised
on the brink of a breath, surrounded them once again with darkness.
--------
       This is a work of fiction. While reference may be made to actual
historical events or existing locations, the characters, incidents, and
dialogs are products of the author's imagination. Any resemblance to actual
persons, living or dead, is entirely coincidental. 
       All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in
any manner whatsoever without written permission of the publisher except in
Page 1

the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and review. For
information, address NovelBooks, Inc., P.O. Box 661, Douglas, MA 01516 or
email publisher@novelbooksinc.com
       *NBI*
       Published by
       *NovelBooks, Inc.*
       P.O. Box 661
       Douglas, MA 01516
       NovelBooks Inc. publishes books online and in trade paperback. For more
information, check our website: www.novelbooksinc.com or email
publisher@novelbooksinc.com 
       Produced in the United States of America.
       Cover illustration by Ariana Overton
       Edited by Courtney Mroch
       ISBN 1-59105-123-1 for electronic version
       ISBN 1-59105-148-7 for trade paperback
       Previously published under the ISBN 0-9706913-5-1
--------
         This book is dedicated to all those people who generously gave of
their time and expertise:
+ Paul Cropper, a leading expert in Australian mysteries and an author
himself, for the many great reference books he's written on the subject of
Australian Mysteries.
+ Ratana and Nathan, two Aborigine students and close friends, studying in the
Indigenous Peoples Studies Program at James Cook University in Queensland,
Australia. They gave us insight into the beautiful 'family' attitude that most
of these people hold close in their culture.
+ Tim Bull, of 4ABC Radio in ACT, Canberra, Australia-affectionately called
'The Yowie Man' as a result of his investigations of Yowies [and all
paranormal events in Australia]. He is well known as a very popular radio and
TV personality and a published author, writing of his many true life
adventures with the paranormal beings and places in the land down under.
+ Ken & Ardy Scott and Jennifer Bryson Wakeling, our dearest friends and
supporters in Australia. Without their input, encouragement and sharp eye for
details, this book would not be half what it is.
+ To Courtney Mroch, editor par excellent at NBI. She caught things both Max &
I missed, making this a much better story. Thank you, Court!
+ To our families-Cynthia, Nida, Dani, Byron, Debbie, Albert, Kenny, Becky,
Aaron, Duncan, John, Brandon, Jacob and all the rest of our huge family-thank
you for your support and your confidence in us.
+ Finally and most importantly, to our love and respect for each other.
+ To Max-my life, my heart and my strength. Without his intelligence, his
knowledge, his talent, his patience and his insights into the mysteries of
Australia this book would never have been born-Ariana
+ To my wife Ariana, who showed me how I could take vague thoughts and weave
them into a tapestry of meaning. I am forever indebted to her for the
intelligence, ability and creative skill she brought to this union and above
all for the great love that made a whole man of me-Max
--------
         *PROLOGUE*
       _"What is the most cunning creature in the world? The one you never see
or hear."_
       He raised his bloodied face from the fresh kill, the antelope forgotten
as the voices filled his head. They called to him, a siren's song, stroking
every cell and fiber of his brain. Picking up his spear, he rose onto his
knees, listening. He anxiously fingered the black stone hanging around his
neck, its angled facets catching the light in a rainbow of colors. Fear
twitched thick, knotted muscles as he aimed his mind toward the message he
knew he must listen to and obey. He could hear Umbra, his grown son, in the
next valley, and the other men of his village. They all froze, joining their
Page 2

thoughts to his, listening to the distant message. 
       _Garagh, my father, do you hear? They call again_, Umbra's thoughts
connected with Garagh's mind, which was now filled with images alien to
memory. 
       _Yes, I hear, my son. It is stronger this time. We must answer, as we
have been taught to do by the ancients. Call the others. We must go-now,_
Garagh answered. 
       No resistance was possible, or given, as he rose onto trembling,
muscular legs. Slinging the kill around his thick neck, Garagh scanned the
horizon for the other hunters of the tribe, his dark, penetrating eyes
protected from the fierce sun by a thick brow. He could hear their thoughts
and feel their reactions, and he knew they were aware of his inner workings as
well. 
       _Come my brothers. We go to the camp. We must ready our people for the
journey. It is time ... at last._
       Aiming his resolute face toward the south, he took his first step into
a journey that would last thirty thousand years and change the fate of
mankind.
--------
         *CHAPTER ONE*
       Dr. James Hay felt a river of sweat run down the valley of his wide,
sunburned back. The deepening color of his skin highlighted the small
triangular scar on his right shoulder. He ran his fingertips absently over the
faint ridge while carefully inspecting the rocks scattered over the table
before him. 
       Straightening with a groan, he rubbed his hands over the knots aching
in the small of his back and lifted his eyes to gaze at the brilliant blue of
an Australian summer sky. As a cool breeze swirled around his body like a
playful puppy, shivers of delight ran though him in spite of the intense humid
heat. A small, secret smile curved his lips. His stomach muscles tensed when
the damp, sensual smell of the rainforest, mixed with the perfume of orchids,
wafted into his nostrils. His body betrayed him... 
       _It smells like her, primal, sensual, earthy._
       The forbidden thought sent a jolt through him, his body responding in
spite of a lifelong regime of iron control. He pulled in a ragged mouthful of
the heavily scented air. 
       _It's been too long ... way too long._
       The undulating sensuality of palm fronds swaying in the wind brought
back a memory of watching her dance, her body moving with grace and elegance
against the man who held her tightly against him. Passion swirled through his
loins, building an unquenchable fire. A torrent of desire that flooded his
mind and body. He closed his eyes and willed away the feelings, the mental
images assaulting him from all directions. With a ragged breath, he turned
toward the sound of soft footsteps approaching from behind. He turned. _Please
be_.... 
       The lone figure of Maggie Chin, an elegant Chinese girl of twenty-two
and one of his postgraduate students, slowly made its way toward him. Like a
cold shower, her approach served to snap him out of useless reverie and remind
him fantasies, by their very nature, cannot fill an empty life. He yanked his
shirt off the branch he'd hung it on to dry, slipped it on and took a deep,
cleansing breath, dispelling the images he fought to bury since his trip to
Washington. 
       _Work is what I need. It's always been there for me and it always will
be. Besides, Samantha Louis doesn't even know I'm alive and if she did, a
woman like her wouldn't want me._ He used his tried and true mantra to rebury
the past and get on with the present.
       He studied the site several volunteer students were working on with the
diligence of ants. Their chatter and laughter echoed around the site,
silencing the lorikeets, cockatoos and insects that normally dwelled there.
The tangled, dripping vines of the rainforest almost obscured the view of the
Page 3

central site where a small knot of trusted people gathered. Each one worked
feverishly on a facet of a towering, coal-black obelisk standing in the center
of a perfectly round bare spot fired into the middle of the rainforest. Its
smooth, geometrically cut surface reflected the sunlight beating upon it with
all the brilliance of a perfect diamond. James stood on the outskirts of the
site, away from the group, his hands resting on the carvings etched deeply
into large fragments of the hard rock they'd found laid out in a perfect
circle around the obelisk. Observing the high-energy activity of this elite
group of volunteers, his body quivered with fatigue and suppressed
excitement. 
       Part of it had to do with the unique object they'd found, but another
part was due to the telephone call he'd made from his seedy hotel room two
nights ago. 
       _She is on her way to Australia. She'll be here any moment. God, I wish
she was coming here for me instead of the promise of a big story._
       In spite of the knowledge that she couldn't be interested in anything
other than another literary award, the thrill of seeing her again sent another
tremor through his body. They'd met once, at a gathering of science delegates
in Washington, D.C., where he gave a talk as guest speaker. He vividly
remembered briefly talking to her about his work investigating Australian
mysteries. The genuine interest she showed in the subject surprised him. He
also remembered thinking how it would be easy to drown in the blue of her eyes
and lose his very soul in her arms. The memory of Samantha's lithe body
encased in a flowing black velvet dress, her flaming auburn hair cascading
down the soft bare flesh on her back, remained etched in his mind. 
       Samantha Louis, as he found out later, worked as a world-class
freelance journalist. After hearing she'd won several major awards, he stopped
paying attention, stopped dreaming about her, stopped thinking he might have a
chance, knowing she was out of his league.
       A family friend out walking in the bush had discovered the obelisk. He
sent a photo and a map to the University. James knew the find would be an
international media circus unless he moved fast to contain it before it became
public knowledge. That's when he decided to do a thorough background check on
Samantha Louis. He liked what he saw and heard about her integrity and
professionalism. Her honest and precise reporting motivated him to contact her
when it became obvious he'd have to let the media in on his find. James needed
her to report the truth, to keep out the rest of the sensation-seeking press
with her clout and, more importantly to him, to protect the Aboriginal people
he loved
       He realized he stood there with a silly grin on his face and instantly
pulled his thoughts back to the present situation. Maggie stood patiently
waiting for him to notice her before speaking out. "Lost in another world
huh?" She fingered her long, black braid and smiled up at him. The silken
tropical print of her blouse whispered when the breeze caught it.
       Her child-like voice, smooth porcelain features and tiny figure never
ceased to stir up feelings of fatherly protectiveness inside him. But then, he
felt that way about all his students. He grinned at her. "No, a new found
world, Maggie. What's up?"
       She held out a neatly typed report. "You asked for the analysis data I
did of the black rock found on the coast, remember? To compare this one to?"
Her calm, modulated tone, one used by very young people when dealing with
older authority figures, made him chuckle. 
       "Right. Too much on my mind lately." His face split into a lopsided
smile. When she turned to go he added, "By the way, I don't think I ever
thanked you for dropping everything, including your PhD, to come and help us
with this. I value your expertise with the analysis. Thanks, Maggie."
       She held up her tiny hand with an indulgent sigh. "I've told you
before, Doctor, no thanks needed. This is a chance for me too. Anything that
has to do with people's beliefs and myths is just a part of the whole.
Besides, I get tired of Oriental mythology. I wanted to see how other cultures
Page 4

fared in that department. Anything else I can do before I go help Ratana with
the etchings?" She raised a perfectly shaped eyebrow at him.
       "Well, thank you anyway. I'm sure your husband doesn't appreciate your
absence." When she grinned, he ventured on. "Since you ask, would you indulge
me and go see how Nathan and the others are doing down at the blockade?" He
absent-mindedly swatted at another mosquito attracted to the sweat saturating
his clothes.
       While she quietly walked toward the dirt road leading into the
clearing, he opened the report, briefly scanned it, then looked up to search
for his research assistant. "Ratana, where the hell are those computer
readouts I asked for?" he bellowed over to the young Aboriginal woman kneeling
at the base of the obelisk and taking notes. 
       From where he stood, her thick brown hair obscured her face, but her
body language spoke volumes about Aboriginal pride. Her wide shoulders tensed
then relaxed before she replied, "Patience, Uncle. They'll be here when
they're finished. Eddy's gonna bring 'em and you know how slow he is, so calm
down." She immediately dismissed him, absent-mindedly brushed dried red clay
from her dark brown legs and returned to her work.
       Grunting in frustration, he scanned the other students gathering
information, hoping to spot Eddy at his usual pastime of harassing the female
students when they bent over. James snorted with disgust at the image of
Eddy's small, piggy eyes devouring the sight of the young women's bodies while
they worked. He pushed the image out of his mind as he strode to a battered
and ancient army tent used as a base office. He paused at the closed tent flap
and listened. Issuing a low snarl of anger, he stepped inside. Eddy sat at the
computer terminal, downloading files onto a computer disc. The young man's
frail-looking and bony body was bent towards the screen with intense
concentration. The thick glasses he wore reflected the streams of file names
moving down the screen. The slack-mouthed look of greed and evil malice shone
from his pale face. 
       "What the hell are you doing?" James demanded when he looked over
Eddy's hunched shoulders and saw the data from the find streaming down the
screen.
       The young man's skinny body jumped at the sharp whiplash in James's
voice. "Just backing up the files, Doctor Hay. That's all." The pallor of his
face and his small features blended in with the dull, yellowish tinge of his
T-shirt. He stammered, squirmed and peered anxiously at the flap of the tent. 
       James leaned over Eddy's shoulder and stared closely at the list of
files copying onto the disk. He felt his cheeks and neck suffusing with the
red-hot flush of anger. He glared at Eddy's frightened face. "Okay, Eddy.
Who's paying you for this? One of the newspaper guys or your uncle?"
       "I can't talk. He'll kill me. I didn't mean it, Doctor Hay. Please
don't hit me." Eddy cringed back in the chair, his hands outstretched. His
words degenerated into childish whimpers, sputtering and stuttering. Eddy
jumped out of the chair and bolted out of the tent. James ejected the computer
disk out of the drive and tucked it into the pocket of his khaki shorts. As he
left the tent, Ratana headed in, almost bumping into him.
       "Hey, what's going on? Eddy just flew past me like his tail was on
fire," she asked, concerned at the thunderous look on his face. "And you look
like you just caught a blowfly in the teeth." 
       "He was copying our files. I'll bet he intended to sell the disk to one
of those newspaper vultures trying to get in here. I caught him in the act and
he ran." Running his fingers through the wet hair wildly capping his head, he
fought back the bile rising in his throat at the thought of a student, even
one as unsavory as Eddy, selling his data to those who regularly ostracized
his work. "It was bound to happen sooner or later, I suppose. Peter would give
anything to discredit me. I know he forced that kid on me so he could use him
in some way. I just hoped Eddy would prove me wrong."
       "Well, what's done is done. I'll make sure Nathan knows to keep him out
from now on. At least you know he'll bleed the reporters dry before he gives
Page 5

up what he's stolen, if anything." She laughed, deep and throaty.
       "At least I managed to catch him before he made off with the disk
anyway." He fingered the blue plastic disk while he mentally counted the stack
of them on his desk.
       "And, if they choose to print what he claims to remember, we'll hit
them with a lawsuit based on faulty information. I'll be that skinny
flat-chested lawyer from the TV comedy show and you can be Bobby
what's-his-name from that other lawyer program." Ratana roared with laughter
at the image of herself trying to walk in clunky heels and a micro-miniskirt. 
       He snorted, suppressing his own laughter. Forcing his face into a
serious expression, he proclaimed, "They deserve it. Those people are like
cockroaches, they just keep turning up no matter how hard you work to get rid
of them."
       Ratana subsided into a disjointed series of chuckles. "Yeah, and you've
always been so nice to them too. Seriously, James, this find is drawing
reporters from all over the world. This Louis lady you contacted better get
here soon. We can't keep the rest of them out forever, you know. The only
reason they're not swarming over this place is because it's a protected
Aboriginal hunting ground, but that won't keep them out for long. What do you
plan on doing when that happens, shoot them?" Her deep brown eyes studied the
distress James knew his face revealed.
       "If I thought for one minute it would help to let them in, I would. At
first, excited about my finds, I called them, wanting to share my work with
the world. I found out real quick how idealistic that turned out to be." He
scowled and took a deep breath. "This is so much more than I've ever found
before. Mick told me I'd have no choice this time. I have to cooperate if
we're to save it from the bureaucrats. Problem is, I don't trust any of them.
Maybe this American-lady journalist can find a way, I don't know. I do know
one thing, though. If Ms. Louis doesn't show up soon, I don't know what to do
short of turning Nathan's hotheaded native guards loose on them." 
       He groaned and sat down on a stool beside the tent flap. Rubbing his
eyes, he continued, "This is one of the greatest alien finds ever and we have
to beat off the press, the government and the nutcases just to study it. Worse
yet, my own boss at the University refuses to let the board know I've found
anything worthwhile. If I go back down to Townsville to get the funding I need
from the board, the bastards here will seize the obelisk and we'll have
nothing. It's a no-win situation, Ratana. I've waited years for something like
this to happen and now it feels more like a disaster to me than a blessing."
He rubbed his eyes again. "God, I'm tired."
       "Excuse me, Doctor Hay? Do you remember me? You called and invited me
to come to do the story for you..." Sam looked awkward as she stood in the
doorway of the tent. She tugged at a sweat stained business suit and pulled a
high heel out of the sticky clay, obviously feeling like a complete idiot.
James could almost hear her ranting inside his head. 
       _Damn those travel people! No one warned me about what was out here.
Neither did that bloody photographer of mine. I'm gonna kill him when we get
back to the hotel._
       He had to admit she did a good job of being embarrassed while
maintaining a professional pasted-on smile.
         ~*~
When the tall, wide-shouldered man she knew to be Doctor Hay rose and turned
at the sound of her voice, Sam's mouth dried up. He looked just the way she
remembered. The sheer raw masculinity of him seeped into her body like hot
oil, massaging her libido. She felt her body come alive under his amused
stare. 
       _He's not handsome but, boy, there's something about him that hits a
woman like a ton of bricks!_ Sam thought as she took in his looks at a glance,
comparing the way he looked now to the shy stranger in a tuxedo she'd met
before. _Tall, older, but still muscular; in top shape. Long legs, tanned,
rugged ... wow ... eyes._ She felt her stomach knot up when those incredible
Page 6

gray eyes swept over her.
         ~*~
"Ah, Ms. Louis, you finally arrived." James became aware of his voice-deep,
sensual and vibrating with suppressed desire. Inwardly, he flinched and took a
firm hold of his emotions. He took in her tall, athletic figure, superimposing
his memory of her curves under a clinging dress onto the woman standing
awkwardly in front of him now. 
       He also saw the young, tall, handsome man standing behind her with a
video camera on his shoulder. "Who the hell are you and how did you get past
the guards at the roadblock? I don't talk to reporters so please leave. Ms.
Louis, you may come in." He turned back to Ratana, immediately dismissing the
cameraman as one more irritating human intrusion to ignore.
       "Doctor Hay, Marc is with me. If I'm doing the story, I need my
cameraman." Sam's eyes flared with irritation at the preemptory tone James
fell back on when under stress. Deliberately, she reached out to pat her
cameraman's arm, clearly sending a message that she would refuse to cooperate
without the young man. 
       Marc's mouth smirked at James with the appearance of good-natured
one-upmanship, but his eyes flashed triumph and antagonism. 
       James studied the two and his heart hit his shoes when his fantasies of
her disintegrated instantly. The hollow feeling inside his chest sharpened
into anger, but he looked deep into her eyes, responding to their fire against
his will. The sight of a running figure behind her yanked him back to the
moment. "Just a moment, Ms. Louis." 
       Maggie trotted up, gasping for breath and holding her side. "Doctor
Hay. Nathan says to get ready. There are some high-ranking military guys at
the barrier. He says he can't keep them out."
       He nodded at Maggie, whose look of anxiety and furtive glances at the
computer reminded him about saving any of the data he may have overlooked.
Ratana, already one step ahead of him and anticipating the military grabbing
their information, sat at the computer. She was rapidly saving then deleting
files at a furious pace. 
       "Ratana what would I do without you?" He lightly shook her shoulder
then turned back to Maggie, her face a study in curiosity as she inspected Sam
and her cameraman. "Maggie, get the guys to pack up what they have as soon as
they can manage it. I don't want anybody confiscating our findings." 
       "Will you please tell me what's going on here?" Sam wiped beads of
sweat off her forehead, then stood with her fists on her hips, an insulted
tone tingeing the question. 
       James held up a hand to stay her question while he continued to give
Ratana instructions. "We have to get pictures of all the markings on the stone
made pronto. When you have the backup disks safely stashed, have whoever does
the photos use the Polaroid and take them from different angles." James
deliberately kept talking, hoping to get his emotions in check before he faced
Sam again. 
       _God ... she is beautiful, but this isn't the time or place._
       The look on Ratana's face told James he wasn't fooling her, no matter
how cold and professional he spoke to Sam. She responded to his orders with a
smirk and a laugh in her voice. "Don't worry about Nathan. He'll hold them for
as long as we need. However, that stone won't wait and if the mobs are going
to hit soon then we have to get as much as we can before they do." 
       James sent a tiny smile to Ratana, her knowing look boring into his
thoughts. He took a deep breath and turned to Maggie, who stood quietly, but
alertly, by the tent flap. "Maggie, go take some Polaroids of the obelisk; all
sides, all angles. Bring them back and give them to either myself or Ratana."
Facing the young cameraman, the video cam still on his shoulder, James barked
out, "You. Go with her and get some film of the artifact. When you're
finished, I expect you to give the film to Maggie and clear off." When the man
hesitated, looking at Sam for a nod, which she gave, James shouted, "Now!"
Maggie turned and trotted away faster than she'd arrived, the cameraman hot on
Page 7

her heels. 
       Sam rounded on James, her voice coiling in tightly held strands of
self-control. "Doctor Hay, if I remember correctly you are the one who called
me. We spoke about my coming to do a legitimate story on what's happening
here. Remember? I'm assuming you wanted everything recorded. To do that, both
my cameraman and myself need to have access to everything. I need facts,
information, pictures ... you know, something to write about." 
       James realized that his lack of common manners was pressuring her to be
sarcastic, and he could see her struggling to keep a leash on it, not wanting
to start off on the wrong foot. The jumble of guilt and desire that flooded up
within him threatened to give his feelings away. In response, his voice
dropped to even colder tones.
       "Okay, Ms. Louis, you may keep your companion, but keep him out of our
way. I don't want to be tripping over him every time I turn around." 
       His stomach twisted when Sam forced a smile and nodded her head in
agreement. "Agreed, Doctor Hay. Marc is a professional and will not interfere
in any way."
       "Good."
       "Now, about the information you've already gotten. Any pictures too." 
       "I'll fill you in later. In the meantime, when he returns you can take
him and look around ... get a feel for things. Don't touch anything though and
keep out of the way." He steeled his face with a stern look, in spite of
feeling like he'd like to dive into the cool of her eyes and just keep on
sinking.
       "Doctor Hay, this is unprofessional. It's..." Sam stood ramrod
straight, her long fingers clenched so tightly the knuckles went white.
       "That's what you people do isn't it? So go do it and leave me to my
work, please." Her presence distracted him far more than he could afford at
the moment, and he knew it.
       Sam stared at his face. James could see her debating whether or not to
push the issue. He towered over her tall frame, intimidating her; obviously
something she wasn't used to from anyone when she flinched but defiantly stood
her ground. Without further comment, she made a sound of deep disgust and with
a final sweep of contemptuous eyes over James and Ratana, she stormed through
the heavy vines surrounding the tent.
       After she left, James's shoulders slumped and he quietly eased down on
a chair tucked next to the tent flap. "Why the hell did I treat her like that?
Talk about being a cad." He snorted, disgusted with himself. "I'm never that
rude to people, much less to beautiful women."
       Ratana chuckled again. "You noticed, huh? It's about time, Uncle. We
always wondered why you never married." She leaned back in her chair.
"Besides, you're not fooling me a bit. You're rude to her because you know
she's the one who could finally get you to hang it up and get a real life."
She glanced at him under her lashes and smiled. "You're like an old, set in
his ways, bachelor. You're fighting giving up your freedom."
       He threw her a disgusted look and made a show out of ignoring her and
her amateur psychology. When he tried to clear his mind, he found that he was
too tired to worry about Sam, relationships or anything beyond his work. The
obelisk took precedent. He steeled himself to brutally keep Sam out of his
life and his heart, at least until he finished this work. Having decided that,
he relaxed and awarded Ratana a smile. She frowned. "All joking aside, you
look ragged, Uncle."
       James closed his eyes in an effort to escape for the moment. Deep
fatigue and worry made James feel much older than his forty-seven years. He
leaned back heavily into the sagging canvas chair, groaned and closed his
eyes, determined to grab this short respite from the chaos he knew was
coming. 
       Her fingers flying over the keyboard, Ratana spoke as if nothing out of
the ordinary was happening. "You know, it's eerie. The markings on that thing
are so similar to the Aboriginal drawings at Split Rock it's uncanny. The
Page 8

black rock it's made from looks the same as the stone in the Black Mountain
out by Cooktown. The only difference is, this baby is much harder. Robbie had
to analyze it standing up. Nothing would cut it, not even his diamond-tip
drill. He's kind of thrown by that, I think..." 
       Ratana's voice brought his eyes back open. "James, all my life you've
protected me, taught me and cared when others didn't bother. Why haven't you
ever made a life for yourself? You've never told me why."
       He propped his chin on a hand and hesitated before answering. "When my
parents died and I went to live with Mick, all I could think about was
becoming a doctor. Then, when Mick taught me about our people, I knew I had to
do something about the problems I saw all around me, something to help. When
every avenue was blocked to me because my mother was Aborigine, I realized the
only way I could do anything positive was to find proof of our right to be
here, our right to claim the land." 
       He paused, staring unseeingly at the computer screen. "I never made
time for a personal life before. No woman caught my eye, even though my
cousins paraded every girl over twelve and under fifty my way." He smiled a
tired smile and poked her in the side. "Now, it's in the hands of the gods. I
have other more important things to see to." His gaze returned to the open
tent flap. 
       The exasperation in Ratana's tone yanked James's attention back to the
conversation. "It's clear you're attracted to her and she to you. Get a life,
Uncle. Give her a go."
       "Listen to you. Just a kid and giving me advice about my love life.
What about you and Nathan? You two are closer than soul mates but you never
told me about that either. Now's your chance, luv." He hoped to get her off
the subject of Samantha Louis.
       She lowered her eyes and came as close as she could to blushing, but
she didn't answer the question.
       His weak smile almost reached his eyes. "That's what I thought. Well,
this isn't the time to be sitting around talking about my personal life. We
have to get this thing out of here and somewhere safe. How the hell can we do
it? Maybe she can help if I let up and be nice." He shrugged at his lame joke
then ran his hands through his damp hair again. "I have to get back out there.
Our fearless government has arrived and I'm not so sure they won't arrest us."
He started to stand up. Ratana pushed him back down into the chair.
       Squatting down beside him, Ratana reached up to grasp his hand. "You
okay, James? You look more stressed than you should over this thing. You're
letting them get to you before the fight has even started. That's not like
you. At the settlement, you used to teach us kids to always look for
opportunities, to be more, reach out more than we were born to be or have.
Here's our chance and you fizz out on us. Or did this Sheila get to you? Have
you finally met a woman who can get through that thick hide of yours?" Her
deep brown eyes peered into his, assessing how well her jibes were working. 
       He shot a disgusted sideways look told her, telling her that the old
trick didn't work anymore. "Can it, Ratana. I'm not passing on the opportunity
and I'm not stressed over those damned reporters either, Ms. Louis included.
I'm just tired and I am worried Eddy may have taken something the government
people will use against us. I want this thing secured before all the vultures,
academic as well as military and government, get to it and ruin our chances of
deciphering it." 
       "That can only mean your old nemesis is on her way then; our
illustrious Queensland MP herself. Don't worry, we'll be set up by the time
she gets here. She won't be laughing at our work this time. By the way, I got
the rubbings of all the symbols for you. I hid them and the fragments in your
car boot before anyone tried to lock us down and take away all we collected.
We have plenty of time to just talk. So, tell me ... what's eating away at
you? I'd like to help you for a change instead of the other way around." An
impish smile twitched her lips. 
       In spite of her smile, James felt irritation at this unaccustomed
Page 9

bombardment into his private feelings. He suppressed the feeling and
deliberately smiled back at her. 
       "Thanks, little sister, but I'm fine; really I am. I'm just out of
fuel, I think. I didn't sleep last night. I kept waking up and crawling out to
stare at that stone. There's something about it that seems familiar to me ...
Hell, I'm just getting too old for this anymore ... and I know it's just a
matter of time before the military comes in here and grabs it all."
       "That's what you keep saying but maybe this time the Uni will back you
up. Maybe..." The impish look left her face and was replaced with a deep frown
when James didn't respond.
       He reached down to scratch a mosquito bite on his thigh then sat back
and looked hard at Ratana. "Look, I know Peter Howard is on his own when it
comes to shooting down my work. Thank God the University board is willing to
give me time to prove my claims. It really pisses Peter off too. When this
proves out, he'll be out ... finally. At least we'll have something to work on
when it happens, thanks to you." He patted her hand then stood up, stretching
his back. "Which reminds me. I have to call the bastard, much as I hate to
talk to him. He'll have to get somebody to cover my classes next week." 
       Ratana pointed to the cell phone sitting beside the computer. "You
might as well get it over with." She smirked as he rose to place the call. 
       James heard the phone connect and waited with tense muscles for the
confrontation he knew was sure to come. When Peter spoke, James let out his
breath. "Hello Peter. It's James Hay here. I'm calling from the site." He knew
he was speaking in stiff, clipped sentences but couldn't stop himself. "Look,
Peter, I'm on to something big here and I need you to find a replacement
lecturer for my classes for the next few weeks."
       Peter's deep, lazy reply came through the line sounding like a tinny
recording. "No way, Hay. You get your ass back here and fulfill your contract.
That bullshit you chase can wait until you have a holiday." 
       James could hear the glee in his voice and gritted his teeth. "Dammit,
Peter, you know I can go to the board and bypass your authority. They gave me
leave to pursue this and you know it. You may be the Chancellor but they hold
the moneybag. Are you really going to force me to call them again? Besides, in
spite of your determination to inject pettiness into our working relationship,
I still believe in calling you as a professional courtesy." 
       "Well, don't bother, I don't want or need a professional courtesy from
you. One of these days I'm going to show you up for the crook and fraud you
are, you know. Besides, you know that I can delay anything you want to do for
so long that you might as well not do it to begin with." This time, Peter did
laugh. "So don't give me any of your shit, Hay. I'm not in the mood for it."
       James felt anger, bitter and black, rising within and struggled to
contain it. "Only a scientific idiot like you would be this blind to fact,
Peter. And get this through that thick skull of yours, you may be able to make
things hard on me but you can't stop me. And while we're on the subject, I
caught your nephew, Eddy, trying to steal my data. I know you put him up to
it. What I can't figure out is why you want it when you think it's worthless."
James allowed a sneer of contempt to saturate his words.
       The pause on the end of the line delighted James. He could imagine
Peter frantically trying to figure out some way to deny his nephew's behavior.
When Peter spoke, his voice was strained. "What my nephew does has nothing to
do with me. I'm not interested in your fantasies or your make-believe data.
You may have the board fooled into thinking your little trips have value, but
I know you're only fleecing them out of the cost of a free trip for yourself
and your primitive black friends."
       Before James could reply to his racist remark, Peter snapped, "Get back
down here and arrange for your classes yourself. And don't call me for
anything again, Hay." He slammed the phone down so hard it came through the
line with a crack. 
       James laughed out loud, knowing he'd bettered Peter Howard for a
change. It felt good. He smiled down at Ratana, who was acting like she hadn't
Page 10

heard the entire conversation.
       She was watching the activity in the clearing while casually braiding
her hair. In a calm voice she asked, "What do you want to do about the site?"
She snapped a band on the end of her hair and looked up at him. "And how soon
do you want to leave?"
       Distracted by the hum of people moving about, he muttered, "We have to
protect it somehow." His gaze shifted to the clearing. "How long do you think
Mick and Nathan can keep the reporters and military out? Aboriginal rights
only stretch so far. I don't think Mick's elder status will keep them out for
long and Nathan's young guards are way too overzealous for comfort. The whole
thing is waiting to go nuclear if we're not careful here. Do you think we can
hold them off for another day or two?" His eyes searched hers, knowing the
answer before she spoke.
       Shaking her head she replied, "Not for that long. Nathan told me
earlier that the military guys are only waiting because some government bigwig
told them to hold back until she can get here from Cairns. When she does,
they'll be all over us like flies on a dead roo. I don't think anything is
going to stop them after that." 
       "It's got to be Henson. She's been waiting to use my research to invade
the Aboriginal lands for a long time now and I think that asshole, my boss, is
working with her. This is just what she's been waiting for. I should walk away
from this and let your grandfather handle it. Maybe then she'd back down."
       "James, I don't even want to hear you talk like that to me. You've
never quit on anything when it was important. This is important. When Nathan
and I needed someone at the settlement, you were there. Grandpa didn't raise
you for nothing, you know. You're special ... special to all of us who call
you family, and this is something you've worked hard for. You of all people
know you can't back down from the bloody vultures that want to steal the rest
of our land. Now, old timer, get off your bum and let's go see what we can
find out about this alien stone we've been given."
       Almost completely lost in thought, James almost missed the twinkle that
leapt into Ratana's eyes as she obviously decided to drop the other bomb on
him, no doubt hoping to get him fired up again. "Oh, I almost forgot to tell
you. Mick told me to tell you the elders of the clan will be here soon. They
want to speak to you about this thing. He says it's a message they've waited
for and they seem to believe you've been chosen to understand it for our
people. Anyway, he'll talk to you when he gets here." 
       James decided to ignore her feeble attempts to get him riled. His lips
twitched into a tiny smile then settled into a serious compressed line. He
took a deep breath and ran long fingers through his already tousled and sweaty
hair. "Thank God. I can use Mick's help right about now. What about the mob
Nathan's boys are holding back?"
       "As for how long the guys can keep the mob off us, I have no idea, but
I can tell you one thing. If anybody can manage it, Nathan can. Come on; let's
go get scientific. That always cheers you up. Take your stuffy teacher tie
off, put your 'Indiana Jones' hat on and get your adventurer spirit in gear,
mate. It's time for a new adventure." She nudged him in the ribs, tossed his
old, battered Digger hat at him and then moved off toward the clearing. 
       When her tall, broad back was no longer visible through the
undergrowth, James went back into the tent. Pulling the last computer disk out
of the drive and putting it into his short's pocket beside the first, he
muttered, "Damn it, she's right! I can't lay down now and let the government
take it away." Staring at the computer, he continued, "I hope Eddy didn't
manage to get anything else out to those sharks. This is my chance to show
that fat bastard at the University I've been right about Dreamtime and the
mysteries happening here all along. When Ms. Louis is finished, Peter Howard
will shit himself, and I hope he slips in it and falls on his fat ass when he
does.
       Cheered up by the mental image of the Vice Chancellor at the University
sprawled in the middle of his own waste, James shut off the computer and
Page 11

headed back to the site. When he approached the clearing, the absolute quiet,
in contrast to its former hum of activity, set off mental alarms. He could see
the group of students and village volunteers standing and facing the stone in
the middle of the circle. A group of soldiers stood frozen in place on the
road leading into the site. They shifted nervously, obviously uncertain what
to do in this situation. Their officer stood glaring at the elders with the
look of someone who wished he could be somewhere else. The news people handled
their cameras and tape recorders, taking their cue from the military but not
liking it. Nathan and his friends stood beside the road, angry at their
failure to stop the mob from gaining entrance. All of them remained motionless
and silent. And all of them faced the stone. 
       Standing off to the side and partially under the vine screen, he saw
Samantha Louis and her young sidekick filming the drama unfolding in the
clearing. The look on her face reflected the mood of the crowd standing inside
the clearing-a mixture of fear, awe and indecision. The deadly quiet bound all
of them to each other, to the stone and to the people themselves. When James
stepped out of the tangle of thick bush, he understood the reason for their
silence. 
--------
         *CHAPTER TWO*
       Seven elders of the local Aboriginal settlement encircled the stone,
hands held and heads bowed. Each gray-bearded man sported intricate face
paintings covering his broad features. A pure white headband with Aboriginal
dot pictures of animals racing across them encircled their foreheads. 
       Three younger men, clad in native loincloth and unpainted headbands,
squatted behind the circle, ready with traditional clapping sticks and
didgeridoos, the Aboriginal equivalent of a horn. When James halted in front
of the undergrowth, they began to play, a slow, mournful tune he seldom heard
played outside secret elder meetings. 
       The old men began a slow shuffling dance around the obelisk, chanting
in their native tongue, each sharing his piece of the Dreamtime song with the
world, merging it into the story of creation. James understood the ritual
enough to know that what they were doing was very seldom performed and usually
of great importance to the clan. It related to how the sun was created from
the primordial mud on the first day and the moon and stars rose from the same
source that night. Then how the sun warmed the aged and decrepit sleeping
ancestors in their waterholes. They emerged from the mud and sang the world
into existence from the clods of earth around them. It told of the Lizard man,
the Rainbow-snake man, the Kangaroo man, the Wombat man and all the rest of
the totemic species on the 'song-line' that each Old One traveled in his
lifetime ... the beginning of the world and its dreams.
       The elders' voices rose to passionate heights as they sang of their
burden and their joy. How they were chosen as kirda (boss) and kutungurlu
(guardian-policeman) for the land; how they must maintain and protect those
secret places that the ancients claim as their resting-places. 
       They told of their song-line to those following in the generations. The
song soared when it told of the universal music of the path of their Ancestors
and the Dancing in the spirit. It explained their Dreaming. The Dreaming that
is their sect, their ancestry, their totems, their intricate kinship and their
relationships with the earth and with those unseen things that rule their
pathways. The song told of things past and things to come; magical, mystical
things. 
       James struggled to throw off the magic of the song being woven around
the obelisk and the elders who held it in their minds. He slowly emerged back
from the place the music transported him to; a place of peace, harmony and
joy. He shook his head, dispelling the disquieting, gauzy feeling of unreality
threatening to engulf his mind permanently. He made himself focus on the here
and now, knowing he must be alert and aware to what was happening around the
stone. 
       When his eyes scanned the faces of the watchers, they fell on the large
Page 12

group of outsiders observing from the dirt track. Obviously on their way into
the clearing when the music started, they too had halted and now stared,
fascinated, at the ritual unveiling in front of them. He frowned in irritation
when he spotted the cameras and uniforms of news people and military
personnel. "At least they have enough respect to keep their distance until
it's done," he muttered under his breath. 
       His gaze settled on Sam's swaying form amongst the vines. He found he
could not tear his gaze away from her. The light shining around her seemed to
showcase her tall, long-legged body. He felt caught up with her, both of them
lost in a sensual dance of intertwining souls. Her eyes dazzled him with the
turquoise blue facets radiating from them, creating a prism of light around
her face that gave him a sense of Mother Earth and the sea that nurtured her.
His body and mind wanted to reach out to her, merge with her-consume her and
never leave the comfort of her arms. He knew she was lost in the weave of the
magic and he wanted to join her.
       When the volume and intensity of the chant rose, James was drawn away
from Sam and back into the circle of men dancing and singing. He felt the
music's vibrations reach inside him, compelling him to sway with its beat and
return to that plane of existence that knew all, told all and held all.
Remembered words from his childhood translated snatches of the song. The
images of ancient beliefs and prophecies returned to him as he watched the
head elder, Mick, his grandfather, lead the circle around the stone. He saw
this man, his gentle hands wrapped around James's small boy's head. Mick's
expressive brown eyes, so dark they were almost black, burrowed deep into
James's gray ones, relaying comfort and security. His low, soothing voice,
vibrant with passion and awe, spoke of the days of Dreamtime, the promise of
the Old Ones and what it would bring to his people when they returned to
enlighten the world once again. 
       James stood transfixed by the sight of the ritual, anchored to long ago
memories. The chant and dance reached fever pitch. He strained with its
intensity then it abruptly ended on a deafening single word, accompanied by
the clashing notes of the instruments. When the last note ended the stone
shattered into dust, scattering brilliant iridescent motes high into the air.
All motion and sound stopped as they lazily settled to the ground, the moment
frozen in time. The stunning vacuum of sound and space that remained
transfixed all who were touched by it. The magic spell binding the onlookers
evaporated when the stone disappeared. 
       The resulting uproar of motion and noise that ensued temporarily
deafened him, but also served to restore his stunned wits. The clearing came
alive with human activity as soldiers rushed to cordon off and inspect the
spot where the stone once stood. Reporters and cameramen swarmed around the
site, frantically filming and speaking in high-pitched voices into tape
recorders. 
       Ratana, transfixed like the others, abruptly came to herself when a
chunk of the black rock fell at her feet. She stooped to pluck it from the
clay and quickly slipped it into her pocket. She scanned the chaos around her
and gasped when she saw her granduncle, Mick, barely withstanding all the
bodies rushing around his frail form. She hurried toward him, catching up with
James when he lunged to grab Mick, preventing him from collapsing under the
feet of the crowd.
       James, stunned with disbelief, asked the old man, "Mick, are you okay?
My God! What just happened?" 
       Mick's frail body slumped against James's strong arm. He blinked up at
James. "My son, it is the message we have waited for. It tells of things you
must know; things you must find. Help me over to your tent where I can sit and
rest." He indicated the table and chairs sitting beside James's tent,
partially hidden in the deep shadow of the rainforest. 
       Waving away Ratana's offer of another arm, he waved his fingers at her
and peevishly demanded, "Go now, daughter of my brother. I will call when it
is time for you." Without hesitation, she nodded in respect then turned back
Page 13

to stand under a tree, observing the chaos within the circle. She cringed when
soldiers brutally pushed back students and tribal volunteers and encircled the
site. A crowd of news people frantically snapped photos. When an officer
bellowed at them, a knot of soldiers quickly moved to block their view. 
       James helped Mick over to the stool and gently eased him down. "What
about the others, grandfather? Will they be all right?" he asked, anxiously
watching the remaining elders as they sat, unmoving, in the clearing,
steadfastly ignoring the shouts of the soldiers and the flashing of the
cameras.
       "They will soon recover from the visions and they will hold their
position until it is finished. Before the others come for us, I must speak to
you of the black stone." He grabbed James's arm and pulled him down onto a
chair until James faced the old man, eye to eye, his grip surprisingly strong.
He held out a leathery fist and grabbed James's hand until the two met. His
fist opened and something hard pressed into James' palm. He opened his hand
slowly and gasped. The part of the obelisk containing the engraved image of a
horse now lay there. He slowly closed his fist and squatted next to Mick,
searching the old man's face. Mick solemnly gazed back and continued. "I knew
who it was meant for when it came to me. So do you, my grandson. The messages
on the stone speak of a quest; a quest you must make for our people. You
cannot refuse, my son." His solemn face peered deeply into James's eyes as he
spoke.
       "Me? A quest? What quest and why me? Speak plainly, Mick." A flood of
excitement gripped his chest. His breathing quickened.
       "The stone speaks in the language of the rock pictures. Your Dreaming
totem sits upon them. You must go where it leads you. You must follow its
song-line to the secret place the stone will lead you to." 
       "My totem? You mean my horse tattoo? But you told me there is no such
sign for the Aborigine people. It was tattooed on me at birth and unknown to
any of the elders. I'm not..." James started to protest.
       "Yes, you are. The people are of the heart. Your mother, a much-missed
daughter, was of the heart. You are of the heart. Your totem has been chosen.
It sits atop the totems of the old language and of our people. It speaks of
ancient ones that have no speech. They wait for your coming. You must go."
Mick's stern look and tighter grip silenced James's words. The old man held
out his crabbed hand to James. James accepted it with awe. The old man nodded
approval. "You have gone to do the will of the people before, my grandson, as
your mother before you. This time, you do the will of the world. There is no
other path." 
       His eyes met Mick's in understanding. "Where did it say I have to go
for this quest? Did it tell what I'm to do and when?" James sat straight, his
face somber.
       "It speaks of going to the southern regions and finding the place of
meeting. That is all I can tell you. The spirit of the horse will lead where
you must go. I do not know this spirit, but I do know it carries the rainbow
with it, as you do. Both are of the earth and the earth will lead you. You
must have faith, the faith of your childhood. It is important you do this
thing and do it now. There is no time left." The old man's hand fell to his
side in fatigue. "Now take me back to the circle." He rose and James took his
arm, supporting him as they walked.
       A knot of military men stood like wooden soldiers around the elders,
hands poised above sidearms. James and Mick made their way toward the elders,
pointedly ignoring the armed guards. A young, smooth-faced officer, looking
like he'd put on his brand new uniform for the first time, stepped up to them
when they reached the circle. "Doctor Hay. I have been authorized by the
Australian government to secure this site and impound any and all information
and data you possess about it." His clipped military declaration accompanied a
glare, designed to give the impression of mature authority.
       The officer handed James an official looking document. When James
spotted Hensen's name on it, he stuck into his pocket without reading any
Page 14

further. Scanning the area for Ratana, Nathan or Maggie, he was relieved to
see the circle empty of all but the soldiers. "Captain, it would seem there's
nothing here for you to secure or impound anymore, but you're welcome to what
you can find." He answered in a mocking tone, waving his hand around the empty
circle.
       "Maybe I can help, Captain." Sam strode up to the young officer and
handed him a folded paper. He opened it and as he read what it contained, his
face became grim and stoical. He folded it back up slowly then, after a small
hesitation, handed it back to Sam with a surly nod. Without another word, the
officer motioned to his men and strode off toward the tent with two soldiers
in tow.
       "I don't know what you have there, Ms. Louis, but it must be something
pretty potent to get the military to back off." James's words and smile of
pleasure broke the silence that ensued after the soldier's hasty retreat.
       His smile seemed to take Sam completely off guard. Her voice shook when
she answered. "It's a document from some government official ordering any
military personnel to give full cooperation to us while we're here. My boss is
a personal friend and he managed to get us this document just in case anyone
tried to keep us out of places we needed to get into." Her cheeks glowed a
pleasant pink under his scrutiny. "I know, it's a typical American steamroller
move, but it did get them off your back," she added defensively.
       "Thank you," James said sincerely. He turned back to Mick when he
became aware the old man was plucking persistently at his arm.
       "What, Mick? What is it?" James felt the whole day was slipping into
the realm of the fantastic and almost expected to see a flying saucer overhead
waiting to beam them all aboard.
       "The stone would never have spoken to them anyway. This woman has heard
its call too, my grandson. She is of the Old Ones, as you are. You must take
her with you." Mick stood up straight and pointed to Sam's startled face.
       She whispered, "How did you know?"
       Before James could react to Mick's pronouncement or Sam's response,
Ratana trotted up to Mick and whispered in his ear. "Grandfather, the place is
overrun with soldiers threatening our people. What are we to do, fight or go?
The elders must take the lead now." 
       "Yes, it is time to go, but you must stay with James. He will need you
in the days to come, my child. Trust in your memories and lean on the truths
you have learned." Mick squeezed her hand then walked slowly toward the silent
elders, who were standing and waiting for him. James watched them with a lump
in his throat. His pride and love for the Aborigine people were only
overshadowed by his fear for them.
       When they'd disappeared into the rainforest, James turned to Ratana
with a searching look. "What did he mean by all that?"
       Ratana held herself still as a rock and watched the elders move down
the track leading out into the depths of the rainforest and the settlement
where she'd grown up. James studied her profile as he waited for an answer.
Her features were broad, strong and pronounced. She stood tall for a woman and
her face reflected the deep brown of a pure Aborigine. What softened the
almost masculine look she nurtured were her large, luminous brown eyes. James
still felt protective of her, as he did when she was a toddler trailing after
him throughout the settlement. 
       She was the daughter he knew he'd never have and he loved her with a
strong protective pride. She'd graduated top in her class at the University
and now worked as his field assistant-an arrangement that helped him in more
ways than one. She looked after him like a daughter might, cooking and making
sure his socks matched.
       Her strong voice startled him out of his reverie. "He means you will
need someone you can trust in the days to come. He didn't tell me why, but he
did tell me it would mean the difference between our people staying or being
lost. He told me this yesterday. Now, it's your turn to tell me what all this
is about." She turned her gaze full on him, ignoring Sam standing beside him,
Page 15

and held it unwaveringly, inspecting him in return. 
       "Ratana, I don't know any more about it than you do. That rock had
markings on it that he thinks are important. From what I can tell, most of the
markings resemble those at Split Rock, but some of the glyphs are ones we've
never seen before in any ancient writing. How he knows what they mean is
beyond me and he's not talking yet. But, he did tell me I have to go south and
find the answer to what they mean myself. I'll go, but I don't know where or
what in the south to look for, so I'm stuck." He held up his hands in
surrender. 
       Sam stepped away from the two, seemingly embarrassed at being in the
middle of their conversation, but curious enough about the stone to continue
listening. Ratana, as tall as Sam, stepped closer to James and lowered her
voice while keeping her eyes firmly on Sam. "Not stuck, just in the dark. I
know one thing ... I know we'll be sent the help we need, when we need it.
Things just work that way. I've seen it for myself too many times to question
it any longer. We'll be led where we're supposed to go and find what we're
supposed to find. I think she's one of the things you're meant to find and
take with you." She nodded at Sam, amused at the city woman's efforts to
unstick her high heels from the red clay.
       Giving Ratana another scathing look of disgust, James stalked over to
confront Sam as she still struggled with her shoes. He grabbed her arm and
halted her struggles. "Just slip your shoes off. You'll never get them out
with your weight in them." His tone held a disgust he didn't really feel about
being forced to drag a woman he didn't know along on a trip to nowhere.
Privately, he wondered what it would be like to see those eyes first thing in
the morning. 
       Tossing his hand off, Sam snapped, "Look, maybe you don't mind being
covered with slimy red mud, but I do. I have no intention of walking in this
stuff barefoot."
       "Suit yourself, lady." He started to turn away, when a thought struck
and he turned back to her. "When you've finally gotten yourself unstuck here,
I think you and your photographer friend should leave. As you can see, there
isn't going to be a story here for you. I apologize for wasting your time Ms.
Louis, but you will be sufficiently compensated, I assure you. Now, we have a
lot of work to do here and a lot of packing up. We don't need to have people
underfoot while we're doing it." Again he started to turn away but Sam grabbed
his arm, her fingers digging into the tight muscles under his sweaty shirt. 
       Her grip dug surprisingly strong into his forearm. James wanted to
flinch, but suppressed the impulse when he saw the fire in her eyes. 
       _This is one woman you don't back down to or she'll eat you alive.
Another ambitious woman_, he speculated. 
       "Look, we came almost ten-thousand miles to cover this. I pulled out
all the stops to get my boss to go for this whole story, so I'm not going to
lie to you and say it doesn't matter; it does. This event is one of the
biggest things of the century. I'd like to make sure it's written about
accurately. I'm not going to force you, but did it ever occur to you that we
might have some pull with the government? We also have a huge budget for
research or whatever needs doing. I might be able to help you. What do you
say, Doctor Hay? Give us a chance at least." Marc grinned and walked away,
snapping pictures of what was left of the circle and the camp.
       Samantha managed to ask for his help, without sounding like she was
asking. That impressed James and he had to admit to himself, although he'd
never admit it to anyone else, Ratana was right; he felt strongly attracted to
this woman. It excited and terrified him at the same time. Admiring the blaze
of red hair surrounding her face, he thought, _A very strong woman indeed_. 
       He silently considered what she said and gave himself more time to
really look at her, to gauge her sincerity. 
       _She's attractive, but tries to hide it. Wonder why? Great hair and
eyes. Tall and leggy. Not beautiful, but probably could be if she'd put a
little makeup on. Workaholic, no doubt._ His thoughts kept pulling away from
Page 16

the practical and back to her. 
       Ratana leaned over and whispered, "I told you we'd get what we need for
this trip. She's what we need. She's what _you_ need. Don't be a thick head,
James. Let them come along. The worst that can happen is they get in the way
and we get rid of them later."
       "What makes you so sure they're what Mick was referring to?" James
hissed into Ratana's ear.
       She placed her large, strong hand on his forearm, squeezed for emphasis
and replied, "I'm _not_ sure, but I do know Mick knew we'd be needing help and
this just feels like the right thing to do for some reason."
       He looked into her eyes and noted the sincerity there, then he looked
at Sam's face as she listened to as much of their exchange as she could. He
didn't completely trust her motives or ethics, but he did trust Mick and
Ratana's.
       "Okay, what do you want?" James shrugged, folding his arms and waiting
for her to tell him what the cost of cooperation would be. 
       _Let her make the first move_.
       "You won't regret this. First, if there's nothing here you've hidden
from the Fed's we could see..." she raised her eyebrows waiting to see how he
reacted. He continued to stare, stone-faced at her. "Okay, since there's
nothing here of much interest anymore, can we go somewhere comfortable and
talk? I have a list of questions..."
       "Like where? Back to town or to my place?" He raised his eyebrows in
return.
       Her normally full lips compressed into a thin line, Sam dryly replied,
"We have rooms in Crocodile; at the local hotel. If it's not too much trouble,
I'd like to go change into something more suitable. Would buying you and your
friends dinner be pushing too much?"
       He cocked an inquiring eyebrow at Ratana. She stood unmoving, silent
and stone-faced as she stared into his eyes. Shrugging, he turned back to
Samantha and replied, "Dinner would be nice. We have supplies to pack up here
before we can go anywhere though. Mind if we meet you there later?"
       "I don't mind. We'll be at the Crocodile Hotel in the thriving town of
Crocodile itself. It's the only restaurant in town; actually a pub. Sorry ...
I suppose you already know that." She blushed. "We'll be there in two hours.
Is that enough time?" Sam asked, genuinely pleased that he'd agreed to talk to
her.
       "We'll be there." James replied and abruptly walked away, making his
way toward his tent and shouting for Maggie to get the crew to pack up the
equipment.
         ~*~
"Well. He doesn't believe in 'thank you' or long good-byes, does he?" Marc's
sarcastic tone matched the look on his face when he sauntered back.
       "He only says 'so long' to those he respects and he never says 'thank
you' for something not given with a generous heart." Ratana flatly stated. Her
luminous brown eyes shot fire at Marc. Then she whirled on her heel and left
him and Sam standing there, unsure what her remark meant to the success of
their story.
       "I was always told the Australian people are a friendly lot. Now, I'm
not so sure ... or is it just me?" Marc asked as he watched Ratana pause to
speak to Maggie then disappear into the tent Doctor Hay entered earlier. 
       Sighing deeply, Sam shrugged her shoulders. "I think it's a combination
of scientific arrogance and antisocial attitude. Too bad ... I could go for
the guy. Well, just as long as we get our story. You ready? By the way, remind
me to castrate you later for letting me make a fool of myself and come out
here in a suit. Some friend and colleague you are!" She shoved his shoulder,
almost unbalancing him.
       Snickering, he replied, "Hey! You can't blame me for the way you dress.
You're the one who told me to know what I'm doing here. What about you, didn't
you read up on what the weather is like here? Besides, your suit has pants.
Page 17

It's the heels that don't quite make it, I think." He leered at her as he
spoke.
       She glared at him sideways then started back to the car. When they
reached the rental car, she reached inside and grabbed a pair of tennis shoes.
Sitting down on the car seat, she slipped off the heels, now caked with red
clay, and pulled up her pant legs to remove the knee high hose she wore with
them.
       Marc heard her muffled scream and, slamming the trunk on his camera
equipment, ran over to her side of the car. "What the..."
       Sam had both pant legs rolled up and was plucking things off her legs
with disgust. "You ... you ... shit!" she sputtered as she pulled long,
worm-like leeches off her legs.
       Marc's face turned white at the sight. "Leeches? There are leeches out
here? But we didn't go into any water."
       "If you had read your book on this country as you claim then you'd know
they crawl on the ground and latch onto you as you walk by. I found that out
in Malaysia. Damn! I hate these things! You'd better check your legs too,
Marc. They get up your pant legs."
       His face got even whiter. Without any shyness at all, he unzipped and
dropped his jeans. His legs were covered with them. Sam laughed when he sat
down hard on the red clay and frantically began pulling them off. 
       "I wouldn't sit there, if I was you. You may be acquiring more in
places you won't want them." 
       She laughed out loud when he jumped up faster than he sat down. "This
is quite a country, isn't it?" Her eyes lingered on the flap of James's tent.
Smoldering passion burned deep within her eyes and a violent blush colored her
cheeks.
       _Yes, quite a country all right._
--------
         *CHAPTER THREE*
       The Crocodile Hotel and Pub was located exactly in the center of town,
if you could call it a town. A handful of weathered buildings baked in the
north Queensland sun, each tin-ribbed roof reflected sunrays onto what was
left of the eucalyptus trees scattered around them. Wallabies, normally shy
and in hiding during the day, now blatantly lay under the sparse shade the
trees or buildings provided. 
       Not a soul could be seen on the short, dusty street this time of the
day; not even the ever-present Blue Heeler dogs every drover owned in the
Outback. The hotel seemed to be the only building the owners felt compelled to
paint once in awhile. Sam admired the classic Queensland architecture, but had
real trouble with the color combination of dark green, yellow and orange. 
       "Looks like Halloween is here to stay," Marc observed when they'd
checked in. Next he commented on the locals they could see through the dirty
windows of the first-floor pub. "I think beer drinking is the national career
choice here; that, or chasing sheep."
       As they parked in front of the hotel, Sam elbowed him. "Shut up, Marc.
It's bad enough these Australians think we're arrogant and spoiled without
someone like you adding childish and rude to the list. This story is going to
be written even if I have to knock you out, take your camera and do the photos
myself."
       "Okay, okay. I was just kidding anyway." He got out of the
air-conditioned car and immediately stopped as a wall of heat hit him. "Damn,
this place is hot!" Sweat broke out on his body, soaking his shirt, before he
made it to the trunk and removed the camera equipment. 
       Sam stepped out, covered her eyes with her hand and looked up and down
the street. "Maybe you should get some shots of the town, Marc. Background
stuff." Without waiting for an answer, she turned and made her way to the long
covered verandah surrounding the hotel.
       "It's too hot, Sam. I'll come and get some shots later when the sun
Page 18

won't grill me in the process." 
       She stopped just short of the faded green swinging doors that led to
the hotel's lobby and turned around. "Look, I've had just about enough of your
childishness. Mel may be your uncle and he's my employer for the moment, but
that doesn't make you boss. Is that understood, Marc? This is a job. You know
what a job is? Where you do the work then you get paid? Take the damned
pictures!" She spun around and stormed through the doors. 
       Marc stood next to the rental car, his big hands white with anger, his
dark face suffused with hot blood. His mouth opened, ready to protest. The
words stuck in his throat as he watched her move toward the hotel door. The
pale green camisole she wore clung to her breasts; sweat molded it to her. The
angry words he meant to utter didn't get out until long after she disappeared
into the cool darkness of the hotel; and then they came out as more of a
whimper.
         ~*~
James and Ratana drove into town three hours later. The sun was almost down
and the streets now had people moving toward the pub for the evening's
festivities. 
       "How did Nate do today? Did he have any trouble with the military?"
James asked, leaning forward to peer out of the dusty windshield at the people
walking by.
       "He had a bit of flak with a couple of the soldiers, but his mates kept
it down for a change. He said he'd meet us here later tonight and tell us all
that went on from his side of the camp today. Besides, you know Nate; he'll
want a complete report from you about how it went with the officers. He loves
to hear how we beat them at their own games sometimes." Ratana chuckled and
leaned forward with him, watching the sparse parade of townspeople at dusk.
       James laughed out loud at her remark. "Yes, he is a bit militant
himself, but the man knows what he's about when it comes to the bush. He's a
good mate and a good bushman. Have you two decided when you're going to marry
or has your mum chosen him for you yet?" he asked, peering at her sideways,
waiting for a reaction. It didn't come.
       "She whacked him with the mulga wood last night, in fact. His back has
a nice dark bruise on it. He's a good bloke. I'm satisfied," she commented
without any outward show of deep emotion. 
       James parked the Rover in front of the pub and reached over to grab her
hand. "I wish you both well. Both of you are my family, my clan and my
friends." Embarrassed at the 'White Fella' show of emotions he seldom indulged
in, James squeezed her hand, smiled and opened the door. 
       As they climbed out of the dusty Range Rover, a lanky, almost skeletal
man in a big drover's hat stopped on the wooden walkway and raised a hand
toward them. His bearded face remained solemn and unsmiling, but his attitude
was one of welcome. "G'day, Doc! You and the lil' lady goin' to shout the suds
tonight?" 
       James smiled at the man, noting he probably hadn't taken a bath since
the last time they'd met a month ago. The old man's leathery face beamed under
an oversized bush hat when James said, "G'day, mate. Sure thing. First round
is on me." He turned to Ratana and covered his mouth. "Old Pete's finally lost
those last teeth, I think. He won't smile anymore. Well, he will when he gets
a few beers into him."
       Pete continued to rant on, in spite of being talked around. "'Cos I
have a real strange tale for yer, Doc. Somethin' I know yer'll want to hear.
Yer been tryin' to find out about the things in the rainforest and I found
somethin'; some black stone with scribblin's. I know yer'll want..." 
       James gripped the old man's skinny arms and pushed his face into
Pete's, hoping to get his attention. "Pete, Pete ... what was that you said?
You found something? Start from the beginning and tell me about it."
         ~*~
Sam sat by one of the dusty windows of the pub. She sipped tepid beer and
watched the rough men around the bar with a leery eye. Several men had already
Page 19

tried to pick her up and more than a few offered to arm-wrestle Marc for her.
They good-naturedly accepted the 'no thank you' they got from Sam, but tried
to taunt Marc into joining the Aussie outback version of the Olympics at the
antique wooden bar. Marc rose to the challenge and now sat teetering on an old
stool. He reeled, drunk on local beer and loudly singing ballads of the bush.
However, he still reached out every so often to grab at the barmaid as she
moved back and forth behind him.
       Sam ignored him and studiously watched James and Ratana casually
talking with the old drover. Her anger rose as the minutes ticked by. Her
sandaled foot tapped out the irritation building inside her. She watched James
lounge against the dusty Range Rover and smile as the old man animatedly waved
his arms around, his toothless mouth rambling on.
       "That rude, arrogant, ill-mannered..." Sam pushed her warm beer away
and stood up, ready to storm outside and give him a piece of her mind. 
       "Hey there, lady with the long, purty legs. Would yer be wanting to
have a drink with a lonely, parched man?" A huge hand, dark and covered with
thick black hair, gripped her arm. 
       She stopped in her tracks, slowly turned around and looked up into the
smashed face of a local thug; at least he looked like a thug. The grin pasted
on his face showcased his missing and blackened teeth. The stubble on his face
looked weeks old without having decided to become a beard. His sweat and
food-stained shorts and shirt reeked. The ball of nausea that hit Sam's
stomach while looking at, and smelling, him almost sidetracked her from her
course ... but not for long. She hit him square in the nose with all her
might, paused only long enough to see him grab his face and sit down hard on
the dirty wooden floor, then she stalked to the swinging doors leading out to
the street, her anger hotter than ever. 
       James came through the doors, almost knocking her down in the process.
She ran into his chest with enough force that his automatic response was to
grasp her tightly to him and step back through the doors. "Hey! What...?" When
he saw her face, he stopped and stared at her, his face scowling with concern.
"What happened, Miss Louis?"
       Before she could tell him, the thug came charging out of the pub, his
face a study in rage while his nose dripped blood down his bare chest. He ran
into Sam's back and all three of them, looking like a six-armed beast, fell,
tumbling off the verandah and into the dusty street. Within minutes the
patrons of the pub poured out of the doors and crowded around the tumbling
trio, cheering them on and hoping for a brawl. 
       Sam squealed, smashed between two big men. James grunted on the bottom
of the pile, unable to catch his breath when the thug sprawled, roaring like a
wounded wombat, on top of both of them. 
       Sam regained her breath first. "Get off me, you damned hairy ape!" She
got her legs under her and pushed the thug off, rolling off of James at the
same time. She sprang up and stood, bent at the waist and ready to hit,
glaring at the thug as he groped around on the ground, looking for a handhold
up. He squinted, his eyes clogged with dirt and blood, making it next to
impossible for him to see where he was going. He grabbed the hairy legs of two
drunken men who laughingly pulled him to his feet. They twirled him around to
face Sam and James, hoping to prolong the entertainment. 
       James, gasping for breath and holding his left arm tightly against his
side, was the last to stagger to his feet. He shakily held up his right hand
and croaked, "That's enough, Paulie." Gathering air into his lungs, he
thundered, "Damn it, Paulie, stop this right now!" 
       The big man stopped, spit blood onto the ground, smiled crookedly then
passed out. James walked over, squatted next to the limp body and felt his
pulse. Shaking his head, he pronounced, "He'll live. Tom, Keith, get Paulie
back into the pub and find a dark spot to stuff him into. He'll sleep it off."
He motioned for the two who had helped Paulie to move him. They staggered over
and hefted the unconscious man up, laughing as they made their way back into
the pub.
Page 20

       With shaky legs under him, he felt strong hands on his arms, steadying
him. Ratana on one side and Sam on the other. "Your arm looks broken and your
lip is bleeding. Are you in pain?" Sam asked, her forehead creased with
concern as she used a handkerchief to mop at the stream of blood dripping from
his chin. 
       He took the bloody cloth from her hand and held it against his lower
lip. "Thanks, Miss Louis, but it's not broken." He rotated his arm, flinching
with the pain. "I'm all right. Are you? Paulie landed on you pretty hard. I
know; I was on the bottom of that _menage a trois_." His lopsided smile lit up
his face as he took in the dirt on her face and the scrapes on her knees.
       Her face suddenly looked like sundown as deep pinks, reds and roses
infused her skin. Her eyes flashed emerald. "The whole thing is your fault,
you know. I came out to remind you that you agreed to meet me over an hour
ago. I've been waiting in that pub and fending off baboons in shorts for
almost an hour and a half. I got tired of waiting for you to remember your
manners. That particular ape followed me. So if you don't mind, I'd like to
get this meeting on the road ... unless you have any other people you'd like
to chat with first?" She dusted off her shorts, spun around and stalked back
into the pub, leaving him gaping at her retreating back and shapely backside.
       "She's not much on 'thank you' or 'sorry', is she?" Ratana laughed at
the comical look on his face and slapped him on the back. "Where's she going?
I thought you two had a meeting planned? Better hurry and catch up with her,
mate." 
       Ratana moved away and headed for the truck as he turned to shoot an
appropriately acid retort back at her. She made it to the truck before he
could think of anything suitably nasty.
       Grunting in disgust with the absurdity of women, he moved toward the
pub, determined to show these women how a man kept his self control. He
stalked through the swinging doors and met a fist in the middle of his nose;
then his entire body met the hardwood floor, where he proceeded to take a
much-needed nap.
       He woke up in a dark room, lying in the middle of a soft bed, with a
cool cloth across his forehead. It didn't take away the intense pain in the
middle of his face, though. Wincing, he sat up and held the cloth on his nose
instead. 
       "Ah, you're back in the world of the living, I see." Sam came out of
the kitchenette clutching another cloth, this one filled with ice. She held it
out to him then walked over to the single armchair in the room and sat down.
She picked up a frosted glass of lemonade and gulped the contents half down.
"Now, do you want to tell me why you decided to pick a fight with that ape
again? Wasn't that embarrassing tussle in the street enough to satisfy your
manly urges for violence?"
       His muffled reply had an angry, accusatory tone to it. He settled
himself against the wooden headboard and glared at her, obviously expecting an
answer.
       "I can't understand a thing you're mumbling, Doctor Hay. Would you
kindly take the icepack off your face and answer me, or would you rather wait
until next week when your nose gets back to normal? By the way, it's not
broken. Thought you'd want to know that." She lifted her glass to him, but the
smirk on her face told him she probably was disappointed at the news.
       "I said I didn't pick another fight, I ran into one. He hit me as I
came through the doors. Besides, I only got into the first one because you
came plowing into me. Or did you conveniently forget that part?" He felt like
a little kid returning a taunt for a taunt, but he was unable to stop himself.
       Her bare foot stopped tapping on the wooden floor and she set her drink
back down. Taking a deep breath, she looked at him and said, "Look, we both
want the same things, I think. I want to tell the real story about what's
happening here and you want to protect it from those who would hide it or
exploit it. Right? By telling the world about this, we can both protect it.
We're on the same track, I'd say. Why don't we start over? We got off to a
Page 21

very bad start, but it doesn't have to stay that way. Okay?" She stood up,
smoothed her dirty shorts, walked to the bed and held out her hand to him, a
quirky smile playing on her face.
       His hand slowly came down from his nose, the ice inside melting over
his chest and onto the coverlet. He hesitated. Then he held out his hand and
shook hers firmly. "Okay. I apologize for my rudeness. I'm not ordinarily so
ill mannered. I've been burned by journalists before and this thing has gotten
out of hand. You're right, of course. Telling the truth will protect whatever
is happening here. I guess I could have a worse lot in life than traveling
with a beautiful woman." He knew the smile transformed his face from a serious
one into a ruggedly handsome one, so he flashed his brightest and best smile
at her. Seeing her frown of disapproval, his demeanor switched to one of
seriousness. "All right, you and your friend can come along. _But_, it will be
on my terms. No story or pictures unless I okay the final product. Agreed?" 
       Sam sat down on the bed, still holding onto his hand. "Tell me what you
know, Doctor Hay. Tell me everything that's happened up until today when the
stone disappeared."
       His smile returned. "Call me James if you don't mind, Samantha. If
we're to be partners, we might as well be on a first name basis."
       "All right, James, call me Sam. We can introduce the others as they
show up. Now, let's get this thing on the road shall we?" Her smile matched
his as they looked into each other's eyes, unaware of their hands still locked
together.
--------
         *CHAPTER FOUR*
       The drive down the coast into Townsville from Cairns drained all
James's energy. A long drive, relieved only by the occasional small town, it
boasted hot, muggy and boring scenery for five solid hours. The air
conditioning in his old red van had long ago given up the ghost and the
interior was stifling, even with all the windows down. James drove while
Ratana and Nathan sat in the back with the site's clay-crusted equipment. They
all gulped down large quantities of lukewarm water from their portable
bottles. None felt much like talking after the first hour when they caught up
with each other's versions of current events. 
       When all became silent, James glanced in the rearview mirror to see
Nate and Ratana dozing now that the early evening sky was cooling off and
cooler air was flowing into the open windows. James glanced periodically at
the side mirror and checked to make sure Sam and Marc still followed in their
rental car, a newer model station wagon. "Probably has good air conditioning
too." James mumbled as he checked their position again and wiped away the
sweat dripping down his neck.
         ~*~
Sam drove as Marc, clutching his camera like a teddy bear, dozed in the back
seat. The air conditioning in the Commodore station wagon kept the interior
cool and comfortable. She watched the battered van as it ate up the miles in
front of her. She was glad to follow James. Driving on the left side of a
two-lane road without any major towns along the way didn't make for
confidence, even for an independent American woman. What she did feel was an
overwhelming sense of expectancy.
       The two-vehicle caravan pulled into the parking lot at James Cook
University and stopped in the fading shade of two huge frangipani trees, both
laden with fragrant white flowers. Their scent enveloped Sam when she stepped
from the coolness of the car into the fading heat of the day. She stumbled
dizzily as she tried to correct the lightheaded, almost surrealistic look of
James standing under the canopy of the trees. Sam gaped, moving her head from
side to side in disbelief as he seemed to float suspended in air and time
toward her. His body appeared to undulate toward and around hers; she liked
it. The world surged, then shifted into slow motion. Everything became liquid;
a waking dream.
       She stood frozen to the spot, as her eyes tried to adjust to what
Page 22

appeared to be an ancient person of undetermined sex floating up beside James.
The vision's long hair entwined itself around him, pulling him closer to the
apparition. It whispered in his ear. It stroked his head. It smiled and kissed
his cheeks. It looked up at Sam with sun-red eyes and beckoned her to
approach. Frozen in place, Sam stood rooted to the spot. It disappeared just
as suddenly as it appeared and the world snapped back to reality with the
force of an overstretched rubber band. She stumbled and would have fallen if
the car hadn't been there to lean against. As her world righted itself, she
gasped with the feeling of being reborn.
       "Are you all right, Sam?" Marc stood beside her, holding onto her arm
as she sagged against the hot car. Her eyes tried to focus on James when he
frowned at her, shrugged, then turned to casually chat with his two young
assistants. He flashed one last glance at her then moved toward the low
building. Unable to speak, she nodded and reached back in through the car
window for the cold water bottle nestled next to her seat. She gulped down a
mouthful and steadied herself before standing upright again. "I'm fine. Must
be this heat. Let's go get this story." She gave Marc a shaky smile and
followed James and his group as they made their way toward a squat yellow
building.
       Her legs were like rubbery extensions of her body as she made her way
into a chaotic jumble of lab equipment, computer terminals, and shelves
crammed full of dusty books and jarred specimens that looked like tiny
mummies. "Cute. What do you do for entertainment? Hunt down the deadly
butterfly and mount their little heads on the wall?"
       James walked over to sagging floor-to-ceiling shelves packed with
hundreds of flat wooden boxes and slid one from the stack. He smiled down at
the plain box with fatherly pride and opened it to reveal a layout of
butterflies neatly pinned to a white background. He adjusted the nametag
arranged below one specimen then shifted the box to better catch the meager
light in the room. "Beautiful, aren't they?" he murmured.
       Sam leaned over the box and wrinkled up her nose. "They're gorgeous but
the smell is horrible. Did you catch all these yourself?" she asked, genuinely
impressed with the collection.
       He dragged his gaze from the multi-colored display and searched her
face for a trace of sarcasm. When he saw that her question was sincere, he
flashed a large, white-toothed grin at her. "Yes. I love butterflies. Some
people think it's a girlie hobby, but I've loved them since childhood when I
saw my first beauty in Jamaica."
       "You grew up in Jamaica? How did you end up here?" she asked, her
journalist's curiosity rising in earnest.
       "It's a long story. One I don't care to have spread across a
newspaper." He shut the box and replaced it on the shelf. Turning back to her,
the grin completely gone from his face, he announced, "Now, I have to get on
the phone and coordinate some supplies for this trek down south. Ratana, would
you or Nathan please make some coffee for our distinguished guests? I'll be
back soon." He disappeared through a connecting door into his private office.
       Sam frowned at the closed door. "Touchy! Can't even ask harmless
questions without him getting his panties in a bunch."
       "It wasn't a harmless question, Ms. Louis." Ratana commented from
across the lab table. She held up her hand, palm forward. "And before you
start grilling me with questions, it's his business and I won't answer you
either." The smile that accompanied the statement took the sting out of the
words.
       Sam smiled back, shrugged her shoulders and turned back to the shelf,
retrieving the box. She sat it down on the countertop, opened it and studied
the insects with interest. "Strange man. Hard on the outside and sensitive on
the inside." She glanced up to see Ratana watching her with a knowing look on
her face. Sam turned to inspect the room. "Cramped place for a scientist to
work inside. He must not be too popular with the higher-ups here."
       Marc nodded in agreement as he walked around the lab, curiously
Page 23

touching and examining all the stainless steel equipment. In awe, he muttered
to no one in particular, "This place looks like something out of a mad
scientist movie." He raised the small camera slung around his neck, focused it
and scanned the room.
       Nathan, looking calm and cool in shorts and sandals, started to sit
down. Ratana stopped him with a look. "Nat, go unload the equipment from the
van and collect the stuff we'll need for down south. You know he'll want to
leave right away."
       He made a disgusted sound through his nose. "The guy thinks we're all
running on limitless energy like he is." When he smiled, his big white teeth
lit up his face. "Oh well, he's worth it, I suppose." He shrugged, smiled
again at Sam, then looked at Ratana and lifted a finger to his forehead,
saluting her with charming Aussie cockiness. He used the same finger to point
at Marc with a different attitude. "Hey, mate, give me a hand. We need some
equipment from the office next door." 
       Marc looked at Sam questioningly, a frown on his face. She grimaced at
him. "Oh, go help, Marc. Make yourself useful. There's nothing to film here."
She shoved at his arm, throwing him off balance and into Nathan. 
       Nathan laughed and shoved Marc from the other direction. Marc pushed
back, laughing like a boy. When Sam and Ratana glared at them, they grinned at
each other and headed for the door. Like two schoolboys in a battle of
one-upmanship, the two men left after a small scuffle to see who could get out
the door last. When they left so did all activity and sound.
       Aware of the unsettling stare Ratana now placed on her and the lack of
conversation, Sam inspected the hundreds of stacked wooden boxes. "This guy is
into everything, isn't he?"
       Ratana sat down on the stool next to a high counter. Her brown legs
twined around the metal legs and she perched her elbows on the counter as she
watched Sam inspect the room. 
       "Not everything; just everything he thinks he can prove."
       Sam turned around to face her. "Prove? You mean he's a ghost hunter?"
Her deep throaty laugh echoed throughout the room.
       Ratana chuckled with her. "Not exactly. James hunts answers to
mysteries. He's a scientist who unwillingly believes in the unbelievable and
he's determined to justify it to the rest of the world by finding hard
evidence. That's not so strange, is it?"
       Sam turned back to inspect the jars and containers lining the shelves.
"No, I suppose not. What's hard to believe is that a man with his education
and intelligence believes it without proof to begin with. What's even more
surprising is that a big university like this one would pay his way to chase
these wild stories down. I thought all academics were stodgy and
narrow-minded."
       "I think you'll find things are much different here than in your
country, Ms. Louis. You also need to remember who and what he is to understand
it. As for the university, they fund his studies because he's been doing this
for many years now and he's actually disproved some of it for them. Only,
Peter Howard, the head of this department, is so jealous of James that he does
what he can to sabotage James's investigations. It's a dual-edged sword he
walks and he knows it."
       "Ah ... they give him enough rope to hang himself then. That makes more
sense to me." Sam strolled over to inspect a shelf crammed with hardbound and
very dusty books. "What did you mean, I'd have to remember who and what he is
to understand him?" She peered at Ratana out of the corner of her eye.
       "You'll find out. Just keep in mind that rigid opinions about what we
don't know usually leads us down false paths." She paused and relaxed her
tensed back. "You like him, don't you?" Her brown eyes deepened as they
studied the woman's body language; it screamed surprise.
       Sam plopped onto a stool facing Ratana's. She plucked a Kleenex from
her shoulder bag and mopped the sweat from her face. "The air conditioning
feels great. I thought I'd melt when we got out of the car." 
Page 24

       "You're avoiding my question, Ms. Louis. Didn't anybody ever tell you
it's rude to do that, especially when it's something so obvious?" Ratana
raised her black eyebrows, widening her eyes even more.
       Sam dropped her hands and deliberately looked squarely into the other
woman's eyes. "You _are_ direct, aren't you? Okay. I can be blunt, too. Is he
yours?" She set her mouth and waited for a confrontation. What came next
surprised her.
       Ratana laughed, long and hard. "That is rich, truly rich. Is he mine?"
She continued to snigger until Sam's look of perplexed anger stopped her. "I'm
sorry. It's just a very funny question. He raised me. When James came to our
settlement, he was a scared teenaged boy, orphaned and alone. He came to live
with our grandfather, Mick, the elder you met at the site." Ratana settled her
arms onto the countertop and continued. "I used to follow him around like a
puppy. I couldn't get over his beautiful pale skin and I had a crush on him.
He became my mentor, my friend, and I respect him as family. That's why I call
him Uncle. No, he is not mine, he belongs to no one but himself." 
       Ratana's white-toothed smile set Sam at ease. "I'm sorry. I didn't mean
to be insulting. I'll be just as forthright as you are; yes, I like him." Sam
blushed. "I never heard you call him Uncle." She smiled back at the young
woman still smiling at her. Her face softened. "I hope we can become friends,
Ratana." 
       "Oh, we will. I'm sure of it." 
       Ratana stated this so matter-of-factly Sam frowned at it. "What do you
mean by that? How can you be so sure?"
       "Because I have the sight and I know it will be. I also know there is
death in the wind to the south." Ratana freed her legs from the stool and
stood up, stretching.
       "You know..." Sam, startled and deeply curious now, halted in mid
sentence when James reappeared out of his office. He stalked into the room and
halted next to the stack of cases on the wall.
       "That son of a bitch. That bloody bastard. That..." He slammed his fist
on the counter next to Sam, his face contorted with anger and disbelief. Sam
jumped but remained silent; as did Ratana, who waited for him to finish the
tirade she knew was coming.
       He brushed dust off the stool next to Sam and plopped down. Taking a
deep breath, he flashed an embarrassed smile at her. "Sorry. I don't usually
get so bad tempered but Peter Howard, the head of my department, has a problem
with my personality and my work. He loves to block me at every turn."
       Sam raised her eyebrow. "Your boss disapproves of your work? Why?"
       "The man has a personal dislike for me that I've never been able to
figure out. He goes out of his way to make my life miserable, in spite of the
fact I obtained university approval to study these things for the Indigenous
Peoples Department. He doesn't believe in what I do, for one thing. He thinks
it's all fairy tales and spook stories. Fact is, so does most of the
scientific community. It doesn't matter." He ran his fingers through the wild
mop of hair on his head. "I had to bypass him just to get a damned four-wheel
drive for the trip, but I got it. Are you ready to leave or do you need to
stop somewhere first?" 
       The impatient look on his face stopped her from asking to get a room,
shower and food. "As long as we grab something to eat on the way, I'm ready to
go now."
       "Good." He turned to Ratana. "Would you go check and see if Nathan has
the equipment ready? Stan is bringing the Rover around front soon and I want
to be ready." 
       Ratana nodded and unceremoniously left. The silence returned, even
deeper than before. James sat awkwardly, playing with a specimen jar on the
counter while Sam returned to peer into the open butterfly box. Shoving the
specimen aside, James abruptly stood up and shut it with a loud thud. "Time to
go." He moved toward the door.
       "Hey! What about your classes? Don't you have to stay until they're
Page 25

finished?" Sam asked with perverse humor.
       He spun around and glared at her. "Don't worry about my schedule, Ms.
Louis. I take care of my own business." He stalked toward the door.
       Sam watched as his tall frame moved fluidly out the door. He reached
the veranda then turned and waited expectantly for her to follow. Slowly, she
stood and walked out the door and, without a glance, strode past him.
Instantly, sweat soaked her plain cotton blouse when she stepped off the
covered porch into the blazing sunlight. The Rover sat packed and ready at the
curb. Marc snapped pictures of a flock of black cockatoos brawling over
eucalyptus blossoms in the trees nearby. He seemed to enjoy their raucous
screaming, joining in the noise with his own warped imitations of their
voices. Ratana and Nathan stood under a shade tree talking to a wizened old
man dressed in wrinkled khaki shorts and worktop. It was clear they preferred
to ignore Marc's antics. As Sam approached with James right behind her, their
conversation stopped. 
       James stuck out his hand to the old man. "Thanks, Stan. I appreciate
your help. By the way, would you take this and put it in your safe at
Indigenous Studies? You're the only one I trust in this place to watch out for
it for me." James held out the computer disk, a chunk of black rock and a
packet of pictures. 
       Stan smiled, showing off his lack of teeth. "Sure thing, mate. No
worries. You just ask for them back when ya want 'em." He cackled. "That old
arse boss of yours won't get 'em from old Stan." He cackled again and shambled
off toward the main buildings of the University.
       James turned and walked to the knot of people now waiting around the
vehicle. "Everything ready to go, Nathan?" James asked, inspecting the Rover.
       "Yep, Uncle. It's all there and packed down tight, just like you said."
The teasing tone in his voice brought a tiny smile to James's mouth.
       "Okay, okay. I'm sorry. You know how I get when I get in the middle of
these things." James opened the driver's side door and sat behind the wheel.
He turned it on and set the air conditioning up to high.
       Marc, Ratana and Nathan climbed into the back, leaving Sam to sit in
the passenger seat. "By the way, do you have any idea where we're going? I
haven't heard anybody say anything about maps or directions yet."
       "We're going to the only place I know that has anything like this
strange black rock down south. We're going to the Glass House Mountains. It's
a place where so many strange, unexplained things happen even the hardcore
cynics are afraid to go there. It's also a place where a great many people
disappear each year. They're never found or heard from again. That's where
we're going." He put the Rover into gear and drove out of the parking lot.
--------
         *CHAPTER FIVE*
       "When the hell are we going to get out of this damned car? And where
the hell are we?" Sam alternated between glaring at James's set jaw and
staring at the blackest, wettest night she'd ever seen. The headlights, with
their ineffectual illumination, did little to reassure her. The rutted red
clay road they bounced and slid over, its path barely discernible through the
heavy rain, was a nightmare. Indistinct outlines of crooked, towering trees
flashed by the window. Every time a lightning flash lit the road and the
twisted shape of one of the trees rushed past her window, she flinched,
expecting it to be some prehistoric monster ready to pounce on the car and
devour them whole.
       James continued to stare at the road, his eyes slitted in
concentration. "To answer both your questions, we're coming into a little town
called Sapphire. After we pass through it won't be long before we hit a big
town called Emerald. We'll stop then, not before." 
       His clipped, calm answer only deepened her already bad mood. "This road
is the darkest, loneliest_, worst_ excuse for a road I've ever had the
misfortune to travel over, if you can call it a road. Why did we have to go
this way, or is it okay to question your judgment? Isn't the coast road
Page 26

everyone else uses good enough for us?" She moved restlessly in her seat,
adjusting her seat once again and grimacing as she gingerly rubbed the knots
forming in her lower back.
       Moving carefully to avoid waking Ratana and Marc, one snoring softly on
each side of him, Nathan stuck his head between the front seats and politely
touched Sam's shoulder. "Ms. Louis, we had to come this way. Remember the
radio announcement about a sudden cyclone hitting Bowen? That's south of
Townsville on the coast road. We couldn't go that way." He tapped Sam's
shoulder harder, emphasizing his words. "It is a sign leading us this way. It
is important we do this according to what comes to guide us. To do otherwise
would be unacceptable and dangerous."
       Sam turned to look at Nathan's profile in the darkened car, the green
dashboard lights making his features look like something out of a Stephen King
novel. "Are you serious? Are you trying to tell me the gods told us to come
this way by sending a freak cyclone to hit the way south? Come on!"
       "It be true." 
       His simple, flat statement pulled Sam upright in her seat. She turned
to search his face. "Okay. I'll accept that ... for now. I have one more
question you might be able to answer. Would you tell me what the gods want of
us and why? Do you know?" 
       "I know but I cannot tell. It would mean death to tell those not of the
People." He abruptly pulled back into the darkness of the rear seat and fell
silent.
       Her mouth hanging open, Sam turned to James. "Can you tell me what this
is all about?"
       He ignored her. "This is Sapphire we're coming into now."
       Sam glared at him then leaned forward to get a better view of the town
through the streaming windshield. The intermittent lightning flashes revealed
a small, rough looking town of few buildings, most rundown with tin roofs.
"Why do they call it Sapphire? Are the gems found here?"
       Before James could respond, a brilliant white light flashed through the
windshield. James slammed on the brakes, sending the Rover sliding over the
slick clay of the road. It shuddered, turned sideways and moved steadily
toward a concrete block building sitting next to the road. Sam's eyes widened
and her mouth opened in a silent scream as the Rover aimed toward the solid
wall of concrete. The world slammed into slow motion, the scene surreal and
filled with colors normally unseen by the human eye. Cracks of thunder became
physical entities. They roared through the car and shattered the night with
piercing arrows of light, penetrating Sam's closed eyelids like shafts of
white-hot lava. The humid, cloying smell of plant and earth permeated the car,
giving its small space the funeral reek of death. Sam gagged, clutching her
ears with shaking hands.
       Another bright flash of lightning caused Sam's eyes to snap open to see
the lone figure of a tall black man dressed only in a loincloth, a spear in
hand, his face covered with the traditional painting of a highly respected
Aboriginal Elder. He stood, statue-like, upon the hill just behind the
building they now moved toward. With exaggerated and maddening slowness, he
raised the spear and pointed it at the Rover. A heartbeat later he threw back
his head and raised both arms into the night. Fingers of lightning flickered
around him, appearing as a multi-colored snake, slithering to protectively
surround his body. Almost as quickly as the snake appeared, it vanished. His
lips mouthed words into the feral wind battering his body. A brilliant
blue-white light surrounding him threw his face into relief, his broad
features taking on the etched look of the red clay he stood upon. With a
bone-crushing snap, the Rover stopped moving, the passenger side door halted
by a wall of air just inches from the concrete. The storm died as suddenly as
it started and the figure on the hill disappeared with it. An eerie silence
enshrouded the Rover, its passengers still locked into a numbing state of
shock. The world subtly slipped back into place when a whimper from the
backseat filled the Rover with sound again.
Page 27

       "_Who_ was that?" Ratana's voice quivered with fear. She gulped air, on
the verge of panic. "Crikey, what was that around him? The Rainbow Serpent?"
Her voice lowered to a stunned whisper. 
       "You saw him, too?" James whispered hoarsely then cleared his throat.
"You saw the Aboriginal man on the hill, too?"
       Sam reached out and grabbed James's hand, her own hands shaking and
slick with sweat. Her facial muscles worked to attain a look of normality. She
licked her lips. "I saw him. He saved us. He stopped the car." The awe and
fear in her voice, reverberating through the Rover like a living thing,
heightened the feeling of unreality. 
       Marc's only remark did nothing to break the tension in the car as he
mumbled under his breath, "Holy shit!" 
       Ignoring his weak attempt at humor, Nathan spoke from the darkness. "We
all saw him. The Great One leads us and finally binds the Clans across the
land. We are being guided and protected. _Now_ do you see, Ms. Louis? _Now_ do
you believe?" His voice held no animosity, only wonder and absolute faith in
what was happening.
       "I believe. Now, I believe." Sam shuddered and crossed her arms over
each other, rubbing the goosebumps suddenly covering them.
--------
         *CHAPTER SIX*
       _The pounding on the door translated itself into a giant hand trying to
tear down the small, dark room where James hunkered in fear, his heart
thudding in his chest in rhythm with the beat. His mind scrambled, trying to
find a way to elude the threat of death he knew waited outside the door. The
voice inside his head screamed at him, "There's nowhere to hide. Nobody is
coming to save you. You have to save yourself." _
       _He rolled his body even more tightly into a ball, hoping he would be
overlooked when it finally broke through. _
       Nathan's voice cut his dream into shreds, its tatters dissipating in
the morning light streaming through the motel room's inadequate drapes. "Wake
up, mate! James, wake up!" 
       James rolled onto his back and slitted his eyes against the light,
waiting for them to adjust to the room's alien look. He rubbed them and sat
up. "Okay, Nathan, I'm up. I'll be right with you." He groaned, glanced at the
clock, groaned again and swung his legs to the edge of the bed. The carpet
felt nubby and coarse against his feet. He pulled himself off the bed and
stumbled to the door, struggling to pull on his shorts at the same time. The
door cracked open and he peered out, bleary-eyed, at Nathan standing there
looking rested and freshly showered. "What time is it? The damned clock in
here doesn't work." He yawned, opened the door wider and waved Nathan inside. 
       "It's nine o'clock. You told me to wake you. The others are waiting in
the restaurant across the street. We all decided to let you sleep as long as
we could. We figured you could use it, being an old fella and all." Nathan's
face struggled to remain straight. "It's getting late, though, so pull your
finger out and get dressed." Nathan pulled a clean shirt out of James's duffel
bag and threw it at him. 
       James grimaced and caught it in midair, grumbling, "Only six hours
sleep ... hey! I told you to wake me at seven." James yawned again. "Oh well,
you're probably right. You can wait if you want but I'm grabbing a shower
first. He ran his fingers through his tangled hair and headed for the
bathroom.
       "I'll go wait with the Sheilas, I think. Besides, the Emerald Cafe sets
a big table and I need time to eat my fill before you get there and clean it
out." Nathan chuckled and turned to leave. He paused with his hand on the knob
and turned back. "James, the black fella last night ... he really was there? I
didn't just see things?"
       James halted inside the bathroom doorway. "He was really there, Nate. I
saw him too. So did the others. I think you, of all of us, have it right; we
_are_ being guided and protected, so stop worrying about whether or not you've
Page 28

gone round the bend. You haven't." He knew his lopsided smile appeared even
more crooked when combined with lack of sleep. He hoped it would convince
Nathan to get a firm grip on their circumstances. James needed all the sanity
he could get right now.
       To James's relief, Nathan grinned back. "You're right. I've been raised
and taught all my life about the Old Ones. Mick raised me to be an elder when
the time came. All that still didn't prepare me for the real thing, I guess. I
know this is real but something inside me still wants to believe it's some
kind of bad movie. You know what I mean?" 
       James clapped a hand on Nathan's shoulder. "I know exactly what you
mean, mate, but we all have to face things the way they really are, not what
we're comfortable with. That's why we're here, to find the truth."
       Nathan snorted and turned to go, saying over his shoulder, "Whatever
you say, Oh Great White Guru. Now, will you get cleaned up and meet us across
the street? I'm hungry." When James threw a dirty pair of socks at him, Nathan
ducked outside the door, using it to block the assault. His face took on a
semi-serious look as he growled, "See ya when you get there. I'm not saving
any brekkie for you so hurry up." He slammed the door shut when a pair of
underpants came sailing across the room.
       James grabbed clean clothes and turned toward the small bathroom. His
reflection capturing his attention, he hesitated before the mirror over the
dresser. The worry lines on his forehead, his eyes dull with concern and the
obvious fatigue of the trip, startled him as he studied his face. "I only hope
we're ready for what truths we find." He walked over to the shower and turned
the cold tap on full. He yawned again and stepped in. 
         ~*~
The Emerald Cafe served good, hot food and lots of it, just as Nathan
reported. Both he and Marc were wolfing down huge amounts of food and ignoring
the women, who spoke quietly together as they ate. James strolled in sporting
fresh khaki shorts and a short-sleeved cotton shirt. His hair glistened with
water from his shower but his eyes still showed signs of fatigue. 
       "Morning, everyone." He reached for the pot of tea and poured himself a
mug. He took a big gulp and sighed, relaxing back against the faded red
plastic seat of the booth. "Ah, I needed that."
       Sam quietly sipped her coffee and the two men smiled and resumed
eating. Ratana picked at her food. "Morning, Uncle. Did you sleep well?"
       "I hope you don't think I'm prying too much but why do you and Nathan
call him Uncle when he's not your real uncle?" Sam put her cup down and peered
at Ratana with curiosity.
       "In the People's clan, an older person, much respected, whether related
by blood or not, is called Uncle or Auntie. It's a title of affection." Ratana
pushed her plate away and picked up her teacup to take a sip.
       James smiled. "That's a bit simplified but accurate. Mick raised me
when my parents died in a plane crash. He's my grandfather and Ratana and
Nathan are cousins, although he raised them too. He is grandfather to us all."
He leaned forward and placed both elbows on the tabletop. He looked into Sam's
eyes. "Now, down to business. I called an old friend of mine. His name is
Spencer and he's one of the leading experts in the field of paranormal
activity in Australia. He knows a lot more than I do so we'll need his help.
He'll meet us at Rockhampton tomorrow, where we'll form some kind of plan for
the rest of this trip. I know it's a bit late, but I'm not sure where to go.
All Mick could tell me was to go south and that means the Glass House
Mountains to me. I'll feel better talking to Spence about it though. Any
ideas, suggestions or questions?" He glanced at all of them in turn, waiting
for feedback.
       "It's clear all of you want to ignore what happened last night, but I
would like to know what the hell happened." Marc locked his gaze on James, his
fingers drumming the hard surface of the table.
       James cleared his throat. "I'm not ignoring it. I just don't know how
to explain it beyond what we all saw." 
Page 29

       "Neither do I. It looked to me like the old man stopped our car from
hitting that concrete building. As for the rest ... your guess is as good as
mine." Sam shifted in her seat and poured more coffee into her cup, slopping
some of it onto the tabletop.
       Ratana leaned closer and locked her eyes with Marc's. "You don't need
to understand it right now. All we need to do is follow the way we've been
given and find what we're being led to find." She settled back and softened
her words with a small smile.
       "I guess you're right. I don't think any of us can really say for sure
what happened last night. I just can't accept that it was some kind of
supernatural rescue though. But it sure was weird." Marc shrugged and went
back to shoveling his breakfast into his mouth. 
       "Well, we know one thing. We know we're here now and we're headed to
the Glass House Mountains. We'll get our answers there." James sounded unsure
but nodded his head to emphasize the last sentence.
       "Why the Glass House Mountains?" Sam leaned forward, cup in hand, and
looked intently into his eyes, a soft smile on her lips.
       He turned to her and met her gaze head on. "Because they're eroded
volcanic plugs and there are a few small deposits of a similar black stone
like the obelisk we found at Crocodile. It's all I have to go on and ... it
just feels right." He shrugged and smiled.
       "It is right. They hold the secrets promised by the Old Ones from
Dreamtime." Nathan stated flatly. He pushed his empty plate away and poured
some coffee.
       "Well, whatever we find there, I'm going to get some film on it." Marc
wiped his mouth with a napkin then grinned and patted the big camera bag
sitting beside him in the booth.
       James nodded at them. "Right. Let's get going then. We have another
long day ahead of us before we reach Rockhampton." He started to rise then
hesitated when the others remained seated. "What is it? We have to get going.
Come on." 
       "We decided we'd all take turns driving this time. You're a good driver
but you were tired last night." Nathan pointed his finger at James to
emphasize his words.
       "And ... you need to eat something first. We'll wait." Ratana pushed a
plate full of toast toward him. "Order something." Both her tone and face
reflected stubborn determination.
       He sighed and sat down. "Okay, okay. But ... we leave just as soon as I
eat. All right?" He picked up a piece of toast and started eating, the others
taking their time over what they still had in front of them.
         ~*~
       The city of Rockhampton glowed against a moonless night sky. Nathan
maneuvered the Rover into a parking place in front of a roadside steak house,
its neon sign flashing the words 'Tropic of Capricorn' onto the dark parking
lot. Groaning, he stretched his back and announced, "We're here. All out for
tucker time." He smiled and stepped out into the parking lot. The others soon
followed. 
       "I could eat a whole kangaroo, I could." Ratana chuckled. "I'm sure
glad we'll be in the mountains tomorrow. All this riding in the car is making
me feel like a pretzel." She stretched long and lazy. Marc eyed her gyrations
with obvious interest and wolf whistled. Ratana ignored him and bent to
stretch some more.
       Sam also stretched but less openly, aware of Marc's leering eyes. "I'm
hungry too. Let's go eat."
       "Wait. There's Spence now. I told him to meet us here. Looks like he
had no trouble finding the place." James walked briskly toward a green Rover
similar to the white one they used. His grin of welcome when he spotted Spence
asleep behind the wheel slipped into a full laugh. "Hey, Spence! Nap time is
over, old mate." He reached through the open window and shook Spence's
shoulder. 
Page 30

       Spence's long, gray hair covered his face and blew out in time with the
loud snores emanating from a slack mouth. His thin arms jerked in time to
James's pokes into his thin, yellowing undershirt. Snorting, Spence came awake
with a jolt and suddenly sat upright in his seat. Rubbing his eyes, he glared
at James through slitted eyes ringed with red. "Leave off, ya bugger! I'm
awake." His thin hands pushed James's fingers from his shoulder. "Oh, it's
you. What took you so long? You're late, as usual." He smacked his lips and
pulled a wadded handkerchief out of his pants pocket to blow his nose.
       "We're not late. I told you we'd be here around seven and it's just
before that now. Are you hungry?" James laughed at the old man's obvious
discomfort at being caught sleeping in his car.
       Spence groaned and stepped out of his car, empty cans of beer falling
onto the pavement when he stood up. James stooped and picked them up, tossing
them back into the car. Spence belched then smiled up at James, showing off a
new pair of dentures. "Yep, I'm always hungry. We gonna eat here?" He pointed
to the neon sign, erratically sputtering and losing lights.
       "Yes. Now come on. We've all had a long ride and I'm starving. I want
to introduce you to this bizarre group of shadow hunters I've assembled here."
James laughed again when Spence's face registered shock and dismay. "What? You
think you're the only one who can do strange things and get away with it?"
       Spence sputtered then smiled another toothy smile. "Okay, but you
didn't tell me there was going to be others coming along. I thought we was
going to tramp the bush by ourselves again." He stamped his dirty, worn hiking
boots in a parody to match his words, like a child having a temper tantrum.
       "Nathan and Ratana are with me. I seem to remember that the last time
we four went out in the bush, they had to bail you out when you got lost."
James chuckled.
       "Leave it to you to remember unimportant things like that. Hope you
brought lots of beer this time," Spence muttered.
       Lightly pushing the small man ahead of him, James leaned over and
replied, "Not this time, Spence. No more 'good old boys' parties in the bush.
This is serious. I told you what we found on the Kuranda Tableland. It's not a
joke."
       Spence stiffened then turned slowly, meeting James's eyes. "I know it
isn't a joke and I know it's serious. I found one just like it years ago in
New Zealand. I've been waiting for over forty years to find another." He spat
on the tarmac, grimaced then spun on his heel and walked toward the
restaurant, leaving James standing there, stunned. The others had already gone
in so James trotted to catch up.
       He found all of them, except Nathan, laughing around a table in the
bar, including Spencer, who was shining as the center of attention between the
two women. Spencer raised a huge mug of dark beer and announced, "This is
gonna be a bash in the bush with a mob of randy roos!" He then gulped down
half of it and came up with foam permeating the ragged hair around his
grinning mouth. "They ordered for us so I didn't have to wait for the brew,
James. I think I like this bunch." He hugged the two women against him and
laughingly released them again when they struggled to escape. "All right, me
ladies, I know I beg a bathing. Would either of you wish to volunteer to
help?" He roared with laughter at the dirty looks they both shot him.
       James looked around the room. "Where's Nathan?"
       "Oh, he had a call to make. He'll be right back, James. Sit down, sit
down. Have a drink," Spence bellowed.
       "This is our expert in paranormal activities?" Sam's eyebrows arched
high when James settled down into the chair next to her.
       "You bet, I am! I've been tramping New Zealand, New Guinea and
Australia for over forty years now. Always on the scent of the elusive UFO,
Yowie, giant monitor lizard or Bunyip." Spence chuckled and downed the rest of
his beer.
       Marc set his camera down on the tabletop and leaned forward. "Yowie?
Bunyip? What are those? _Giant monitor lizards?_" Marc's eyes grew round with
Page 31

interest.
       "Those, my dear boy, are some of the many Australian mysteries you
Yanks don't notice or care about enough to send National Geographic to
investigate." He harrumphed and lifted one thin arm toward a barmaid for
another round of beer.
       James picked up his glass and took a sip. "Don't let him fool you. He
is one of the world's leading authorities about these things, here and abroad.
Even Paul Cropper respects Spence's knowledge."
       "Hey! I've heard of that guy. Didn't he write a bunch of books about
UFOs and other stuff?" Marc searched James's face with intense interest.
       "Yes, he's also an expert in the field. He wrote _Out of the Shadows_
with Tony Healy. It's a great reference book if you're interested in learning
more about our Aussie secrets. And ... I'd like to brag a bit for him, because
he won't, and tell you that James has partnered with Paul on many occasions in
the past. He, too, is considered a world's expert in this field. There, now
I've done your promotional work for you, you can take it from there, I think."
Ratana snickered, wiped her mouth with a napkin and pulled a bowl full of
shelled peanuts toward her.
       "Yep, he's a good guy, old Paul is. Where's me beer?" Spence peered
into the dim light around the bar, searching for the barmaid. 
       "You hide your light under a basket well, Doctor Hay." Sam giggled at
the fierce blush on his cheeks, then paused a beat to become serious. "So, you
think the obelisk you found up north has something to do with these mysterious
beings?" Sam looked puzzled. "I thought we were just going to find some more
of the black stone it was made of and do a story on the Aboriginal people
connected with it."
       "We are, but it's right in the middle of a paranormal hot spot in
Australia. You have to wonder whether they're connected or not." Ratana
munched on a peanut while watching Spence out of the side of her eye. "James
has been researching the link between them for years. So has Spence."
       Sam turned to look at James, who quietly sat sipping his beer and
shelling peanuts. "_That_ is what this is all about? We're chasing aliens?" 
       Nathan sat back, arms crossed over his stomach and nodded. "It be true,
Ms. Louis. The Old Ones promised the People there would be a time when they
would be called and the world would be set right again. It is now time." His
eyes bored holes into her, daring her to say differently.
       Spence slammed his hand on the table. "Well, it don't do no good jawin'
about it now. We won't know until we get there. Where the hell is my beer?" He
grinned at the barmaid approaching with a full tray. When she set a mug in
front of him and he'd taken another big gulp, he looked across at James. "When
do we leave for this alien hotspot and get to hunting?"
       "Tomorrow morning, early. I want to be out of here by eight in the
morning. Did you get rooms yet?" 
       "Yep. Booked 'em just like you asked. Over to the Capricorn Motel up
the street. Course, I wouldn't mind a bit of room swappin' if the ladies
aren't happy with their accommodations." He leered at Sam and Ratana.
       "That reminds me, why is everything called the Capricorn something or
other here? Does it have a special meaning?" Sam ignored Spence's leer and
focused on the others.
       Ratana, Nathan and James busted out in mild laughter. "What's so funny?
It's a legitimate question." Sam scowled at them.
       "Sorry Sam, it's just that you're _sitting_ on the Tropic of Capricorn.
Everybody here knows that and takes it for granted." Ratana laughed again.
       "We are? Right on the line?" Sam looked at Ratana with wonder.
       James pointed to a yellow line painted on the floor. It ran the length
of the room and bisected the table they now sat around. "Right on the line.
You're sitting in the tropics and Marc is sitting in the Temperate Zone of
Australia."
       Marc and Sam peered down at the line. "Wow." Marc traced it with his
boot. "We are on the line. Cool." He smiled and picked up his camera to film
Page 32

it.
       "Hey! Cutie! More beer here." Spence bellowed at the young girl waiting
tables. He turned to the group, his lined face serious, "Save your laughs for
the Glass House. You'll need them there." Then a smile broke out, smothering
the flash of fear showing in his face. "When do we eat?" 
--------
         *CHAPTER SEVEN*
       "When are you going to tell me about the other artifact you found in
New Zealand?" James sat quietly in the passenger seat watching Spence maneuver
his Rover down the highway at an uncomfortably fast rate. He glanced in the
side mirror, checking to make sure the white Rover wasn't falling behind.
       "Nice day, ain't it? Good day for a drive." Spence's knuckles, white on
the steering wheel, tightened even more. He glanced out the window repeatedly,
avoiding James's look of expectation.
       The Bruce Highway paralleled the Pacific Ocean so the trip down south
brought sea breezes and the smell of salt in the air. James took a deep breath
and sighed. "I love the ocean. I think when I retire I'll build a small
cottage next to it and just fish all day." He hesitated then swiveled in his
seat to face Spencer squarely. "Spence, I have no idea why you're reluctant to
tell me, but I think you should. This situation is too unsure as it is. We've
been friends for a very long time. You can tell me, I won't say a word to the
others if you don't want me to."
       Spence's hands relaxed on the wheel. He took a deep breath. "You're
right. This isn't the time to play clam." He took another deep breath but kept
his face pointed toward the road ahead. "You know I was raised in the North
Island in New Zealand. You also know I'm half Maori. Like you, I've had to
keep my bloodlines to myself or the academics would try to use it against me.
What I didn't tell you is that I'm the son of a chief. I grew up in a tiny
village on the East Coast. One evening, when my father and I were fishing out
in the bay, a bright white light lit up the sky. It blinded us then it knocked
us out. When I awoke my father was gone ... disappeared right out of the boat.
I managed to get back to the shore. When I hit the sand, screaming for help,
the elders led me to a black stone with markings just like the one you say you
found near Kuranda." 
       Spence turned his head to look directly into James's face. "It had my
father's totem mark freshly etched at the top. The elders told me he had been
taken by the Old Ones and that I now had the duty to follow, to find out what
they wanted from us." He took a ragged breath and turned back to stare at the
highway. "They castrated me and gave me a special moko." He pointed to his
chin, covered by a thick gray beard. At James's puzzled look, he sighed. "My
chin tattoo. Didn't you ever wonder how I got it? They wanted me prepared and
dedicated to the quest. I've been searching for those answers ever since." 
       "Why would I wonder about your tattoo? I've always known you're Maori,
Spence. I guess it didn't sink in that you wouldn't have that unless you're
high up in Maori society. Royalty, huh? You sure don't look it." He poked at
Spence's yellowed shirt and faded shorts. 
       "Hey! Bugger off, ya great sod. These be my best duds, don't ya know?"
Spence laughed.
       "It does make one wonder ... about the two stones being alike, I mean.
You should know that the stone we found had my totem at the top. Mick told me
I'm now being led to find the answers too. I guess we're both strapped with
this, aren't we?" James felt the tension in his face ease as he smiled at the
old man.
       "My gut tells me the answers are here ... right here ... at last."
Spence nodded at the Glass House Mountains looming alongside the highway.
Their imposing peaks, black against the blue of the sky, pointed like
sentinels toward the heavens. 
       James watched the first peak speed by the window. "The ancient
Aboriginals called them the father, the mother and their various children.
They all have meaning, don't they? So many millions of years of volcanic
Page 33

activity to make these ... so much mystery inside them." 
       "Do you know which one we have to go to? I haven't got a clue." Spence
peered through the windshield, inspecting the range of mountains flying by.
       "No, I don't. I planned on stopping here, at Beerburrum, and having
lunch and a brainstorm session. No sense chasing our tails. Maybe Ratana or
Nathan will come up with something based on the Dreamtime stories. I don't
know, but at least we'll get lunch." 
       "Tucker at Beerburrum! I always did like the name of this place."
Spence grinned and pointed to the Glasshouse Cafe, sitting next to the highway
leading into town. "Here okay?"
       They pulled into the small parking lot and waited for the other Rover
to park. They strolled onto the wide verandah shading the front door of the
cafe and waited for the others to catch up. 
       "I'm sure glad you guys finally decided to stop somewhere. My bladder
hates me right about now." Marc squirmed then trotted inside, still clutching
his camera.
       Sam tried to press out the wrinkles in her white shorts with sweaty
palms, then gave it up as hopeless. "Damn, it's hot. I'm glad we stopped, too.
I'm in serious need of a cold drink." 
       Ratana and Nathan locked up the car, then walked into the shade of the
verandah. Nathan rolled his head, trying to unkink his neck from the long
drive. "Bloody heat makes you feel like a limp goanna ... if you be a Yank,
that is." He winked at Sam and grinned at James. "You and the good Doctor
Spence know where we're headed yet?"
       "Not yet. In fact, I'm hoping you and Ratana can help us with that
problem. Let's go get some lunch and a cold drink for the lady." He swept his
arm toward the door and smiled at Sam.
       The cafe turned out to be more along the lines of a lunch counter
take-away, and very crowded, so they decided to buy their food and take it to
the park in the middle of town to eat. When they'd settled down under the
shade of a big mango tree, Ratana pulled a piece of black rock out of the
pocket of her shorts, closed her eyes and began to rhythmically hum, feet and
hands swaying with the tune. 
       "What's she doing?" Marc chewed on a huge sandwich and watched her with
interest. 
       "She's tuning in to her magic place. She's trying to find a guide as to
where we should go. Ratana's inner voice has saved me more than once."
Nathan's matter-of-fact reply removed any doubt about his seriousness. He
closed his eyes and joined her.
       James and Spence remained silent but stopped all motion, intently
concentrating on Nathan and Ratana's movements. Sam sat still, waiting. Marc
continued to munch on his sandwich but he squinted his eyes at the group and
reached for his camera. Sam reached over and halted his hand when he grasped
it. She frowned at him. He shrugged, tried to smile then fell quiet along with
the rest.
       When Ratana's eyes opened, unfocused and staring, Sam, sitting next to
her, gasped at her next words. "Alangarr ... anangumin mayingku ngiva.
Anangumin ambeny alh anyjir. Ambin abum ichan Beerwah. Yibii. Yarmani idhar
odh alal Tunbubudla." All tension left Ratana's body. She lowered her head,
eased down onto the shady grass, rolled into a ball and fell asleep.
       "Uncle. Searching for the law of the people. Looking for the vagina of
the seven sisters. Tasting the breast of the mother. The woman leads, the
father protects. The Rainbow Serpent dreams inside the testicles of the
twins." Nathan chanted, translating.
       Sam touched Ratana's arm, jerked it back and looked at James, a
helpless, puzzled expression on her face. "She's as cold as ice. Is she okay?
Shouldn't we do something?"
       James reached out and took her hand. "She's fine. It just drains her.
She'll sleep for about an hour then she'll be okay. I've seen this before."
       "She speaks the old language." Spence murmured. "It's the Uw Olkola
Page 34

dialect. It used to be spoken by the Aboriginals from Tamworth up to Northern
Queensland. I haven't heard it for almost thirty years." His eyes never left
Ratana's sleeping form. 
       Marc elbowed Nathan, who sat clear-eyed and wide-awake next to him.
"Hey, Nate. You know that lingo too?"
       James squeezed Sam's hand, then, lunch forgotten, he grabbed the folded
map he had placed in front of him when he sat down. He unfolded it and ran his
finger over the range of mountains they now sat near. "The mother ... the
twins. Those are here all right. But what does the rest of it mean?" He ran
his hand through his hair and looked hard at the map, trying to divine the
answer.
       "The Twins ... we must go to the twins. The seven sisters and the
mother nurture them. Our answers lie there." Ratana's groggy voice startled
them.
       Spence grinned at her. "The Twins it is." He turned and looked to the
west, the grin slipping into a frown. "The Twins it is."
--------
         *CHAPTER EIGHT*
       James turned onto the Woodford Road heading west toward the center of
the mountain range. Spence, Nathan and Ratana, in their green Rover, stayed
close behind. Within minutes of leaving the town, they felt the valley inside
the mountain range close in and capture them. Even though it was still late
afternoon, no cars or people sped along the road. The sun setting in the west
gave the peaks a fiery glow, red and orange bursts of light flaming around the
tips, like matches lit to show them the way. By the time they turned down a
red clay service road leading toward the dual-topped mountain named 'The
Twins', it was almost dark, the sky now a deep velvety blue. When heavy
jungle-like vegetation blocked out the last of the sun, they pulled into a
clearing at the base of the first Twin peak and stopped to camp for the night.
The men pulled the supplies out of the Rovers. 
       "Why the hell you got to bring all this fancy junk?" Spence grumbled to
Marc as he struggled to pull a heavy camera case out of his Rover.
       "Hey, fella, that's my living you're manhandling there. Be careful!"
Marc rushed over and grabbed the case out of Spence's grip. "This is a very
delicate camera and that's my laptop computer over there." When he saw
Spence's look of disgust, he reached toward the rest of his equipment. "I'll
get them."
       "What the hell you need all those new-fangled gadgets for anyway?"
Spence reached back into the back of the Rover and pulled out a box of food.
       "Pictures. My job is to record all this for later. I have a digital
camera that takes pictures right onto a computer disk so we can see them on
the laptop. Do you want to see it?" Marc put the large camera case down at his
feet and plucked a smaller case out of his backpack.
       "Nah, I'd rather see some girlie magazines if you have some," Spence
chuckled.
       Ratana glanced at Sam, grinned and grabbed two flashlights. "It's
getting macho around here. I think it's time to go find some wood for the
fire." She turned toward the thick copse of trees three quarters around the
campsite and headed toward them, with Sam close behind, both shaking their
heads in amusement.
       Sam stooped to pick up a gnarled, gray branch from the forest floor.
She placed it in her arms, along with a few other branches then she stopped
and looked up. "Ratana, would you tell me about the Aboriginal legends we're
dealing with here? This whole thing seems so unreal, so Hollywood..." She
blushed, realizing she sounded childish and insulting. "But if it's too
personal, I'll understand." Her voice faded into an embarrassed cough.
       "Why talk about it when you will soon see it for yourself?" Ratana
continued to pick up dry branches, making her way back toward the clearing. At
the edge of the undergrowth she stopped and turned to face Sam. "The legends
say the Old Ones, the ones who watch over us and have promised to return the
Page 35

land to what it should be, will contact us, lead us and finally save us. It is
now coming to pass. It's that simple." She smiled and turned back to the
clearing. "Looks like the blokes are having a bit of trouble with the tents."
Ratana moved into the clearing, shouting at Marc, who struggled to erect a
tent. "Hey! Yank! It helps to use the poles."
       Sam returned with an armful of wood. She threw it down next to Spence,
who sat in the dirt, his knobby knees covered with red clay and his dirty
hands working diligently on the stack, trying to start a fire. He looked up at
her and smiled. "Good on ya, Ms. Louis. Or can I call ya Sam?" 
       She smiled down at him, rubbed her hands over her clay-stained shorts
and squatted down next to him. "Sure. Call me Sam." She hesitated a heartbeat
then continued, "Spence, what's going to happen now? Do you know?"
       "Nope. All I know is that we're supposed to be here and what comes,
comes." He struck match after match trying to get the kindling to ignite.
Strings of Aussie swear words followed each match's failure to get the job
done. "Damn things got wet with my beer." He swore again and pulled a lighter
out of his shorts pocket.
       Sam gazed up at the darkening slope of the mountain and took a deep
breath. "I guess you're right. What comes, comes. I just hope we're ready for
it." She glanced down at the woodpile, reached in and rearranged the way they
stacked up, pulled out her lighter and lit the smaller slivers at the bottom
of the pile. It ignited and soon took off. "You have to have airflow for it to
work." She smiled at Spence's snort of disgust, stood up and walked over to
the heap of tent she and Ratana would be sharing. Ratana was laying it out
flat and gathering the poles to set it up with. Sam stooped down and picked up
one end and a pole. "Let's show these fellas we can pull our own weight."
       Ratana picked up the other end and smiled back at her. "We already
have." She nodded at Spence, who now grumbled to himself as he pulled iron
pots and pans out of a box. Her laugh echoed up the wall of the mountain,
temporarily silencing the awakening wildlife stirring in the bush.
       The kerosene lanterns hanging from the entrance of each of the three
tents made a nicely lit circle around the campfire. They all sat on foldout
stools, balancing tin plates and cups on their laps while they ate. Marc put
his plate down on the ground and clasped his cup of tea. He looked up into the
sky. "It's so dark out here. There must be a zillion stars up there." The tone
of wonder in his voice brought a smile to the others, now looking upward to
marvel at the heavens above them.
       "With no city lights out here to ruin your vision, you can see them
all. It's beautiful, isn't it?" Ratana took a sip of her tea and continued to
stare into the night sky. 
       Spence let out a wild whoop. Sam dropped her plate and Marc grabbed the
big movie camera he always had ready at hand. Nathan jumped up, nervously
peering around into the dark foliage, searching for the source of alarm.
       Spence laughed, long and loud, slapping his thin thighs with both
hands. "Sit down, boy, there's no danger. It just came to me. You know ...
what Ratana said, 'The seven sisters'...oh, come on, James. Remember what she
said? 'Look for the vagina of the seven sisters.' There's your answer!
Straight ahead, just beyond the second Twin. Look!"
       James stared at the spot Spence pointed to. "I'll be. There they are.
The seven sisters, the Pleiades. Seven stars in a cluster and they point to
the Twin." James's voice quivered. "The second Twin, they point to it like a
finger in the sky."
       "Is that where we're supposed to go?" Nathan sat back down, his hands
and feet still moving nervously.
       "We must search for the vagina, the opening. A source of life ... a
river." Ratana spoke clearly into the ensuing silence.
       "There are no rivers here." James pulled out an area map and leaned
toward the fire in order to capture enough light to see by. "This place has
been mapped, tramped over and hiked on for years now. It's even been
photographed from the air and by satellites so even the tops of the peaks are
Page 36

well known. There's nothing like that anywhere around here. Even this growth
was planted by men." He swept his arm around the circle, indicating the thick
forest of growth surrounding their campsite.
       "You also mentioned something about sucking from the breast of a
mother. What does that mean?" Sam, eyes wide at this new revelation, stared
into Ratana's glowing eyes. Flames from the fire gave them the look of an
inner fire.
       Ratana's voice dropped to a bare whisper, deep and monotone. "Life, a
river of life."
       "You people are giving me the creeps. Do you really believe all this
mumbo jumbo stuff?" Marc laughed nervously and laid his camera back under his
chair. He then picked up the hot pot of tea resting on the fire-grate to
refill his cup.
       "You Yanks think with all your money and your fancy technology that you
know everything. The old ways still have meaning, Marc. This isn't mumbo
jumbo, it's reality, a reality we're just now realizing exists side-by-side
with what we laughingly call civilization." James took the pot from Marc's
hand and refilled his own cup. His reflected no humor when he looked into the
younger man's face.
       "Tomorrow, I think we need to hike around to the other Twin and take a
look see at what's there. If we are being led by the spirits then we have to
trust they'll take us where we're supposed to go." Spence, all laughter gone
from his voice, tossed out the rest of his tea and threw the cup into an empty
box sitting next to his chair.
       "What is that?" James, back to the peak and facing the thick
jungle-like trees, leaned forward and put his plate down on the ground. In the
distance, a big blue-white light shone through the trees and then slowly rose
lazily into the sky, hovering over the forest. 
       "It's not a star, that's for sure. It came out of the forest ... and
it's growing bigger." Nathan pointed to it, his hand shaking. 
       As the light rose higher, James stood up and the others, fixed in
place, watched it lift then hover over the crown of the mountain. Every night
sound abruptly stopped, the thick growth around the clearing falling eerily
still and silent ... waiting. Unaware of their actions, they all stood ... and
waited too.
       The object moved slowly toward them, hovering for seconds in between
small advances. It seemed to be approaching cautiously, like a predator
stalking its prey. At a distance of about a half-mile, it abruptly stopped and
shot off to the left, heading toward the farthest Twin. It came to a halt
directly above the peak. Like a shutter going up, a beam of blue light shot
out from the bottom of the object. What it illuminated on top of the peak made
the group gasp with a collective shock of recognition. 
       The Aboriginal man they'd seen standing on the hill in Sapphire, bathed
in lightning and rain, now stood immersed in the light of the object hovering
directly above him. He faced the campsite and not one person in the group
doubted that he knew they were there. 
       The old Aborigine's eyes glowed brightly, piercing into every mind and
into every heart. He slowly raised his spear arm and pointed to the spot where
the light first appeared. He stood in that pose, arm and spear fixed inline
and one foot planted on the opposite knee, an aura of light backlighting his
form, for what felt like hours. When he finally turned his head to look at
them once again, he began to fade, a smile on his face the last image to
disappear. With him, the light went out and the night, still silent and poised
on the brink of a breath, surrounded them once again with darkness.
       Sam moved close to James, her body quivering. He reached his arm around
her waist and pulled her closer, his own body quivering with excitement.
"Agngar leads us."
       "Aga ... who?" Sam whispered, pressing even closer against his side,
her body now quivering in response to his nearness. 
       "A ghost, a spirit. We have our answer. We head south tomorrow." His
Page 37

voice took on depth and strength. "We go to the spot he points us to. Our
answers lie there."
       "How can you be so sure? For all we know, that UFO is playing with our
minds. If it's a UFO at all." Marc glared at James, fear clear in his voice.
He tucked his camera back into the bag he'd hastily dropped in the excitement
of the sighting.
       "We know and you do too. It was our guide, the one who saved us from
the car accident. He leads us to where we need to go." Ratana, brightness in
her eyes he avoided looking at, reached out and patted Marc's arm
       Marc pulled his arm away. "I think all of you have been watching too
much Star Trek. This Aboriginal, Maori, Indian stuff is all a bunch of old
myths and kiddie stories. And you're all buying into it because you want to
feel a part of your blood brothers or something. Am I the only one here who
hasn't lost his mind?" He looked around the circle of faces now staring at him
with disbelief.
       "You've seen everything we've seen, Marc. How can you still
disbelieve?" Nathan's face registered shock.
       "Look, all of you have this thing ... this cultural thing going on with
you. I don't. I'm a cameraman, a news guy, and I'm just not buying all this as
something supernatural. I can't." Marc shrugged, then his body sagged, all
tension leaving, and he sat back down. He retrieved the tin cup he used for
tea and refilled it from the pot, now cold.
       Spence searched Sam's face. "You're part Native American, aren't you?
That's what he's talking about. James is part Aborigine, Ratana and Nathan are
full blood, and I'm half Maori. That leaves you. He's right, isn't he? We do
have this common factor. I wondered about that." Spence also sat down,
scratching the tattoo hidden under his beard.
       Sam disengaged herself from James, avoiding his eyes. "Yes, I am. I'm
half Osage, a plains tribe from Oklahoma. I didn't know until last year when I
finally located my real mother. She gave me up when I was born. That's why my
last name is Louis. I was raised in an orphanage in St. Louis, Missouri. It's
all I ever knew until I finally found her ... rather, I found her grave."
       James stepped close to her and reclaimed her waist. "It would seem the
old cultures, the ones still harboring a deep respect for the land and the
spirit that formed it, are the ones who now benefit. I'm glad." He leaned down
and planted a kiss on her forehead. She placed her hand over his, clinching
her waist, and smiled up at him.
       "So, we're all agreed. Other than Marc. We will head south tomorrow
morning and, as the saying goes, we shall see what we shall see." Spencer
kicked up the coals on the dying fire and threw more wood on. He placed the
billycan back on to reheat.
       As the fire flared, sending spiraling sparks of orange into the night
sky, a loud rustling in the brush, just outside the fire's light, captured
their attention. Spence halted before throwing another branch on the fire, and
the others also abruptly stopped in various poses, a frozen diorama of real
life. 
       "Look to your right ... there, just behind that big tree with the
twisted trunk. There's a pair of eyes shining through the leaves. Do you see
them?" James whispered.
       "I see them. And a couple more pairs too. What do you think they are?
They're too high off the ground to be dingoes, and Roos wouldn't come this
close to a campsite." Spencer kept his gaze glued on the thick leaves behind
James's back. Imperceptibly, he jumped when several more pairs joined the
original two. "There are more gathering."
       "My God! What is that foul odor?" Marc gagged and covered his mouth
with his hand.
       "Don't move! Stay right where you are until we know for sure what these
creatures are and what they want." James hissed toward Marc in as low a voice
as he could muster and still be heard. He then very slowly moved Sam closer to
the fire and pushed her down into a chair, standing behind her with his hands
Page 38

protectively on her shoulders. "I've smelled that before. So have you Spence.
Remember the trip we made into the Daintree last year?" His voice was barely
audible as he continued to watch more sets of brilliantly lit eyes gather
throughout the thick leaves. 
       "Yeah, I remember. Almost made me lose me tea then and it's just as bad
now." Spence swiveled his head around the circle of light. "They're only in
front of us and to each side. I think the mountain doesn't offer enough trees
for them to hide behind. At least our backs are safe. I think."
       "Yowies." Ratana flatly stated. Seeing the confusion on Sam's face she
continued, "Bigfoot, Yeti, Sasquatch ... the hairy men of the mountains."
       Marc quietly reached down under his chair and gently lifted the small
hand-held digital camera up to his lap. Easing it up to his face, he snapped
the button, setting off a series of clicks and whirrs that echoed around the
deadly quiet of the clearing. Instantly, the eyes disappeared.
       "Dammit, you bleeding Yank arsehole! Ain't' you got no sense? They were
here to help us." Nathan raged across the clearing and pushed Marc's shoulder,
almost unseating him.
       Marc jumped up, fists clenched. Before blows could fall or Spence and
James could intercede, another loud crashing of the brush again froze them in
place. Hearts pounding, they waited once more to see what the night would
present to rock the world as they knew it. The thick leaves parted and a
figure stumbled out into the clearing.
--------
         *CHAPTER NINE*
       A young woman stood just inside the outer reaches of the firelight. Her
shorts and T-shirt were filthy and torn, her hair knotted and tangled with
leaves. Her small frame shook with fatigue. She presented an impression of
something wild, newly born from the bush as she wrung her hands, giving her a
look of a small child. Large green eyes took up most of her face as she
fearfully glanced at each of the group then lowered them to stare at what was
left of her hiking boots.
       Stunned silence drew out. She raised her eyes and looked around the
circle of faces staring at her and asked, "Is something ... wrong? I saw your
fire ... and thought ... it would be all ... right to come ... in and ask ...
for help." The fear-laden stutter she struggled with made her words come out
in staccato bursts. 
       The sound of human speech broke the spell and galvanized the group to
action. Sam and Ratana rushed to the woman while the men answered in chorus.
"Yes, come in, come in. My God, you're not much more than a child. What in the
world are you doing wandering around out there by yourself?" James's question
overrode the voices of the rest and accompanied the women's action of bringing
her to the fire.
       The young woman sat down on a chair and gratefully accepted a hot cup
of tea from Ratana. She sipped it and sighed. Looking up at James, she offered
a tired smile. "I'm not a child, I'm almost eighteen and I wasn't alone. I was
hiking with a friend when he disappeared. I've been trying to find my way back
to our camp for two days now." She took another sip of tea then put the cup
down onto the box sitting next to her. She gripped a tattered backpack with
white knuckles. "I saw your fire and..." 
       Sam pulled her chair over and sat down next to the girl. She reached
over and patted her on the shoulder. "It's okay, honey. Ignore the guys. You
just scared them is all. What's your name?" She pushed the young woman's
tangled hair away from her eyes and peered into them, noting their unusual
shade of bright green.
       "Cindy. My name is Cindy Walsh. My friend, Darren, talked me into a
weeklong hike here. We got here three days ago. The first night, while I
slept, he disappeared from our camp. When I woke up, I went looking for him
but then I got lost too and couldn't find the camp again." She shuddered as
tears made tracks through the splotches of red clay covering her face.
       The men crowded around the fire while Sam and Ratana stayed near the
Page 39

girl, protectively hovering over her. James leaned toward her across the dying
fire, inspecting her condition. "Do you know which direction he went in? Can
you remember?"
       "I ... I think I might be able to show you which way he went, but we'd
have to go back the way I came." She looked unsure of whether or not she could
actually do it.
       "Wait a minute. What about those damned eyes and the light? Didn't you
see them before you came in here?" Marc's voice vibrated with tension. He,
too, leaned into the fire, intently staring at the girl's frightened and
streaked face. 
       "What eyes? What light? I don't know what you're talking about." Her
voice cracked and more tears flowed. She covered her face with tiny, delicate
hands and wept with deep, gulping sobs.
       "Stop it, Marc! Damn you. Can't you see the poor girl is scared out of
her wits?" Sam glared at him and moved closer, putting her arm around the
girl's shaking shoulders.
       "He's right, Sam. Leave off. We need to know what is going on here and
she might be able to help." Spence came to stand beside the girl, edging
Ratana out of the way. He squatted down next to the girl's chair and took her
smooth hand in his aged one. "Wee one, can you tell us if you saw anything
strange out there before you came inside the camp?"
       Her eyes, rounded with anxiety, looked into his. "No ... No, I didn't
see anything. All I saw was your fire through the trees and brush." She
gripped his hand with a strength that resulted in a shocked look on Spence's
face as his fingers turned white from lack of blood flow. Then she burst into
tears again. "Did Darren come this way? Have you seen him? Please, I have to
find him."
       Ratana gently pushed Spence away from the girl. "We haven't seen him,
Cindy, but we will try to find him for you. In the meantime, why don't you
come with me and have a wash? I think you'll feel better if you do." She
gently helped the girl up and led her away toward the women's tent.
       "So much for finding out what those damned eyes were." Marc still held
the digital camera in his hand. "At least I think I got some pictures of them.
We can take a look-see on the laptop and maybe have more to go on than just
red eyes in the bushes."
       "We'll take a look tomorrow. I think we'd better all get some kip time
for now. We have to get up with the sun and find that landing spot." James
stared off toward the marker point where the UFO landed. "I think most, if not
all, of our answers to a great many things will be there."
       Spence clapped him on the back and stood staring into the bush with
him. "You just might be right, mate. You just might be right." Spence walked
over to his tent and disappeared without another word.
       "I just hope nothing else happens tonight. I'm bushed. Shouldn't
someone stand guard just in case those creatures return?" Marc asked, his eyes
frantically searching the thick brush that seemed to crowd into the clearing
with each inch the fire died down.
       "I don't think we're in danger, Yank." Nathan threw the comment over
his shoulder as he made his way toward the tent he shared with Marc.
       "I damn well hope not," Marc whispered and turned to follow him,
yawning as he did so.
       James lingered behind, watching Sam walk to the car then lean into its
open back hatch to search for extra bedding for the girl. He lounged around
the fire, sipping hot coffee and hoping she'd come sit with him, because he
was too reserved to ask. When she came up empty he went to help her. After
searching both vehicles, to no avail, he shut the last door and turned to her.
"She can use my sleeping bag. I don't think I'll be getting much sleep tonight
anyway."
       She tilted her head and looked up into his eyes. Moonlight bathed her
features into a silky canvas of beauty that took his breath away. "Has anyone
ever told you just how lovely you are?" When her lips parted into a pleased
Page 40

smile, he slipped his arms around her waist and drew her closer. 
       "Has anyone told you just how masculine _you_ are?" she whispered and
pulled him closer to her tensed body.
       "I've wanted to do this since..." His lips edged closer to hers. Her
lips parted further, moist and ready.
       "Are you standing guard tonight, mate? Cause if you are then you better
get to it and let us old geezers get our shuteye." Spence's rasp of a voice
jolted them apart like a lightning strike.
       Sam patted her hair and stepped back, her eyes still glued to James.
"Yes, right. It is time to get some sleep. We have a long day ahead of us
tomorrow if we're going to find that landing site." She turned and smiled at
Spence, who stood by his tent flap grinning like a schoolboy who'd just pulled
off a great practical joke and gotten away with it. "Good night, Doctor Hay."
She moved off and entered his tent without a backward glance. She soon
emerged, sleeping bag in hand, and entered her own with a small wave at the
two of them.
       James walked toward Spence, a thunderous look clouding his face. "Nice
one, Spence. Do you enjoy being a pain in the arse all the time or are you
just naturally one?" He returned to his chair by the fire, his back to the old
man's laughter. When all was once again quiet, James glanced back at the
tents, noticing all the lanterns had been extinguished. He smiled to himself
and began to quietly whistle as he stoked up the fire. Within hours, he slept
deeply beside the embers, now cooling around the forgotten pot of tea.
         ~*~
A chorus of grunts, yips and whispers surrounded the camp in the early morning
hours. Sam came awake with a jolt and struggled to remember where she was and
what had woken her. The inside of the tent smelled musty and cloying. Her eyes
refused to see anything but pitch black as she blindly turned her head, hoping
to find the source of her alarm. "Are you awake, Ratana? Cindy?" she whispered
into the darkness. Every instinct she possessed sent out alarms and red flags
flapped inside her mind, telling her something was very wrong. Her fear grew,
waiting for something, anything, threatening to show itself. She needed
something tangible to fight against. Her heart pounded against her ribs as
adrenaline pumped through her body. 
       Sam eased out of her sleeping bag and reached over to her right, her
hand meeting the silky smoothness of the nylon tent. On hands and knees,
coiled for an attack, she slowly ran her hand along the side, moving toward
the flap that enclosed them. When her fingers finally felt the zipper of the
flap, she grimaced at the rasping noise it made. When she had it completely
open, Sam flipped it aside, letting moonlight flood the inside of the tent.
She braced herself for what might be lurking inside with them. All she saw was
Ratana and the girl curled up inside their bags, chests moving rhythmically in
deep sleep. Sam visibly relaxed and sighed with relief at the sight. "Damn
midnight jitters," she mumbled to herself then quietly reached over to find
her shorts. She pulled them on, leaving her thin T-shirt on instead of finding
a shirt, and moved toward the exit again. 
       "What is it? Is something wrong?" Cindy stirred and sat up, blinking at
the light flooding inside. 
       "No, no, it's okay, Cindy. I just had a bad dream is all. I'm going out
to go to the bathroom. I'll be right back." Sam reassured her, adding an
embarrassed chuckle.
       "Can I come too? Now I have to go." The girl's small voice sounded
scared again. 
       "Sure. Come on. We'll be better off going in pairs anyway." Sam
scrambled out of the tent and waited for the girl to catch up. She stretched
when she straightened up and looked around the darkened camp, hoping she
hadn't awakened the men as well. 
       When she heard Cindy behind her, she turned and smiled. "At least I
didn't wake the guys. Listen to those snores. I'm amazed they haven't scared
away all the wildlife with that racket." She kept her voice to a bare whisper.
Page 41

       The girl only smiled in return and pointed to a clump of brush close to
the face of the mountain. She raised her eyebrows with an unspoken question.
Sam nodded and they headed toward the spot. Sam leaned over and whispered,
"You go first and I'll stand guard, then you can stand guard for me."
       The girl nodded and disappeared into the brush. Sam could make out the
white of her tank top through the leaves and turned to face the camp in case
one of the men appeared. She relaxed a bit, listening to the wild music of the
bush. After a few minutes, she turned back around and peered into the bushes.
Cindy's white shirt could no longer be seen. "Cindy? Where are you? I can't
wait any longer. It's my turn." She walked to the spot she'd last seen her and
stood looking in every direction for the missing girl. "Cindy?"
         ~*~
The sky, still a velvety blue fading into daylight, began to lighten with pink
and orange in the east. Nothing stirred in the camp except a pair of Rainbow
Lorikeets screeching to one another in a high gum tree. James staggered out of
the tent he shared with Spence and shuffled toward the cold embers of the
fire. Even early morning was warm so close to the tropics so all he wore was a
short sleeved shirt and khaki shorts. His socks kept falling down his calves
into his hiking boots as he walked. He swore and stopped to pull them up. He
picked up a stick lying next to the fire and poked at the ashes. He swore
again. 
       _I must be getting old. I ache all over and I feel like I haven't had a
lick of sleep. Damn hard ground!_
       When Nathan appeared, bleary-eyed and rubbing his face, James looked up
and grumbled. "Hey, good morning. You make the fire and I'll get the coffee
pot ready." He handed the stick to Nathan and walked slowly to the Rover to
rummage through the supplies they shut up in it overnight.
       Nathan grunted and picked up wood from the stack made by the women the
previous day. He went about making the fire while James poured water into the
pot and found the coffee tin in a box of food. When the fire finally began to
blaze, he sat down on the ground and slowly fed sticks into it like an ancient
priest making a sacrifice to his pagan god.
       Marc shuffled out of his tent, his shorts and Aerosmith shirt badly
wrinkled, and blinked at the sun now rising full force onto the camp as it
peeked over the mountaintop. When he spotted Nathan, he shambled over to hold
his hands out over the fire. "Where's breakfast? And where's the women?" He
scratched his butt and yawned while stretching like a drunken cat.
       "I'm awake, you bloody twit." Ratana stepped out of her tent fully
dressed and yawned herself. She half turned and watched Cindy emerge behind
her, still buttoning a clean shirt. Ratana looked her up and down. "You look a
sight better than you did last night, my girl." Then she smiled and continued,
"You must hate zippers. Even your shorts have buttons and your hiking boots
have Velcro."
       Cindy smiled back her, her small face transforming into a young,
untroubled face again. "I hate zippers. I always get something caught in those
things so I refuse to use them." She laughed, a high tinkling, bubbly sort of
sound.
       When Cindy stood outside the tent and Sam didn't follow, Ratana peered
through the flap. "Isn't Sam up yet? Hey, Sam. Come on before the blokes eat
all the food." When she got no answer, she poked her head inside and repeated
her words. With a sigh, Ratana re-entered the tent and reached down to nudge
at the lump inside the sleeping bag. "Sam. Wake up, you lazy Sheila." A frown
furrowed her face at the softness of the lump. She pulled back the top of the
bag and saw a pile of dirty clothing there. She stepped back outside. "You
fellas seen Sam? She's not in her bag."
       Nathan and Marc shook their heads and continued to set up the pans for
breakfast after James set the coffeepot in front of them. James walked over to
the women's tent and when he saw the worried look in Ratana's eyes, he too
poked his head inside the tent. "Where could she be? She's too smart to go
wandering off by herself." Hard lines of worry showed on his face when he
Page 42

turned to look at Cindy and Ratana. "Did either of you see her leave the tent
earlier?"
       "I woke up in the middle of the night and went with her to use the
bushes." She shyly pointed to the clump of brush they'd used the night before.
"When I finished she was gone so I just went back to sleep, thinking she
couldn't wait. That's the last time I saw her." Cindy blushed and lowered her
eyes.
       "Shit. Nathan, Marc, go wake up Spence. We have a lost woman on our
hands. We have to go search. Now!" His voice thundered across the camp,
causing both men to drop what they held and move to wake up Spence. He turned
back to Cindy, her head hanging and her eyes glued to the ground at her feet.
"When did this happen, Cindy? What time? How long ago?" His breath came fast
and he took a deeper one and made himself calm down.
       "I ... I...I don't know. It was dark and I was sleepy. I don't have a
watch. I don't know." Her face screwed into a mask of anguish. 
       James, seeing female tears coming on, patted her arm. "Hey, kid, it's
okay. We'll find her. Don't worry." His hand fell lamely back to his side when
she risked a look at his face and she gamely straightened herself upright
again.
       When Spence flew out of his tent half-dressed, Nathan and Marc right
behind him, James had grabbed his backpack and stood ready to leave. "Come on.
She's probably out there and can't find her way back." His voice, still harsh
and anxious, set the others in motion. 
       James turned to the two women. "You two stay here just in case she
comes back. Don't leave the camp. Do you hear me?" 
       They both nodded, Ratana's features set into a hard, emotionless look
and Cindy's into out-and-out fear. Then Ratana reached down inside the tent
and pulled out a bag sitting there. She rummaged inside and came up with large
hunting knife. She glanced at James's startled look. "Just in case." 
       He nodded. When the men trotted over to join him, he nodded at them
too. "Right. Let's go find her." 
       They moved as a unit toward the clump of brush that Cindy had pointed
to when she indicated where they'd gone during the night. When they
disappeared into the bush, Ratana and Cindy moved over to the fire and
mindlessly began to make a breakfast they knew nobody would eat. Ratana had
just picked up the hot coffeepot out of the coals when a scream echoed out of
the brush. She quickly set it down again and grabbed her knife. She pulled
Cindy up to stand behind her and stood listening to a thrashing noise in the
thick growth just outside the camp. What came flying out of the bushes set her
to laughing so hard she had to sit down.
       Sam, clad only in a thin T-back shirt, dirty shorts and barefoot, came
thundering out of the bushes, her face beet red and words more suitable to a
military man spewing out of her mouth. "Those damned men! Can't a lady take a
pee without having some idiot male barging in and ogling her?" She stopped
just inside the clearing and glared back the way she came. "You sons of
bitches! You perverted peeping toms!"
       The men, just as red in the face as Sam, came stumbling out of the
bushes behind her. None of them ventured an apology or an explanation in the
face of her anger. Ratana's laughter faded into anger too. She ran to Sam.
Grabbing Sam's shoulder, she spun her around, her own anger full blown. "Where
the hell have you been? We've been searching for you all over the place. Are
you daft going out into the bush without someone with you?"
       Sam, face diffused with an angry red glow, opened her mouth to speak,
then stopped, mouth still open but speechless. She spun around, inspecting the
clearing like she'd never seen it before. "What's going on here? How did it
get light so quickly?" Confusion, then fear, swept across her face. 
       James stepped closer, a look of real concern in his eyes. "Sam, you've
been gone for hours. Cindy tells us you went out in the middle of the night
and, thinking you'd be right back, she went back to bed. When we woke this
morning you still weren't back. That's why we went looking for you."
Page 43

       When Ratana grabbed her again, she threw off the hand holding her arm
and moved back to face all of them. She put both fists onto her hips. "What
the hell are you talking about? I've only been gone a couple of minutes!"
       James stepped closer. "I can't explain it either, but according to
Cindy you've been gone for several hours, Sam. We woke up and you weren't here
so..." He spoke slowly, with measured tones, like one would speak to a small
child. When she showed further fear at his words, he stepped up next to her
and peered down into her face. "What possessed you to go out alone in the dark
to begin with? Especially after what we'd seen earlier?" His tone,
deliberately controlled, held a touch of fear in it. 
       Sam's hands fell to her sides. "You're kidding! I've only been gone ten
minutes at the most. And I wasn't alone. Cindy and I went together. She went
first and when I lost sight of her, I went to look. Then I couldn't wait any
longer so I did my own business and you guys showed up. Is this some kind of a
joke?" She looked searchingly at the grim faces of her companions then her own
face registered their sincerity, followed shortly with shock. "My God! I don't
remember anything but what I just told you. I tell you, I didn't fall asleep
out there and I know it was only minutes that passed." Her shoulders slumped.
"Maybe I'm losing it here."
       Spence turned to Cindy, who still stood next to the campfire, her eyes
on the ground. "Cindy, when did you two go out? How long ago was it?" His
voice vibrated with urgency.
       She looked up, twisted her hands together and shook her head. "I don't
know. Like I said, I don't have a watch. When I stepped out of the brush, I
couldn't see her so I went back to bed. But, I know it was a lot longer than
ten minutes ago. The moon was up high ... right there." She pointed into the
sky.
       "What is going on here? All of this shit is something right out of a
science fiction story." Marc walked to the fire and set his backpack down next
to the chair he collapsed into.
       The others soon followed. James held Sam by the arm and guided her to a
chair, where he stood behind her, lightly kneading her shoulders like a nurse
over an invalid. She flinched but allowed it, her face pinched in deep
thought.
       "Nope, not science fiction ... fact. The moon set about three hours
ago." Spence scratched at his chin. "I think what we may be dealing with here
is the notorious 'lost time' people have experienced when a UFO encounter
happens." Spence's matter of fact statement acted like a bombshell. Everyone
went completely silent as it sunk in what his words might mean.
       Ratana and Nathan exchanged meaningful glances. Nathan cleared his
throat. "We know of this and have for a long time now. The Yowies often come
when the light in the sky is seen too." Ratana nodded at him. "We ... Ratana
and I ... know there are spirits leading us. They must have chosen you for
some reason, Ms. Louis." He looked embarrassed.
       Sam looked up at him like he'd grown another head. "Look, I believe in
what I see, hear, taste, feel and smell. Everything else is yet to be proven.
I know I stepped into that bush when it was pitch dark and less than ten
minutes later it was light and you guys were standing there staring at me. In
my mind, that means I went just before sunrise. No mystery, no spirits and no
surprises. End of story."
       James leaned down, peering hard at the back of her neck. He pushed her
hair aside and inspected a small puncture still oozing a trail of blood. "What
is this, Sam?" He leaned over her shoulder to look at her face.
       "What's what? What did you find?" She raised her fingers to the injury
then lowered them to inspect the blood on her fingertips. "What the hell? I
must have scratched myself out there." She continued to stare at her bloody
fingers, hypnotized by the sight of her own blood.
       Spence stepped up and inspected the puncture while James continued to
hold her hair aside. "UFO sighting, lost time ... implants?" He raised both
shaggy gray eyebrows at James.
Page 44

       A loud peal of laughter echoed around the clearing. Marc slapped his
knees and continued to laugh, long and hard, until he ran out of breath.
Choking and gasping he held his arms across his chest and struggled to regain
his composure. "Oh my God! This isn't Star Trek, it's the X-Files! Maybe the
Yowies who came last night are really little gray men and they just had to
have a party so they got Sam to come and entertain them." He busted out with
intense laughter again, almost falling out of his chair.
       Sam started crying. James cupped her head with one of his hands and
roared, "Shut up, you idiot wanker! Maybe you don't take any of this
seriously, but we do." When the laughter continued after only a slight pause,
he took several strides toward the laughing man, his fists clenched. "Pack up!
You're out of here. I wish the hell I'd never agreed to you coming in the
first place." 
       The menacing snarl and clenched fists finally shut Marc up. His eye
went round with fear, darting around at the somber, angry faces of the group.
"Jeesh, guys. It just struck me as funny. I'm sorry, Sam. I didn't intend any
harm. Honest." He spread his hands in supplication toward her.
       "Let it go, James. It would be more trouble to take him back than it's
worth anyway." She sighed and stood up, still gently touching the wound to her
neck. "I'll go wash this. It's okay. Really." Her limbs seemed unsteady when
she stood and Ratana took her arm, helping her over to the large water
container sitting next to the Rover.
       Nathan stared up at the sky. "It all has meaning. It all leads
somewhere." His words sounded like a chant.
       Spence followed James, who still stood menacingly near Marc, and
lightly touched his shoulder. "Come on, mate. He meant no harm. Let's go get
some brekkie and coffee and all calm down. I don't know about you but me
nerves feel like lute strings right now." His toothy smile elicited a puny
replica from Marc.
       James grunted, relaxed his fists and turned on his heel to stalk over
to the fire. He grabbed the coffeepot with such fury it boiled over into the
hot coals, hissing like an angry snake. He poured himself a cup of coffee and
sat down. Spence joined him there and filled a cup for himself and, seeing
Cindy cringing in her chair, one for her as well. He offered the metal cup to
her with a grin. "Drink up, girl. It's hot and will fill your veins with
energy."
       She reached for the cup, almost touched it, and jumped back with a
swiftness that surprised Spence. The cup jolted as he pulled his hand back,
spilling hot coffee over his fingers. He yelped with pain and jumped up,
sucking on them with fury. "Damn, that's hot! Did you get burned?"
       She shook her head, jumped up and ran to the women's tent. James
watched her go with interest. "What was all that about?" With a puzzled look
he looked at Spence, who was still blowing on his hand. "She never touched the
cup. She didn't get burned. Why did she do that?" Shrugging, he stood up with
his own hot cup and flexed his shoulders. "Oh well. God, I feel tired already
and we haven't even begun our trip yet."
       "What trip?" A booming male voice, tinged with sarcasm, echoed from
behind James. 
       James flinched and shut his eyes at the sound. "Oh God. Please don't
let it be who I think it is." He took a deep breath and turned toward the
cars. A small, thin man in khaki stood leaning against the white Rover. A
battered bush hat almost hid the small, narrowed eyes studying the campsite.
His thin lips quirked into a wry smile when he shifted his gaze and returned
James's stare. "Hello, Doctor Hay. Fancy meeting you here." He stroked a thick
sandy moustache while he talked.
       Spence spat a big wad of phlegm into the dust at his feet. "Guilford
King. What the hell are you doing here? Nobody invited you, as usual." The
venom in Spence's voice clearly showed his disdain for the intruder.
       "I don't need permission to go anywhere. I go where I want, when I want
and I never let anyone stand in my way." He lifted a finger and a young man,
Page 45

squinting through thick glasses, a big sport rifle slung over his back, an
Army duffel in his hands, moved to stand beside him. He placed the bag at
Guilford's feet and stood glaring myopically at Spence and James, a sarcastic
smile playing on his feminine-featured face.
       An old Aboriginal man, black as coal and dressed in nothing but a worn
pair of shorts and a dirty red headband, stood behind the cars, watching them
with an inscrutable expression on his broad, creased face. After studying the
camp, he quietly walked closer, bent over and, heavily laden with a huge pack
on his back, eased down under a tree at the edge of the clearing. His thin
hands reached up to unbuckle the straps that held the pack in place, then he
slipped the pack onto the ground behind him. No emotion moved over his ancient
features as he continued to watch the group of men cautiously approaching each
other. He crossed his legs, rested a wooden staff made from a tree branch
across his knees and silently continued to observe without comment.
       James and Spence moved closer to Guilford, who now conferred with the
young man by his side. He turned toward the two men approaching and announced,
"Oh, good. You're going to extend your greetings to us after all. How nice."
Indicating the young man, he went on. "This is Ian Percy, my protege, and the
old Abo being lazy over there is our tracker, Ernie. He prefers to be called
'Dingo'." 
       Hearing the sound of loud voices, the others emerged from their tents
and stood watching the encounter. Nathan stepped over to the tree where Ernie
sat, straight and silent. Nathan eased down beside him, quietly and
respectfully waiting for an introduction. The old man continued to stare
straight ahead. Marc grabbed his camera and clicked off a series of pictures
of the scene, a grin on his face. The women stood in a knot in the center of
the camp, silently watching.
       Craning his neck to look at the three women, Guilford winked at James,
a sly leer on his face. "Who are the birds? Maybe we could get together later
and have a drop or two and maybe a party, heh?" He snickered. "At least
introduce me to the tall redhead. I could use some interesting diversion." 
       "You son of a bitch. Take your sorry carcass out of here ... now!"
James, fists white-knuckled and poised to rearrange the nasty sneer on
Guilford's face, pressed forward. He could feel the blood rushing to his face,
while his heartbeat pounded in his ears. His body shook with barely suppressed
rage.
       Spence restrained him. "Get out, Guilford, or I'll help him kick you
out. It's bad enough you steal our work and lie about what you don't find on
your own without insulting our friends. Now go." Spence held his temper in
check but slid a long, fillet knife out of his pocket, making sure Guilford
saw it. "I mean it."
       James made his body relax, forcing himself to assume a nonchalant
stance while still holding Guilford's stare. "Well, I won't say it's nice to
see you, King. Now be on your way. We have a hiking trip we're trying to get
ready for." He forced himself to smile. He felt like a snarling lion that had
just caught a whiff of something dead and wanted with every shred of his being
to attack and kill.
       Guilford didn't return the smile. "So much for Australian manners. At
least we British know how to behave in social situations." He sneered at the
group and crooked his finger at the young man and tracker. "We'll be making
camp nearby if you need any protecting. Don't get your hopes up of any
invitation to tea, though." 
       Guilford and the young man moved off toward the bush, the old man
standing and trailing behind. When they reached the trees, Guilford hesitated
and turned to look at James over his shoulder. "We'll be seeing each other
again, Hay. Bet on it." Then they disappeared into the thick growth.
       Marc stepped up to James's back as he stood watching for signs of their
return. He peered into the brush but leaned close to James's ear to whisper,
"Who were those guys?" 
       "People I wish I didn't know." James spat the words out and stalked
Page 46

toward his tent without another word. He grabbed a bucket of water and ducked
inside.
       Marc raised his eyebrows at Spence. "I guess they're not best friends,
huh?"
       Spence looked at him with a sour expression. "That man is one of our
greatest enemies. He's here for a reason, believe me. You thought things were
bad before; now he's here, they are worse ... far worse."
       "I don't see how it can be any worse." Marc grumbled, stamping on a
large spider crawling near his boot.
       "You don't know him. Somehow he manages to find out where James and I
go when we track these mysteries. He always shows up and manipulates things so
he can take the credit when it's legitimate. Problem is, he also makes sure we
take the blame for the hoaxes. He doesn't hesitate to trump up something to
make himself look good either, especially when he's trying to sell his damned
awful books. He thinks he's the world's authority. Fact is, he's a joke but
his skin's too thick for it to sink in. I hate the bloke and so does James."
He paused, scratching his beard. "How the hell did he know where we'd be when
we didn't even know ourselves? The bastard gives me a bad taste in me mouth."
He grimaced and spat again.
       Nathan walked over to stand next to them. "He brings evil with him. The
dark ones sent him to stop us. He will kill us if he can." His voice
registered shock and disgust.
       Marc halted in mid stride, his breakfast forgotten. He spun back toward
them. "Oh, shit. What next?" He shook his head and turned back to stare at the
fire.
--------
         *CHAPTER TEN*
       Nathan and James finished packing the extra gear into the Rovers and
locked the doors. The campsite, now cleared and empty, looked barren of
comfort or human warmth. All that remained were the two dusty Land Rovers
parked under a big tree next to the mountain's western slope. Scattered around
the bare clearing, the group, each focused on finishing up their preparations
for the trek into the bush, remained silent. 
       James and Nathan joined Spence, who stood at the outskirts of the brush
examining a barely discernible trail leading off to the south. "This is the
way, James. Something tells me we should follow these." He pointed to fresh
tracks made by oversized, bare, humanoid feet still clearly visible in the red
clay. 
       James nodded and turned to scowl at the women, who continued shoving
things into already overstuffed packs. "Blow me! I'll bet we end up lugging
those bags around for them before we get there." He sighed, deep and
irritated. "Hey, you Sheilas! It's late. Let's get moving." James hollered at
the stragglers as they scrambled to finish fastening their individual
backpacks.
       Nathan chuckled, deep and rich, then hurriedly rearranged his face back
into a serious look when the women, already struggling under their packs,
caught up with the men. He stepped up to Cindy and eased her pack off her
quivering shoulders. "I think you ladies should leave a bit of this stuff back
here, don't you?"
       James, irritated by the further delay, stepped over to help Sam off
with her pack. "Didn't anyone ever teach you how to travel light?" Seeing
anger flare in her eyes, he held out his hand and softened his tone. "Sorry.
I'm still angry about Guilford. I shouldn't be taking it out on you." He laid
her pack down and expertly unbuckled it in a matter of seconds. "Now, ladies,
you need to lighten these packs by at least half. We'll take what you leave
behind and pack it into the locked cars. Okay?" His conciliatory tone eased
the tension.
       Sam nodded, leaned down and began pulling things out of the pack. "Come
on, girls. They're right. We won't last an hour with all this weight." She
handed her things to James while the other women did the same with Spence and
Page 47

Nathan. Marc leaned against a tree snapping pictures and laughing at the
spectacle.
       When they finally had the lightened packs strapped on and ready to go,
James looked them over like a General in the field of battle. "Keep your eyes
and ears open. I have no idea how far the landing site is so we might have a
long walk ahead of us." His eyes settled on Sam and Marc. "It gets hot out
here so drink a lot of water. And stay together. Don't wander off." He ducked
into the brush, following the trail. The others quickly fell in behind him. 
         ~*~
After fighting thick undergrowth, thorny vines that stung the skin like
miniature scorpions, rivers of sweat and all manner of biting insects for
several hours, Sam was ready to trade all her worldly goods for a motel room
with a shower and a bottle of Calamine lotion. She stopped to gaze at a flock
of brightly colored parakeets arcing gracefully over the treetops; a touch of
the familiar that made her want to collapse and cry.
       Ratana, walking behind her, noticed Sam's state and yelled ahead. "Hey,
Uncle! How about a rest? We've been walking for hours now and we could use
some shade and water." When Sam glanced back at her, gratitude shining in her
eyes, Ratana smiled at her. "I can't take these damned insects any longer."
They both smiled and sighed with relief when James finally stopped. 
       Spence, Nathan, Marc and the women sat under an ancient tree, its trunk
so big around it would take five men linked hand-to-hand to encircle its
girth. James insisted on walking ahead to see if he could spot any sign of the
site. 
       Cindy, quiet and reserved, slowly sipped from her water bottle and
eased her back against the massive tree for support. She sighed and almost
immediately slipped into a doze. Spence stood guard near the trail, watching
for James to return. The other women sipped from their bottles and talked
softly among themselves. 
       Marc leaned over to whisper in Nathan's ear. "I can't figure her out.
She almost never talks and she seems like she's afraid of her own shadow. Why
the heck would a girl like that agree to go hiking in a place like this?"
       Nathan spoke low in response. "Maybe her missing boyfriend bullied her
into it." He shrugged. "It happens." He glanced down the trail. "I wonder if
he'll show up, feeling guilty for leaving her alone out there? I doubt it,
though. Some blokes are real bastards that way."
       Marc opened his mouth to comment and shut it in a hurry when James came
trotting down the trail. "What the hell is he running in this heat for? Is he
crazy?" 
       Marc and Nathan stood up when Spence moved to intercept James on the
path. Ratana nudged Cindy, who came awake instantly. The women stood and
joined Nathan and Marc as they watched the two older men speak together in low
tones. Spence threw his hands around, talking animatedly while James listened.
Just when Sam was ready to take the lead and go find out what was going on,
the two men walked down the trail to rejoin them. 
       James yanked off his sweaty bush hat and ran his hands through wet
hair. He took a big drink from the water bottle Nathan held out to him before
speaking. "Guilford and his men are paralleling us on the right. They're
trying to go unobserved but it's him." He paused. "And I found a body down the
trail a bit. I think he might be your friend, Cindy." He handed the bottle
back to Nathan. "Are you up to coming and seeing if it is? I know it's hard
but..." He watched the girl for a reaction.
       She stepped away from the tree where she'd remained until he arrived.
"I'll come," she stated, her voice calm and steady as she shouldered her pack
and waited.
       The others silently shouldered their packs as well and followed James
back down the way he'd returned. A half-hour later, they halted next to a
jumble of large boulders stacked up next to the trail, some of them as much as
eight feet high. A swarm of bluebottle flies hovered over the green lichens
growing like thick yard lawn on the top of the rounded stones. James held his
Page 48

hand up to the group. "Spence, you and I will go with Cindy. The rest of you
stay here. No sense in the rest of you seeing this too." He gently took Cindy
by the elbow and led her toward the boulders. Spence followed, his eyes
scanning the ground for tracks as he walked.
       Marc swore and Sam jumped when a pitiful wail rose from behind the
rocks. James, stoned-faced and somber, led Cindy back to the group. She clung
to his shirt, her face pressed to it, sobbing like a small child. He gently
extracted her from his chest and handed her over to Ratana and Sam with
sadness in his eyes. "It's him." The women led her to a shady tree growing
next to the trail and sat her down. The girl's sobbing became softer but she
gripped Sam's hand and sat clinging to Ratana's blouse.
       James turned back to rejoin Spence, who still searched the area around
the body. "What do you see, Spence? Are those animal tracks or human?"
       Spence straightened up and rubbed the toe of his boot into a deep track
running near the foot of the corpse. "It's just like the tracks we found up
north. No doubt about it." He pointed to the right of the tracks. "Take a look
at this, James. There's a trail of blood splatters as big as twenty-cent
pieces leading off toward the trail. My bet is he shot something and it lived
long enough to tear him up this way."
       James stooped and picked up what was left of a .303 rifle. Splinters of
oak stock were all that remained of a once beautiful old gun. The steel
barrel, now bent at a ninety-degree angle, gave it an almost comical look,
like something out of a cartoon. "What the hell would be strong enough to
shatter solid oak and bend a barrel like this?" He turned the gun over and
over in his hands. 
       "You know what did that as well as I do, James." Spence took the
shattered weapon from James's hands and carefully inspected what remained of
the wooden stock. "There are blood stains on the wood too."
       "If he killed it, it would be long gone after two days. We both know a
dead Yowie has never been found so that's no surprise. Poor Cindy. I wish she
didn't have to see this." James stooped over the dead man and waved his hand
over the face to run off the flies. He's been torn apart. He's barely
recognizable as a human being. It's a nasty way to die."
       "Well, we can't bury him so we'll have to leave him until we can report
this and have someone come out and fetch him." 
       Spence's matter-of-fact statement echoed James's thoughts as he looked
with pity at the dead man. "We'll have to mark the spot. You got one of your
old red handkerchiefs on you? That should do it. Go get a long branch to tie
it to and I'll get his I.D. for the authorities." James felt around the man's
jeans, hoping to find a wallet. When he felt no tattletale lump, he searched
around for a pack. All that was left of it lay a few feet away and contained
no identification. He stood up with a sigh, gathered what he could of the
man's effects and walked back toward the trail.
       Spence had secured the red cloth on a long sturdy branch and now waited
with the rest of the group, who shot question after question at him about the
dead man. He held his hands up in defense and pointed to James when he came
into sight. "Ask him. I didn't check the guy out, James did." He threw up his
hands and walked up the path to inspect the blood trail he'd noticed earlier.
       Marc stepped up to James, his face a mask of fear, and asked, "How did
he die, James? Was it an accident? You know, like he fell or ran out of water
or something?"
       James put a hand on Marc's shoulder. "He was mangled by some kind of
animal." When Marc recoiled in revulsion, he continued. "Look, we're not
children here and we don't have time to coddle anyone with a weak stomach or
delicate sensibilities. If you expect me to lie to you so you won't have to
face facts, then you have a rude awakening coming. Lying to you won't protect
you but telling you the truth will."
       Marc shut his eyes and struggled to collect his composure. "Okay,
you're right. We can't protect ourselves if we don't face facts. Right. I got
it. I'm okay." He stumbled over to the shade of the tree and sat down heavily.
Page 49

His face dropped into his hands.
       James walked over to the women and squatted next to Ratana. "How is
she?" He laid the remains of the dead man's pack at Cindy's feet.
       The girl lay quietly relaxed in Ratana's arms, but her eyes were alive
and darting from face to face. "She'll be okay. I think she's tougher than she
looks."
       James squatted next to the ruined pack and pulled two plastic baggies
out of a side pocket. One held a dozen hand-rolled cigarettes; the other was
full of seeds. He held them out to the girl. "Cindy, what do you know about
this? Was your friend here to plant Marijuana? Is that why he was armed?"
       Cindy shuddered, closed her eyes tightly and buried her face in
Ratana's shoulder.
       Sam stood up and patted James on the shoulder. "Can I talk to you,
James? Alone?" She nodded at Ratana then at the girl. "I'll be back soon in
case you need any help." Her voice exuded sympathy for the girl but worry at
the same time. She moved off onto the trail and away from the tree. "James,
this may not be the time to bring this up but there's something wrong with all
this, especially Cindy and that ... dead boy. It doesn't feel right." She
threw up her hands in exasperation. "Hell, I don't know how any of this could
feel normal. It's all weird." She took a deep breath. "Look, I don't know the
right words here but under these circumstances, something feels out of whack
to me. That's the best way I can explain it. I ... I wanted to warn you. I
don't want you to get hurt and it feels very dangerous out here to me." Her
shoulders slumped and she turned to face down the trail, away from him. "Shit!
I'm making a muck of this." Taking a deep breath, she fought to hold back
tears. "James, I'm scared." 
       He took her by the shoulders and turned her back around to face him.
Her eyes pleaded with him to understand and not laugh. "I know, Sam. I know.
So are the rest of us." He pulled her to his chest and stroked her hair. 
       Over her shoulder he saw Spence straighten suddenly and assume an
attitude of listening intently to something coming from the bush. James
tensed, gently pushed her away and kissed her on the forehead. "Why don't you
go sit with Ratana? Don't worry, I'll watch out for myself ... and you." He
smiled at her, lightly kissed her parted lips then hurriedly walked down the
trail to join Spence.
       "James, I heard something odd coming from that direction." He pointed
off into a thick growth of bush. "It sounded like..."
       A high-pitched shout echoed throughout the foliage. Flocks of birds
suddenly took flight, their calls almost deafening as they flew out of the
treetops. James, tall and wide-shouldered, and Spence, small and quick, didn't
hesitate. In tandem, they took off in the direction of the shout, ignoring the
thick growth trying to slow their progress.
       With a suddenness that surprised them, they rushed out into a small
clearing surrounded by large trees and thick brush, the entrance they'd
arrived through looking like a tunnel of living green. Guilford and Ian stood
just inside the circle with rifles pointing toward the trunk of a tree on the
far side of the clearing. A five-foot tall hairy shape, partially hidden in
the foliage beside the tree, stood very still, its eyes gleaming yellow at the
rifles pointed at it.
       "It's the proof I've searched for years to get. Finally, I'll make all
you idiot academics stand up and acknowledge me as the best." Guilford sneered
when he saw James and Spence standing, dumbfounded, in the clearing. 
       James eased closer, his eyes glued to the creature now snarling at the
sudden arrival of two more humans. "Shut up, Guilford. This isn't the time."
When he saw Ian edge closer to the brush, he whispered, "For God's sake, Ian,
don't shoot. It won't harm you if you don't threaten it. Back up."
       The young man ignored him, a malicious and self-satisfied smile on his
thin face. He stepped closer to the creature, which responded with a weak cry
of fear. Ian stepped even closer, the rifle steady on the dark shape.
       When the women, led by Nathan and trailed by Marc, stepped out into the
Page 50

clearing, James held up his hand to them, indicating they should stay where
they were and keep quiet. Nathan halted and held himself motionless, his gaze
glued to the brush with the others. One of the women gasped as the hidden
creature stumbled and reached out a hand to steady itself against the tree,
revealing a thickly coated arm.
       Spence moved quietly up beside Guilford and whispered. "Whatever it is,
it's dying, King. Let it be. You'll still have your prize but let it die in
peace."
       Guilford snorted in derision then stepped closer to Ian, leaving Spence
standing behind him. Their two rifles never moved from the target. James took
a step toward the two hunters, intent on convincing them to back off. As his
foot hit the ground, the long, hairy arm stretched out of the brush toward the
knot of people beyond Guilford and Ian. A loud whimper issued from the shape
as its hand, palm upward, reached out in supplication. Slowly, the bulky
creature began to move into the clearing, its hand still held out in peace.
       The leaves parted, revealing a face with large, liquid eyes dulled with
pain. Ian pulled the trigger. A hole the size of a golf ball appeared in the
middle of the sagging creature's chest, blood blossoming like a crimson flower
against its thick coat of hair. It finally fell, unmoving and fully revealed,
out of the brush.
       When the report of the shot died down, the silence in the clearing was
deafening in its intensity. Then pandemonium broke out. Ian war whooped at the
top of his lungs and ran toward the dead creature lying at the foot of the
tree. Guilford lowered his rifle and stamped his foot in rage at the younger
man's action, the women screamed and James moved back to the small group
standing behind him as if to protect them against the madmen with the rifles. 
       Spence still stood inside the clearing, his shoulders slumped and his
fists bunched into knots of rage. His face, a mask of hatred and loathing,
worked and twitched. His chest heaved as he sucked in large gulps of air.
Gradually, his body straightened and tensed. He slowly pulled the long fishing
knife out of its sheath on his belt. Crouching into a defensive stance, he
slowly moved toward Guilford's back. Standing so close he could smell the
man's sweat, Spence poised the knife to plunge it into Guilford's kidneys.
       Nathan roared, "No, Spence!" and pushed past James to run into the
clearing. 
       James spun around to see his friend ready to commit murder. He leaped
into the clearing right behind Nathan. Guilford, now aware of the threat at
his back, turned around with his rifle raised. Nathan hit him at a dead run,
grabbed the rifle out of his hands and slung it into the undergrowth. James
grabbed Spence, pinning his arms down against his sides. The old man cursed
and spat like a cat that had just been bagged. In spite of their size
differences, James struggled to hold onto his friend. 
       The women rushed toward the knot of men. Marc remained at the mouth of
the entrance, pressed against the thick bush that made up its impenetrable
walls. As he stood at the edge of the clearing, Marc's head moved from side to
side like an autistic child who refused to believe the evidence of his eyes.
Sam reached James and stretched out a trembling hand toward his arm as he
shook Spence and roared, "Get a grip on yourself, Spence. We need you to have
a cool head right now. Spence!" When Sam's hand gripped his arm, James ignored
her and continued to glare into Spence's unfocused eyes. 
       Clutching her boyfriend's shredded pack, Cindy stumbled toward the
huddle of inert fur at the base of the tree. She moved like a sleepwalker, her
eyes fixed and her face smooth with disbelief and horror. She froze next to
the body, her arms rigid at her sides. 
       Cindy's somnambulant walk across the clearing alarmed Sam. She dropped
her hand from James's arm and moved quickly across the clearing toward Cindy.
When she reached the silent girl, Sam searched her face and patted her
shoulder. She took a deep breath and squatted next to the limp body. Sam
looked down into its peaceful face and reached out to lightly touch the silken
coat with trembling fingers. When Cindy crouched beside her to put a
Page 51

comforting hand on hers, tears suddenly began to stream down Sam's face as she
murmured over and over again, "My God, it was just a baby. It was crying. My
God..."
       James used all his strength to hold Spence while he shouted into the
old man's ear, trying to snap him out of it. Spence stopped struggling so
suddenly James thought he might have had a seizure. Then he saw what the rest
were beginning to see.
       Ian had rushed from his hiding spot among the thick brush and was now
standing triumphantly with one foot on the Yowie's body, his rifle held high
in a parody of an old African white hunter. The women, crouched beside the
body, stared past Ian into the thick trees. He didn't notice what was
happening just behind him but the women rose slowly and began to back away
from him, their eyes huge with fear.
       The green of the foliage began to shimmer and take on form. Shapes of
varying height and width began to solidify and move. They moved toward Ian
with clenched massive hands. Before he could move to protect himself, two of
the huge man-like creatures appeared behind Ian's back and had his struggling
body locked inside massive arms before he could react to their presence.
Several other figures began to appear inside the trees, each standing as if
watching an execution, silent, somber and unmoving. The two larger ones each
took hold of one of Ian's arms, growling and snarling their rage. Their
brilliant yellow eyes flashed like liquid sunlight as they held his puny body
between them. When the blood and death smell of their companion lying dead
under Ian's feet reached their wide, flaring nostrils, they bellowed with a
roar that shook the dusty leaves on the trees. They lifted Ian off the ground
like a rag doll and his screams of terror began.
       The silent watchers in the trees moved silently forward in
anticipation. Ian screamed again and the duo, with roars of triumph, began to
pull Ian's body tight between them. His limbs pulled easily from the sockets,
like they were made of tissue paper, tearing and popping with the incredible
pressure put upon them.
       It happened so fast Ian had no time for the pain to register. By the
time it did, the pair still holding his torso upright had a firm hold on his
legs. The scream of agony that finally erupted from Ian's throat drowned their
sounds of revenge as they pulled him apart. 
       With a movement that clearly spoke of utter contempt, the largest Yowie
reached up and twisted Ian's head off like a soda bottle's lid, ending the
man's scream as abruptly as shutting off an annoying audiotape with the press
of a button. The dominant Yowie held the head high in the air and roared,
showing long, yellowing fangs, while the other casually tossed the limp body
aside. Holding Ian's head in front of his eyes, the larger Yowie stared into
the face of the dead man, roared once again and, with an attitude of disdain
and revulsion, threw it into their midst. Totally ignoring the other humans
standing stunned before them, they lifted the body of their dead companion as
tenderly as a mother with a child and disappeared as mysteriously as they'd
appeared. Not a trace was left to verify they'd been there except the metallic
stench of blood in the air and Ian's mangled head lying in the clearing at
Guilford's feet.
       Guilford's eyes gleamed with naked admiration, respect, maybe even
love, as he stared at the huge beasts.
       Marc's whimpers, Spence's labored breathing, and the sound of Ratana
vomiting as she knelt in the dirt only broke the utterly complete, shocked
silence that remained. 
--------
         *CHAPTER ELEVEN*
       A feeble fire, made hastily inside a makeshift campsite, flickered and
illuminated the varying shades of white and gray faces surrounding it. The
loud hum of insect activity outside the circle of light attested to the lack
of conversation inside the circle. 
       Finally, restless and unable to abide the depressing mood of the group
Page 52

of people huddled together in silent shock any longer, Spence stood, produced
a large bottle of cheap whiskey from his pack and poured some into a tin cup
he used for coffee. He downed a large gulp before he decided to break the
somber quiet and speak. "Bloody hell, people. Snap out of it. What did you
expect? Disneyland rides out here?" When the only response he got was a circle
of sunken-eyed stares from the women and being totally ignored by the men, he
snorted in disgust. "So, okay, it was bloody, it was gory, it was a sight to
make you puke your toenails but hey, the bloke had it coming."
       Ratana flinched when he mentioned puking and Cindy began to softly cry
again. Sam held her by the shoulders and stared into the fire. James stood up
and held out his cup. Spence filled it. "I had no idea this trip would be so
dangerous. If I had, I would've insisted the women stay behind." He took a
drink and sat back down, staying well away from Guilford.
       Sam's head came up with a snap, her eyes flashing with firelight. "Now,
just a minute here. It seems to me the women aren't screwing this up; the men
are. That idiot got himself killed because he and this arrogant ass," she
nodded at Guilford, who sat smugly sipping his own stash of brew, "came in
here to play big game hunters. They got what they asked for as far as I'm
concerned. As for being in danger, I can't answer for Ratana or Cindy but I've
been there before and I can handle myself. So, get the notion out of your head
that you have to play He-man and protect me." 
       "That goes for me too, James. I'm okay. It just took me by surprise is
all. I've never seen a man die like that. I have seen men die, though, so I'll
get over it, have no fear about that." Ratana pulled herself up straight and
looked squarely in his eyes.
       "Speaking of playing Big Game Hunter ... Guilford, where's your
tracker, Ernie? I didn't see him earlier either." Nathan's question served to
silence the group once more.
       Guilford, sitting relaxed with one leg crossed primly over the other
and a cup held in his hand, like one would sit at a formal tea party, held his
chin up and gave Nathan a scathing look before answering. "I do not keep track
of the help. However, he did lead us to the Yowie. How he knew it was there is
anybody's guess but he did lead us there. I saw him in the clearing. He
dropped his pack and ran. I'm assuming he either ran back home in terror or
was killed by the Yowies. Either way, it's no concern of mine anymore."
       Spence snorted. "Damned bloody snob of an arsehole. The man probably
had enough sense to get away from you while the getting was good."
       Marc, sitting huddled in his chair, hadn't spoken a word since he'd
followed Spence, Nathan and the women from the scene of Ian's death to find
and make a camp for the night. Several yards beyond the scene of Ian's death,
Spence had located a small cleared area under massive gum trees. A tiny,
running creek ran through it, offering fresh water. Spence and Nathan had
induced him and the women to get busy, hoping activity would blot out what
they'd just seen.
       Marc hadn't looked back at James and Guilford when they remained behind
to bury what was left of the young man; he hadn't cared enough to look. By the
time James and Guilford had stumbled into the camp, tired and dirty, to
gratefully accept cups of hot coffee, the sun was going down and Marc was
still sitting catatonic in his chair. Now, the camp enveloped in total
blackness, he raised his eyes, still round with fear, to James. "I have to get
out of here too. I won't stay here another day. I swear, if one of you won't
take me back to the car, I'll go by myself, but I'll go either way." When not
one person challenged him or expressed a desire to escape with him, he looked
around the circle of people with absolute incredulity on his face. "I think
you're all crazy. Nobody in their right mind would stay here now." His eyes
settled on James once again. "I am going first thing tomorrow. Nobody better
try to stop me either."
       "I'll take you out, Marc." Nathan glanced at Marc's startled reaction
then shifted his gaze to James, who looked just as surprised. "I'll take him
out at first light and I'll be back by dark. I promise." When James relaxed
Page 53

and nodded, Nathan nodded back and reached out his cup to Spence with a smile
on his face.
       "Good riddance to bad rubbish." Guilford saluted Marc with his cup then
smiled and took a hearty drink.
       "Screw you, limey. You got us into this in the first place. Those
creatures hadn't threatened us before you came along." Marc threw the remains
of his coffee into the fire and stood up, looking down on the Englishman who
continued to smile up at him. "Why the hell are we allowing him to tag along
with us anyway? The guy's a creep."
       Spence laid a hand on Marc's arm. "Let it go, son. It's done now.
Besides, you're forgetting Cindy's friend. He was killed before His Highness,
there, came along." He tilted his head at Guilford. "I think Cindy's friend
wounded the Yowie before we found it so it's not entirely his fault." Spence
spat in the fire and gave Guilford a sour look. "We're not like him, we're
civilized men who take him in for protection in spite of his obvious character
faults." Spence donned a sarcastic grin. Guilford's smug smile slipped when he
saw the hatred in Spence's eyes that gave a lie to the grin still plastered on
his face.
       "You never did tell us how he died or what you found there, James."
Ratana looked up at him, expectantly. 
       "I guess it's time to rake over the facts as we know them now." James
took a deep breath. "Okay. Spence and I know, from looking at the guy's
remains, that a very strong being mangled him pretty badly. We have every
indication it was the wounded Yowie." Seeing Cindy flinch, he hesitated.
"Sorry, Cindy, but we can't afford to ignore things. We're very much in danger
here and knowing what's what is our only hope of surviving." He turned his
gaze back to the group. "Yes, we now know it's a Yowie. They're very real, in
spite of media gluttons like Guilford whose proof of their existence gives all
the research a bad name." He ignored Guilford's look of anger. "We found a
shattered rifle with a bent barrel next to the hiker. Only a very strong
creature could've done that. I think, for reasons unknown, he shot the Yowie
and was attacked and killed right afterward as a consequence. Somehow, it
survived long enough to get to the clearing where he found it." He nodded at
Guilford, who silently sipped his drink and wisely refrained from making
remarks.
       Spence leaned over to James and whispered, "That reminds me. We have
something to discuss between ourselves later." When James nodded, he sat back
down and sipped his whiskey, alert to everyone's reaction.
       "Then there's a chance it only acted in self defense. So did the others
when Ian killed it. That means we may not be in danger if we don't bother them
anymore." Sam's voice became softer and sadder as she spoke. "I think I felt
more for the poor creature than I did Ian." Her voice trembled at the memory
of the child-like whimper for help she heard just before the shot.
       Guilford sputtered and laughed. "Oh come on! It was just a dumb animal.
Ian was a human being. Have you no loyalty to your own species? What a lot of
silly female twaddle. Stupid Yank cow." He shook his head in amusement at her
sad tone.
       Marc kicked the chair Guilford sat in and smiled maliciously when he
sprawled in the dirt, his cup flying into the fire. "You son of a bitch. You
watch how you talk to her, if you know what's good for you." His fists were
clenched, waiting for Guilford to stand up. 
       James pushed Marc back into a chair and sat down between him and
Guilford, who slowly stood, dusted himself off and rearranged his chair
further away from the group. "Haven't we had enough violence for one day?" His
disgust at Marc and Guilford etched his face with deeper lines when he looked
at first one then the other. "We won't solve anything with more." He turned to
Marc. "If you can't get a grip on your temper, Marc, then go to bed. None of
us want any more problems tonight, if we can help it, and I won't tolerate it
myself." The threat in his voice succeeded in convincing Marc. He stood and
stalked to his tent without another word. 
Page 54

       When Guilford grunted with satisfaction, James turned to him, the same
threatening tone in his voice. "You can stay in this camp, Guilford, but only
because I don't want my conscience to suffer because of your lack of brains.
However, I'd suggest you pitch your tent away from ours."
       "I think we could all use a good night's sleep..._if_ I can sleep after
today." Sam emptied her cup. She nodded at Cindy, now asleep in her chair.
"Better wake her up, Ratana, and get her to bed too. I'll be in soon. I need a
wash first." She strode off to get a towel from her tent then headed toward
the small creek.
       Ratana nudged the girl awake and headed her toward their tent. When
Cindy disappeared into the tent without protest, Ratana took a deep breath and
hesitated before following. "Uncle, what about tomorrow? Are we still going to
continue following the path or give it up?"
       "We don't give up. We _won't_ give up," Spence said, answering the
question for James. "We're too close now and I know the answers are here."
       Nathan emptied his cup and set it down next to the fire. "Yes, they're
here. We don't go back, Ratana. You know we can't."
       She nodded and turned to enter the women's tent. Nathan watched her go
then asked, "Do you want me to stand guard tonight, Uncle? I'm not tired
anyway." His brown eyes sagged with fatigue.
       "No, Nate. You have an early morning tomorrow getting Marc back to the
Rover. Go get some sleep. I'll stay out here." James sat back down and
refilled his coffee cup, dismissing the subject. Nathan went to his tent,
grateful for the reprieve. 
       James turned to Guilford and Spence. "Spence, you come and spell me in
four hours. King, you relieve Spence four hours after that. No questions and
no arguments." He held up his hand at Guilford's open mouth, preventing the
protest he knew was coming.
       Guilford stood and kicked his chair over in disgust before stomping
off. 
       "We have a problem, James. I didn't want the others to hear this
because it would probably make things harder than they already are ... but ...
I'm not sure about Cindy's story of how that guy died." Spence twisted his
hands together, staring into the dying fire.
       "What do you mean? His death looked straightforward enough to me."
James leaned forward and put his elbows on his knees, completely alert and
listening.
       Spence's eyes didn't leave the fire. "That blood trail I found ... you
know, the splatters the Yowie left after the guy shot it ... well ... Oh,
hell!" He looked up into James's eyes, his own troubled. "James, that blood
wasn't more than a few hours old. She told us he'd disappeared three days ago.
There wasn't a water bottle or food in his pack either. It just doesn't add
up. If the guy went trekking on his own he would've taken supplies and if he'd
just shot that Yowie we would've heard it. Something is screwy here and I
can't figure it out, maybe you can."
       James sighed. "Spence, this whole trip is unreal. Nothing out of the
ordinary would surprise me anymore. Let's just let it lie until we have more
information. Okay?" He rubbed his eyes with the back of his hands. "I'm too
tired to think much more about it tonight."
       "You're right. We're all worn out and overwhelmed. But..." Seeing
James's fatigue, Spence shut his mouth.
       James gave Spence a hard look, daring him to open his mouth again, but
the old man simply stood for a few moments studying James, then he nodded and
went to his tent without further comment. James lowered his face down into his
hands and let out a deep breath. His shoulders slumped and his eyes closed
with tired relief. When a pair of hands gently lit upon his shoulders and
began kneading the hot, bunched muscles along his neck, he groaned with
pleasure.
       Sam moved her lips to within inches of his ear and whispered, "I was
hoping we'd get some time alone tonight. I think we could both use a break
Page 55

from the others right about now." 
       He raised his head and reached up to capture her right hand in his own.
He gently pulled her around to face him. Smiling up at her with an unspoken
intensity of emotion mirrored in his eyes, he gripped her waist with both
hands and eased her down onto his lap. 
       In the firelight, her eyes shown softly luminous and her lips were
full, moist and parted. A tremor ran through his body when he felt her settle
onto his lap and sensuously wrap her arms around his neck, settling her head
upon his shoulder. He held her close, burying his face into the sweet hollow
of her collarbone. Her scent, the freshness of the rainforest combined with
her unique womanly smell, overwhelmed him. His lips pressed against her damp
skin, moving slowly, savoring her taste. His hand gently cupped one full
breast, firm and unfettered, as his lips moved up along her neck. She
shivered, her tongue slowly exploring the curve of his ear. Her warm breath
sent shivers through him and his breathing quickened with hers.
       _I could spend the rest of my life holding her like this._ Tasting the
thought, James knew it felt right ... real.
       A high pitched screech of rage, followed by a series of snarls and
growls reverberating throughout the forest, instantly chilled James's heat.
Sam gasped, frozen in place. He tensed and eased her off his lap, then he
stood, nudging her behind him. "Sam, go wake up the women, then all of you
stay in the tent until I tell you it's safe to come out." His whispered
command set her in motion.
       While she ducked into the women's tent, he backed slowly toward the
men's tents, eyeing the thick growth around the camp as he made his way there.
Before he reached them, the men, in various stages of dress, rushed into the
clearing, each donning heavy objects in their hands for weapons. Spence, a
heavy fishing knife clenched in his fist, stepped up next to James and
whispered, "What is it? I don't think I've ever heard that type of animal in
the bush before."
       Before he could answer, Sam ran out of the women's tent, breathing hard
and wild-eyed. "Cindy's gone! She's not in there." 
       Ratana, fully alert and pulling a shirt over her head, appeared right
behind her. "She's right, Uncle, the girl is gone."
       "Oh, my God. You don't think that those ... those ... creatures might
have her? That she's the one they're..." Marc, his face white and pinched with
fear, was the only one who clung to his tent flap instead of joining the group
now standing together in the clearing. 
       Nathan held his hand up to Marc, chopping off his words. All listened
intently to the loud snarling and screeching taking place just outside camp.
Sam clung to James's arm, standing steady but scared. Nathan slipped an arm
around Ratana's shoulders, both sure that whatever happened was the will of
the Old Ones. Spence held his long knife low and ready, his knuckles white
around the hilt. Guilford, clothed in a silk dressing gown and standing alone
in front of his tent by the creek, scanned the brush with a hunter's eyes. He
held his heavy hunting rifle in the crook of his arm, ready to shoot if
necessary. 
       Abruptly, the birds that had been flitting nervously throughout the
trees disappeared. The wind died without a whisper and all sense of life
receded. A heavy feeling of weight pressed down on them, saturating the air.
After what seemed like hours, a low, gentle voice wafted across the creek. "It
be only dingoes killing a roo. I be watching outside for you and no danger
there." 
       A wizened and graying Ernie stood on the far bank of the creek under a
big gum tree. He was still dressed in a dirty red headband and wrinkled pair
of shorts, his hands tightly gripping his ancient carved spear. Only the
moonlight gave his form any definition or detail when it glowed around him,
giving him an unnatural look of power, like an awakened god of the rainforest.
       Guilford jumped and swung the big rifle around in reaction to the
voice. When he recognized the old man, he lowered the gun. "Bloody hell,
Page 56

Dingo! You gave me a fright! Where the bloody hell have you been off to? I
could have used your help with this bloody tent!" 
       Laughter erupted, abruptly ending his tirade. He turned with feigned
dignity and glared at Sam, who led the way, her face becoming red as her
laughter gained in volume. 
       Ernie slowly shambled toward the water then turned back to beckon
behind him. When Cindy came into view and took his hand to cross the creek,
Sam's laughter choked off. "Cindy! She's with Ernie. Thank God!"
       Nathan and Ratana walked past Guilford without a glance, their
attention riveted on the old Aboriginal man wading through the water. When he
stepped onto the bank next to Guilford's tent, they moved forward and both
nodded in respect. Ernie nodded in return and continued forward, Cindy beside
him. He walked up and faced James. "The girl be unhurt. She know not where she
be." He dropped the girl's hand and turned back toward Guilford's tent. 
       Sam stepped up and took Cindy's hand, peering closely into her face.
"Cindy? Honey, where have you been? Why did you leave the camp?"
       The girl seemed disconnected and unsure of herself as her eyes found
and focused on Sam's face. "I ... I don't know. All I remember is the old guy
taking my hand and now seeing all of you here." Her voice bordered on panic. 
       Sam slipped an arm around her shoulders and led her over to the
campfire to sit down. James and Spence walked over to speak to Ernie, who
stood beside the creek pointedly ignoring Guilford's demands for service. The
old man spoke quietly to Nathan and Ratana, their heads bent together in
conference. Before the two men could reach Ernie, he waded back across the
creek and disappeared into the trees. 
       Guilford stood, hands on hips and a look of pure rage on his face.
"What the bloody hell does he think he's doing?" He shouted to Ernie's
retreating back. "Come back here, you lazy Abo! You worthless..."
       Spence stepped up and hit Guilford squarely on the nose with all his
wiry strength. Guilford hit the dirt like a bag of soggy laundry. Spence,
rubbing his knuckles, grinned at what he'd done. "There. Now _you're_ no
longer worthless." He wiped the clay on his boots onto Guilford's silk
dressing gown, exposing the Englishman's red silk thong in the process, nodded
with satisfaction at James and stalked away, heading for his tent and the
bottle inside it.
       Shaking his head and ignoring Guilford's exposed state, James turned
back to Nathan and Ratana. "What did he tell you?" His tone held a willingness
to listen respectfully to the old man's words.
       Ratana's face registered distress but Nathan's voice remained calm and
steady. "He said the Yowies are angry at the white men. He also told us we
should not enter the portal when we reach it."
       James glanced over his shoulder to see if the others were still at a
distance. Spence was returning from his tent with a cup in hand. He quickly
turned back to Nathan. "Should the others know this? Did he say what the
portal is we should look for?"
       "That's all he said, Uncle. I know you are to know of these things and
maybe Spence too but not the others, I think." Nathan nodded at the two women,
now joined by Marc, sitting around the fire.
       James nodded in agreement just as Spence joined them. "What's up? What
did the old bloke have to say?" His breath reeked of whiskey and James
flinched when the fumes assaulted his nostrils.
       James indicated Nathan. "You tell him, Nate. I'm going to ask Cindy a
few questions." He started to turn and spotted Guilford sitting up, a hand to
his swelling face. "It might be best if you talked away from here." 
       James slowly walked toward the fire, buying time to decide how to
approach the girl. The fire, now stoked up again and flickering with renewed
energy around a fresh pile of branches, gave the women's faces an eerie look.
The play of shadows over Cindy's face as she talked quietly to Sam made James
pause and study her closer. Shaking his head and mumbling about 'tricks of the
light', he sat down next to Marc, who seemed content to just sit there and
Page 57

listen. 
       Leaning forward on his knees, he fixed the women with a look of
seriousness that halted their conversation. They looked at him expectantly.
Pausing, he collected his thoughts. "Cindy, do you remember at all how you got
outside the camp tonight?"
       She straightened in her chair and stuck out her chin. "No, I don't. All
I remember is going to bed, drained and tired. Then I came to in the middle of
the forest with that Aboriginal man standing in front of me. He brought me
here. That's all I remember."
       "That's exactly what she's been telling me, James." Sam patted the
girl's arm and smiled at her. "I think she's telling the truth." She turned an
irritated look on James. "It happened to me too, remember? Why is this so
important to begin with?"
       He leaned back, resisting an urge to snap at them. "Everything is
important. After all we've seen and heard you don't know that yet?" He took a
deep breath. "Look, there's so much happening here and all of it, so far, has
come fast and furious. We hardly have time to think, much less analyze what it
all means. Forgive me for pushing but we need to know what we're in the middle
of. Sorry, Cindy. Why don't you ladies go grab some sleep?" He looked around
at Spence, Nathan and Marc, all now wide-awake and tense. "There'll be plenty
of guards tonight, I think." He flashed them a brief smile then hit Marc on
the leg. "Come on, Marc, let's go see what we can do to make the ladies feel
safer." 
       He stood and, without waiting for Marc's response, stalked back to
Spence, Nathan and Ratana. They stood by the women's tent, talking quietly
together. Guilford had disappeared into his tent. James announced, "I won't be
sleeping much tonight. If anyone wants to bed down, go ahead. There will be
someone on guard all night." He looked questioningly at the men. Nathan shook
his head in the negative and Spence snorted in derision. Ratana, seeing the
women making their way toward them, remarked, "Someone has to get some sleep.
Looks like the women are the only ones with common sense around here." She
smiled and ducked into the tent.
       Spence, Nathan and James moved away from the entrance when Sam and
Cindy approached. Sam smiled at them but Cindy stared straight ahead, her mind
turned inward and her face reflecting uneasiness. They entered their tent and
James could hear Ratana's greeting to the pair. 
       Spence watched them go and muttered, "She's right. We have no common
sense. If we did, we'd have brought elephant guns with us on this trip."
       "Elephant guns? I'm hoping the good war fairy air drops us some rocket
launchers tonight." James's grin flashed against his tanned face and a throaty
laugh erupted from his mouth. When he saw Spence wasn't laughing with him, he
added, "Weapons aren't the answer here, Spence. We're not like Ian or King and
I think the best thing for us to do is trust in the fact that we know we're
supposed to be here."
       "Trust? Trust in what? That we don't have a real clue as to what we're
looking for? Trust that those beasts won't tear us limb from limb while we
sleep? Right, James!" Spence snorted with derision.
       "I guess grandfather is right after all." When he saw Spence's look of
confusion and curiosity, he continued, "He always told me the secret to life
is taking stumbling blocks and making them into stepping stones." He took a
deep breath, savoring the cloying scent of the forest, turned his eyes to the
sky and murmured, "Looks like we've been given the blocks to work with,
doesn't it?"
       "Yeah, in more ways than one ... and the first block I intend to make
over is Guilford's head." Spence burst out laughing when he realized his joke
could be taken two ways.
       The momentary humour of the situation seemed the only way to remain
sane until the sun came up again.
--------
         *CHAPTER TWELVE*
Page 58

       The harsh Australian sun rose too high in the sky, blistering the
clearing with its heat before the camp was packed up and ready to move out.
The disturbances during the night, and the lack of sleep resulting from them,
had everyone on edge, sluggish and tired before the day had a chance to begin.
After a hasty breakfast of damper bread, honey and coffee, the women surprised
everyone by cleaning up the camp and being the first ones ready to go.
       Sam mopped at the sweat making her hair stick to her forehead. "My God,
this place is humid and hot ... and it's not even nine yet." She took a deep
breath and pushed some damp strands off her face. Ratana offered a rubber
band. Sam flashed a grateful smile at her as she quickly put her long hair
into a ponytail. Seeing Marc and Guilford taking their time standing in the
creek filling canteens with water, she raised her voice in protest. "Come on,
fellas. Even the shade under these trees is hot enough to fry an egg in. Let's
get going!"
       Marc shouted back. "We're almost done. Don't get your panties in a
bunch."
       The laughter from the other men working around the campsite took their
toll and the women, after a pause, joined in. Ratana bantered right back. "We
don't wear panties, Marc. That way you don't have anything to try to get
into." The women roared louder than the men did when Marc's reaction to this
declaration was to slip in astonishment and sit down hard in the middle of the
stream, his shorts soaked and a look of surprise on his face.
       Stifling a giggle with a hand over her mouth, Cindy eased her pack down
under the tree and then sat down on it. "I don't know why this seems so funny,
but it is." She giggled again.
       Marc stood up, glaring at all of them then, canteen in hand, he walked
out of the creek with as much dignity as he could muster. Guilford had long
since distanced himself and now stood under a clump of trees, pretending to
inspect something in his pack. James, Spence and Nathan each shouldered a
heavy pack and met Marc in the middle of the clearing. 
       Marc stooped down to his pack and began unbuckling the straps. James
frowned down at him. "What are you doing? We have to get going."
       "I can't hike all the way back to the Rover in wet clothes. Besides, I
need some socks and shoes on my feet." His caustic rude answer set James's
teeth on edge.
       "Look, Marc, it's bad enough you've roped Nathan into taking you back
without holding him up so he has to walk in the midday heat." He watched with
disgust as Marc ignored him and took his time picking out a pair of socks. 
       He turned to Nathan. "Nate, sorry about this but when you get back to
the Rover, there's one more thing you have to do. Use the mobile phone in the
car and call the authorities. Tell them about the hitchhiker we found. You
might have to stick around and lead them to his body. You'll have to tell them
about Ian too. Explain why we buried him." He grimaced at the thought then
clapped Nathan on the back. "Get back to us as quickly as you can. We'll leave
clear markers on the trail for you to follow." He looked down at Marc's bent
head. "And don't take any crap from this joker." He stalked off, leaving Marc
giving him an explicit gesture with one finger aimed at his retreating back.
       Spence grabbed Nathan's forearm with a hand. "Go with the eye of the
Great One upon you, my friend. I'll be watching for you tonight." He nodded at
James and they moved off toward the women, leaving Nathan to hurry Marc
along. 
       Guilford stood outside the group but watched everything with beady-eyed
interest. Spence spat on the ground and inspected him with a wry smile. "Hey,
King. How's the nose today?"
       "Sod off, you bloody savage." Guilford sneered and wrestled with his
pack, struggling to get it on his back. When he had it in place, he settled
his heavy hunting rifle into the crook of his arm, arrogantly raised his chin
and gave Spence a look of challenge with hate-filled eyes.
       Spence spat again, grinned and moved to stand beside James. "Ready when
you are, mate."
Page 59

       They moved off into the heavy growth with James in the lead and Spence
sandwiching the women between them. Guilford trailed behind, grunting under
the unaccustomed weight of a pack and rifle. The women walked closely to each
other, heads bent and talking with lowered voices and animated gestures.
       The midday heat made walking even in the shade unbearable. Soon the
only sounds coming from any of them were grunts when the occasional leech was
pulled off a leg or arm, or a groan when the strap of a backpack dug too hard
into an aching back muscle. All were determined to keep on walking and refrain
from complaining. They trudged on with grim determination until James called a
halt and led them to a tall stand of thickly leafed trees. They eased their
packs off straining backs with an obvious moan of relief.
       Sam rubbed the small of her back with both hands then stretched, moaned
again, and eased herself down under a tree covered with brilliant red flowers.
The heavy, twisted tree branches arched over her head, filling her nostrils
with the heavy scent of Frangipani. She leaned heavily against the trunk,
closed her eyes and sighed with contentment.
       Ratana soon joined her, while Cindy stationed herself under a
neighboring tree and peered anxiously up the trail. Ratana eased gracefully
down onto the thick growth under the tree and took a sip from her water
bottle. She smiled at Sam and offered the bottle. 
       Sam took a sip and was surprised to taste a sweet lemony flavor on her
tongue. "This is good. What is it?"
       Ratana retrieved the bottle and tucked it back into her pack. "It's an
ancient Aboriginal secret." A broad, white-toothed grin lit her face up.
       Sam leaned back against the tree and picked a tall blade of coarse
iron-colored grass. She inspected it with a studied action. "Ratana..." Her
gaze lifted from the blade for a moment then dropped back to it quickly. "What
happened to James in Jamaica?"
       When the silence drew out, Sam glanced at Ratana for a reaction. Ratana
was sitting stiffly, staring off into the thick brush. Before Sam could
apologize for asking too personal a question, Ratana replied, "He won't talk
about it much but I know his obsession with the paranormal began there. His
family lived on some kind of plantation and one night ... something ...
attacked all the white people on the island in a killing frenzy. James was
saved by a black family that he was close to, but his parents were
mysteriously killed."
       Sam gasped. "My God, that's horrible. You said 'mysteriously'. What
killed them?"
       Ratana turned to face her, eyes black and intense. "Nobody seems to
know, not even James. All he could find out was that some paranormal event
connected to the local people's religious beliefs had something to do with
what happened. He could never find out any more than that. It was hard for him
to give it up too. But, he found a way to deal with it. I think that's why
he's so obsessed with these mysteries. I think he's driven by his own fear. I
also think he needs to face it and destroy it; or at least understand it ...
somehow."
       Sam chewed on the blade and asked around it, "How did he end up here,
on an Aboriginal settlement?"
       Ratana shook her head in wonder. "I suppose you don't know what an
uncle is?" When Sam's head came up in puzzlement, she snickered. "When James's
parents died, he was left an orphan. He was only sixteen so the authorities
sent him here to be raised by his people. Mick took him and raised him like a
grandson." When it dawned on Sam what that meant, a light of understanding lit
in her eyes. Ratana nodded and continued, "That's right, James's mother was
half Aboriginal. He's my uncle not only because I respect him like I told you
the other day, but because I'm the daughter of his adopted sister." Ratana dug
a finger into the loose soil beside her hip. "My mother died when I was small
and James practically raised me. Nathan too. He has a great need to protect
people, especially those he loves." Her great, brown eyes peered up through
thick black lashes and watched Sam with interest.
Page 60

       Sam threw the mangled blade of grass down and gazed at James talking
with Spence. "He's a man of deep passions," she murmured.
       "Yes," Ratana stated, matter-of-factly and joined her scrutiny of James
to Sam's. "I shouldn't have told you. It's his business and he'd be upset if
he knew I told you."
       Sam turned back to Ratana and placed her hand on Ratana's forearm. "I'm
glad you did. Now I can understand him..." Her hand dropped away. "And that's
becoming important to me. I started off just wanting a good story ... now,
it's far more than that ... far more."
       Ratana nodded, a knowing smile on her lips. Sam blushed and turned away
to watch James once again. Ratana's gaze swept over the trail until she
spotted Cindy standing alertly under a tree and peering fixedly into the thick
brush lining the part of the trail they'd just traveled. Ratana frowned as she
watched the strange girl. When Sam stirred, Ratana asked, "Do you know what's
going on with Cindy? Ever since we left camp she's been staring off into the
bush like she's expecting something to be there."
       Sam swiveled her head to look at Cindy's stiff body. She put a hand up
to shade her eyes. "You're right, she does seem to be waiting for something
... either that, or she's scared." Sam's hand dropped to lap. "After all, her
boyfriend was killed by something strange out here. I'd be paranoid too if it
happened to me." Sam peered around at the swaying brush, unconsciously
inspecting it for any abnormal movement. "This is a dangerous country, a very
dangerous country."
       Leaning over to Sam, Ratana whispered, "That it is, my friend." Ratana
chuckled. "By the way, I think I should warn you that there are green ants all
over this tree. I'd suggest you get away from them. They bite." She laughed,
deep and throaty when Sam came springing up from the ground, shouting a string
of swear words as she frantically shook her head and brushed her clothes at
the same time.
       Ratana turned her around and began to brush the ants from Sam's back.
"You know you can turn the table on these little devils too. They taste
fantastic on a hot day; just like lemons. Give it a try and bite 'em back."
Ratana laughed again.
       James strolled over. Cocking an inquiring eyebrow at Ratana's continued
laughter, he tried to pick the ants out of Sam's swinging ponytail. "Hold
still. I'll get them out." He held her chin with one hand while plucking them
out with the other. "Ratana, you might want to keep in mind that our guests
are not as well versed as we are when it comes to dangerous things in our
country." He looked meaningfully at Ratana's blushing face. "People have been
known to die here because of ignorance."
       When he'd inspected her head thoroughly and pronounced her free of
pests, Sam took a deep breath and fumed at him. "Isn't there anywhere in this
country where you are free of biting wildlife?"
       A crooked grin broke out on his face, deepening the dimples she'd only
had a glimpse of before. "Nope. The whole country is covered with them. From
now on, check before you sit on something." He chuckled and turned back toward
Spence, who had walked ahead to inspect the trail. 
       As he walked away, she heard him add in an offhand manner, "By the way,
you might want to check inside your clothes too. Those things get into
everything and they bite hard."
       Swear words, louder than before, followed his back. Snickering, he
caught up with Spence and squatted down next to him. "Find anything?"
       The old man's finger traced a line of markings deep in the clay next to
the track they followed. "I don't know yet. I've never seen anything like
these marks before. What do you make of them?" 
       James leaned closer to the markings and froze. The markings clearly
showed the same form as the obelisk's engraving of his totem; the totem his
grandfather said was a symbol of his travels on this earth. Several minutes
passed before he found his voice. "It's the same mark as on the black stone we
found. It's the symbol Mick said belonged to me." His eyes rose to meet
Page 61

Spence's, both sets filled with understanding.
       "Searching for the law of the people. Looking for the vagina of the
seven sisters. Tasting the breast of the mother. The woman leads, the father
protects. The Rainbow Serpent dreams inside the testicles of the twins."
Spence recited the chant Ratana had supplied at the park. "We're being led."
His finger traced the marking lying in front of James's totem sign. It clearly
showed the breasts of a woman pointing to the right of the trail.
       "Do you two even know where we're going or is all this just guesswork?"
Guilford's sarcastic voice succeeded in breaking the spell of the moment.
       James's hand covered the markings while Spence stood up to face
Guilford, who tried to crane his neck around and see what they'd been staring
at for so long. "Back off, King. You're only being tolerated because James
possesses a strong sense of honor. I, however, would just as soon gut you
right here." 
       Spence's set face and the hand reaching for his sheathed knife were
enough to send Guilford scuttling back toward the trees, a scowl on his face
and curses spitting out of his mouth. Seeing him coming, Ratana and Sam
decided to join James and Spence, leaving Cindy serenely chewing on an apple
under the tree. Sam, still rubbing spots on her sweat soaked blouse, stalked
over to face Spence. "Can't we get rid of that guy? He's dangerous, you know."
       James, now rubbing out the markings with his hand, still squatted next
to the faint trail they stood on. "Not yet." He stood up and faced her, a
serious look settling his face into harsh lines. "Haven't you heard that old
saying? 'Keep your friends close but your enemies closer.'"
       She snorted in disgust. "Men!"
       Ratana took a sip of tepid water from her canteen then fixed the two
men with large brown eyes. "What did the signs say? Are we going in the right
direction?"
       "Signs? What signs?" Sam looked around with curiosity.
       Spence glanced back at Guilford before replying. "Yes, we're going in
the right direction. What we don't know is how long it will take to get where
we're supposed to go. And, we don't know what to look for when we get there."
       "We'll know." The certainty in Ratana's voice sounded unmovable. She
turned to look back the way they'd come. "Nathan will be coming tonight. He
has a message for you. Listen to it very carefully." With that cryptic
pronouncement, she walked back to the tree trunk and sat down cross-legged on
the thick growth next to Cindy. She reached into her pack and pulled out a
clear plastic bag of dried fruit and began to eat, pointedly ignoring the
faces staring at her.
       Sam, hands on hips, shifted her gaze from Ratana, to James standing
quietly beside her, then to Spence, who was wandering up the track, inspecting
the trail again. She demanded, "What signs? You found some sign telling us
which way to go? What is going on here? Why all the secrecy?"
       James took her by the arm and moved her back toward the shade. "They
were just some markings in the clay but they pointed off in the direction
we've been going. Since nothing so far is outside the realm of science fiction
at its worst, we'll follow them. As for secrecy, there is none ... except
around him." He nodded toward Guilford, who now sat leaning against the tree,
unaware of the green ants making a trail toward his exposed neck. 
       James glanced at Sam as she stared up at him, her face registering a
comical look of disbelief and belief. He stopped just before they reached the
trees, hot sun still beating down on the parts of his face not shaded by his
old bush hat. "Look, Sam, I'm a scientist. I demand proof of everything but
you have to admit, just like I've had to admit, that some things just can't be
proven or measured; they just have to be believed. This whole thing is
saturated with myth, fairytales and apparitions. We have no choice but to
suspend disbelief and follow the way we're led." His words stumbled along then
ended with a deep breath.
       Her eyes softened. "I know that. I've known that from the beginning.
I'm just mystified about you. The longer I'm around you and the more I see and
Page 62

hear, the more of a puzzle you become to me. A scientist, who was raised in a
small Aboriginal village, believes in spirits and monsters but has a warm,
generous, honest streak running through him. I think you're probably a
Pulitzer Prize winning story all by yourself." The tiny smile on her lips
widened. 
       He frowned. "I sometimes forget you're a journalist."
       "And that makes you like me less?" She bantered back, aware of the heat
emanating between them as they stood close to each other.
       He held his hands up in defeat. "I give up. Okay, I admit it ... I like
you ... a lot." He stepped closer and whispered, "I thought I'd made that
abundantly clear already." His dimples deepened with the secret smile he
flashed her.
       "You did." She moved her lips closer to his; the whisper of her words
giving them added meaning.
       "James! Come here!" Spence's excited shout served to bring them back to
reality. 
       Stepping away from Sam, James put his hand up over his eyes to shade
them and peered down the trail. He could see Spence hopping around and
frantically waving his arms, beckoning James to come quick. "He looks excited
about something." He smiled, dropped his hand and trotted down the trail.
Spence continued to jump and bob around. James grabbed him by the shoulders.
"Bloody hell, Spence, calm down. You're going to give yourself a heart attack.
What has you acting like a flea in a fit?"
       Spence stepped off the path and over to a small group of black rocks
sitting in the middle of a totally bare spot. He stooped down, picked up one
and tossed it to James. "These are the reason." The calm smirk on his face
belied his body movements. He shifted from foot to foot like a restless
teenager waiting for a date.
       James inspected the stone, thunderstruck by its lightweight and the
incredible precision of its sides. The stone shone, multi-faceted like a
professionally cut diamond, capturing the sun's rays and sending brilliant
hues of colors flying around the small cleared space of the path. 
       When Sam caught up with him and peered at what he held in his hands,
she gasped. "It's the black stone ... just like the one up north."
       Ratana, Cindy and Guilford, panting with exertion and out of breath,
pushed their way closer to get a good look at it, each silent and tense with
anticipation. Guilford shouldered his way next to James and took the stone
from his hands without ceremony. Guilford then took a magnifying glass from
his pocket and peered hard at the stone, muttering as he looked. "It has a
faint pattern of geometric lines across the entire surface. They're not
visible with the naked eye but I can just barely see them. They look like a
matrix of connections of some sort." He raised the glass and stated, "This
stone wasn't made naturally, that's for sure. An intelligent being carved
those lines on it." He scratched his head with one hand while gripping the
stone and the glass with the other. "Haven't a clue what the lines mean
though. Might be some sort of energy focus." He stared at the stone,
completely forgetting the other people around him as he studied it, deep in
thought. He jumped when Spence snatched the stone out from under his eyes and
glared at him. Guilford shot him a hard look then put his glass away with a
snort.
       Spence turned his back on King and pointed at the other stones, drawing
the attention of the group to the small clearing. Six black rocks, identical
in shape and size and cut with the same precision as the one James still held,
sat in a perfect two meter circle inside the mound of bared earth. An
indentation revealing the original location of the seventh stone sat precisely
in the center of the circle. James stepped inside the circle, reached down and
replaced it to its niche. Immediately, all the stones shifted and whirled
until what remained defied description. James leapt back, his arms sweeping
Sam and Ratana back with him. A circle of liquid light, reflecting all the
colors of the rainbow, swirled around the center stone as it too shifted and
Page 63

began to change shape. What met the startled, mesmerized stares of the
onlookers was the three-dimensional image of an eye, blinking, intelligent and
alive, staring back at them.
--------
         *CHAPTER THIRTEEN*
       James and Spence backed up, the eye following their movements. The
others stood behind them, transfixed by what their eyes registered but their
brains fought to deny. 
       "What the hell is that thing?" Sam gasped when the eye fixed on her
face in response.
       The others pressed forward to look closer. Cindy peered between the two
men's shoulders. "It's an eye and it's looking at us." She backed up further,
huddled behind Sam.
       Guilford fought to get beyond the people blocking his way. James held
his heavily muscled arm out and prevented him from getting any closer. "Don't
touch it. We have no idea what it is or what it can do." 
       While Guilford snarled in frustration, still trying to bypass James's
arm, the eye, stones and circle blinked out. What remained was a bare spot on
the ground; nothing to even hint at what was there moments before.
       Spence took a tentative step forward, leaning over to inspect the site.
"It just ... disappeared." His bemused comment accompanied a shout of rage
from Guilford.
       "You stupid bleeding Aussie smegs! It's gone. We could've taken the
stones and studied them. They were worth a fortune! Bloody damned idiots!" He
hit out at James, rushed past him and proceeded to tear at the bare mound of
earth with his hands.
       "What are you doing, King?" Spence asked, sarcasm and disgust dripping
from his voice.
       "They must have gone somewhere, you sod. They have to be here ... maybe
underground." He panted as he dug.
       The group moved back toward the shade, all watching Guilford's
progress, or lack of it. Shaking his head in disgust, Spence mumbled to
himself while he sat down under a tree, his gaze still locked on Guilford's
frantic digging. Ratana handed a water bottle to him and sat down next to him.
"What do you think that thing was?" She picked up her pack, removed a bag of
food from it then settled it behind her as a pad. She took a bite of a pear,
keeping her eyes locked on Guilford's activities as well.
       Following her lead, Sam took the opportunity to grab a handful of nuts
and dried fruit from her pack and then also used the pack as a pillow. She
offered some to Cindy, who stood staring off into the brush once again. When
Cindy refused to acknowledge her offer, Sam shrugged and began to eat it
herself. James, sitting on the other side of her, sat cross-legged in the
shade, his thoughts turned inward while he casually played with a huge beetle
moving slowly across his path. "I have no idea what it was or what it was
doing. I know one thing, though, it'll probably be back."
       Cindy finally sat down between Sam and Spence. When Sam shot an
inquiring look at her, Cindy smiled back at her then cocked her head at James.
Now relaxed and munching on dried fruit, Cindy sat up straighter. "What makes
you say that?" She fixed him with a stare, her eyes full of childlike
curiosity.
       He continued to finger the beetle, impeding its progress across the
grass. "Because it had a purpose, a reason for what it did. We just don't know
what it is yet but that won't stop it from doing what it's supposed to do.
Besides, it may not have even been real. It might have just been an illusion
of some sort." He glanced up at her, a smile on his face. "Basic scientific
observation."
       "Does everything have to fit into the realm of scientific provability
before it can be classified as real to you?" Sam asked between mouthfuls of
nuts.
       "That used to be the case. Now, I'm not so sure." He took a sip of
Page 64

water and went back to the beetle and his thoughts.
       Spence, leaning against the tree, his battered hat over his eyes and
his knobby kneed legs crossed at the ankles and stretched out in front of him,
lazily murmured, "We really should get on the move again, mate. Do you think
we could leave that Pom bastard here to dig his way to China while we slip
away?"
       "I don't care about what he does with himself, one way or the other.
But, you're right, we need to move on." James flicked the beetle in its
hindquarters, sending it on its way, tucked his water bottle into his pack and
stood up. His gaze swept over the others still lounging under the tree. "Ready
when you are." He hefted his pack and settled it onto his back, waiting while
the others did the same. Guilford, lost in his digging, continued to throw up
handfuls of red clay. "You just might get your wish, Spence. He doesn't look
like he's slowing down at all."
       Spence, shifting his pack onto his back, took a moment to glance at
Guilford then shook his head again. "The man will do anything for a buck or a
camera."
       With the men's help, the women donned their gear quickly and they moved
as a whole back onto the track. Peering to the right where the marker
indicated they should go, James ran his hand through his hair. "It's badly
overgrown that way. I guess we'll just have to hack our way through. It's
going to be slow going though."
       Spence pulled out the large knife he always carried and moved into the
brush. "Then we'll just have to make our own trail." His small frame moved
fluidly through the tangle of vines and undergrowth, ruthlessly slicing
through what resisted the pressure of his passage. The others followed single
file, quiet and alert. James brought up the rear, his eyes scanning their
surroundings for any signs left for them to find. He didn't notice the thick
brush behind them as it rustled and swayed.
       By the time the sun began to set and the air cooled down, the
lightweight cotton shirt and shorts Sam wore felt like heavy wool soaked with
sweat. She fell back to talk to James, his movements still alert to anything
out of the ordinary. "How do you do it? I mean, keep on walking in this heat
without becoming tired or sick to your stomach?" 
       Noticing her sweat-soaked clothes and her voice dragged down with
fatigue, he remembered how grueling these hikes could be and how dangerous to
those not used to it. He stopped and shouted to Spence. "Spence. Find a good
spot for a camp. I've had enough for one day." When Spence's reply of 'okay'
wafted back, he slipped his arm around her waist and started to move forward
again. 
       She leaned toward him and planted a small kiss on his cheek. "Thank
you." She beamed up at him as they walked together.
       A half-hour later Spence called a halt and waited for James and Sam to
catch up. He stood beside a ten-foot pile of boulders hidden in the middle of
a thick stand of trees. The area around the site had enough clear space to
pitch tents and a small stream ran beside the stack of rocks. "This ought to
do the trick, I think." Spence beamed and pushed out his thin chest.
       "Good show, mate." James slapped him on the back. He helped Sam slip
the pack off her back then did the same and placed his beside the rocks. He
slowly walked around them, inspecting them for nooks, crannies and small
holes. "Looks like there's no danger of us camping on top of a snake nest." He
then walked over and squatted next to the stream. Dipping his hand into the
clear water, he drew up a palm full and took a sip. "Water's okay too."
Standing back up, his line of vision scanned unconsciously over the rocks.
Under the largest one he could make out a faded set of images etched into the
stone. He knelt down and peered closer. "Well, I'll be stuffed. Spence, come
and look at this." He pointed to the drawings.
       Spence knelt down and tilted his head to see under the lip of rock. "I
wondered about that."
       "About what?" James's long fingers traced the grooves of the pictures.
Page 65

       "The horse, you're totem. It's not an Aboriginal animal, not even an
Australian one. I wondered why they gave it to you and what it meant. Now I
know."
       James turned to Spence with understanding in his eyes. "This is the
place I've been sent to find. There could be no other place with that sign on
it." The words came out as a statement of fact, sure and confident.
       James clapped Spence on the shoulder and stood up, Spence following
him. They returned to where the women were sitting on their packs, fanning
themselves with anything handy. James looked over the soft, grassy ground and
pronounced, "It's a good place to spend the night."
       Spence puffed out his chest again and grinned, then he began to unpack
the tents and cooking gear. "Yep and we don't have that bloody Pommie prick to
muck around with either. I'm a happy man." He chuckled and pulled out a tin
cup, rapidly followed by a half-full whiskey bottle.
--------
         *CHAPTER FOURTEEN*
       The kerosene lanterns hanging on the front of the tents threw the mound
of boulders the group camped beside into bold relief. The tall, stately rocks
took on the look of spotlighted works of art lit from below. Sam sat in her
chair facing them and the fire, dinner plate in hand, a cup of tea by her
feet, both forgotten. She stared at the way the light played over the
smoothness of the rocks, contrasting with the crevices and cracks. Colored
lichens of a muted green and blue sprinkled across the tops of every boulder.
In the dim moonlight they took on a glowing yellowish-green iridescence. The
contrast between the brightly lit bases and their glowing tops fascinated her.
The lively argument between Spence and Guilford, who'd caught up with them an
hour after they set up camp, much to Spence's disgust, had set her teeth on
edge. Tired of the bickering, she'd momentarily tuned out, directing her
attention to the primitive lure of the Australian landscape. 
       James leaned over and nudged her in the arm. "Hey, where are you?
You've been staring at that pile of rocks for almost ten minutes now."
       She sat her plate down on her lap and picked at the beans and dried
beef Ratana had cooked up earlier. "I was just thinking about how beautiful,
and how deadly, this country can be. Everywhere you look there are flowers and
leaves as big as your hand and the wildlife here is breathtaking. But ... it
can all kill." She turned her eyes up to his. "Can't it?"
       His gaze shifted to the boulders. "Yes, it can. In the tropics, the
plants, insects and reptiles are aggressive in their fight to stay alive. They
have to be, there are too many predators here not to." Seeing her look of
alarm, he rushed on. "Not the kind of predators you're thinking of; the kind
that devastate plants and insects. Australia is the land of marsupials,
remember? What I'm talking about is the toxins plants and insects make to
protect themselves against each other and against birds and reptiles." He
chuckled. "We do have our share of legends about the other kind of predators
too, though."
       "Oh? What legends?" Sam put her plate down on the ground then settled
back, tepid tea in hand, listening with a look of intense interest on her
face.
       "Haven't you ever heard of the Queensland Tiger, or the Giant Monitor
Lizards up north, or the Bunyips that are supposed to be hiding in the lakes
and rivers here? All of them supposedly exist and eat people on rare
occasions." He chuckled again at the startled look in her eyes. "Just like
America, we have our share of strange, unfathomable beings here too. You have
Bigfoot, we have Yowies, you have Champie, the sea monster, we have Bunyips,
you have UFOs, we have UFOs, you have Bill Clinton and we have John Howard.
You see? Our countries aren't that much different." He smiled when he saw her
lips twitch then break into a grin.
       "I don't think politicians count as aliens. Not yet anyway." She
laughed, deep and throaty. "You must believe these myths have some basis in
fact if you've spent your life tracking these stories down." Her smile became
Page 66

bigger when his face flushed red. "Why do you do it, James? It's obvious to me
you hate being a laughingstock and that you take it seriously. But why pursue
these things when no proof has been found to support their existence?"
       "Are you being the 'Journalist' now, or are you really interested?" His
green eyes sparkled with reflected moonlight but his face reflected an
intensity of emotion.
       "I'm interested ... personally interested." Her lips parted and her
eyes sparkled to match his.
       "Hey you two! No private chatting. Especially when what you're saying
is so interesting to _all_ of us and you whisper so we can't hear it." Spence
slapped his knee and guffawed with a loud burst of laughter.
       Sam flinched, blushed and then bent to refill her cup, obviously trying
to hide the look on her face. James, calm and smiling, turned to Spence,
Ratana and Cindy. "And what were all of you talking about that is worth _us_
listening to, eh?"
       "Ratana was just telling me about the Aboriginal beliefs and how all
this makes sense to her in view of those beliefs. Weren't you, Ratana?" Cindy
volunteered.
       "Yes, but you know the stories already, Uncle," Ratana mumbled, then
fell silent.
       "I know them but Sam and Cindy don't. Besides, it's not often I get to
hear them again ... not since I've been at the Uni, anyway. Please, go on." He
smiled and settled back in his chair to listen.
       Taking a deep breath, Ratana faced the fire and, turning her attention
inward, resumed her discourse on Aboriginal beliefs and how they dovetailed
with the present circumstances. "The Aboriginal people have an earthbound
philosophy. The earth gives life to a man, gives him his food, shelter,
language and intelligence, and the earth takes him back when he dies. A man's
'own country', even an empty stretch of spinifex, is, itself, a sacred icon
that must remain unscarred, uncorrupted. Aborigines believe that all 'living
things' are made in secret beneath the earth's crust, as well as all the white
man's modern things-his aeroplanes, his guns, his Land Cruisers-and every
invention that will ever be invented; all slumbering below the surface,
waiting their turn to be called forth; back into life." 
       She looked up and briefly locked her eyes upon the black peaks of the
Glass House Mountains, now indistinct but solid against a star-studded night
sky. The moonlight bathing the peaks gave them a look of ethereal magic. 
       She sighed. "This place is a sacred resting ground where they sleep.
These mountains are the mother, father and children of the Old Ones. Even
their names say as much." She disengaged her eyes from the towering black
mountains and shifted them to those who sat around her listening with rapt
attention. "That's why we were called here. They have waited, listened,
watched and learned, now they beckon for us to come to them again. It is time
for the sleepers to awaken ... time for the final act to play out."
       "Sleepers? What sleepers? You mean the Old Ones themselves will come
back from below the earth and actively take part in things now?" Sam leaned
forward, her eyes bright with interest. A small frown creased her forehead.
"Final act?"
       A loud thrashing in the bush, followed by an even louder shout, brought
the conversation to an abrupt halt. "Oroo! Hey you blokes in the camp!" Nathan
ducked under the low branches of a lone Flame tree and stepped into the
clearing. He grinned when he saw their startled faces, the firelight
flickering over them in strange patterns. "All of you look like ghosts. Or did
you think I'm one meself?" He chuckled and dragged a foldout chair over to the
fire. "Give us a cuppa will ya, Ratana?" He rubbed his hands over the fire and
gratefully took the hot cup when she passed it over to him. He sipped the tea
and sighed with contentment then looked back into the trees with concern.
"Come on out, Marc. You can't hide forever." He chuckled again when Marc
walked out of the bush looking shamefaced and the worse for wear.
       Loud rustling and high-pitched squeaks followed Marc's progress through
Page 67

the tree. He spun around, his face white and pinched. "Not again!" He slowly
backed away from the tree toward the light of the fire.
       Spence shouted about the cacophony of noise from the wide canopy of the
tree, "It's okay, mate. It's only fruit bats. They won't bite you."
       Marc turned and moved quickly to the fire. "This damned country is
dangerous. It's uncivilized." He was breathing hard and took a few minutes to
calm down.
       James, filled with amused curiosity, switched his gaze between Nathan
and Marc, waiting for an explanation. When none came immediately, he shook his
head, then settled upon Marc when he lowered himself down into a chair beside
Sam. "So you decided to stick it out, eh? Good on ya, Marc."
       Nathan found a chair and reached out for a cup of tea. When he had it
in his hands he leaned forward to reply. "Nope, mate, he didn't. We've been
trekking all today going toward the mountains like we planned. I know me way
in the bush but I have to admit, this one has me stumped." He took a sip of
his drink. When he looked up he had a frown on his face and a look of
bewilderment in his eyes. "We followed the same path in the direction we came
from but ... we ended up here. When I saw the lights it drew me up short but
here we are." Seeing the assortment of shocked, confused and curious faces
staring at him, he shrugged and stated, "I can't explain it."
       "I can." The deep, low voice of Ernie, although barely above a whisper,
sounded clear and strong across the clearing. He stepped out from behind the
high stack of boulders and pointed a long spear at a circle of black stones
that hadn't been there before he arrived. They looked identical to the stones
they'd found earlier, the etched markings on each one glowing in the
flickering lights. His deep brown eyes glimmered with moonlight when he nodded
at the circle of startled faces now fixed on him. He stood erect and proud,
clothed in native dress, his grizzled gray hair still held down with a bright
red headband. He pointed his spear at the circle once again and sang out a
series of strange, melodic notes only he understood. Stamping his bare feet in
the dust, he declared, "It is time."
       The stones dissolved, moving in a clockwise direction, until they
became the same swirling pattern of rainbow colors that had held the group in
awe earlier. A ring of multicolored hues threw blinding shafts of light beams
around the campsite, giving it the appearance of a party sprinkled with the
shattered facets of a disco ball. 
       Silently, they all stood and approached. Circling the spot now
remolding itself, they all stared into it with awe and wonder. James spoke
first. "What is it, Ernie?" His voice trembled when he spoke. He lifted his
eyes to meet those of the old man, a look of deep respect in them.
       Without answering, Ernie stepped closer to the ring of light, waved his
spear over it and closed his eyes. Within moments, the circle began to
enlarge, widen and rise like a plate standing on its rim. It shifted and
changed, soon becoming a tall rectangle of pure misty light. 
       Ratana gasped. "It's a doorway. The doorway to the underground resting
place of the Old Ones." She turned to Nathan and grasped his hand, her face
alive with joy. "Nathan, you were right all along. You were right."
       Sam grabbed James's arm and trembled. "Do you think it's the thing
we've been searching for? The thing you're supposed to find?"
       Before anyone could answer, the doorway moved back and settled into the
face of the boulders, molding itself to the rocks. The boulders shimmered,
giving off heat waves, without the heat. The rocks shifted, turned and finally
became a larger version of the obelisk they'd found north of Crocodile. Its
shiny black surface caught and reflected the light still shimmering around the
portal leading into it.
       "It is the portal to the Old Ones. You have been invited. Come." Ernie
moved into the light and disappeared from view.
       Before anyone could act, Guilford King stepped in front of the portal
with a large handgun poised level at James's stomach. "This is my discovery.
I'm going in there and anyone who follows will be shot." The shadows dancing
Page 68

over his small features gave him the look of a rabid weasel. His dark eyes
danced over the group of people assembled before him, waiting for somebody to
challenge his claim. Spence growled under his breath and clinched his hands in
frustration. James tensed for action, Sam stared at King, and Ratana froze
with alertness.
       When Nathan stepped forward, Ratana moaned and reached out to stop him.
Nathan faced King with a look of pained confusion on his face. "Peter Howard
told you where to find us, didn't he? That's how you knew where to look and
what we were looking for, isn't it?"
       James frowned at Nathan. "What are you talking about, Nate? What does
Peter Howard have to do with all this and him?" He nodded at Guilford, who now
looked as confused at the turn of events as James did.
       Nathan turned his head toward James and lifted his head up high before
answering. "I have betrayed you, Uncle. Peter Howard has information about me
and my friends that he threatened to use if I didn't help him." His head
sagged with shame, unable to sustain any dignity under the look of shock on
James and Ratana's faces. "He made me tell him where we were going and he made
me promise to make sure the old Pom got there first instead of you." His head
sunk even further down. "I am so sorry, Uncle, so very sorry." His voice had
dropped almost to a whisper.
       Ratana reached out to Nathan and held his arm. "What could he know
about you and your warriors to make you betray our people and our friends?"
she asked gently, her eyes large and liquid with worry.
       Nathan grabbed her hand and held on tightly to it as he answered in a
monotone. "One night two men came onto the settlement. They came to defile the
burial places of our revered ones. I and my warriors caught them at it. We
beat them as a lesson and let them go. Later, we heard that they had died and
we knew we would be jailed for murder if anyone found out. I swear to you, we
did not beat them so bad that they would die." His eyes pleaded with them to
believe him. "But when they did die, I knew that I could not allow my men to
die in jail. There have been too many black deaths in custody." His hand
dropped to his side. "Peter Howard sent a message to tell me that he knew
about it and would turn us in if I didn't help him stop you from finding the
truth of the black rock. He was angry that you found the first one and he
didn't. I was to stop you and fix it so King would find it instead. I could
not do it in the end."
       Sam stepped forward. "How did he know about that night, Nathan, unless
he was there ... or someone else was there who told him?" 
       "Eddy! It could only have been him. He must have been with those men
that night and saw you. I bet he arranged those men's deaths, too, so his
uncle could have something on us." The anger in Ratana's voice was edged with
certainty. 
       Guilford sputtered with disgust. "This is all so very enlightening but
I have a date with fame and I am eager to be on my way." He took a step back
toward the rock then hesitated. He waved the gun at Nathan and sneered. "You
are quite right, of course. Peter and I have a deal. He finds the artifacts
and I go get them, we both get credit for the find, which furthers our
careers, I get to write the books, not to mention a pot of money." He chuckled
with satisfaction. 
       "I thought you were after fame and glory, King. That's what you always
claimed anyway. Especially when you were caught with artifacts that turned out
to be hoaxes," James sneered.
       "Well, for the record, old boy, I much prefer the money and lots of it.
Now, if you have nothing of interest to add to this dull conversation, I have
a mystery waiting for me to solve." He smiled coldly and stepped toward the
portal. 
       When Guilford's eyes were focused on the opening, Nathan made his move.
He threw himself toward Guilford, hitting the older man with enough force to
crush him. Nathan grabbed the gun out of his hand and tossed it toward James.
Panting hard, the young man stood and pulled Guilford upright with one hand.
Page 69

Nathan glared into his face. "I no longer care about Peter Howard or what he
can do to me. I cannot betray my people or my family." He shook Guilford hard
enough to rattle his teeth then shoved the man away with contempt. Guilford
landed beside the rocks and lay still.
       James stepped up and grabbed Nathan's arm. "It doesn't matter what
Howard has on you, Nat, I'll stand by you and so will the rest of the clan."
He nodded then added, "You did the right thing anyway. You beat him. You
should be proud of yourself for that."
       Nathan smiled. "You're right, I beat him." He stood up straight and
pointed at the portal still waiting for them. "We must go now. We don't know
how long it will stay open."
       James reached down and took Sam's shaking hand. "I've waited all my
life for this." He grinned at her. She smiled back and nodded her head. They
took a deep breath and stepped through the doorway.
       Guilford rose shakily to his feet and leaned against the rock. He
remained silent but his eyes were focused pinpoints of hate and concentration
as he watched Spence move toward the portal with single-mindedness.
       "Father, I have finally ended my search," Spence whispered, fingering
the greenstone tiki of the Maori that had hung around his neck since birth. He
didn't hesitate. He trotted into the light.
       Guilford reached out to grab Spence's faded shirt and shouted, "You
can't go without me, you bloody..." Guilford's body disappeared inside the
rock with a wink.
       Marc stood there with a look of sheer terror on his face. "I can't. I
can't. I won't."
       Nathan patted him on the shoulder. "It's okay, mate, you don't have to
but Ratana and I do. Bye, Marc." He patted him one last time and turned to the
portal, glancing at Ratana's face with a look of anticipation. "Ready?" She
nodded, biting her lower lip.
       Before they could step forward, Ernie appeared back out of the portal
and turned to watch it disappear, leaving only the blank face of the obelisk
behind. He turned to face Ratana and Nathan, who had tried to rush past him
but failed to do so before the entrance vanished. "You must stay here with me.
It is commanded." 
       His face, granite-like and deeply etched with age lines, didn't move or
show any emotion when they loudly protested. "We have to go! We've come all
this way..." Ratana's face registered anguish while Nathan's showed simmering
anger at the old man who still blocked the way.
       Ernie held up his hand. "No! You cannot go." He turned to look at the
blank wall of the obelisk once again. "This time is for them. Your time will
come." He stood immovable in front of them, the stern features of his face
fading into darkness when the firelight began to die down. 
       "Who are you?" Nathan whispered, fear trembling in his voice.
       "Your future," the old man replied as he stared with deep, black eyes
into their faces.
--------
         *CHAPTER FIFTEEN*
       The sound of dripping water echoed off sheer walls so high that light
from the one smoking torch fixed to the wall could not reach the ceiling.
Rivulets of deep red fluid ran down invisible grooves where they had made
their descent for eons. A dim light emanated around them. Sam dug a matchbook
out of her pocket and lit another torch she found leaning against the rock,
holding it up to get a better look at the solid stonewall behind her. She
blinked with surprise when she touched the stone, realizing it was the portal
she'd just stepped through. Squinting against the smoke and dim light, she
held up the torch and peered into the darkness beyond. "James! Where are you?"
Her voice trembled with fear. 
       He appeared out of the darkness like a wraith, holding a smoking torch
in front of him like a flashlight. When he saw her backed against the wall, he
smiled to reassure her. "I'm here. I was just taking a quick look around." He
Page 70

stopped abruptly. "Wait a minute here. If we came through the portal at the
same time, how come I got here before you?"
       Sam stepped away from the wall. "I don't care how. Besides, this whole
trip has been unbelievable so far. Why should one more strange thing bother
us?" The relief in her voice turned into a dry humor.
       She turned to peer up at the wall again, pointing at the red glow of
the water. "What do you suppose that is?" she asked. "And where the hell did
the opening go we just stepped through?" She ran her hand over the rock again,
searching for any seam or crack that would give away the opening.
       James lifted his torch and peered at the wall. "There doesn't seem to
be any opening here. But, then, this whole thing seems to be one magic trick
after another so I suppose nothing should surprise us anymore."
       Sam turned around to face him. "Magic? I don't think so," she replied.
"More like Lord of the Rings come to life." She sighed. "Any more of this
spooky shit and I'll be marked for life."
       James stepped up to her and smiled. "Speaking of marked for life ...
Turn around again, Sam. You have something on the back of your pants." 
       Her eyes widened and she gingerly turned her back to him. "What is it?"
Her voice trembled.
       His hand ran over the tight curve of her right buttock and she
shivered. "It looks like red paint," James stated. "You must have gotten it on
you when you backed into the wall we came through." He pointed to stain
patterns running across and down the wall's surface.
       When Sam held the torch closer to inspect the wall they'd stepped
through, she gasped. "It looks like the walls are bleeding."
       James reached up and lightly touched the damp wall. He rubbed his
fingertips over the slimy fluid then he smelled it. "It's not blood. It's red
clay dissolved in water. I had no idea there was this much water under this
area ... under the entire continent, for that matter." 
       "Where the hell are we and where does this go?" Sam asked, shivering.
       "I was exploring it when you yelled," he replied. "This seems to be one
big open cavern and, from what I can tell, there's a big underground river in
here too. Come on, I'll show you."
       Holding their torches high, they moved further into the cavern until
they heard the echoes of running water. James swiveled around, his torchlight
throwing shadows over boulders strewn here and there as if a huge child had
thrown them away as forgotten toys. Down the middle of the cavern, there ran a
wide, placid stream of water, an underground river. 
       Sam moved close to James. "Where are we? Do you know? And where are the
others?"
       He gripped the torch and peered into the darkness as much as he could.
"Ernie was here waiting for me when I came through. He handed me this torch
and then just melted into the dark. I don't know where he is now." He turned
around in an arc, peering hard into the darkness. "As for the others, I have
no idea either. If you came so late behind me then they might take awhile to
arrive, I'd say. There must be some kind of time warp here. That's the only
explanation I can come up with at the moment." He looked down into her face
and wanted to kiss her. Instead, he stated, "You're right. Everything has been
so strange that we have no right to expect normality now." He chucked her
under the chin and turned back to look around.
       "We'll never find this tour available at any travel agency, that's for
sure." Sam laughed. "Do you have any idea where we may be now? Are we inside
the mountain, you think?"
       "One of them. I'm not sure but I think we're inside one of the Twins.
The prophecy Ratana spoke of is coming true. Remember? Inside the Twins sleeps
the Rainbow Serpent?" He ran his hand over the smooth face of the wall once
again. "This is odd, though. The Glass House Mountains are all volcanic plugs,
yet these caverns are limestone and clay. They shouldn't exist here." He shook
his head, still fingering the slimy walls. 
       "What I don't understand is why Nathan, Ratana and Ernie weren't let in
Page 71

with us. It would make more sense to me to invite the Aborigines than us," he
stated as he turned to squint into the dark cavern. 
       "Well, there must be some logical reason. So far, everything has had a
purpose. You haven't steered us wrong yet." Sam looked up into his face, her
expression trusting.
       He leaned down and placed a light kiss on her lips. "That's for
believing in me ... but, for the moment, I'll reserve judgment about leading
us in the right direction." He raised his torch to see a tall boulder, similar
to those the obelisk had simulated outside, standing not six feet away on a
red sandy surface. "From what I can see so far, and hear from the way our
voices echo, this must be a huge cavern inside the mountain."
       Sam sniffed the air, her head held high like a bird searching for signs
of danger. "At least the air is fresh in here." She sniffed again. "But
there's something else I smell too. I can't make out what it is though."
       "That river is moving water, not stagnant." He sniffed the air. "I
smell something odd too. Interesting ... but not bad. We need to explore and
find out what's what here." He raised his torch overhead and began inspecting
the wall for telltale signs of the entrance.
       Spence, only feet away, rambled among man-sized boulders, inspecting
the beaten pathways winding aimlessly between them. The light of his torch
bobbed and weaved like an oversized firefly as he moved among them. When he
reached another pathway that ended at the river's shore, he stopped, bent down
and dipped his fingers into the water. He looked out at the river when James's
words wafted across the cave. "Hey mate! About time you two caught up! This
bloody cave is huge!"
       His torchlight was insufficient to light his view of the furthest wall.
"This bugger is wide and it's fresh water, not salt. Interesting. It must be
at least twenty meters across." He moved further into the cool water, his old
boots quickly becoming wet with red muddy water. "The Aborigines have told of
an underground cave system and huge rivers running through them for centuries.
I've heard about it but I didn't believe it until now." 
       James moved away from the blank wall of black rock that was open
minutes ago. He reached down and picked up another crudely made torch and lit
it with the one he held in his hand. He placed the newly lit torch in a notch
in the wall that obviously had been carved out to hold it. "Speaking of
Aborigines, where did Ernie go? And where are Nathan and Ratana? And how did
you get here before us?" When he saw the bewildered look on Spence's face,
James shook his head. "Never mind. Nothing makes sense here anyway."
       Spence took a deep breath and turned back toward the jumble of rocks
he'd walked around. "I don't know about the others but Guilford came through
with me. The lousy bastard grabbed a hold of me then ran like a devil when we
got here. I'd like to kill the slimy get." He turned his head to stare at
James and Sam. "If I thought for one minute you'd let me, I _would_ kill him
too."
       Ignoring the venom in Spence's words, James replied, "At least we know
he's not armed anymore. The most damage he can do now is to talk us to death.
Come on, Spence, we have to find the others and figure out where we are."
James stepped toward the boulders in front of Spence.
       "I wish old Ernie was here. He'd be able to tell us where we are and
what all this means, I bet." Spence spit onto the red clay at his feet.
       Sam shuddered, rubbing her hands over the gooseflesh popping up on her
arms. "James says Ernie was standing here when he stepped through. I guess he
lit the torch he handed to you then went back out. Or, were you here first
Spence? I'm confused! We all came about the same time but we all arrived at
different times. How can that be?" She glanced back at the smooth face of the
wall. "And Nathan, Marc and Ratana didn't come through at all." She shivered
again and looked up at James with round, frightened eyes, her pupils made
large by the dim light and fear. They looked as black as the wall they all
stood beside. "What is this place, James? Why were we brought here?"
       He stepped closer to her and put his arm around her shoulders. "I don't
Page 72

know yet but I think we'll be safe enough." He flashed a shaky smile down at
her. "After all, we were invited, remember? Have some faith. First thing we
need to do is figure out where we're supposed to go in this place, then I have
no doubt we'll find out what we're supposed to do here." He squeezed her
shoulder then moved forward toward the river of black water they could see
through the jumble of titans littering a red sand beach. The flickering light
from their torches threw shifting shadows across the faces of the huge, smooth
rocks James and Sam moved through to reach the shoreline.
       "Incredible," he murmured when he spotted what appeared to be a
life-sized statue of a horse carved from the rock. It stood on the red sand
beach bordering the river. The boulders seemed to be surrounding it. He
stepped up to the carving and ran his hands along its sleek lines. "My totem,"
he whispered.
       Sam ran her hand over the smooth surface, surprised and delighted by
the silky feel of the rock. "It's beautiful. What does it mean?"
       James stuck his torch deep into the damp sand then moved around the
statue, inspecting the markings up close. "I don't know but I'm sure we'll
find out sooner or later."
       Spence, ignoring their conversation and seemingly unaware of the
statue, squinted out across the dark water with a frown on his face. "There's
something in there. Did you see that?"
       Guilford, who had been dogging Spence's trail through the maze of
rocks, stepped up, crowding him against a boulder in the process. "See what?
What was it?" His breath came fast and hard with excitement. He craned his
thin neck over the water, his torch outstretched to its fullest, in an attempt
to spot the source of the disturbance in the water. A small wave lapped
against his feet.
       Spence pushed him away. "Get away from me, you bleeding Pommie
bastard." He wiped at his arm, a grimace of distaste on his face. He turned
and made his way along the shoreline to stand close to James and Sam, who were
still examining the statue. "You found it, did you?" He too ran his hands over
the horse, examining it in detail with his torch lighting every curve and
line. "Other than the chisel marks on it, I can't see any other markings. Can
you?" 
       James, lost in thought, his eyes and hands glued to the statue standing
before him, remained silent. Spence rested his hands on the carving's back and
commented, "This is odd. There have never been any symbols or cave drawings of
horses in Australia. No horses at all, until European times, for that matter.
Why would someone go to the time and trouble to carve one here of all places?"
       James took a deep breath. "Well, I know that the earliest cave
paintings from Europe were of the horse. It's one of the oldest everywhere
else and Mick told me this totem is older than the oldest rock drawings. He
said the horse was a symbol of what would come; what had to change." He ran
his hand lovingly over the animal's flared nostrils. "The horse changed this
country. The European settlements took it away from the Aborigines with horses
and armies. Now the horse is back." His eyes burned with the flickering fire
of Spence's torchlight. "It means a change is coming again; a big change."
       Spence's eyes lingered on the whitened knuckles of James's fingers as
they gripped the nose of the carving. "Why would it be your totem then, James?
Are you the harbinger of the new Millennium?" The question, low and deep,
reverberated with a depth of awe.
       James relaxed his fingers. He began to stroke the long nose of the
horse like he believed it to be a living thing. "I don't know, Spence. I wish
I did." He took another deep breath. "But I do know we'll find most, if not
all, of the answers somewhere in here." He glanced around, watching the water
lap at his boots like a friendly dog.
       Spence held his torch up higher and took a deep breath himself. "Yes, I
know we will. I just wish we knew where and how and what beforehand." He
chuckled. "Don't ask for much, do I?"
       James smiled at him. "You're just getting old." Glancing into Sam's
Page 73

troubled eyes he declared, "First things first. Let's get everyone together
and search this cave thoroughly. There's bound to be a way out or another
trail. It's just too dark in here to see it yet, that's all."
       Sam, her hand resting on the neck of the carving, suddenly raised her
head higher, glanced around and asked, "That reminds me, where's Cindy? Have
any of you seen her since we came in?"
       Spence held up his torch and searched the space around them. "I don't
remember her even coming inside. Maybe she got locked out like the others."
His voice held a note of uncertainty.
       A shout off to their left bounced off the high walls, sounding almost
like the roar of a crowd at a ballgame. James's head came up with a snap. He
grabbed up the torch he'd stuck into the damp sand and headed at a trot in the
direction of the shouts now coming at regular intervals. Sam and Spence ran
close behind him, the light from their torches bobbing along the rock faces as
they made their way along the path.
       Abruptly, they came to a halt in a large clearing beyond the jumble of
rocks they'd run through. Guilford stood beside a roughly made log boat,
easily big enough to carry twelve people. A pair of crudely shaped oars lay
beside it on the sand. When the group appeared, Guilford's eyes rose from
staring at the boat's insides. "Took you long enough. I was debating whether
or not to use this bloody thing by myself and just leave you here." He sniffed
with disdain, his tone haughty and a fist on his hip.
       Walking up to the boat, the trio ignored Guilford's preening
declarations about how he'd found it and what they should do next. Spence
walked around its rough-hewn hull, inspecting it with the eye of a licensing
agent. James and Sam stood at the prow, their eyes searching up and down the
riverfront for further discoveries. 
       After Spence had walked around the boat twice, he rubbed the grizzled
whiskers on his face and turned to them with a grin. "Now ain't that
fortuitous? This thing is made out of Eucalyptus and will certainly be around
long after we're dust. It's watertight from the looks of it too. Wonder who
left this here for us?" His head swiveling around and his eyes scanning what
he could see lit by the torch light, he continued, "Well, there's plenty of
water to put the boat into but no place to steer it once it's afloat, from
what I can see. I wonder where we're supposed to go with this thing."
       "There. That's where." Sam, now a few yards down the shoreline, pointed
to a large opening in the wall several yards beyond her. It could just barely
be seen in the dim light. The river flowed into it with a gentle gurgle.
       "Right! Then let's be off. I can't wait to see what we uncover next.
This is going to be a damned exciting book, I can tell you. I missed out on
the Yowie and the black stones but this just might make up for it. Lots of
money in this discovery alone." He chuckled.
       James glared at him. "We're not going anywhere until we find Cindy. Our
group sticks together, King." Seeing the look of rage suffusing Guilford's
face, he glared harder. "And this boat goes nowhere until we find her.
Understood?"
       "Where has that damned girl got off to?" Spence walked down the
shoreline, toward the tunnel the river flowed into. "Where is she?" Swelling
his lungs to capacity with air, he bellowed, "Cindy! Where the hell are you,
girl? Cindy!"
       A calm, strong voice responded. "I'm here." She stood in front of the
nearest boulder, on the path they'd just used. Her small body, still in
tattered shorts and shirt, stood unnaturally stiff and still. Her eyes glowed
when the torches the group was holding swung around toward her, highlighting
the deep golden flecks within the dark brown.
       Sam gasped and started to rush to the girl. James held her arm,
preventing her from moving. She looked at him with consternation. "She doesn't
look right, James. She might be hurt."
       "Exactly. She doesn't look right. Stay here." He dropped his hand from
her arm and moved slowly toward Cindy. "Cindy, where have you been? Are you
Page 74

all right?" 
       His voice, low and reassuring, seemed to make an impact. Cindy's body
relaxed as he approached. She focused large, liquid eyes on his face, the
pupils so deep and fathomless they looked like unending wells of ebony. When
he stood within arm's reach, she held up her hand to halt him in his tracks.
Her entire body began to shake, the tremors starting at the top of her head
and moving down her torso and legs, like the undulating motion of a snake. She
threw back her head and howled like a wild animal in pain. The long hair she
kept tied up in a ponytail came loose from its bindings and flew into the air
when she whipped her head back and forth in a frenzy. It made her look like an
enraged lion tossing its head in the wind.
       James held his hands over his ears, attempting to block out the high
keening of her voice as it climbed in volume and pitch. Stunned with the
intense assault to his ears, he was unable to move from the spot he stood
upon, his entire body helplessly anchored in place. "My God, please stop!" His
bellow of pain almost overrode her screams.
       Sam, Spence and Guilford still stood rooted around the boat, each as
frozen in place as James, and completely powerless to help him. Sam's mouth
stood open in a silent scream of her own but no sound could escape her locked
throat. Spence grunted in frustration and rage, his face suffused with the
pain of effort as he struggled to move.
       When her screeching, along with James's howling, finally stopped and
only the noise issuing from the slow movement of the water could be heard in
the cavern, what remained where Cindy once stood made them wish that a mere
scream was all they would be subjected to.
--------
         *CHAPTER SIXTEEN*
       James collapsed onto the sand, groaning with pain, still clutching his
ears. The scream Sam held locked inside her throat erupted into the cavern
with the force of a whirlwind. Spence instantly raced forward to James where
he lay writhing in agony. He ignored the apparition towering over James's
inert figure as he squatted down, wrapping his arms around his friend. Then he
froze once again. Guilford took several awkward steps toward the figure
looming over James and Spence. He gave the outward appearance of being drunk
or drugged, uncoordinated and dazed.
       All eyes fixed on the creature. It stood tall, solid, unmoving and
silent, like one of the huge rocks rising behind it. Its golden eyes,
white-ringed with terror, flickered from one human to the next in a
never-ending circular dance. When it's great mouth opened, large, yellowed
fangs appeared. It's lips, unmoving, a hollow voice, seeming to come from far
within the cavern of the beast's massive body, issued forth. "Do not fear. We
mean you no harm."
       James, propped against Spence's thin chest, shook his head and focused
on the being that stood within inches of him. It towered over him, a good
seven feet tall, and glistened a brilliant auburn when the silky mat of hair
covering its entire body swayed with the creature's movements. Gasping for
breath and struggling to his feet, he leaned heavily on Spence's arm. His eyes
locked with those of the beast. "Who are you? What do you want with us?"
       The deep, echoing voice issuing forth from the Yowie's mouth seemed to
carry a touch of humor. "Patience, my friend. Patience. All your questions
will be answered and all your quests fulfilled in time. The being you see
standing before you is a child of the earth ... a beloved child. It means you
no harm and will guide you to us. Have faith."
       "No harm? You must be kidding! We saw one of these beasts tear a man
into pieces small enough to feed a Taipan." Spence spat out his anger and fear
but held his ground.
       "That one deserved to die, as others do. We do not harbor foolish human
notions that all of your species must live. Some of your kind, lesser-evolved
strains, exist to serve their baser needs and wants ... and to harm others in
the process. They bring destruction to all and to this world." The voice
Page 75

paused and became softer, caring. "This being is not a beast. It is more than
an animal but less than a man. It feels, it thinks, it cares. Tread carefully
in your assumptions." The voice held a mixed note of warning and sympathy.
       "Our species? What are you?" James now stood solidly on his own but
well away from the Yowie rolling its eyes at him.
       Sam, who had walked softly and carefully to join the men, now stood
quaking in front of the Yowie. She looked deeply and fearlessly into its eyes.
"What happened to Cindy, our friend?"
       This time the voice did laugh. "You are looking at her now. This one
volunteered to watch over all of you, to guide you and help you reach this
place. This one is the same one you call Cindy."
       Sam hesitated, bit her lip, then, determination on her face, stepped
forward, reached up and placed a gentle hand on the shoulder of the Yowie. It
trembled under her touch. "Hello, Cindy. I'm glad you're okay." She awkwardly
patted the soft furry shoulder and waited.
       The large, yellow eyes locked on Sam's, softened with a gentle look of
curiosity, then glowed with affection and relief. The thin-lipped mouth curved
into a smile and a hand twice the size of a man's tentatively raised to touch
Sam's arm. The fingers felt her skin then gently patted it. Sam's face broke
into a big smile. She turned her head toward James and Spence, who stood
transfixed watching this display. "She smells like fruit and flowers. Don't be
afraid. Can't you see she's scared?"
       Spence shook his head in wonder. "That woman has the courage of a
titan."
       James took a deep breath and moved to stand beside Sam. He reached out
and touched the silky coat of the arm still resting on Sam's arm. He sniffed,
frowned, and then inspected the Yowie with the practiced eye of a scientist.
Looking up into its face he asked, "Did Cindy kill the hiker? How did you
manage to maintain her illusion of being human all this time? Is she..."
       The voice cut him off in mid-sentence. "No! These beings are gentle and
shy unless provoked or afraid. You must be patient. All will be explained. She
will row you in the boat we left. We will meet soon." Then the Yowie's mouth
closed and animation returned to its face, a tiny, fearful smile still on its
lips. It dropped its hand and stood there ... waiting and tense.
       "Can you talk on your own?" Spence bellowed, craning his head toward
the startled animal but refusing to move any closer.
       Sam spun around and pushed at his chest, sending him sprawling. "For
pity's sake, Spence. She's not deaf and she's not a foreign tourist. You don't
have to shout. Damn men and their sledgehammer ways!" She turned back to
Cindy's trembling hulk and softly asked, "Cindy, can you speak? Do you
understand us?"
       The Yowie whimpered and tilted its head in confusion. Sam patted her on
the arm and smiled into her face. "Don't worry. It's okay." She looked over
her shoulder at the two men standing behind her, their faces a comical study
in confusion and exasperation. "They won't hurt you. Come with me." She
grasped a furry arm and tugged lightly, the smile still on her face. Cindy
reluctantly followed with large, shambling steps, her head swiveling from side
to side, trying to watch everything at once.
       Sam led her to the boat and placed her in the front with all the
delicacy of a bellman at the most expensive hotel in town. The men followed,
muttering and whispering among themselves. Guilford, still anchored beside the
boat's prow, slowly backed up when the Yowie approached. He hadn't uttered a
word during the entire encounter or its subsequent outcome that led the
creature to him. He now yelped and jumped behind James when she came near
enough to reach out and touch him. "I don't believe it won't hurt us. This has
got to be a trick." He gulped and hunkered further behind James's back.
       James reached back and yanked him to the side. "Get a grip, Guilford.
If it were going to harm us, it would have done it by now. Besides, didn't you
hear what whoever-that-was talking through it said? Don't you believe your own
eyes and ears?" James's disgust at the man's cowardice swelled when Guilford
Page 76

tried to hide behind Spence. He shook his head and moved toward Sam, who now
sat in the boat talking quietly to Cindy. When he reached them, he began
placing smoking torches into slots designed for them along each side of the
boat.
       Spence sputtered and stalked off to enter the waiting boat. "Damn idiot
yellow-backed Pommie bastard..."
       When Guilford saw the Yowie placidly accept their presence and actually
smile at Sam, he stood straight and tall as he smoothed his hunting clothes.
He moved toward the boat, his head held high, looking down his nose the entire
way. When he stepped into the back of the boat and sat down he snorted. "It's
just a dumb beast after all. Should be shot and stuffed and sent to a museum."
       When Spence turned with a raised fist, he strained his head up even
further. "Touch me and I'll kill you, you Kiwi savage." When James forced
Spence's fist back down, Guilford declared with all the pomposity he could
muster, "All of you are too stupid to understand what we have here. We have
the perfect opportunity to grab that animal and take it back to civilization.
We'd all be rich and famous."
       James gritted his teeth. With slitted eyes, he glared at King's
arrogant face. "Shut up, King. Just shut up."
       Before the words were completely out of his mouth, the boat began to
move away from the shore. Cindy reached out with long arms, snatched up both
heavy oars, used one to push its heavy weight out into the water and now rowed
the boat out into its deeper middle. She executed strong, steady strokes that
made her massive biceps ripple beneath the thick auburn hair covering her
arms. Sam grinned and spoke to her, like a proud mother watching her toddler
master a difficult feat. 
       Spence leaned forward and whispered in James's ear. "What's with her?
She's acting like that big gorilla is a child." His voice reflected the
mystified wonder of Sam's reaction to the Yowie.
       James leaned back to reply. "She's a woman and that thing may be big
but it is a child, Spence. Haven't you looked into its eyes?"
       Spence snorted, sat back and began to scan the water they traveled
slowly over. Only yards from the entrance to the tunnel, a large ripple
appeared off to their right, its foamy wake almost a jet stream of froth.
Spence sat up straight and focused all his attention on the fast moving motion
of the disturbance. When it continued to parallel the boat for some distance,
Spence poked James in the arm. "Take a look at that. Something big is moving
under there and it's following us."
       James pulled a torch from its slot and held it up higher, leaning far
out over the water in an attempt to light the area better. After watching it
for several minutes, he eased back inside the boat but kept the torch tightly
gripped in his hand. "There's something there all right. It must be whatever
you spotted earlier. What in the world could it be? Unless they have some
mighty big fish in this river, I'm at a loss."
       "Nothing has been normal on this trip. Why expect it now?" Spence
muttered, his eyes locked on the path of the unknown stalker.
       Without any outward warning, the movement of their follower abruptly
stopped. All three men leaned further out, hoping to regain sight of it.
Suddenly, a rounded, grayish domed head, like an upside down metal bowl the
size of a beach ball, rose steadily and sedately out of the water. It's face,
complete with whiskers and large eyes, gave the impression of an oversized
seal bobbing effortlessly alongside the boat. All three men leaned back,
mesmerized by the unfolding spectacle of another unknown creature. 
       Sam, made aware of the sudden movements of the men, turned around in
her seat to stare at them, and then at what appeared so close to the boat's
side that she could reach out and touch it. "My God! What is that thing?" She
moved back closer to Cindy, who continued to slowly row, unphased by the
event.
       A four-foot long, elegantly curved neck dispelled the image of a seal.
The flickering light of the torches sent shafts of multi-colored rays bouncing
Page 77

around the cavern when it reflected off the metallic sheen of the creature's
body. It swam closer and lifted its head higher into the air. Peering down
into the boat, it's large, liquid brown eyes, rimmed by coal black eyelashes,
blinked at them with curiosity. It shook its head, revealing a long, dark mane
of hair running down the backside of its neck and disappearing into the
water. 
       James cautiously peered over the side and announced, "It has flippers.
It's swimming; keeping pace with the boat. Well, I'll be. I should have
known." He raised his eyes to stare at the dog-like face staring back at him.
The long whiskers on each side of its upper lip gave it a comical Groucho Marx
look. James chuckled, watching it tilt its head at them, shake its mane and
roll over in the water like a pet dog begging attention.
       "What is it? Should have known what? James, what is that thing?" Sam's
reaction bordered on hysteria.
       "It's a Bunyip, rumored to be a water monster and better known as the
Rainbow Serpent," James stated. He turned to look at her, his face rapidly
moving from humor to curiosity to consternation then back again. "It's the
Australian version of Nessie." He nodded at Spence. "And the Maori version is
called a Taniwha. They've been reported all through South East Australia."
       "It's a _what_?" Sam relaxed a bit, leaned closer to James and
tentatively peeked over the edge to get a better look. "It looks like a baby
seal with a giraffe's neck and a dolphin's body. More like someone's warped
idea of a badly put together kid's puzzle. _This_ is what Nessie looks like?"
Her face registered wonder when she looked at the animal playing.
       "It looks like Heuvelmans was right after all," James murmured,
distracted by the movements of the creature.
       "Who's Heuvelmans and what is he right about?" Sam asked, leaning
forward to get a closer look at the animal as it swam near the boat.
       James continued to study the Bunyip while he talked. "Bernard
Heuvelmans, the father of Cryptozoology, always claimed that water monsters
are some sort of long-necked seal. This little fellow certainly seems to prove
it out, doesn't he?" He reached out a tentative hand and felt the smooth skin
on the animal's back as it glided by.
       The Bunyip executed a neat roll with its entire body then rose high out
of the water and came down with a splash of its two large front flippers. The
cool spray that hit the boat soaked all of them to the skin. Cindy cooed and
reached out with a long arm toward the rollicking creature. Sam, hair dripping
and her wet cotton blouse clinging to her curves, clapped her hands and
laughed like a little girl. James, smiling at her obvious delight in the
little Bunyip, didn't have the heart to tell her that the stories of their
sightings sometimes resulted in someone or something being killed.
       "You might well laugh, lady, but these things have been known to eat
people and their livestock," Spence grumbled as he searched his pack for the
knife he always carried. His hand abruptly stopped its restless search. He
took a deep breath and muttered, "'Remember what happens to those who use
violence.' Damn my father!" He pulled his hand back out of the pack and sat
back, a disgusted look on his face.
       Guilford already clutched a big hunting knife of his own. His eyes
slitted in concentration on the animal, he slowly leaned out over the water.
When the Bunyip made another roll and emerged, its head rising above the boat
and a look of sheer joy on its face, Guilford, quick as a striking snake,
reached out and grabbed its mane. Before it had a chance to react, he'd sliced
off a handful of the coarse hair from its neck and held it clutched in his
fist. "Proof! I finally have proof these things exist!" he shouted
triumphantly. The animal screamed with fear, plunged under the water and
disappeared with a loud splash. A thread of blood ran through the swirl it
left behind.
       Guilford turned to the others, the trophy held high. "You see? Evidence
... finally, I can prove to everyone that what I've been telling them is
true."
Page 78

       Sam leaned toward him, her face contorted with fury. "You bloodthirsty
son of a bitch! You've hurt it. It's bleeding. It was only a baby."
       Spence lunged at him, his teeth bared and rage etching his craggy face
into the mask of a madman. He lurched forward, determined to reach Guilford,
the violent rocking of the boat tossing him back and forth. A roar of immense
volume erupted beyond the spot where the baby Bunyip had disappeared. Spence
froze in midstride then sat down with a thud, the noise, magnified when it
reverberated off the cavern's walls, stunning him into silence.
       A seething cauldron of water boiled only a few feet from the side of
the still rocking boat. Within seconds, a larger version of the creature
they'd seen rose like a city skyscraper from the depths of the river. It's
head, the size of a Volkswagen, turned toward the thing that had threatened
her baby. It roared again and bared double rows of serrated teeth.
       Sam screamed, James bellowed, "Row faster, Cindy. Damn it, row faster!"
and Spence scrambled into a squatting position, his hands white as they
gripped the sides of the boat.
       The Bunyip swept through the water like a shimmering submarine, its
long neck stretched forward and its mouth open in snarling rage. Within
seconds, it slammed into the boat, curved its long neck down and grasped
Guilford by the torso. His head and shoulders disappeared in the monster's
mouth. His bare legs kicked so frantically that one of his English field boots
flew off and narrowly missed hitting Spence in the head. 
       The Bunyip lifted Guilford out of the boat and up into the highest
reaches of the cavern, his legs dangling like a rag doll. With one great whip
of her head, she tossed Guilford's body up into the air. As he descended into
her waiting jaws, a blood-curdling scream erupted from his lungs, which was
abruptly cut off when her teeth clamped down on his torso. She turned her head
in the direction of the boat once again. She stared for long seconds, blinked
twice then slowly descended, foot by foot, back into the river, leaving behind
one circular ripple on the surface of the water and a worn boot floating
inside it. 
--------
         *CHAPTER SEVENTEEN*
       Darkness enveloped the boat. The smell of damp, moldy earth wafted
around Sam with choking intensity. What instantly came to mind was the image
of a cemetery-an old, untended one. Her soaked clothes clung to her, feeling
like a tight shroud. Her senses overloaded when the sound of splashing, very
close, sent her into a frenzy of fear. She reached out with both arms,
frantically seeking comforting arms. "James! Spence! Where are you? Are you
okay?"
       Two warm arms wrapped around her tightly and drew her to a warm, broad
chest. She felt the hammering of James's heart when she threw her arms around
his waist in response. His whisper sounded hoarse and unsure. "Hush, Sam. I
think we're safe now. She won't be back."
       "Where are we? Why aren't the torches lit?" she whimpered into his
chest.
       Movement in the rear of the boat and a clearing of a throat accompanied
Spence's reply. "We're in the tunnel. When the Bunyip got Guilford, water
washed over the boat and the torches were doused. I can't get them lit again."
       A series of deep grunts, along with a large, furry hand patting her on
the back, almost sent Sam screaming overboard. James held her in place. "It's
just Cindy, luv. Calm down. You're safe now."
       She made herself relax against him but her breathing remained fast and
strained. She took a deep breath, consciously shoving the irrational fear
away. "I'm okay now." She took another deep breath and sat up, James's arm
still draped around her shoulders. She patted Cindy's hand and spoke in her
general direction. "Thank you, Cindy." A small grunt echoed around the tunnel
in response.
       The boat started moving again, its rhythmic forward motion a comfort.
Sam settled back against James's chest and sighed deeply. "There are only
Page 79

three of us left. He died so horribly, James, so violently." 
       He could hear the tears welling up in her voice. "Sam, he deserved it.
Remember what Cindy's controller said? 'Some will die and deserve it.' I
believe that, whatever or whoever we find, they aren't violent by nature.
Based on what's happened so far, I'd say we're being tested."
       Spence leaned forward, his breath hot on the back of James's neck.
"Tested? Yep, I'd say so too. Everything that's been going on has that feel to
it. Too many coincidences to be coincidental."
       "What I'd like to know is, if that's what's happening here, what are we
being tested for?" Sam pressed back further into James's chest and reached up
to hold the hand cupping her shoulder.
       James's hand tightened on hers. "We'll soon find out. There's a light
up ahead. I can see the end to the tunnel." 
       The total blackness they'd been moving through began to lighten. They
could dimly see Cindy still rowing in the front of the boat. Every stroke
brought details of the tunnel they traveled through into greater focus. Its
craggy walls hosted a blanket of leprous slimes and fungi that gave off a
feeble light of phosphorescence. Steady dribbles of water seeped down the
sides, keeping the tunnel moist and feeding the river as they joined it. 
       Within minutes a bright circle of light appeared around a bend. "There
it is. I wonder what we'll find now." Sam's voice quivered but she sat up
straighter when the light became stronger.
       Brilliant, white light dazzled their eyes when the boat finally moved
out of the tunnel and into a cavern even larger than the first. James blinked
and shielded his eyes with a palm, squinting around its huge interior. By the
time the boat scraped up onto a sandy shore and Cindy leapt out to drag it
further onto the bank, his eyes had completely adjusted. He sucked in a deep
breath, stood up and stepped into a scene straight out of a science fiction
movie.
       He reached down and handed Sam out onto the shore then pulled her over
to stand close to his side. Spence leapt out, grabbed their backpacks from the
bottom of the boat and tossed them on the red sandy ground. He slipped his on,
his eyes glancing around the cavern with animated interest before settling on
the object resting on a mound of earth well back from the water. "Well, well.
So this is where it comes from."
       All three stared at the seamless hull of a dull metallic craft. It sat
against a wall of black stone. The wall glittered with embedded gemstones.
James stared at the twinkling lights and his mouth dropped open. "Those jewels
lay out the pattern of the Pleiades star cluster, the Seven Sisters. Ratana
was right, it is a marker of some kind." The others studied the pattern of the
gems silently. They cautiously moved toward the craft.
       As they approached, they had to crane their necks in order to view the
domed structure above the jointed metal legs it sat upon. Spence boldly walked
up to it and placed a hand on the underside. "It's a spaceship. Blow me, but
it's a flying saucer. I always did say they're real." He chuckled with delight
as he ran his gnarled hand over its smooth surface. It hummed in response.
Spence leapt back, a look of consternation coloring his face. 
       "Leave it, Spence. I don't think we're supposed to play with the things
we find in here." James peered up at the saucer. "This is like something
straight out of _Journey to the Center of the Earth_." His attention was
diverted when he caught sight of Cindy waving her arms at them. "I think she's
trying to tell us something." He nodded at Cindy when Spence and Sam turned to
face him.
       They stared at her, wondering what she was trying to convey. She
motioned for them to come back, her actions unmistakably tinged with fear.
They wasted no time in getting back to the boat, relying on Cindy's guidance
to stay out of trouble. She grunted with satisfaction when they stood in front
of her. Then she raised a long arm and, hooting softly, pointed to the wall
they'd had their backs toward when they entered the cavern. A blank screen,
rivaling in size those found in movie theatres, was nestled into the wall,
Page 80

almost seeming a part of the rock. Its edges gleamed dully, apparently made of
the same metal as the saucer.
       James examined the flat, featureless square. "I think Cindy wants us to
look at this but if it's a screen I haven't a clue how to turn it on." 
       He turned to the Yowie and motioned as best he could that he needed her
to show him how to use the screen. She hesitantly moved up and placed her hand
on a smaller square of metal embedded into the wall beside the screen.
Instantly, a diamond-clear picture appeared on it. 
       The scene being played out depicted a handful of cavemen spread out
inside a valley. The leader had just killed a small antelope and reached down
to tear a hunk of flesh off its hindquarters. Blood dripping off his chin, his
head whipped up and his eyes grew round. He rose up, hesitated and stood there
as if listening while he fingered a black stone hanging by a rough cord around
his neck. 
       "James, it's a black stone! Somehow this scene is tied in with what's
happening now." Sam stood closer to the screen, studying the actions of the
caveman.
       The hunter cocked his head, nodded silently and moved off down the
valley, leaving his kill behind. Shortly, the other hunters, bearing spears
and similar animal skins, joined the lead man. They appeared to be conferring
with each other without moving their lips.
       "This is strange. They're talking to each other. I can see it by the
expressions on their faces. But they're not speaking." Sam flashed a puzzled
look at James. "Telepathy? Cavemen?"
       "Impossible! Those are Neanderthals. Undoubtedly they had the skills to
hunt and survive, they used fire and buried their dead but something as
complex as telepathy? Come on! They didn't even have a language as far as we
know. When they disappeared out of the valley of the Neander River in Germany
and other sites around Europe, they left nothing behind to indicate they had
any social skills at all." James frowned in concentration when the images
they'd been watching suddenly stopped.
       "Disappeared? How did they just disappear?" Sam continued to stare at
him, now ignoring the frozen sequence of events on the screen.
       "They just did, Sam. Nobody knows how or why. If all of this has
something to do with them then it's a damned shaky connection. Why all the
mystery? Why do the ones who called us here want us to watch a high tech movie
when they could easily come and tell us what this is all about themselves?"
James swiveled around, taking in the details of the cavern as he turned.
"There's no tunnel other than the one we came through and there are no doors
that I can see. It's a dead end. What's the point in bringing us here?"
       Spence stepped up to him and laid a hand on his arm. "Son, instead of
always trying to figure things out logically, why don't you just go with the
flow? They have their reasons. We just have to wait and see what they are."
       James turned back to the screen. "You're right, Spence. They're in
control here. Bad habit of mine..." When he turned his gaze back to the
screen, the scene of the cavemen began to move again. He concentrated on it
without further comment. It went on to depict a small village of women,
children and the hunters moving out of the valley and entering a large cave.
Then it abruptly halted. When the screen went blank, he continued to stare at
it. "Is that all? Just the cavemen and their families moving into caves? Was
that supposed to mean something to us?" 
       He looked over at Cindy. She still stood beside the small metal square.
She raised both her hands and put her two thumbs on the pad of the square. The
screen lit up again, this time with a collage of scenes flashing one after the
other. It started with a panoramic view of the earth as seen from space. It
then rapidly moved from scenes of unfinished pyramids, to Mayan temples, to
battles between medieval armies, then to several people they all recognized
from history books and movies: Nostradamus, Plato, Hitler, Einstein, and more.
       "It appears to be the complete history of mankind. They must have been
watching us and recording this for centuries." Sam turned to stare at the
Page 81

saucer. "It's all true." Her voice vibrated with wonder and awe.
       James crossed his arms and frowned. "I fail to see what any of this has
to do with Yowies, Bunyips, UFOs or this place. Maybe I'm just being thick but
this strikes me as a bit flamboyant and unnecessary."
       Spence cackled and slapped him on the shoulder with a dirty hand.
"Listen to you, Mr. University. Does everything have to be complicated before
you get it?" He cackled again.
       Before James could think of a suitable retort, Cindy let loose with a
series of emphatic grunts, groans and whimpers. Their attention on her
completely, she nodded her great head and waved an arm at them while she
shambled toward the back wall behind the saucer. They followed and shortly
came to a small tunnel entrance that had evaded their search of the cavern.
Cindy stooped and entered the tunnel, still anxiously checking over her
shoulder to make sure they followed. James led the way, Sam stayed close to
his back and Spence brought up the rear.
       The tunnel opened into a smaller version of the outside cavern. A large
circle of seven black stones, the largest in the center, sat exactly in the
middle of the rounded cave. The walls surrounding the black stones twinkled
with the same gemstones they'd found next to the saucer. 
       Spence stepped up to the nearest wall, lifted a torch from a bracket,
brought it close and stared at the stones flashing inside the clay. He ran his
hand over them and turned to James with a lopsided grin. "This is Orion. See
the belt and the outline of the star cluster?" He followed the curve of the
cave and inspected each set of gems, James and Sam slowly moving behind him.
He stopped when he reached Cindy, who stood patiently waiting for them to
finish their inspection. "All of these are constellations. There's the
Southern Cross, that one's Andromeda, that's Scorpius..."
       "What does it mean? Are they just decorations?" Sam leaned into the
torchlight and took a good look.
       A shimmering light lit up the interior of the cave, startling all of
them into breathless silence. They spun around to face the circle of stones.
It formed into a doorway. None of them could have possibly anticipated what
stepped through the doorway and into the cave. Sam gasped, James gripped her
hand so tightly that her fingers turned white and Spence stood, dumbfounded,
with the torch still raised over his head. Cindy kneeled on the hard packed
clay of the cave and touched her forehead to the ground, her arms spread in
obeisance. 
--------
         *CHAPTER EIGHTEEN*
       A soft, melodic voice wafted inside James's head. It sensuously
insinuated itself into his conscious mind. _Greetings. I am Amaru. Welcome and
be at ease._
       A vision of female loveliness stood in the circle of the black stones.
A flowing white gown draped her slender body from swan-like neck to dainty
ankle. Tiny bare feet poked out from under the hemline. Her long hair
glistened with gold and silver highlights. When she fixed large, languid blue
eyes upon James and smiled, he felt real gut-wrenching fear for the first time
since they'd started their journey.
       Spence lowered his torch then dropped it on the sandy floor. His mouth
hung open and his eyes gleamed. "She's beautiful." His whispered declaration
accompanied a slow shuffled walk toward the apparition.
       James lunged at him, blocking his forward motion and grabbing both arms
in the process. "Spence ... Spence, get a grip, mate. She's not real."
       "She looks real enough to me, James." Sam cautiously eased forward,
examining the woman with cynical eyes.
       The woman gently smiled then spoke out loud. "I am real. However, you
are quite correct in your caution, James. Things are rarely what they appear
to be in this world." She closed her eyes, nodded her head and transformed
into the short, broad form of a wizened prehistoric woman. She still wore the
white gown but the golden hair that had spread like a halo around her face now
Page 82

covered what they could see of her body. When she lifted her head and met
their astonished gazes with startling yellow-brown eyes, she smiled again. "I
hoped to spare you the shock of my true appearance until I was certain you
could handle it, but I see the good doctor is not so easily fooled anymore."
       Spence gaped at her. "Is everything we've seen so far an illusion?"
       At the same time, Sam blurted out, "How did you do that?"
       Amaru held out her hand, palm outward. Her voice, still soft and
musical, silenced them. "Only the necessary illusions are used with humans."
She indicated Cindy's prone form. "It was necessary to have you accept Cindy
as one of your own so she could help you. But everything else we have allowed
to be revealed to you is very real." She turned her attention to Sam. "To
answer your question, it is done with our minds. We have abilities that have
made it possible for us to remain undetected from humankind for centuries.
It's a simple matter to use these abilities to deceive others for their own
protection ... and ours."
       James stepped between the woman and his friends. "What are you? Why
have you brought us here? And what has happened to our friends?"
       Her voice never faltered in the face of his demanding questions. "I
think it would be better served if I show you what you seek." She beckoned
with an outstretched hand for them to join her in the circle.
       James hesitated, glanced at Spence and Sam, then turned and walked
boldly into the circle of stones. Spence and Sam, following his example, also
stepped into the circle but huddled closely to each other and James. The trio
faced the woman and waited. She nodded her head in approval then turned to
Cindy who now stood upright and awaiting her command. "You may go back to your
clan or join us, my dear. You choose."
       Cindy turned her lips up into a parody of a smile and eagerly stepped
into the circle with them. She shyly moved to stand beside Sam and patted her
on the shoulder as if to reassure her there was no reason to be afraid. Sam
smiled up at Cindy and took her hand.
       Within moments, with no indication of motion, sound or sense of having
moved from the cave, they looked out into the interior of a bustling center of
activity inside a high-tech building. The walls shone with the same polished
metal they'd seen on the saucer. High glass walls towered several stories up
into the center of the complex, giving it the look of a giant's fish tank just
waiting to be filled with interesting specimens. Groups of assorted beings
moved with purpose around and inside the complex, working at terminals,
viewing large screens like the one in the outer cave and moving up spiral
staircases to levels above. Some of them appeared to be human, including young
children. Some of them were almost identical to Amaru, with the exception of
hair color. They ranged from black to almost white but all were covered from
head to foot with a thick coat. Some were clearly animal-like in appearance,
their faces and bodies unclothed and awkward moving. All of them ignored the
newcomers and busily went about their business. 
       "What is this place? _Where_ is this place?" Spence swiveled his head
back and forth, trying to take it all in at once.
       Amaru, a smile still on her face, swept an arm around the room, long
golden hair sweeping with it. "This is our home. Come. I will take you to a
place of comfort where we can speak of these things. All your questions will
be answered in time." 
       She moved gracefully toward a wall filled with closed panels of the
same metal used in the central area. She placed a surprisingly feminine hand
upon the first panel in line and it disappeared into thin air. Amaru turned
and beckoned them to enter.
       Deep plush carpeting deadened their footfalls when they entered the
room. It had the deep green feel and smell of a forest floor on a sunny
afternoon. Diffused lighting caressed walls painted with murals of the
rainforest, giving the room a comforting, peaceful look and feel. Long,
elegantly curved couches of deep mushroom leather beckoned from around the
room. 
Page 83

       Sam, the first to step through, moved into the center of the room and
felt all her pent up tension dissolve. "This place is incredible." She settled
down onto a couch facing the door and returned the smile Amaru flashed in her
direction. Cindy settled herself on the floor at Sam's feet and studied the
murals with childlike wonder.
       Spence joined Sam on the couch, inspecting the room with darting eyes.
James sat on the arm of the couch, crossed his arms and waited for Amaru to
seat herself before he spoke. "Yes, this place is incredible but Amaru still
hasn't answered our questions. Where are we, why are we here and what are
you?"
       Amaru smoothed the folds of her gown down around her legs then settled
back with a sigh, locking her golden-brown eyes upon James. "You humans are
always impatient; always wanting everything immediately." She sighed. "I will
answer some of your questions now but, soon, I will show you things that will
answer the rest. When you see, you will understand. This will save much time.
Is this acceptable to you?"
       They all nodded. James uncrossed his arms and replied, "Yes, that will
work. Please, forgive my rudeness." He ran a hand through his hair and
ventured a shaky smile. "We've been through a lot these last few days and you
have to admit, a lot of it is just plain hard to believe."
       Amaru nodded her head in return. "Yes, I understand. I will tell you
what I can. The rest will wait." Taking a deep breath she continued. "You are
inside the mountain called The Mother. We have dwelt here for centuries
waiting for a time and an exact set of circumstances to arise. That time is
now and events are such that we know we must take action."
       She held up her hand when Spence leaned forward, his mouth open to
speak. "Please. Let me finish, then I will answer more if I can." When he
leaned back and crossed his arms across his chest, she went on. "You asked
what we are. To put it simply, we are of the race you know as Neanderthal
people. Eons ago we were called here to establish this place. We had no idea
for what purpose but we obeyed and came. Since then, we have built what you
see now. What we do will be shown to you. The 'why' will also be explained.
For the time being, just know that we are here to help." 
       She hesitated and lowered her eyes. Sighing deeply, she raised them
again and swept her gaze over them. "You three are the keys to saving this
world. That is why we tested you, let you assimilate some truths most humans
would deny and why we brought you here now."
       Spence sputtered. "The Neanderthals were primitive. They didn't even
have a language! How can you sit there and expect us to believe you're what
you say you are and that you built all this." He swept his arm around the
room.
       Amaru smiled again and shook her head. "Humans are so predictable ...
and so arrogant." She locked eyes with Spence. "Did it ever occur to you that
what you think you know might be wrong?"
       The look of startled surprise on all their faces made her laugh, a
sound of a wind chime swaying in the breeze. "You found skeletons of my
people, imagined what we looked like, assumed we are primitive and apelike and
all of it based on nothing but bones and a lack of any real evidence to the
contrary."
       She stood and walked to a side wall. Holding her palm against it
brought forth another screen. She turned to them like a teacher with a class
full of slow students. "Let me show you."
       The screen came to life, this time with sound, smells, thoughts and the
distinct feeling of existing in the scene with the caveman squatting by the
dead antelope. The look of deep pain within his eyes moved them when he
reached out and gently caressed the face of the dead animal. Then he eased a
stone knife down to the animal's chest and cut out the heart. Lifting it to
the sky, then to his lips, sent a shudder through them. The onlookers became
totally entranced when they could hear Garagh's thoughts. His words and
feelings, coming directly from his mind, echoed into their own brains. 
Page 84

       _I regret your death, my little friend, but it is the way of the people
to need your help to survive. You give your life for ours. For this, we honor
you. Your heart is my heart. From this day forward we are one. You do not die
in vain. Those who made us will welcome you to green hills and many females to
comfort you in your new home. Forgive those not of the people who kill your
kind without respect. They kill to enjoy killing and would kill the world if
they could._
       James, Spence and Sam could feel this man's fear, his love for his
people and for the valley they'd always known as home. They could also 'hear'
the complex thoughts, ideas and concepts surging within the man's brain. They
experienced a heightened awareness of the world around him: animals, plants,
air, sunshine and other people. They could feel the power of his mind as it
effortlessly tapped into abilities mankind was just now becoming aware of, and
which they still didn't know how to use. 
       _My son, the hill you stand upon is one without shelter from the spears
of those not of the people. Hide yourself from their eyes for they walk in
violence and blood and will not spare you. Tanatha, take your men and move to
the north for the hunt is there today and it is safe. Do not take more of our
antelope friends than you need to feed the village. I will meet you at the
black rock when you are finished._
       When the voice of Garagh's guide came into his mind, James, Spence and
Sam reacted like it spoke into their own. All three opened their eyes wider,
seeing into the far past.
       _Garagh, it is time. Your journey must start now. Take your people and
go to the sacred caves. There you will find the circle of stones. Take your
people into the circle and find your new home. What you now do, you do for
your children and the children to come for many moons. Your mother awaits you
with welcome arms. Open your own arms in greeting to your brothers when the
time is ripe. They will perish without you. Be strong, use the gifts you have
been given and never let love leave your heart or those of your brothers. Have
no fear, I am with you, always._
       By the time Garagh and his men had gathered the village together and
moved into the caves, James, Spence and Sam knew just how wrong they'd been
and how much they'd underestimated the beings represented by the one standing
patiently before them. When Garagh's voice and image disappeared, they felt
themselves jerked back to the present with a whiplash of intense emotion.
       Amaru tilted her head, her eyes gleaming with affection, and smiled
once more. "Now you understand what we are and where we come from. Don't you,
my children?"
       Sam was the first one to stand up. Her face a study in serious
contrition, she stepped up to Amaru and hugged her tightly. She pulled back
and looked her in the eye. "Yes, now I do," she whispered. She hugged Amaru
one last time and moved away to sit back down on the couch next to Cindy. She
took Cindy's hand and watched while the men approached Amaru.
       James stepped forward and offered his hand. "Thank you for this. So
many things make sense now. Your people chose to live as they did because it
was in harmony with the world, not because they didn't know any other way, and
they used no language because you had no need of it. So many things we do not
know." He took a deep breath. "But there is more, isn't there?"
       She patted his hand. "There is much more. You were brought here for the
same reason we were brought here. The weight of the world rests upon your
shoulders, my son." When James paled at her words, she tightened her grip on
his hand and reached up to stroke his cheek with the other. "You are not
alone. We are with you and, through you and Sam, we are one."
       He smiled. "Yes, I know we are." He slowly turned to Sam and held out
his hand to her. She rose and came to stand next to him, her hand tightly
encased within his.
       "And what about creatures like Cindy? You control them; use them?" Sam
rested her hand on Cindy's back as she tried to control a feeling of
protectiveness welling within her.
Page 85

       "We do not control Cindy's kind or any others. They willingly work in
harmony with us. They understand we are all bound together in this world and,
in order to save it, we must be as one, as we were meant to be in the
beginning."
       Spence stepped forward and touched Amaru's hand. "You said earlier that
you tested us. How, Amaru? Was everything we've seen and experienced a test?"
       She took his hand into hers. "Come with me. Your minds are now ready to
accept the truth. The rest of what you want to know will be explained. There
is much you must see and time is short." Still holding his hand, she moved to
the panel and opened it once again. 
       The room they stepped out into curved away in each direction and met
directly opposite them to form a perfect circle. Several beings of different
types manned terminals placed around the outside curve of the walls. They
peered intently at a large screen placed in front of each one of them. Each
screen depicted different people in different settings, doing different
things. 
       Spence stopped so abruptly when he entered the room that the others
almost crashed into his back. "What the...? We're in a different room than the
one that was here before. This is confusing."
       Amaru indicated the terminals around the room. "This entire complex is
spread throughout the world. The room we just left is in Australia, this one
is in South America. Every door like the panel we just stepped through is a
transporter."
       Spence almost jumped up and down with glee. His face registered the
impish delight of a leprechaun. "Transporters? Like Star Trek?"
       Sam rolled her eyes and sighed. "Amaru, what are all the screens for?"
       "This place is where we monitor the events of this earth. This is where
everything that impacts upon our world is searched, watched, stored and
analyzed. This information keeps us up to date with world events ... and
disasters."
       "Everything? Can you show us what happened to our friends? Marc, Nathan
and Ratana?"
       Amaru strolled toward the nearest terminal and bent to instruct the
operator, a human man, who immediately punched several buttons then stood up
to give her his chair. The image of Nathan, Ratana and Ernie leapt to life in
front of them. They sat cross-legged around a small campfire, the tents off in
the background.
       Ratana leaned toward Ernie, anxiety on her face. "Do you know where he
went?"
       "He has gone to the place he belongs."
       "Ernie, we need a straight answer. Where did Marc go? He may be in
danger out here all alone," Nathan asked in a respectful tone.
       "He is where he must be."
       Nathan turned to Ratana. "I don't think he's going to tell us any more
than he has."
       Her shoulders slumped. "I wish I knew why we weren't allowed to go with
the others. This waiting is getting on my nerves."
       "Yeah, mine too." Nathan moved closer to her and put an arm around her
shoulders. "Don't worry, they'll be back. Ernie says they're safe where they
went. We just have to wait ... that's all ... just wait." His shoulders
slumped a bit too.
       The terminal went blank.
       Sam turned to Amaru. "What happened to Marc? Where did he go?"
       Without lifting her gaze from the terminal, Amaru murmured, "I don't
know."
       "How do we find out?" James demanded.
       Recovering herself, she looked up at all of them staring at her. "He
will be found." She bent back down to the operator and whispered more
instructions into his ear. He nodded.
       She turned back to them. "Now, to the business at hand. There is more,
Page 86

much more, you need to see. Shall we go?"
       Without a word, they followed her toward another doorway.
--------
         *CHAPTER NINETEEN*
       Looking through the window, the inside of the operating room appeared
distorted and unreal. James, hands spread upon the glass, leaned as close to
the pane as he could without fogging it up with the rapid-fire breaths of air
he struggled to suppress. 
       Amaru, standing behind him, put her hand upon his shoulder and said,
"It's all right, James. I understand your fear."
       He turned away from the sight and leaned his head upon the coolness of
the stainless steel wall. Clenching his eyes tightly together, he shuddered.
"How could you? Why?"
       "Why? Because we have no choice. We've never had a choice." 
       The sadness in her voice compelled his eyes to open. The pain and the
tears running down her face to mat the hair around her neck looked genuine.
His gaze searched out Spence and Sam to see how they were reacting to the
scene they'd walked into without warning. 
       They stood staring at the bustle of activity inside the room. Sam's
face registered nothing, but her body looked frozen in place-rigid and
unnatural. Spence's reaction defied description but he too stood silently
watching. Both of them clenched their hands so tightly droplets of blood
dripped onto the metal floor-unnoticed and unfelt.
       James's mind screamed with rage and fear but he gathered the iron
self-control he'd exercised for so many years and used it to force himself to
look into the room once again.
       A woman lay on a stark metal table. She stared, unemotional and
unmoving, up into the large light suspended above her body. Moving around her
were several small figures with large heads and black, unblinking eyes. Their
smooth, unlined bodies, no taller than four feet high, gave the impression of
children playing doctor. But, the various instruments they used to take
samples from the woman's body glinted under the light, dispelling the illusion
and replacing it with the reality. Their movements bespoke efficiency and
purpose as they moved between her and the specimen jars lined up on a steel
tray beside the far wall.
       Finally, the silence broke when a sob of anguish erupted from Sam's
pale lips. She closed her eyes and whispered, "Make it go away. Please make it
go away."
       Galvanized by her words, James rushed to her and pulled her into his
arms. She buried her face against his chest. He turned a look of abject
pleading toward Amaru. Without hesitation, she took Spence's hand and led him
away from the window, like a comatose patient unable to move on his own. James
followed her closely, without looking back, when she opened a panel and
disappeared inside.
       They stepped back into the rainforest room and moved like shell-shocked
soldiers toward the couches. James eased Sam down onto the cushions and sat
beside her, holding both her shaking hands as steady as he could. Amaru helped
Spence over to the facing couch but remained standing when he collapsed upon
it. She turned away from them, her small body visibly shaking with the effort
to gain control over her emotions.
       Without turning to face them, she spoke clearly and with a steady
voice. "Yes, it's true. All of you at one time or another have been here; have
been tested as the woman in there is now being tested. I am sorry but it is
necessary that you remember everything. The only way to bring that about was
to take you back there." She turned to face them, her face composed and
gentle. "This is not done to hurt people. It is done to acquire the body
samples we need. We had to find those of the human race who are genetically
programmed in such a way that they can save it. Do you understand?" She asked
the question with a soft, choked voice, pleading with them to forgive the
unforgivable.
Page 87

       Spence launched himself off the couch and stood glaring at Amaru, his
lean body trembling. "You barbaric butchers! Who do you think you are? God?
You steal people's lives, their sanity, and their families with your bloody
experiments. How can we understand such violent invasions into our lives and
bodies? How can we ever forgive..." When he took another step toward her,
James jumped off the couch to stop him.
       Amaru's eyes flashed with bright golden anger. She held her hand up,
halting all forward movement with nothing more than a thought. Everyone froze
in place. She stepped up to Spence and stood toe to toe with him, her words
trembling with emotion. "We work to save mankind. What excuse do you have with
your senseless violence? Your atrocities toward other humans? Your joyless and
unnecessary slaughter of all living things? Your ruthless raping of this
planet and all it provides for you?" When the anger died out of his face and
she knew he was no longer a danger to her or himself, she raised her hand and
released all of them.
       Spence collapsed onto the carpet, sobs wracking his body. Cindy moved
from the door, where she'd tried to hide herself, and approached his prone
figure. She whimpered and reached out to gather him into her arms. In
response, his arms snaked around her neck. His face wet with tears, he buried
it in the thick hair of her chest. She rocked him, cooing to him like a mother
with a hurt baby.
       Amaru reached out to him when Cindy laid him gently on the couch. She
knelt, placed her hand upon his head and whispered, "Sleep now. Trust in
yourself and us. All will be well. I promise you." He closed his eyes and
slept.
       Amaru took a deep breath, stood up and turned to face James and Sam,
her face troubled. "Do you feel the same way?"
       "No." The simplicity of this one word gave it the weight of a prophecy
in James's ears.
       Sam had come to stand beside him when Cindy moved Spence to the couch.
She nodded and took James's hand. "We understand why, Amaru. It ... it was
just a shock to remember..." Taking a deep breath, she paused. "Is that what
happened to me when I lost time on the way here? The night I went into the
bush and couldn't remember it?"
       "It is." Amaru stood straight and regal, her hands clasping each other
and resting on her waist. "We have been watching you for some time now. We
were sure you carried the coding we need but, somehow, you always managed to
evade us." She smiled. "We had to get a sample and test it before we could
allow you to come any further. Now we are sure."
       "You mentioned this before, that Sam and I are keys. Keys to what? You
said it has something to do with coding in our genetic makeup. What do you
mean by that exactly?" James unconsciously rubbed at the triangular scar on
his shoulder.
       "That is a very complicated thing. However, I want to show you
something that will serve to explain part of it. Unlike the earlier
unpleasantness, I know you will enjoy it at the same time. Shall we?" She
raised bushy eyebrows and swept her arm toward the door panel.
       James took two steps, hesitated and looked down upon Spence's snoring
figure. "Will he be okay here?"
       "Of course he will. Cindy will remain with him until he awakens, won't
you, my dear?" Amaru tilted her head and smiled down at Cindy's cross-legged
form sitting on the floor next to Spence's head.
       Cindy grunted and used her long, thick fingers to stroke Spence's
unruly gray hair back off his face. 
       Amaru nodded at her with approval, then she opened the panel and waited
for James and Sam to move forward before stepping through.
       The second Sam put her booted foot into the room she froze. James held
her arm and whispered, "It's not the other place, Sam. You know we have to
find out everything so let's do it with style." He tugged on her arm, wrapping
it through his own. She stiffened but moved forward.
Page 88

       A bank of blinking data screens covering the left wall gave the room
the look of a twisted version of Frankenstein's laboratory with a disco beat.
The right wall contained a series of computer stations currently manned by two
of the small green beings they'd seen in the operating room. They ran
elongated fingers with round pads at their ends along the flat surfaces of
keyboard panels and watched streams of data scroll down flat, glowing screens
mounted in front of their large, black eyes. Row upon row of clear man-sized
glass tubes filled the center of the circular room. Hoses and switches ran
from their tops like Medusa tendrils and disappeared up into the dark ceiling
looming stories above their heads.
       "My God, we're in the middle of the X-Files. Thank God they're empty,"
James muttered, his eyes scanning the tubes with intense interest.
       "Yes, except this is no movie set and there's no Fox Mulder to come
along and bail us out of here," Sam whispered back.
       Amaru's voice wafted into their minds at that moment. _And no Agent
Scully to tear it into believable scientific pieces either._ They could hear
her laughter echo inside their skulls. 
       With the impulsiveness of children, James and Sam both laughed with
her. They turned their heads to see her coming back from inspecting the work
stations the beings had now left unattended. Her small body, its flowing white
gown sweeping around her, seemed to float toward them from out of the
darkness.
       "What is this place, Amaru, and what are those small beings? Are they
aliens?" James felt silly asking the obvious but couldn't restrain his
curiosity any longer.
       Amaru's laughter took him off guard. She threw her head back and gave
into it with abandon. James and Sam stood awkwardly by until her barks of
laughter subsided into mild sniggers of amusement. When she finally stopped
altogether, she looked at them with a twinkle in her eyes. 
       "Aliens? Whatever gave you that notion?"
       His jaw clenched and his cheeks flushed pink. "You know as well as I do
the whole world has been flooded with pictures of aliens and those ... things
... look just like them." 
       Amaru stood up as straight as she could, primly folded her hands in
front of her body and looked him in the eyes. Her bearing and dignity made her
look like a hairy replica of Queen Victoria when the tiny monarch was angry
with an underling. "That, my dear boy, is one of the reasons why you are here
now; to dispel some of these absurd tales your kind seem to love to believe." 
       "But you ... but they look ... but you said..." Sam sputtered.
       Amaru unfolded her hands and smiled indulgently at them both. "What I
said is that we have many things here. All of them are of this planet." When
they still looked confused, she continued. "Come with me. This place will show
you what I've been doing such a bad job of trying to explain."
       She beckoned, swiftly turned and made her way toward the forest of
empty tubes, interweaving through them until she reached a door panel at the
back. It opened before she'd reached out to touch it. The sound that assaulted
their ears when the door opened came was more of a surprise than the room they
now stood inside. The raucous sound of children playing echoed through the
doorway. They stepped through.
       The room, a replica of the rainforest room without furniture, undulated
with activity in every corner. A variety of small ones, some Yowies, some
grays, some humans and others of unknown ancestry, mingled into groups then
split and reformed into new ones like the ebb and flow of an ocean. Each group
appeared to be working on strange, complex constructions made from rods of
crystal. When the group split, the newcomers took up their task and added to
what the last group left behind.
       "Children? What is this, Amaru?" Sam stood transfixed by the faces and
forms moving around her like an eddy of fluid water, each touching her and
smiling up at her as they passed in procession.
       Amaru smiled, nodding at the young ones as they passed and nodded to
Page 89

her. "I should think it is obvious. It's our nursery."
       James grinned idiotically at a small gray that had approached him and
now stood with its large head tilted with curiosity as it felt the texture of
his clothes. He glanced up at Amaru and Sam. "They're beautiful. These are the
replacements for the colony?"
       "No, James. They are the future of mankind." Her great golden eyes
turned from James to settle upon Sam. "And you now carry their leader. Their
hope ... and yours."
--------
         *CHAPTER TWENTY*
       "Pregnant? I'm pregnant? Wha ... how, how could you know?" Sam gasped,
her face a study in shock, bewilderment, joy and confusion.
       James stared at Amaru with open disbelief and a touch of fear in his
eyes. "She is?"
       "Please, wait a moment." Amaru fidgeted in her chair. "If you don't
mind my putting you off a bit, I'd like to start from the beginning. I admit
the news so delights me that I didn't wait for the proper time to tell you."
Her face glowed with joy when she looked at Sam. "May I frustrate your
questions a bit longer and tell you in the right order?"
       James took Sam's hand. They both nodded in mute silence. Amaru
separated them by inserting herself between their rigid bodies and taking each
one by the arm. She quietly, but firmly, ushered them back through the door.
Once back in the tube room, she moved them to the right and another door
panel. It slid soundlessly open. 
       The room they entered looked very much like the room they'd just left
... except this room had tubes that were occupied. Each contained a growing
embryo. A wall of delicate air bubbles radiated from the bottom upward through
pale blue liquid, giving each one the look of a modern fish tank. 
       Sam gagged, staggered and would have fallen if Amaru hadn't had a firm
hold of her. Seeing her pale face and look of distress, James moved to reclaim
her hand. He placed an arm around her waist and supported her shaking body
while he slowly walked her over to a bank of chairs along the wall next to the
door. He eased her down gently into a padded chair, then stroked her hair
while anxiously studying her face. "Are you okay, love?"
       She nodded dumbly while covering her eyes with shaking hands. 
       Amaru sat down on the other side of Sam and reached out to lay her hand
upon Sam's arm. She hesitated before speaking, then, taking a deep breath, she
leaned close to Sam and spoke in a soft, pain-filled voice. "This place is not
what you are thinking it is, my dear. I can see I must explain thoroughly to
dispel this sickening fear and revulsion you are feeling now for us and our
work."
       Sam slid her hands down to stare into Amaru's face. "Work? You call
this work? It's inhuman is what it is."
       Amaru maintained her composure but held Sam's gaze with a steely one of
her own. "Judging by what humans deem to be acceptable 'human' behavior, I'll
take that as a compliment." After a pause to register the look of shame on
Sam's face, she continued. "Now. Are you finally ready to stop jumping to
conclusions and hear the truth?"
       James sat up straight but continued to hold onto Sam's hand. "Yes, we
are. That's what we came to find ... the truth."
       One short nod of Amaru's head acknowledged his concession to an open
mind. She turned to stare at the bubbling water and began to speak like one in
a trance. "In the beginning, after we came here, we were guided to build this
complex, but more importantly, we were given the gift of knowledge ...
knowledge of a purpose. This purpose compelled us to venture from this place
in order to collect samples of the seeds of life from everything we could
gather, including different races of humans." 
       James held up his hand. "Before you go on, I've been wanting to ask you
something ever since you showed us how your people came to be here. Do you
know who sent you? Who guided you and taught you?"
Page 90

       "James, my child, we have no need to know. Our knowledge has reached a
point where we now realize that this obsessive need to know all the answers
actually stops you from moving on and learning them." When she saw the look of
disappointment on his face, Amaru added, "If it's any consolation, I can tell
you that it truly doesn't matter, James. What does matter is that we continue
to move forward, learn, grow and become one. Does that help?"
       He patted her hand again. "Yes, it does. I can see the wisdom in your
words but I know it will take a while to shed the habits of a lifetime." He
smiled. "Please, go on."
       She smiled back at him before continuing. "In order to accomplish this,
we were also given the gift of illusion and communication with each other and
other intelligent beings around the world. With this ability we were able to
collect what we sought in invisibility, in safety, leaving the rest of the
world ignorant of our presence."
       "Are you talking about DNA?" James leaned forward, his full attention
on what she related.
       "Yes, DNA. All life contains the seed of its beginnings and its endings
within its cells. This is what we knew we must collect and preserve for this
day. It is also through this minefield of information that we sought the one,
unique combination of DNA that held within its heart the answer we needed; the
fulfillment of the purpose. For millennia, we have searched for what we now
know is the answer to everything. At first, like your human ancestors and your
present day scientists, we sought this miracle in the wrong places. We wasted
thousands of years looking for it, first in the basic life forms of this
world, then in the human race. Like you, after all that time, we arrogantly
believed the human species to be superior to everything else. We believed this
sophisticated and complex combination could only come from them and them
alone."
       Startled into attention at what she was hearing, Sam too leaned forward
to stare at Amaru's profile. "You mean that after all these abductions and
experiments you still haven't got it, this magical DNA combination you've been
looking for?"
       Ignoring her question, Amaru continued her story. "The result of that
search is the children you just met. Our first attempt to find the right
combination by splicing our Neanderthal genes with those of a lower life form,
the gorilla, resulted in those you now call Yowies. We chose the gorilla for
its family loyalty, its intelligence and its capacity to care and feel."
       "The Yowies are half human?" James leaned closer until he almost fell
out of his chair. Moving closer to Amaru, he waited for her answer.
       Sam's response erupted at the same moment James asked his question.
"Are you trying to tell us those sweet creatures are merely failed
experiments? Something to be played with then tossed aside as so much
imperfect matter?"
       Amaru's eyes widened in shock. "Haven't you been listening to me? What
we've created here is our children, precious life as valid and as valuable as
any other."
       Sam's cheeked flared pink. "I'm sorry, Amaru. I thought ... I'm sorry.
Please go on and finish with your explanation."
       Amaru took a moment to collect herself before speaking. "Our next
attempt was with a much more intelligent and adaptable species, the dolphin.
This resulted in what you now call the 'grays' and regard as aliens. They,
too, were not what we sought but they turned out to be remarkably intelligent
and focused. They have become our scientists, in fact, and lead our teams in
looking for the genetic materials we search for. What you think are space
ships are merely vehicles we designed to assist us in the gathering of these
samples. We use them, along with the aid of the grays, to accelerate this
gathering of information. We allowed them to be seen, hoping the world would
bind together against what they perceived to be a common threat. It
accomplished just the opposite. Now, your nations snarl over this new
technology like jackals over a dead animal. It has segregated your people even
Page 91

more than before." She sighed deeply and shook herself.
       "From there, we went on to try different combinations using ourselves
as the parent base until we'd exhausted all avenues we could explore. That's
when we turned to other races and started over again. Slowly, we gathered
information, recorded events, focused and sampled those humans who showed
extraordinary ability or intelligence."
       "That explains why someone like Adolph Hitler would be shown as a
pivotal figure in our history," James muttered. He looked up at Amaru. "How do
all these ... crosses between human and other species fit into the solution?"
James asked, his forehead creased with concentration.
       "I know this will sound simplistic but know that it's the truth ... We
have found that any species can coexist and flourish in harmony with each
other if they share common knowledge and a common purpose, like an ant
community. Every living thing upon this earth has its place. We've proven here
that individuality can be maintained without sacrificing the good of the
whole. This ability to communicate with each other through the mind has opened
doors that are impossible for humans to even find. It links us all, gives us
all access to what every other living thing linked with us knows and
experiences."
       "You mean you all know what each other knows ... all the time?" Sam
asked.
       "That's right. And here's another thing it has produced for us. It
completely eliminated all the barriers your people cannot seem to overcome in
order to unite the world. This intimate and very personal mental link of ours
produces an environment of family, of loyalty, of caring, because we do not
suffer from nationalism, racism, or barriers of any kind that would keep us
apart from each other, as your race does. You cannot hurt a man when the pain
he feels comes back to you." A sad, tight smile tugged at her lips.
       "This is just too fantastic to be true. It can't be this simple. It
just isn't the way things are in the world." James ran his hand through his
hair and stared at the floor in deep thought.
       "Oh, but it is. Remember I told you we wasted thousands of years
looking in the wrong place? You're doing the same thing. Throughout history,
humans have always focused on things, deeming them important at the time.
However, at no time throughout history did anyone ever focus on what they
should have looked harder at, been aware of or opened their eyes to see ...
the whole picture."
       "The whole picture? What do you mean by that? If you mean we haven't
been trying to clean up the environment, the air, stop the ozone from
disintegrating the atmosphere or made an effort to stop the wars and
destruction then you're wrong, Amaru." Sam sat up straighter and waited for
Amaru's rebuttal of these documented facts.
       Amaru sat back down, turned to Sam and smiled. "I know all you say is
true, Samantha, but it is not and has never been, enough to stop what we are
all on the brink of now ... annihilation. Total, final, irreversible
annihilation." She took a deep breath. "No, what I am referring to is the
failure of anyone, anywhere to stop focusing on only one part or element or
few elements of this world at one time. When we finally woke up and realized
the answer lay within the simple instead of the complex then, and only then,
did we know what to look for ... and we found it. The question is, did we find
it in time?"
       James and Sam locked eyes at this latest revelation. Neither of them
spoke, determined to hear the story to the end. Sam held both of James's hands
tightly and waited.
       "We feared that one day events on this planet would reach such a
critical state that we'd be called to finally use our knowledge to save it.
Those events are now taking place."
       "You mean all the prophecies, myths and legends are true? The world
will one day end in total destruction?" Sam whispered, her eyes round with
fear.
Page 92

       "Yes." That one word statement sent an icy cold chill through their
bodies as it sank into their minds.
       James reached out and took Amaru's chilled hand. "And what was the
purpose you were charged with, Amaru? What needs to be done to stop the end
from coming?"
       She squeezed his hand and looked into his eyes. "The purpose and the
solution are one and the same." 
       "And that is...?"
       "I told you ... to find the one combination of DNA in the world that
would restore the earth and all life that resides upon it, including mankind,
to the balance it had when created."
       "That is the purpose but it can't possibly be a solution to all the
sickness and destruction on the earth today," Sam stated, a hoarseness to her
voice, combined with the frantic twisting of her hands in her lap, betrayed
her fear.
       "My dear, it is the only solution. The seed is what lends life to the
tree, not the tree itself. Can't you see? When the world was created and life
sprung from what you call the 'primordial soup', everything was in perfect
balance. All was dependent upon everything else, supporting and nurturing all
its diverse parts. This individual balance was just the beginning. All the
stars and planets in our universe, equally balanced and tuned, are bound
through lines of energy to each other. Now, the balance is gone. The earth
hums in distress within this net of energy binding the cosmos."
       "My God! You're saying that unless we get back this biological and
ecological balance between the earth, the air, the water and the wildlife
here, the entire universe will shatter?" James's voice shook as he spoke.
       Amaru's silence spoke volumes. When she knew he'd answered his own
question she went on to explain further. "This resonance-the functioning of a
perfectly balanced planet-will spread like a disease throughout the heavens. A
tuning fork, if you will, that has run amok, destroying all the discordance it
can reach ... and beyond." 
       Sam gasped when the enormity of Amaru's revelation hit her. "It's
impossible." 
       Amaru stood up and turned to face them. "No, it is not impossible. Our
mistake, or what deflected us from finding the real answer, was to look too
eagerly to the end product of time, instead of at its beginning. We made the
childish mistake of thinking that time had honed and perfected what it had
started with. We were wrong." She moved to stand before Sam and looked down at
her. "When we finally discovered our error and looked to the source, the pure
source of all life for the answer, we found the solution and can now fulfill
the purpose. That answer lies within your womb."
       Sam bolted out of her chair. "The pure source of all life? What source
is this you keep ranting about?" Before Amaru could answer, she turned to
stare at the bubbling tubes. "What the hell are you trying to tell us, that it
has something to do with the baby you say I'm carrying? How can a child save
the world?" She paced frantically back and forth before the two seated
figures. "Hell, I don't even know that I _am_ pregnant! For all I know you're
filling us with a load of horseshit and expecting us to swallow it whole." She
stopped and glared at Amaru's calm face.
       "It is the truth and you know it. You can now hear her..."
       "If you found your damned solution then why are you still experimenting
on people? That woman in the lab..." Sam's anger made her tone harsh and
unyielding.
       "She is one of us. She volunteered to help us perfect..."
       "Shut up damn you, just ... please ... shut ... up!" Sam's scream of
rage echoed around the room. Her body was as tightly drawn as it could be
without snapping in two as she silently sent daggers of hatred and rage at
Amaru's small form, still sitting calmly looking up at her.
       "Do you really believe this to be true after all you've experienced,
seen and heard leading up to this time, as well as what you are hearing and
Page 93

feeling now, Sam?" 
       When Amaru's soothing question settled into Sam's fevered mind, she
collapsed like a broken doll into her chair, sank her face into her hands and
sobbed. James wrapped his arms around her and rocked her until her tears
subsided.
       A pained look of anguish passed over Amaru's face. "You know you carry
this child within you and you know when and how it was conceived. You don't
need me any longer to tell you, do you, Sam?"
       When Sam lifted her pale, drawn face back to Amaru, a new strength
shone in her eyes. "I know."
       James lifted his face from Sam's hair. He reached out with a forefinger
and placed it under her chin, forcing her to look at him. "What do you know,
Sam?"
       She sat up straight and pulled out of his arms. Her reddened eyes
boldly stared into his. "I know the child is there and I know when and with
whom it was conceived." She took a deep, shuddering mouthful of air. "The
child is yours James. We made it the night I went into the bush and lost
time."
       He shot out of his chair, his eyes never leaving hers in the process.
"What? Mine? How can that be? I didn't lose time that night, I slept
through..."
       "You did lose time, James. You just didn't come to in the bush to make
you aware of it, is all. You are the father of this child." Amaru's flat
statement of fact echoed around the room with the same intensity Sam's scream
had produced.
       James stood there, his mouth open and eyes glazed while the memory, and
certainty, of this fact filtered into his conscious mind. When it had, he
closed his mouth and a gleam of understanding and joy radiated from him. "I
remember now. I remember meeting Sam outside, walking with her into the bush
and taking her into my arms. I remember loving her and wishing it would never
end. I remember..."
       Suddenly, his knees felt weak and every muscle in his body threatened
to stop working. He sank back down into his chair and looked, speechless and
dumbfounded, from Amaru's smile to Sam's uncertain one. He touched Sam's face
with gentle fingers, a look of awe and wonder on his face. "How do you know
these things, Sam?" He turned to meet Amaru's gentle eyes. "Is this another
part of the miracle?"
       Amaru's lips twitched with a tiny, secret smile. "In a way, it is. Sam
was not aware of it but she has always been able to 'see' and know things. She
thought it was just her keen journalist's instincts." Her smile broadened at
Sam's look of amusement.
       Amaru met James's gaze with the same smile but a serious look to her
eyes. "Now, of course, the child heightens the ability." She hesitated and her
voice lowered. "And more..."
       James leaned forward. "More?"
       Having regained most of her composure, Sam asked, "Amaru, how will this
child of ours, a mere human child, fulfill this promise of hope for the
world?"
       Amaru simply leaned forward, locked her eyes upon Sam's belly and
uttered one word. "Speak."
       Yes, it is time. Thank you, Amaru. My mother, my father, it is time to
make my presence known and to tell you the rest of what you need to know ...
hear me and know the truth.
--------
         *CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE*
       Amaru closely studied James and Sam as the knowledge of the child's
existence and power seeped through the shock she knew they felt. She also knew
this was the fatal moment ... the cusp, the time of turning when the plan, the
hope, would either fail or succeed. All they had done to prepare these two
humans for this moment, all the testing, the patient journey, revealing
Page 94

information and secrets long protected, all the revelations and explanations,
could now collapse like a house of cards if they rejected that tiny one
sentence plea that flooded into her mind at the same time it had theirs. She
held her breath and waited, fully aware of those linked around the world that
listened and waited with her.
         ~*~
Sam slowly moved her hands until they covered her flat stomach. The beatific
radiance that shown on her face as she looked down at them and the unborn
child that was sheltered beneath them warmed James's heart to its depths. He
reverently reached out to place his larger hand upon hers. When he felt his
vocal cords unlock and his ability to speak return, he whispered, "She spoke
to us. She's alive and she spoke to us." He looked up at Amaru's glowing face.
"How can that be? She's only a day or two old, at the most. She ... it ...
she's only a microscopic bundle of cells. There's no brain yet..."
       Amaru interjected. "A mind is not dependent upon a body or a brain. She
was aware from the moment of conception." When she saw the stunned look on
James's face, she added, "This is the combination we sought, James, the
miracle we searched for ... and you and Sam have brought it to the world."
       "She called me Mother." Sam's eyes flashed a brilliant, crystalline
blue when she finally looked up, her hands still tightly pressed against her
belly.
       James leaned over and gently pressed a kiss on her lips. When an arm
surrounded his neck and her lips parted to return the kiss, his heart
shattered within his chest. He felt himself meld into her, through her, with
her and the child, joining with them as one. An overwhelming feeling of
completeness, of belonging and of peace flooded into every cell of his body.
When he lifted his mouth from hers, he knew the three of them, together, could
accomplish anything.
       "I am relieved you are not angry with us for interfering as we did. We
could plainly see you two are in love, but we couldn't afford to wait any
longer. I'm afraid we ... forced you to hurry up." Amaru coughed and covered
her mouth with her hand. Her eyes twinkled with mirth.
       James and Sam looked at her with shock then both dissolved in laughter.
       "I'm so glad you did ... and you're right, I do love her, with all my
heart. I was just too stupid to tell her." James beamed at Sam, his eyes
filled with unshed tears.
       Sam laid her head upon his shoulder when he encircled her within his
arm, holding her close as a fierce wave of protectiveness washed through him.
He turned to the forgotten figure sitting quietly observing them and forced
himself to finish what they'd started. "She will tell us the rest?"
       Amaru nodded, her face almost as radiant as Sam's. "If you wish. This
does not surprise you, James?"
       He grinned at her, finally released from all anger and doubt. "No, it
does not. What does surprise me is how blind we are to the simple truths that
surround us in this world. We bury ourselves in the complexity of details we
think are the answers when the smallest of things lurk under our noses. I now
understand that those simple things are the source of truth and understanding.
That's something I couldn't see before ... but I do now."
       Her smile broadened. "And do you also see now what I mean by going back
to the source of all life for the solution?"
       "I do, Amaru." Sam's radiance still showed from her face. "You
literally mean the source, don't you? The pure genetic material that existed
at the beginning before all the varied life forms to come left it to follow
their own path."
       _Yes, my mother, you are correct. In the beginning, distilled within
one small pond of water, there existed the potential for thousands of life
forms to originate. This source has disappeared over the aeons but its legacy
has not. Within every living thing upon, in and above this earth there still
exists separate but accurate pieces of the original puzzle. What Amaru and her
people spent those aeons seeking was the one being that embodied, again, all
Page 95

the threads of life necessary to the well being of this world. No multiple
combining could possibly succeed in this, it had to be two individuals, each
with their necessary half of the puzzle, coming together to produce the living
whole. Those two are you, my parents, and, within me, once again, the cycle of
rebirth can be accomplished._
       James, enrapt with the new experience of mentally speaking with his
unborn daughter, stood up and leaned down close to Sam's stomach. "How can you
... how _will_ you do this?"
       They could hear the distant tinkle of tiny laughter. _My father, I am
not a god, as you are thinking. I am a human, your daughter. My genetic code
is the miracle, not I. When all comes to pass and the world is emptied of the
seeds of destruction then I will be called upon to help with replenishment.
Those left, like you, Mother, and those you have seen here, will be the true
instruments to completing the rebirth. When that time arrives, I will merely
be the catalyst that works with the natural elements already here. My seeds
will once again restore to the earth that which it gave in the beginning.
Harmony will be restored._
       "Your children will be the beginning of a new human race?" Sam asked,
awe in her voice.
       _No, Mother. I cannot have children as you will have me. I am the bank
that stores all the codes for all the lifeforms needed by the earth to heal
herself. I will supply that which no other can supply yet. All will be as it
was before. There is no other way._
       Sam glanced up at Amaru. "What I don't understand is, with all these
powers all of you have, why didn't you intercede before now? Why didn't you
stop things before they became this bad?"
       Amaru shifted in her seat and sighed before answering. "My dear, we
know from history that anything we offered by way of help would merely add
fuel to the flames." She sighed again. "Sam, if we'd offered this knowledge
and technology to the world as we know it now, do you really believe it
wouldn't be used to conquer, to damage, to kill? By anyone?"
       Sam's hands tightened against her belly. James sat back down and put
his hand over hers again. "It would be a forgone conclusion, I'm afraid," Sam
nodded in agreement.
       "I know it sounds heartless but we have come to view these events with
another perspective. Maybe I can help you understand why it is necessary for
some of your race to ... pass away." She took a deep breath. "Throughout time,
the way of the earth has always been to shed those who cannot or will not
adapt, grow and live in harmony with all else. This is especially true of
those who harbor seeds of self-destruction within their core. Given ages to
prove themselves, and failing, the earth turns on them, eradicates them and
brings herself back into balance once more. To do otherwise would be contrary
to the logical order of things." 
       Amaru turned to James and pierced him with a penetrating gaze. "James,
you have studied the nature of Mother Earth's heart. Did you not recognize
that the smallest of her truths is also the largest? Have you not discovered
that every living thing that has or still dwells with her is compelled to live
in harmony with her or perish?"
       Sam returned her stare, thought deeply, then replied, "This world has
never been any other way. I see the logic of it, Amaru. As humans, we have a
childish tendency to think the rules should not apply to us ... but they do."
       "Another thing of great importance we have discovered is that the earth
is criss-crossed in a net of great energy. It is very much like a spider's
web. When points of power are threatened or any part of the web is weakened,
signals of approaching danger are sent out to the whole. This net of living
energy binds all who live upon it to each other and to the earth."
       "This is incredible ... and it makes perfect sense ... finally." James
blindly stared at the small embryos moving in the tubes, but his thoughts were
turned inward. _My God. It's true. We've had the evidence in front of our
noses since the beginning but we ignored it. Our self-serving blindness is
Page 96

what will kill us in the end. How sad._
       When Amaru noticed Sam avoiding looking at the tubes, she came to sit
beside her. She reached out and took Sam's free hand into her own. "My dear,
let me explain about these devices." She nodded toward the tubes. "I can see
they still distress you."
       Sam shuddered and kept her head down, focusing on James's hand covering
hers. "Yes, they do. They remind me too much of some hideous experiment in a
horror film ... I'm sorry, Amaru."
       Amaru patted her hand. "No need to apologize, my child. Your reaction
is quite understandable. However, you need to know that growing our children
this way is the only means available to us. Does that help you understand why
we view it as something wonderful instead of ... horribly abnormal?"
       _Tell her, Amaru. It serves no purpose to withhold information now._
       "You are right, little one. Now is the time for all the truth to be
told." She turned glittering golden eyes on James and Sam. "This is a secret I
have withheld from the people for centuries. To know such a thing would have
taken their heart away. Although, in hindsight, I wonder if I have not
underestimated them." She sighed. "The truth is, for centuries now, my people,
the Neanderthal people, have not been able to procreate. Myself and the other
elders of the clan have kept this from them."
       "But how in the world could you keep it from them? It's im..." James
asked.
       She smiled. "Our powers of the mind work on each other too, James. It
is generally frowned upon to cloud someone else's mind but we knew, and
agreed, that this was necessary."
       "Why?" It was obvious from her facial expression that Sam was searching
for the right question. "Why keep it from them? Why ... why would it matter?"
Her voice trailed off with uncertainty.
       Amaru smiled a sad, small smile. "We kept it from them because we could
not stand the inevitable pain they would feel when they knew our people, as a
whole, are doomed to extinction. You ask why it would matter ... it matters
because, even though the goal would not have changed and they would certainly
have continued to work toward it, it would have hurt them to know ... for no
other reason."
       "But I saw Neanderthal children playing in the nursery!" James pressed
forward to look at Amaru's face.
       "What you saw were hybrids, not Neanderthals, James. For centuries we
have not been able to produce one child, in or out of the tubes, that didn't
have other genetic material to hold it together. My people are dying." The
last sentence was whispered.
       "I don't understand why. With all your knowledge and technology and ...
gifts. How could this happen?" Sam's eyes filled with tears.
       Amaru peered into Sam's eyes with great sadness. "Because sometimes
things just have to be the way they have to be. It is a part of our world and
our lives that we, all of us, must come to accept without question. What is,
is and sometimes we cannot change it."
       "That sounds too damned negative to me. It sounds like you've given up
on your own people while you work so hard to save ours." James's anger was
apparent in the tone of his voice. "Sometimes I think we don't deserve to be
saved."
       "You do your race credit, James. Here you sit on the brink of either
dreadful things or great things, yet you feel deep pain over our passing."
Amaru's face cleared and she sat straighter in her chair. "That is why you
_are_ worth saving."
       "Isn't there anything at all we can do to save you? To help?" Sam
almost sobbed.
       "No, we have labored for centuries and could not find an answer.
Besides, our goal is to finish what we were brought here to do. With your
help, we will ... and that is enough."
       Amaru stood and held her hand out to them. "Come. It is time for you to
Page 97

go now. Your work is not completed and neither is mine."
       Amaru led them back to the door they'd arrived through and, when it
opened, they stepped back into the room with the empty tubes and workstations.
She ushered them over to two empty chairs, each facing a large darkened
monitor. "Please, sit down. This is the final step you must take before you
leave us."
       When James and Sam were comfortably seated, she continued. "These
machines will endow each of you with all the knowledge and powers we enjoy.
Once you have this common knowledge and the ability to mind link with all of
us here, you will be prepared for one last great task." 
       "What task?" James studied the monitor, flat keyboard and dials with
interest.
       "You will know shortly. Using vocal cords to communicate is tiring for
me and it would take too long to explain." Amaru smiled.
       James picked up what looked like a set of headphones without a wire
attaching it to anything. "Is this what we use?"
       Sam picked the headphones up in front of her and inspected it while she
spoke. "We'll be linked to all of you here? Just like you are with each
other?" She raised her head and blinked in wonder. "And like we are with the
baby now?"
       Amaru nodded. "Yes. You will never be alone ... unless you want to be.
We will be with you, guiding you, protecting you and being one with you."
       "You say we have a task to complete outside of here. Shouldn't we stay
here to protect our daughter ... our Gaia, until she's born. We can't afford
to lose her." Fear shook Sam's voice as she glanced down at herself, seeing
the child lying within her womb.
       "Gaia?" Amaru paused, confusion on her face. Then it cleared and she
smiled. "Yes, Gaia. Earth Mother. It is appropriate." Blinking, she returned
her attention back to Sam. "Have no fear, Sam. She is protected and so are you
two." 
       The confidence in Amaru's voice calmed Sam and she nodded, took a deep
breath and made herself concentrate on this new information. She, along with
James, set the headphones on her head and calmly watched Amaru as she sat down
at an adjoining console and began to type in commands.
       Only seconds passed before Amaru was removing the headsets from them.
"How do you feel?" She glanced anxiously from James to Sam and back again.
       "Feel? I'm still waiting for it begin. What's wrong, why did you decide
to stop?" James frowned at her, waiting for an answer.
       The answer came from within his mind. Images, voices, activities,
colors, sounds, smells: all of it now hit him like a freight train. With the
sensory information, the memories of millions of years flooded into his brain.
It overwhelmed him into mute silence, his eyes rounded with surprise. Sam sat
stock still, her hands gripping the arms of the chair as if she feared falling
out. They both felt a subtle shift inside their minds, an awakening.
       Amaru smiled. "It has begun ... finally."
       _Yes, the final days have arrived, Amaru. You have done well. My
parents are now ready for the challenge. The hope of the world now rests with
them. We can only pray the world will listen and accept._
--------
         *CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO*
       The cicadas stopped their song so abruptly that the silence echoed
louder than the overwhelming chorus had. Ratana, carrying water to start a pot
of coffee, was squatting to set it on the fire when black shrouded phantoms,
no discernable faces showing, detached themselves from the pile of boulders
and silently eased out of the rock like living shadows. Ratana jumped to her
feet and screamed. Nathan and Ernie trotted over beside her, both holding
spears ready and poised for action.
       The leading figure held up a very human hand, reached up to slowly slip
the hood down and smiled at them. "Don't you even recognize your friends and
family anymore? Or have you been going native too long?" James chuckled at
Page 98

their startled faces.
       "Uncle!" Ratana threw herself at James and surrounded his wide
shoulders with strong arms, capturing his surprised body in a rib crushing
bear hug.
       Nathan jabbed the spear into the ground and stepped forward, flashing a
toothy smile, his eyes flitting from James to Sam and Spence then back again.
"We knew you were coming but not when. It's good to see you again, Uncle, Ms.
Louis, Spence." He grabbed James's forearm in an ancient greeting between
brothers. 
       James responded with a grip of his own and smiled into Nathan's face.
"It's good to be back." He slipped the dark cloak off and hung it over the
boulders where it instantly disappeared. Sam and Spence followed suit then
moved to stand behind James, the trio looking like a spearhead of a very small
army. They flashed tiny, tired smiles at Nathan and Ratana but remained
silent. Ratana moved to stand beside Sam and slipped an arm through hers. Sam
relaxed and her smile widened a bit.
       Ernie stood his ground but lowered his spear in salute. He nodded at
the three returned travelers then locked his eyes upon Spence. "There is much
to speak about this night."
       Spence responded, his voice raw with fatigue. "Yes, there is, my
friend. Too much." Shaking his head like a dog just out of the water, he
sighed and closed his eyes. "I don't know what they did to me but I feel like
I could sleep for a week."
       Ernie stepped forward, took Spence's arm and quietly led him away.
James shot an inquiring look at Nathan and Ratana but refrained from
interfering. With an unspoken agreement, the four moved over to the campfire
and sat down in their familiar chairs. A small gust of wind kissed the fire
and sent a wave of brightly lit orange sparks spiraling into the night sky to
mate with the stars. The cicadas had resumed their song. Their music and the
smell and sound of the creek running lent the moment a feeling of Paradise.
       Nathan cleared his throat. He leaned back into his chair, crossed
muscular arms and strained to inject a casual tone into his words. "We know
what happened and where you went, James. We now have the link too."
       Sam, startled from her inspection of the stars overhead, snapped her
head down and stared at Nathan and Ratana. "You do? You know?"
       Ratana nodded. "Yes, we know. While you were gone Ernie instructed us
just like Amaru instructed you. We've been given the knowledge, the abilities
and the task we must complete before we can return."
       "A task, huh? Seems we all have something to accomplish before it's too
late," James replied.
       "What we don't share is our individual task with each other. Ernie
tells us this is important so we won't ask what yours are. But ... will you
tell us what it was like in there?" Ratana's eyes gleamed with curiosity.
       Nathan snickered. "What she wants to know about..." He turned to laugh
at Ratana's blushing face. "...is the part about how the Bunyip got
Guilford." 
       Two hours and several pots of coffee later, James and Sam had told them
the whole story from beginning to end. All, except the part about Sam's
pregnancy. James wanted to reserve that secret between Sam and him for as long
as they could. Nathan and Ratana, both yawning with sleepiness, had gone off
to bed, leaving James and Sam sitting comfortably next to each other around
the long dead fire. Shooting stars arced through the sky, putting on an
exhibition designed to inspire poets and writers alike. Sam lay back in her
chair watching them, a smile of contentment on her face. James studied her in
the moonlight, realizing that he could never live without her now ... never.
       Sam slowly moved her head to stare into his eyes. Her thoughts reached
out to him.
       _Please..._
       "Yes?" There rang a world of meaning in his question.
       _...touch..._
Page 99

       "I love you." His throat tightened until he could barely swallow.
       _...me. I love you..._
       He reached out, took her hand and pulled her to her feet. Deep in her
eyes he could see her hunger, her need. He knew his own need billowed out in
waves of heat when he looked at her, touched her. Searching his mind, he found
what he sought. He led her into the rainforest to a pond of water formed by a
stack of rocks damming up the creek. Silently, gently, his lips met hers.
Easing out of his arms, she stood back and began to undress. When she stood
naked, the moonlight bathed her sleek body with a luminous glow, broken by
rippling shadows from the trees. A throaty laugh of joy erupted from her.
Turning swiftly, she plunged into the pool of water and disappeared from
sight.
       Stripping quickly, he plunged in after her, a laugh welling out of his
throat. The cool water rippling over his nude body dispelled some, but not
all, of the heat. The feeling of floating, of being a part of the universe,
overwhelmed him. He stayed under the water, searching for her, until his lungs
screamed for air. When his head bobbed to the surface, his gaze found her
immediately. She stood dripping beside the pool, her eyes glittering with
reflected moonlight. Long muscular legs planted in the deep moss lining the
edge, she challenged him with the tilt of her hips. She smiled, her lips
curling up like a jungle cat that had spotted something deliciously edible.
       He swam to the shallows, planted his feet on the sandy bottom and
slowly stood up. Grinning, he moved agonizingly slowly toward the shore,
knowing her view of him was building a heat that would soon overwhelm them
both. When he finally reached the bank and stepped close to her, she was
visibly trembling with desire. Her body glowed, full, ripe, ready. 
       _You're beautiful._
       _Come to me, my love. This time is ours and from now on we and our
child will be one in mind, body and soul. I love you._
       He gathered her into his arms, crushed her to his wet chest and
captured her mouth with his own. They sank as one to the velvety moss
underfoot. Their hunger for each other erupted in a frenzied movement of
hands, lips and bodies seeking, touching, savoring each other.
       When he entered her, his universe, his world, his life became hers and
their daughter's. The rhythm of a man and a woman, united, bonded in love,
touched the primal cords within each of them. It was as steady, as strong and
as necessary as a heartbeat. As their bodies united, their minds swirled
around and through each other, seeking, locking, becoming one.
       The moment when logic and conscious thought utterly and completely
dissolve, when eyes lock and people are lost inside each other, completely
merged with each other, is the time when from within a tiny piece of a person,
a lone, bewildered voice asks, "Are you the one?" When this moment arrived,
James no longer heard the voice or the question. He knew. For the first time
in his life, he knew, and his body, mind and soul were finally complete. 
         ~*~
Morning light played across his eyelids, setting off an internal alarm clock
James didn't want to answer. He shifted away from it, his arm still locked
around Sam's naked waist. She mumbled in her sleep and nuzzled deeper into his
neck, her breath warm and moist against his skin. His body responded with its
own warmth, waking him fully. He buried his face in her hair, smelling that
sensuous combination of plants and flowers mingling with her own scent. His
hand rested lightly on her flat belly, aware of the special life growing
there. He sent waves of love and protectiveness to them both.
       "Hey! You two gonna get up sometime today or do we have to eat Ernie's
damper bread by ourselves again?" Ratana's face showed briefly through the
tent flap before she ducked back in embarrassment. "We've got fresh honey,"
she shouted before returning to her breakfast.
       James ignored the intrusion and ran his tongue lightly over Sam's neck
and shoulder, groaning as her hips moved against him under the sleeping bag.
Her lips moved up to his ear and whispered, "Now's not the time, stud." Then
Page 100

she laughed deep in her throat, kissed him and threw off the cover. When she
looked at the evidence of how she had affected him, she stared with admiring
eyes and giggled. He put both hands under his neck, leaned back and grinned up
at her, enjoying her admiration. When Ratana hit the side of the tent with the
flat of her hand and uttered, "Come on you two!" he jumped, groaned again and
rolled out to grab his clothes and boots. He could hear Sam's laughter ringing
inside his mind and grinned. _Later, you vixen_, he sent out to her and heard
her laugh audibly in response. By the time he had his shorts, shirt and boots
on, Sam had ducked out of the tent and the two women were chattering together
over coffee, hot bread and honey they'd found in a nearby hive.
       He blinked and squinted his eyes against the hot sunlight already
streaming into the clearing. Stretching his long arms and legs, he watched Sam
admire his form and grinned. When she turned back to talk to Ratana again, he
went to the stream to wash. The cold water coming down off the mountains woke
him up completely. A faint noise of low voices reached him across the water.
He could see Ernie, Nathan and Spence in deep conversation among the trees on
the opposite shore. They sat cross-legged on a mound of grass and were showing
each other various tattoos and markings on their bodies. James shook his head
and chuckled as he turned back to the clearing. When he reached the women, Sam
was already holding a hot steaming cup of coffee out to him.
       "Oh, that's heaven," he sighed after taking a sip and sitting down. He
stretched out his long, tanned legs and eased back into the chair with the
smug look of a man who has everything.
       Ignoring the hot looks passing between James and Sam, Ratana asked,
"So, when do we leave? Nathan and I have instructions to get back to our
people as soon as possible. How about you two?"
       "We leave today, just as soon as we get packed up," James replied, his
attention still on Sam as she poured another cup of coffee and grabbed another
hunk of damper out of the pan.
       Ratana rolled her eyes and stood up. "Okey-dokey, Uncle. I'll go get
the other blokes and tell them to start dismantling the tents. I'll be packing
if you have any further orders." She threw him a mock salute and strode away,
snorting with suppressed laughter.
       James smiled at Sam's knowing look. _I want you._
       _I know._ She smiled.
       _Tonight._ He grinned.
       _Yes._ She closed her eyes and let a small moan escape her lips when an
image he sent rippled through her brain.
       Sam jumped up, blushing furiously. "We have to pack. We have a long way
to walk and a lot of work to do when we get back." She bent down and kissed
him lightly on the lips. "Later!" Smiling broadly, she followed Ratana toward
the tents.
         ~*~
The trek back to their original camping site was remarkably quiet and
peaceful. By the time they spotted the parked Rovers through the bush, they'd
all mentally exchanged any information they needed to share and felt secure in
the link they knew they'd carry with them when they returned. Ernie had sent
Nathan off in another direction but refused to tell the group why. Feeling
Nathan's presence off in the distance, they felt no alarm at his absence.
       Before the last bush was pushed aside to enter the clearing, James
hesitated, his face clouded with concentration.
       "What is it?" Sam touched his arm and tilted her head to peer into his
eyes.
       Ratana flashed a smile back over her shoulder. "Can't you hear her?
It's Cindy. She's here, saying goodbye."
       Sam's shoulders relaxed with relief. "I've been hearing her for the
last several hours now." She too turned toward the clump of trees they knew
the Yowie hid behind, watching them with a sad longing. "She's going to miss
us."
       James nodded his head, his lips curled up at the corners. _We'll be
Page 101

back soon, Cindy. This is our home now and you're part of our family. We'll
miss you too._ He sent her a wave of affection and felt hers return instantly.
       Sam's forehead creased with worry. "James, what do we do about the dead
boy, Guilford and Ian? Do we report their deaths to the authorities when we
get back?"
       Ratana stepped forward. "No! They'd come in here to investigate.
Besides, we'd have too many questions to answer ... and we can't."
       "She's right, Sam, we can't." He found Cindy with his mind again.
_Cindy, the deaths of the human males?_
       All will be well. My clan has already buried the unmoving ones parts.
None know they were here. Nor will any find them if they search.
       Question? Why did you cry for the human on the trail when we found him
dead if you were not his friend?
       _I cry for all life that ends, Uncle James. Mostly, I cried for my baby
brother's blood the unmoving man had on his body. I miss my brother._
       Sam and Ratana looked at each other with a mixture of surprise and
understanding in their eyes. Ratana whispered, "We mourn him too, Cindy."
       _I go now. Have no fear. Amaru watches and waits for your return. So do
I. _
       They could feel Cindy smile.
       Sam's shoulders relaxed. James placed an arm around her waist. His head
snapped up when he felt Nathan approaching.
       Spence and Ernie stood back to allow Nathan to reach James. His chest
heaved as he quickly recovered from the exertion of jogging while carrying a
heavy pack. He reached up and dragged his forearm across his forehead, wiping
away the sweat dripping into his eyes. 
       James waited patiently for him to speak, his face a mixture of
anticipation and excitement. "What is it, Nathan? I can feel you holding back,
now give."
       Nathan's smile was so big it stretched his lips to capacity, showing a
mouthful of white teeth. He silently held out his hand and placed a small
bundle wrapped in leaves onto James's palm. The others peered hard at the
small package and raised their eyebrows at Nathan, who stood quietly ignoring
their looks and instead watched James.
       James unwrapped it to reveal a flattened black stone with a pattern of
gemstones twinkling upon its face. He shoved his face closer and exclaimed,
"Those are diamonds. It's the Pleiades! The Seven Sisters." He looked up at
Nathan and grinned. "Where did you get this?"
       Nathan nodded at Ernie. "He told me where to go to get it. He said
you'd need it soon. It's a gift from the People and a stone of power."
       James gazed at Ernie's impassive features, waiting for further
explanation. When the old man grunted and shambled off into the bush without a
word, James turned back to Nathan. "Strange bloke." He shook his head slowly
while watching the large fronds of a palm sway where the old man had walked
through. "Where's he going, Nate?"
       Nathan's eyes also followed Ernie's path. "Where he's led to go, I
suppose. He'll be back, just like we will."
       Sam reached out and took the stone from James's hand. "A stone of
power? What power? He said James would need it? What does that mean?"
       Nathan shrugged. "I don't know. That's all he said to me. That, and
you'd know what to do with it when the time came."
       Ratana studied the stone over Sam's shoulder. "It's the same as the
marking over the spacecraft back in the cavern." She locked eyes with James.
"Yes, we know ... Don't question it, Uncle. If Ernie says you'll know when the
time is right then you'll know." She turned toward the Rovers and pushed the
vines and leaves aside to step through.
       When Nathan, Sam and James stepped into the clearing, they were
assaulted by a loud voice that sent them all running toward the cars. "Where
the hell have you guys been? I'm starving here. If you had to go out looking
for your stupid samples so early in the morning couldn't you at least left me
Page 102

something to eat besides overripe bananas?" Marc sat on top of the hood of
their green Rover playing with his laptop and absent-mindedly swatting at
mosquitoes. 
       Sam rushed toward him, her face lit up with joy. Before she could throw
herself at the young man, James's voice thundered into her head. _No, Sam! He
doesn't know. He thinks we were here this morning. He has an altered memory of
the last two days. Thank you, Amaru._
       Sam finished the last few steps toward the Rover at a slower pace. When
she reached Marc she placed her hand on his arm and asked, "What are you doing
there? Anything interesting happen while we were away?"
       He snorted with disgust and laid the computer down on the hood when he
noticed them gathered around him waiting for a response. "Interesting? In this
place? Right! The most interesting thing happening here is the noises of
things creeping up on you-things you can't see. I got so bored I actually
packed everything up for you guys. I couldn't even get any decent photographs
taken." He snorted again and picked his computer back up. "At least some of my
pictures from yesterday came out."
       James stepped up and peered at the computer monitor. A picture of a
Kangaroo peering out of the forest at night was clarifying itself on the
screen. James chuckled. "Looks like you got some good shots there, Marc." He
slapped Marc on the shoulder and turned to let out a deep breath.
       Sam saw his look of relief and smiled. _Seems they can control what
images a camera captures too,_ she thought, knowing the rest of the team could
hear her.
       Marc looked up and asked, "Did you get the samples and information you
wanted? Are there any pictures you want me to take to go with the story?"
       "There is no story, Marc. We looked all day and couldn't find any
evidence to support anything out of the unusual here. Guess this is nothing
more than another one of those strange stories that goes unexplained." Sam
smiled up at Marc's puzzled look.
       "But the black stone up north, the markings, all the..."
       Sam placed her hand on his arm. "Just a black rock, nothing more." She
took a deep breath. "Our work is done here, I'm afraid. Time to go home."
       "Whatever you say, boss." He grinned and slid off the car. Grabbing his
laptop, he stood ready to leave. "Truth is, I won't be sorry to see the last
of this place. Weird and scary shit here." His grin belied the statement.
       "Oh, I don't know. I've fallen in love with the place, not to mention
certain of its citizens." She smiled at James.
       "So, that's how it is, heh?" Marc chuckled. "Fast work there, Louis."
He turned to Spence, Ratana and Nathan. "I won't miss this place but I will
miss the people."
       Nathan and Ratana smiled back at him. Nathan replied, "We'll miss you
too, Marc, even if you are a Sheila in the bush."
       Spence laughed then announced, "Well, mates, it's time for me to go
home. Anybody need a ride?" He looked at Nathan and Ratana with a knowing
look.
       "You bet, mate. We're with you," Nathan responded, taking Ratana's arm.
       They climbed into Spence's Rover and with a wave and a shout of "G'day!
See you later," they drove off in a cloud of red dust.
       Waving at them as they disappeared, Sam had a look of sadness on her
face. James stepped up to her and slipped an arm around her shoulders. "Don't
worry, love, we'll see them again ... and soon, I think."
       Sam smiled up at him then laid her head on his chest. "I know. It's
just that so much has happened that I feel like they're family. I'm going to
miss them."
       _You won't miss us for long._ Nathan's good-humored quip sliced into
their minds.
       _We'll be back and so will you._ Spence was chuckling.
       _Kiss that man for me._ Ratana's voice echoed in their minds. 
       They kissed, smiled and headed for the car.
Page 103

--------
         *EPILOGUE*
       THE NEW YORK TIMES
       New York City, New York, USA March 15
       Today, the world was stunned when the heads of every country in the
world met for an emergency meeting of the UN. This meeting, all by itself, is
not an event to stagger the public. However, it is interesting that countries
presently at war with each other and out of favor with NATO also attended.
       Doctor James Hay, a well-known and much respected scientist
specializing in Cryptozoology, and Miss Samantha Louis, a world-class
award-winning freelance journalist, were invited to be the key speakers at
this historic meeting of world leaders.
       What they planned to address the assembly about is a mystery. Media
representatives for the UN are refusing to comment on what the meeting is for
and what will be discussed today. The eyes of the world are watching and
waiting to learn the outcome.
       THE AUSTRALIAN
       Sydney, New South Wales, Australia Mar 23
       Doctor James Hay and his American fiancee, Miss Samantha Louis, an
award-winning journalist, landed at Sydney airport this morning. They were met
by every known newspaper and agency, each hoping to get an interview about
this dynamic couple's trip to address the UN last week.
       When asked what they had presented to the UN delegates and what the
outcome was, Doctor Hay merely stated, "The world will know soon enough." They
both declined to comment further. It would seem the mystery is to remain a
mystery a little longer.
       THE TOWNSVILLE BULLETIN 
       Townsville, Queensland, Australia March 26
       Our own Doctor James Hay, of James Cook University, along with his new
bride, the former Samantha Louis, an award-winning freelance American
journalist, arrived in Townsville today. They plan on honeymooning on Magnetic
Island, where they have leased a hilltop villa with top security. When this
reporter asked the newly married pair about their trip to the United States
and what their plans are now, Mrs. Hay commented, "We had a nice time in the
U.S. but all we want now is to enjoy our honeymoon."
       It would seem that the couple is determined to remain silent on the
subject of the talk they delivered to the UN last week. 
       THE NEW YORK TIMES
       New York City, New York, USA March 26
       Are the prophecies of the Bible, Nostrodamus and the ancients finally
coming true? The world is in chaos following the breakdown of the emergency UN
talks yesterday. News of more wars erupting throughout the world was announced
today. Many are convinced that we are on the brink of another, and a final,
world war. After years of uneasy peace, the world powers have declared a
worldwide state of emergency following the outbreak of conflicts between
countries traditionally peaceful.
       THE TOWNSVILLE BULLETIN
       Townsville, Queensland, Australia March 29
       Doctor James Hay and his newlywed wife, Samantha, have been reported
missing by their security guards today. Sometime in the middle of the night,
the pair mysteriously disappeared from their honeymoon villa on Magnetic
Island. Locals and news people who had camped out around the villa in hopes of
speaking with the couple report the presence of mysterious lights in the skies
during the night. The security guards were unaware of any strange happenings
as no alarms were set off. 
       When interviewed, the head of security, Mr. Edgar Thomas, stated that
the night before the couple seemed almost euphoric. When asked what he thought
might have happened, he stated, "I don't know. The Hays were happy and looking
forward to returning home this morning. They presented each member of the
security team with a generous bonus check before retiring for the evening. All
Page 104

I can say is that we know they didn't leave the grounds in any traditional way
and that my people are baffled." 
       A massive search of the island and all ferries to and from it are being
conducted. Investigators and local police refuse to comment on who may have
taken them or how they disappeared from their villa.
         *~The End~*
--------
         *And the beginning...*
         *Watch for the last two books in this trilogy, coming soon from
NovelBooks, Inc...*
         A Glass Darkly
         *Looking Glass*
--------
         *SCIENTIFIC NOTES*
       You may now be asking yourself the question "Is this story a complete
work of fiction, or is there some basis in fact?" That question is not as easy
to answer as you might think. In fact, before I can answer we need to look at
the separate parts of the story.
       *THE NEANDERTHALS*
       Neanderthal is the common name for a subspecies of the human race.
Modern humans like you and me are graced with the scientific name of _Homo
sapiens sapiens_. Our cousins the Neanderthals are known in scientific circles
as _Homo sapiens neanderthalensis_. 
       In 1856, limestone quarrymen in the Neander valley in Germany
discovered the bones of an ancient man in a cave. Originally thought to be an
arthritic soldier from Napoleon's army, he quickly had the epithet 'caveman'
attached to him, together with a whole range of misconceptions. Neanderthals
traditionally are depicted as shambling subhumans that represented a low form
of humanity that was quickly replaced at the end-point of the evolutionary
ladder by the upright, handsome, intelligent, modern man. In recent years,
Neanderthals have undergone considerable rehabilitation. New discoveries
throughout Europe and the Middle East have shown that Neanderthal Man was in
fact an intelligent subspecies that cared for its infants and old people. They
used fire and stone weapons. They even performed elaborate burial ceremonies
that showed they had the concept of an afterlife. Certainly Neanderthals had
bigger muscles, a heavier bone structure and lacked a chin. But they also had
a larger brain than modern man.
       The physical differences between modern humans and our ancient cousins
are relatively slight. In fact, William Straus and A. J. Cave, two recent
researchers, have said that "if he could be reincarnated and placed in a New
York subway-provided that he were bathed, shaved, and dressed in modern
clothing-it is doubtful whether he would attract any more attention than some
of its other denizens."
       Whether or not Neanderthals possessed a language is still hotly
debated. The soft parts of the throat like the vocal cords and larynx or the
speech centers of the brain, which might tell us these things, do not usually
fossilize. Other structures like the hyoid bone that anchors the muscles
controlling the tongue, larynx and jaw would tell us something, but hyoid
bones are fragile and, until recently, had not turned up in the fossil
remains. We now know they definitely possessed a hyoid bone, removing any
reason for them not to have a language. 
       What then, of their large brain? While the brain itself does not
fossilize, we can generalize about it. You don't evolve a large brain if you
don't use it. It appears from the shape of the brain case that the Neanderthal
brain was put together in much the same way as modern humans. Various authors,
such as Jean Auel, have argued that Neanderthals had other "talents" in their
large brains. Whatever the truth of the matter, a mental ability is not likely
to be revealed through a study of their bones. 
       Put their large brain together with their physical strength and they
appear to be a superbly adapted species. Yet something happened to this
Page 105

superbly adapted human species that removed it from the face of the earth. The
disappearance of the Neanderthals is an enigma. Some scientists argue that a
more violent subspecies (our own) wiped them out; others say that modern
humans mated with Neanderthals and removed them by swamping their gene pool.
Whatever the reason, we know that about thirty thousand years ago, a very
successful subspecies of human vanished suddenly, to be replaced by the
subspecies that has spread throughout the world and brought so much ruination
to it.
       *YOWIES*
       So much has been written on the subject of manlike animals that I do
not intend to go into the arguments for and against their existence here.
Well-read people worldwide have heard of such creatures as Bigfoot, Yeti and
Sasquatch. Fewer, though, would realize that creatures like these are known
all over the globe under a variety of names. The Australian equivalent is the
Yowie. This manlike beast has been reported along the whole East Coast of
Australia, though the sightings are concentrated in areas such as the Blue
Mountains behind Sydney and the Glass House Mountains north of Brisbane. 
       Many scientists discount sightings of Bigfoot and his cousins as
hallucination, hoaxes or misreporting of sightings of ordinary animals. Some
researchers are convinced of the existence of something out of the ordinary,
though exactly what is another matter altogether. Often these sightings are
reported by people that we would have no hesitation in believing had they
reported something else. Every researcher into the subject has his favorite
theory. Some argue that the creatures are prehistoric survivors of some early
ape such as _Gigantopithecus._ Others feel that they are more human and
represent another species of man. A few even regard them as a psychic
manifestation having no real existence outside the human mind. Certainly, the
literature reveals cases where the beast in question has left no footprints in
soft earth, or has just "evaporated" in front of startled witnesses.
       *UNIDENTIFIED FLYING OBJECTS*
       Interestingly, sightings of Unidentified Flying Objects (UFO's) often
occur at the same time and in the same area as Bigfoot sightings. Although
there is only one (suspect) report of a Bigfoot actually getting out of a UFO,
there are many instances of people seeing them near where a UFO has been
reported. Janet and Colin Bord, two researchers of these and other mysteries,
argue that it is possible that atmospheric and electromagnetic fluxes create
an image in the minds of susceptible people that is interpreted in different
ways. It is interesting to speculate that if it was possible to manipulate
electromagnetic forces precisely enough, one could actually influence what
people saw.
       *BUNYIPS*
       The Bunyip is another purely Australian mystery, though like Bigfoot,
it has parallels elsewhere. The Bunyip is traditionally a water monster that
inhabits lakes and rivers from which it emerges to devour animals and,
occasionally, people. The mention of a water monster immediately makes one
think of the Loch Ness Monster, "Champ" from Lake Champlain in North America,
or the "taniwha" of the New Zealand Maoris. The image one gets from reading
eyewitness accounts of all these beasts is of a large creature with flippers
and a long neck. The popular press often sensationalizes reports of water
monsters as survivors of the dinosaurs and equates them with the long-extinct
plesiosaur. It is far more likely that if these infrequent sightings are of a
real creature that it is something like a long-necked seal. Many witnesses
have reported the existence of a mane or whiskers, both traits of mammals
rather than reptiles.
       There are many reports from around the world of unknown creatures. In
past times, these reports have been dismissed as mistaken identity or hoaxes
perpetrated on gullible visitors. This century, however, has seen a large
number of new animals discovered, from the okapi and the mountain gorilla, to
the Blue Ox and the Vietnamese goat. It is certainly possible that there are
other creatures waiting to be found. The science of Cryptozoology deals with
Page 106

the study of unknown animals. For many researchers in this field, the main
avenues of research are old reports, or vague sightings, perhaps backed up by
the occasional footprint or dead domestic animal. Other researchers seek
evidence in the field, trying to track the beast down, or spending days,
months or years in the pursuit. Not every unknown animal is an exciting one
like a Nessie or a Bigfoot though. Equally valid unknowns exist with the
myriad of insects or deep-sea creatures waiting to be discovered by some
industrious worker in the field.
       *THE ABORIGINE PEOPLES*
       A word needs to be said, too, about the indigenous peoples referred to
in this book. The North American Indian, the Australian Aborigine and the New
Zealand Maori all share a love for the land and a caring attitude toward the
creatures in it. The myths and legends of the creation from each of their
cultures show an awareness of man's place in nature and the harmful effects of
ignoring the need to live with a spiritual connection to the land, the animals
and the plants. Many references are made to the 'Dreamtime', that period of
Aboriginal history and belief that vastly predates any recorded history. The
author has striven to record the legends and beliefs in a sympathetic and
accurate manner at all times.
       So we return to the original question. To what extent is this story
fiction, and to what extent is it fact? The characters are fictional for the
main part, though Dr. James Overton's mother had the surname Hay, he works at
James Cook University in Townsville as a Biologist, he has a New Zealand
friend called Spence, and Aboriginal friends called Ratana and Nathan. The
author's birth initials are S.L. Like the heroine, she is American, she came
to Australia, fell in love with and married the hero. So I'm afraid you must
make up your own mind. If you think the information on Yowies, Bunyips and the
like are too unbelievable, read some of the books and journals listed below
before you decide. Whatever your decision, I hope you enjoyed the story!
       Dr. James M. Overton Ph.D., MSc.
       Botanist, Biologist, Cryptozoologist
       Townsville, Queensland, Australia April 1999
--------
         REFERENCES
       _Out of the Shadow_,Tony Healy and Paul Cropper, Ironbark Publishing
       _The Field Guide to Bigfoot, Yeti, and Other Mystery Primates
Worldwide_, Loren Coleman and Patrick Huyghe, Avon Books
       _Alien Animals_ by Janet and Colin Bord, Panther Books, Grenada
Publishing
       _The Field Guide to North American Monsters_, W. Haden Blackman, Three
Rivers Press
       _On the Track of Unknown Animals_, Bernard Heuvelmans, Hill and Wang
       _The Neandertal Enigma_, James Shreeve, William Morrow and Co
       _The Oz Files_, Bill Chalker, Duffy and Snellgrove
       _Mysteries of the Unknown_ From the editors of Time Life Books, Time
Life
       _Cryptozoology_, J. Richard Greenwell, Sec'ty, International Society of
Cryptozoology, Tucson, AZ
       _The Psychic Sasquatch and Their UFO Connection_, Jack "Kewaunee"
Lapseritis M.S.,Wild Flower Press, a division of Blue Water Publishing, Inc.
       _In Search of Prehistoric Survivors_, Karl P.N. Shuker, Blanford
--------
         *About the authors of Glass House...*
       What does an assistant dog trainer in L.A., a team roper who competed
in pro rodeos, a woman who was the only female to ride a classic Harley
Flathead Hog with the Hells Angels, a professional horse trainer, a database
creator who lectured CEOs, and a comedy radio show hostess in Australia,
author, artist, gardener and lover of ferrets have in common? 
       *Ariana Overton*
       Always versatile, Ariana has led a life that spans continents and
Page 107

countries. Traveling around the U.S., Australia and New Guinea, meeting
exciting people, experiencing exotic lands and cultures, gave Ari a diverse
catalog of characters, settings and storylines her writing can't help but
reflect. After traveling to Australia to research her trilogy on the
Australian mysteries, she met Max Overton, her soulmate, husband, best friend,
and writing partner.
       Her genres and cross genres novels are as eclectic as the author-murder
mysteries (Trapdoor, The Devil Is in the Details-EPPIE finalist 2001 and
Frankfurt nominee), Time Travel Thriller (Tapestry-EPPIE finalist in 2000),
Action/Adventure (Glass House, A Glass Darkly and Looking Glass-EPPIE
finalists in 2001 and 2002] and A Gift for Roo [children's picture
book-inducted into the children's E-book hall of fame] 
       She heads the Art Department for *NovelBooks, Inc.,* designs custom
covers for others publishers and private clients. She was one of five
finalists for the 2002 INDIE Graphic Artist Achievement award, nominated by
three publishing houses, and is consistently top ten in the Preditors &
Editors graphic artist polls.
       To view Ariana's creative designs, go to
http://communities.msn.com/ArianaOverton/bookcovers 
       *Max Overton* is a new author specializing in historical fiction,
although he has also written extensively on biological non-fiction.
       His first book, Lion of Scythia, (an EPPIE finalist in 2001) deals with
conflicts between the Macedonian Empire of Alexander the Great and the tribes
on the borders of his realm. A second book in this trilogy, The Golden King,
is also completed and the third and final book of this series is now being
written. A series of murder mysteries with a historical basis is also being
planned, taking place in Athens of the fifth century BC. 
       Born in Malaysia to English parents, Max has traveled extensively,
living in England, Belgium, Germany and Jamaica before settling down in New
Zealand. Moving to Australia, Max took up a position teaching at James Cook
University. He also undertook studies in tropical butterfly ecology for his
doctorate, which earned him the name of 'The Butterfly Man' in Queensland.
       Max met Ariana in Australia and, after two years exploring the outback,
the tropical rainforests, and New Guinea, they moved to the United States
where they continue to write, side-by-side.
       The two authors recently teamed up to write a novel together. The
result is Looking Glass, being lauded by reviewers as 'the Australian Jurassic
Park.' 
       Personal author's website http://www.angelfire.com/ri2/theovertons
--------
         *_Love mystery, paranormal and suspense?_*
         _Check out these great reads from_
         NovelBooks, Inc.
         www.novelbooksinc.com
       *Lions of Judah* by Elaine Hopper
       _Who can a dead woman trust?_
       *Fate* by Robert Arthur Smith
       _Compelled by the spirit of a murdered woman, Toronto writer Judy
Armstrong tries to save a boy's life._
       *Allude to Murder* by Emma Kennedy
       _Balkan smuggling conspiracy entangles two Americans_
       *Apology for the Devil* by Stewart Thomas
       _American Secret Service Agent Lia Blaine and Major Robert Garrick of
the elite British Special Air Services find themselves thrown together into a
violent maelstrom of corruption and treachery which leads up into the White
House._
       *Too Many Spies Spoil the Case* by Miles Archer
       _Hard-hitting, quick thinking and an irreverent mouth propel Doug
McCool through a tight action thriller with plenty of bodies dropping, bullets
flying and, of course, too many spies._
Page 108

       *Improbable Solution* by Judith B. Glad
       _Gus Loring comes to town seeking forgetfulness. Sally Carruthers can
only dream of the day she can leave. But there's something about Whiterock,
Oregon, that makes every encounter between them more compelling, more
complicated than simple desire._
       *Moon of Little Winter* by Margaret Marr
       _Chely and Ty must remember their past to defeat the Lady in Red, an
evil witch who holds the key that will unlock their memories and help them
regain a love they've shared since childhood._
       *The Scent of Stone* by Savannah Michaels
       _Tintagel Castle, secret caves, and a tantalizing scent cause havoc on
two unwilling lovers. Throw in the magic of Merlin and his delightful
sidekick, Aili, and you'll never look at a stone the same way again._
       *Desert Dreams* by Gracie McKeever
       _Old World Evil vs. New Age Passion ... Can their love survive?_
       *Dangerous Medicine* by Jane Toombs
       _Life at Harper Hills Hospital means living on the edge. Nurse Lynn
Holley and Dr. Nick Dow must overcome their dark pasts and deal with the
dangerous present in order to look forward to a future together. _
       *After the Rain* by Connie Vines
       _Cheyenne Maddox knew it was wrong to love Brede and his
daughter-because whoever had tried to kill her would return. It was only a
matter of time!_
       *Back to Tomorrow* by Gaye Walton
       _Drawn back in time to 1889 Tombstone, librarian Emily Dennison meets
Zachary Tremaine, and gets involved in a mission that leads to more adventure
than she ever imagined. _
       *Skull Dance* by Gerd Balke
       _A pulse-pounding, globe-trotting adventure where the world is held
hostage by terrorists._
       *Diamondback* by Elizabeth Dearl
       _When novelist Taylor Madison discovers a mysterious letter among her
late mother's effects, she heads for West Texas in search of her father's
identity. But small, sleepy towns don't appreciate rude awakenings and Taylor
soon finds herself up to her neck in rattlesnakes and long-kept secrets-a
deadly combination._
         *NovelBooks, Inc.*
         _Surprisingly new ... always unique_
         *www.novelbooksinc.com*
         P.O. Box 661, Douglas, MA 01516
         Or email: publisher@novelbooksinc.com
-----------------------
Visit www.novelbooksinc.com for information on additional titles by this and
other authors.
Page 109

