Bank Transfer 100%Successfull
 Okay so lets get started,
 The first thing you are going to need is banking credentials of some 
sort. The information you need will be different for each bank and depend 
on how your doing the transfers if by phone or online so research is the 
key here!
 If you are doing the transfers online take a look at the banks login 
pages to determine exactly whats needed to login, you might also need 
additional information like a password or code to make a transfer so it's 
a good idea to set up a bank account with internet banking on the bank 
your targeting, this way you will be able to see all that is needed and 
not just what you need to log into the actual website.
 The usual information needed to log into online banking is usually like; 
(remember different banks = different info)
 Username/account number
 Password
 Letters/Numbers of a security code
 Answers to secret question
 Date of birth (sometimes)
 For transfers it's much better to talk and bank using the telephone, 
this is far more successful than online transfers because it doesn't 
attract so much suspicion when a few thousand is being sent somewhere and 
banks will process the transfer there and then meaning that if your phone 
call to them is successful there is a 95% chance your transfer will be 
too.
 You need different information to do this type of transfer and like 
before it's different with each bank, also like before it's a good idea 
to set up a bank account with the bank and make a transfer by phone, this 
way you will know what to expect when you go to make a fraudulent 
transfer by phone.
 Here is a rough guide of what you might need;
 Account number
 Sort Code
 Address Details
 Date of Birth
 Mother maiden name
 Answer to secret questions
 All the information you need for any type of transfer can be bought 
online for a relatively small amount of money, the details for online 
transfers will usually cost you between 3-15% of the account balance. 
Information to make phone transfers will normally cost between $15 upto 
$50 and this depends on how much information is given to you about your 
mark.
 Alternatively you can collect and gather this information yourself by 
the many ways available such as botnets, phishing, data mining etc...

 After you have got the information you need you will need to find or set 
up a bank account which the stolen money can be transferred into (bank 
drop), for obvious reasons this must not be an account in your real name! 
The most common method of getting an account for this is to find people 
willing to offer they're account for a percentage of the money, normally 
30-60% of the transferred amount. Another way of getting bank drop 
accounts is to set them up yourself using fake ID and counterfeit 
documents, there is a little extra work and investment needed for doing 
this but the returns financially are well worth it.
 Now you have information and a bank drop account you are ready to make 
the transfer, here is some information and steps on how to go about 
making both phone and online transfers.
 Telephone banking
 In theory this method is pretty self explanatory because all you really 
need to do is make a call to the telephone banking line of your target 
bank and answer any questions they ask as if you were the person whose 
details you have but like any type of transfer true success will depend 
on how well you plan and carry off the operation so you must talk in a 
calm, cool and collective way.
 Acting or at the very least voice impersonation will play a major role 
in transfers made by phone because NO bank is going to accept a transfer 
from someone on the phone who has the relatively squeaky voice of a 
teenager or young adult when the original account holder is supposed to 
be 60 years old so you must take the time to perfect your voice to sound 
like the account holder might. Sometimes the dialect of a voice can also 
make a bank worker weary of a transfer because if the account holder 
lives in Australia and you were born in India he or she might be able to 
spot this in your fake voice so you must must must! get the dialect,tone 
and language of your targets country correct or you will fail, simple!
 When you have your voice you are ready to make the call, it's a good 
idea to use call spoofing and forwarding to have your targets telephone 
number registered with the bank appear on caller ID because some banks 
may check this or use it as further verification, there is sometimes also 
some sort of voice changing functionality with some of those call 
services which is a good feature to add to the fake voice your making 
vocally or if you have female info and you want to sound like so.
 It's not usually necessary to use spoofing so if your making a call just 
make sure you are doing so from an unregistered pre-paid cell phone or 
pay phone and not the personal land line number in your house.
 Online transfers
 Again like before it's pretty easy to do but there is a lot of different 
aspects that can effect the success you have with this method of 
transfer. All banks have different procedures and levels of tolerance 
regarding online transfers, most of your work at the start will involve 
research, trial and error and perseverance to figure out the best ways in 
doing it and how to maximize your profits from it.
 Okay so you have your information and a drop account, now you need to 

make the actual transfer! When you are doing anything illegal 
electronically via a computer you MUST secure your identity or so called 
virtual fingerprint paper trail your system and modem leaves behind, you 
can do this by using socks, virtual private networks, hacked wireless 
connection or any other form of legitimate anonymizing techniques and 
principals to protect your IP address and ultimately your identity and 
location. A good rule of thumb is to display an IP address located within 
a local proximity to that of your marks location or geographic area so an 
IP from the same city or state is ideal.
 after this step you can successfully and safely login to online banking!
 Now we have to think about what we are doing... as mentioned before the 
banks generally set an amount of money which is deemed acceptable and 
safe to transfer online, the history of the account holders' transfers 
will also come into play so it's your job to determine the highest amount 
a bank will accept in an online transaction without arousing suspicion, 
this can be done by looking at the payment history of an account and 
using your research inline with what you discovered as the banks 
acceptable amount in comparison to the balance and history ratio. It is 
no good trying to transfer $8k from an account with a $10k balance when 
the real account holder has never made a transfer bigger than $3k before.
 So after you have a figure you think or know is safe to transfer you can 
attempt to make the transfer, please take a look below for more 
information regarding transfers in general.
 General notes and tips about making any type of transfer
 The best time to make a transfer is during big seasonal/regional/public 
holidays like Christmas or Summer, people spend a lot of money at these 
times so the chances of a successful transfer increases and suspicion 
falls, please remember it's not the same for small holidays or seasonal 
events like at the beginning of a new year because people tend to hold 
back on spending at those times because they spent so much at Christmas 
etc...
 Transferring money into a bank drop account from the same bank will 
usually happen instantly so you can cashout the money on the same day the 
transfer was made, sometimes this can be seen as suspicious though. If 
you are transferring money into a different bank it will take between 1-4 
days for the money to appear in the drop.
 Don't transfer money at the weekend because people usually use they're 
cards a lot more on weekends when they are off work and out shopping so 
they will find out money has been taken from their accounts faster, best 
day(s) to make a transfer is Sunday,Monday or Tuesday.
 If available select the option to take the money from the account on the 
day it will actually be transferred (1-4 days) there is usually a box to 
tick online for you to do this or you can tell the bank worker via the 
telephone that this is what you want.
 If you have a big balance account like $250k it doesn't mean you can 
automatically transfer $75k out of that account because it's a small 
amount in comparison to the balance, a good rule is to take between 3-7% 
of the big balances but also remember the history of the payments is also 

very important, try to transfer what the banks sees normally from the 
account holder.
 Make small transfers to your drop account that the account holder might 
not see or report, if you make a big transfer 2-3 weeks later there is a 
good chance of success because the bank will see money has previously 
been sent to the same account and no problems were reported.
 Online only;
 Take a look at the last log in date for the account or ask your vendor 
to do this if they checked the account after getting it because if the 
person doesn't log into or use online banking often there is a chance the 
success of a big transfer will fall and you will then be able to adjust 
your transfer accordingly, you will also know that person probably isn't 
going to see a bank statement until the end of the month. 

