Chapter One 
 
Chapter One 
 
Skeeter Jackson wasn't in jail. 
 
And that was so overwhelming a shock, he wasn't entirely sure what to 
do with himself. The one thing he didn't want to do was hang around the 
infirmary, where Bergitta lay in the recovery room after emergency 
surgery and where Senator John Caddrick sat bellowing like a wounded 
musk-ox, threatening to shut down the station around their ears. So he 
ducked past crowds of shaken tourists, wounded in the riot at Primary, 
slithered past news crews and the irate, fuming senator -- who was 
still taking up a valuable medical technician's time to wash tear gas 
out of his eyes -- and headed out into the vast crowds thronging the 
Commons. 
 
He didn't really know where he was going or what he intended to do, 
once he got there. He didn't have a job any longer, and wasn't likely 
to find a soul on station to hire him, particularly not with the kind 
of trouble Time Terminal Eighty-Six had brewing. Skeeter threaded his 
way through the jostling crowds, ignoring the shocked gossip flying 
loose through Commons, and wondered for perhaps the fifteen millionth 
time what had become of his friends, young Julius, who'd been born in 
ancient Rome, and -- far more devastatingly -- down-time refugees 
Ianira and Marcus and both their little girls. Ianira was the leader of 
the entire community of down-timers stranded on the time terminal, 
Speaker for the Found Ones' Council, and the inspiration for the 
fastest-growing up-time religion in the world. 
 
Not only major VIPs in anybody's book, but very nearly the only friends 
Skeeter possessed. They'd all disappeared in the middle of a riot, the 
first of many to hit Shangri-La Station during the past week, and 
despite massive searches, not a trace of them had been found. Either 
they'd managed to escape down one of the open time-touring gates or 
they'd been kidnapped and smuggled out. Or -- and he had to swallow 
hard, at the thought -- somebody'd cut them into small pieces and 
dropped them down an unstable gate. Like the Bermuda Triangle, maybe . 
. . 
 
"Skeeter!" 
 
He looked around, startled, and found Kit Carson homing in. 
 
Panic struck. 
 
"Don't bolt!" The retired time scout held up a hand as he hurried 
through the crowd. "I just want to talk." 
 
Skeeter paused, gauging the expression in Kit's eyes -- a surprisingly 
friendly look -- and decided not to run. "Okay," he shrugged, waiting. 
After all, Kit had stood up for him in the station manager's office 
high above Commons floor, when Security Chief Mike Benson had been 
chomping at the bit to toss him into the nearest jail cell -- or maybe 
through the aerie's glass window-walls. A long shiver caught Skeeter's 
spine at that too-recent memory. Mike Benson had dragged him up from 
the station's subbasement battleground in cuffs, facing murder charges. 

Neither he nor the station's down-timer refugees had really had any 
choice but fight to the death, trying to wrest Bergitta away from her 
kidnappers, a group of Islamic jihad fighters. 
 
The Ansar Majlis had styled themselves after the original Ansar, the 
religiously motivated nineteenth-century "dervishes" of the Sudan, 
famed for routing British forces and killing General Gordon at 
Khartoum. The terrorist members of the Ansar Majlis had dragged 
Bergitta down into the station's sub-basement, where they would've 
beaten her to death, after raping her. But that hadn't mattered a damn 
to Mike Benson. 
 
If not for Kit's support . . . 
 
He didn't even know why Kit had come to his rescue. 
 
So he shoved his hands into his pockets, suppressing a wince where the 
cuffs had dug into his flesh, and waited for Kit to catch up. The 
world-famous time scout actually clapped him on the shoulder, startling 
Skeeter considerably. 
 
"Come down to Edo Castletown with me," Kit said over the roar of voices 
on Commons. "I need your help." 
 
Skeeter blinked. "My help? What for?" 
 
Kit grinned at his tone, but the smile faded too quickly. "After you 
left the aerie, Ronisha ran computer records checks for everyone who 
entered the station today. I'm afraid the databanks are a mess, thanks 
to that riot Caddrick started." Kit shook his head and made a derisive 
sound of disgust. "Half the arriving tourists haven't even scanned 
their records in properly yet. But Ronisha thinks she's got a line on 
the Ansar Majlis leadership. A couple of businessmen, seemed legit 
enough. Came to open up a new outfitter's shop for the Arabian Nights 
sector. 
They checked into their hotel, nice and quiet, then tried 
to contact some of your pals from that murderous construction crew. By 
radio, mind." 
 
Skeeter's brows rose. "Don't tell me, they tried to contact those 
little radio handsets Benson took off those bodies we left downstairs?" 
 
One corner of Kit's mouth twitched. "You got it. Mike intercepted the 
call. That down-time kid, Hashim, who helped you with the rescue? He 
helped us out again, in a big way. He answered the transmission, told 
them there'd been trouble, but he'd meet them, bring them up to date." 
Kit thinned his lips. "They're in my hotel, Skeeter. I want them out." 
 
"Alive?" Skeeter asked softly. 
 
Kit's eyes blazed, giving Skeeter a dangerous, top-to-toes assessment 
that left Skeeter sweating despite the bravado of his return stare. 
"Preferably," Kit said in a low growl. "With as little damage to young 
Hashim as possible." 
 
"No argument, there. Where'd he agree to meet them? At the Neo Edo?" 
 
Kit nodded. 

 
"When?" 
 
The retired time scout checked his watch. "About fifteen minutes from 
now." 
 
Skeeter swore. "I'll need a good disguise. Get me 
somebody's 
headdress. And a tool belt." He paused. "You're sure you've got the 
right assholes? Not just a couple of innocent Arab businessmen looking 
for long-lost relatives?" 
 
"We're sure," Kit said grimly. "They asked Hashim to bring schematics 
of the station's brig, so they could plan an attack. They aim to break 
their buddies out of jail." 
 
Skeeter whistled. "That's bad." 
 
"You're not kidding, that's bad. Right now, 
they're in room Four 
Twenty-Three, waiting for Hashim to show up with his pals." 
 
Skeeter nodded. "All right, let's get this over with." 
 
A quarter of an hour later, Skeeter and young Hashim ibn Fahd were 
walking softly down a carpeted corridor on the fourth floor of the Neo 
Edo hotel, the latter in Neo Edo livery. Skeeter wore a long headdress 
shrugged down across his shoulders and a toolbelt at his hips. The 
toolbelt hid an eight-inch Bowie knife and a snub-nosed revolver shoved 
into a paddle holster inside his trousers. Kit, too, wore a disguising 
headdress and tool belt, and carried a sleek little semiautomatic 
pistol. Security had closed off the corridor at either end, stationing 
officers in the stairwells and elevator. 
 
The fourth floor was as secure as they could make it without evacuating 
innocents from adjoining rooms, which they couldn't do, not and keep 
the element of surprise. A bad situation to be sure, but letting 
terrorists like the Ansar Majlis continue to operate was a good deal 
worse. Five minutes earlier, security had reported the arrival of three 
additional men from the Time Tripper Hotel, also newcomers to the 
station. At a guess, the leadership of the Ansar Majlis had gathered 
for a high-level pow-wow. Once inside the room, Skeeter and Kit would 
probably have only moments before the leadership realized they were 
meeting with decoys. As Kit knocked, Skeeter told his hands to stop 
shaking. 
 
The door to room 423 opened just a crack and a low voice spoke in 
Arabic. Skeeter's heart was pounding. He hoped like hell those 
incarcerated construction workers in the brig had given Hashim the 
correct code word to respond with. Hashim answered the challenge, his 
stance cocky and belligerent. A chain rattled, then the door opened 
wider. Hashim slipped to one side, out of the line of fire. Kit shoved 
the door open and strode in. Skeeter followed at his heels, raking the 
room with his gaze. He found only three men in sight. The door to the 
bathroom was partially closed. At least one in there, maybe another in 
the closet . . . 
 
A well-dressed man of about fifty stared at them through narrowed eyes. 
He spat out something that Kit responded to with a gutteral 

monosyllable. At the doorway, Hashim let loose a voluble flood of 
Arabic, drawing attention to himself. Then the closet door opened and a 
new voice spoke sharply. The effect was electrifying. Weapons appeared 
with terrifying swiftness. The man in the closet grabbed Kit by the 
arm, clearly demanding to know who the hell he was. 
 
The next instant, he was airborne, flipping arse about head past the 
end of one bed. A gunshot cracked as Skeeter dove toward the bathroom 
door, drawing his Bowie knife and slamming it into the unprotected 
thigh of the man between him and Kit. The man screamed. Another gunshot 
blasted loose, but Kit wasn't where the bullets impacted. He was across 
the room, then somebody else screamed and went flying into the mirrored 
closet. Skeeter kicked in the bathroom door, coming in low to the 
floor, and heard a yell of pain just as bullets tore through the 
doorway at head height. The door caught the shooter full in the face 
and sent him reeling back against the john. Skeeter kicked his feet out 
from under him. The man went down hard, struck his head against the 
toilet tank, reeled face-first into the shower stall and lay still. 
Skeeter disarmed him swiftly, then lunged back out into the hotel room. 
 
Hashim stood on top of the man Skeeter had stabbed, grinding his wrist 
into the carpet and holding a gun he'd clearly just liberated. Out in 
the main room, the fight was over. Three men, dazed and bleeding, lay 
in crumpled heaps where Kit had tossed them. Kit was breathing hard, 
eyes narrowed down into slits, then let out a bellow that shook dust 
loose. "Security!" 
 
Officers flooded into the room. 
 
Kit stepped aside as handcuffs appeared and dazed men were wrestled 
into restraints. "Check the room next door," Kit said curtly. "Make 
sure nobody was hurt. Bastards got off several shots that went through 
the wall." 
 
Skeeter stood breathing hard in the bathroom doorway, hardly able to 
believe it was over so quickly. He turned over his own prisoner from 
the shower stall, gratefully stripped off the headdress and tool belt, 
handed over the borrowed weapons, and gave Security his statement. "Do 
me a favor, will you?" he asked in a tight, controlled voice. "Find out 
what they know about Ianira's disappearance." Then, far too wound up 
from the adrenaline rush to just hang around, he headed out into the 
corridor, away from the stink of gunpowder and blood, wishing mightily 
for a glass of something cold to swallow. 
 
"Skeeter." 
 
He glanced up and found Kit heading his way, sans disguise. The 
prisoners were being dragged -- or carried -- out of room 423. The door 
to room 425 was open as officers checked the frightened occupants for 
injuries and reassured a sobbing woman that the danger was over. 
"Security will take it from here," Kit told Skeeter. "Hashim's going 
down with them to translate. Good work. If you hadn't taken those two 
out, I might've ended up 
with a bullet in my back. I don't know 
about you, but I could do with a good, stiff drink and a plateful of 
hot food. How about I treat you to supper at the Silkworm Caterpillar 
while we talk?" 
 

Skeeter swallowed surprise -- and an involuntary rush of saliva -- and 
was overwhelmed by a sudden flood of hunger, accompanied by a spreading 
sense of euphoria that he was still alive to be hungry. He couldn't 
recall when he'd eaten his last real meal and didn't want to remember 
too closely what it had consisted of, either. 
 
"Okay," Skeeter nodded, meeting Kit's gaze. "Thanks." 
 
He wondered what the retired time scout had in mind as they crossed the 
world-famous Neo Edo lobby, heading for the Kaiko no Kemushi, the 
Silkworm Caterpillar. Kit's restaurant, at least, appeared to have 
survived the riot at Primary intact, but the hotel lobby bore mute 
testament to the tear gas and the panic. Hotel employees sponged down 
silk wallpaper in an attempt to remove the residues. The snarl of an 
industrial carpet shampooer broke the elegant hush. Workers were masked 
against fume exposure to the whitish, powdery film of chemical 
irritants left behind. What the cleanup would cost . . . 
 
Beyond the lobby, decorative bridges across Edo Castletown's ornate 
goldfish ponds had been shattered, their railings smashed to splinters 
during the riot Senator Caddrick and his goons in uniform had 
instigated. Before the infamous politician's arrival, Edo Castletown 
had been one of TT-86's most picturesque sectors, with its Shinto 
Shrine and graceful pagoda-style rooflines. Skeeter clamped his lips as 
he traced the path of battle scars, broken shrubbery, and smashed ruin 
that had marred Edo Castletown's fragile beauty. 
 
Too many of his few friends were missing, as a result of station riots. 
 
Kit stood at Skeeter's shoulder, silent and grim as they watched 
cleanup crews trying to clear away the debris. Shopkeepers sorted 
through the wreckage of their merchandise. Rachel Eisenstein's medical 
triage teams, staffed mostly by volunteers since the trained medical 
personnel were all down at the infirmary, treating the seriously 
wounded, ministered to those suffering from tear gas exposure and minor 
injuries. Sue Fritchey's Pest Control crews huddled over a few small, 
dark shapes lying on the floor, trying to keep prehistoric birds and 
pterodactyls alive where they'd been teargassed, trampled, and almost 
drowned in the goldfish ponds. Sue, tears streaming down both cheeks, 
was setting the broken wing bones of a crow-sized flying reptile while 
one assistant held the wing carefully stretched taut and another 
administered anesthesia and monitored the animal's life signs. 
 
"Zigsi," Skeeter muttered under his breath, using one of his favorate 
Mongolian curses. "Doesn't Caddrick know it's against the law for 
anybody to discharge tear gas on a time terminal? Even law enforcement 
agents?" 
 
Kit shot him a sidewise glance, mouth hard as marble. "Men like John 
Caddrick don't care what the law says. And neither do the kind of 
agents who'd come to Shangri-La with him." 
 
Skeeter shivered, afraid of Senator John Caddrick in spite of -- or 
maybe due to -- his rough Mongol upbringing. He recalled with 
satisfaction trading assaults with Caddrick, back at the leading edge 
of that riot, but . . . One of these days, Caddrick was going to calm 
down enough to remember what Skeeter had said and done. 

 
Skeeter knew about powerful men. 
 
Apparently, so did Kit Carson. 
 
"Come on, I need that drink." Kit steered Skeeter past sliding rice-
paper doors into the softly lit Silkworm Caterpiller, with its smooth, 
polished wood floors and delicate porcelain vases and its priceless 
bonsai cherry trees, bathed in their full-spectrum grow lights and 
grafted -- rumor had it -- from cuttings taken from the National Cherry 
Trees of Washington. The scent of expensive cuisine relaxed Skeeter a 
degree as he followed Kit toward a private cubicle near the back, 
threading his way past half a dozen Asian billionaires, two instantly 
recognizable international singing stars, and a haphazard collection of 
the merely wealthy, all of them discussing the riot and Senator 
Caddrick's presence in hushed, worried tones. 
 
Kit motioned him into a chair. "Sit down, Skeeter. You look exhausted." 
At his signal, a waitress glided up, silent and lovely in a silk kimono 
and delicate geisha's coif. Kit ordered for them both -- in Japanese. 
Moments later, a steady parade of silk-garbed waitresses materialized, 
bringing an avalanche of delicate porcelain dishes heaped with the most 
fabulous food Skeeter had ever smelled and -- more importantly -- 
several glassfuls of liquid stress relief. Skeeter upended the first 
and felt better immediately. As attentive servers brought more whiskey 
and poured steaming green tea into tiny cups, Kit smiled, the corners 
of his eyes crinkling into weatherbeaten folds. "Dig in. Enjoy. You've 
earned it." 
 
Skeeter had no idea what he was eating, but it was all fabulous. Even 
the stuff that was raw. He'd certainly eaten stranger stuff as a kid, 
stranded in twelfth century Mongolia. Kit let him eat in silence, 
paying attention to his own meal, then glanced up when a bellboy in Neo 
Edo uniform delivered a heavy leather briefcase. Kit nodded toward a 
chair and tipped the young man. "Thanks." 
 
Skeeter frowned. "What's with the briefcase?" 
 
"The real reason I asked you here," Kit said, his glance intent. 
 
"Oh, great," Skeeter groused, toying with his chopsticks. "Make me feel 
better, why don't you?" 
 
"Actually," Kit chuckled, "I hope to do just that." 
 
Skeeter looked up from the dripping bite of whatever wonderful 
concoction was dangling from his chopsticks and waited, abruptly wary. 
He did not expect what came next. 
 
"I want to talk about your future," Kit said, sitting back and toying 
with the edge of his plate. When Skeeter just stared, the grizzled 
former scout gave him that world famous jack-o-lantern grin and 
chuckled. "All right, Skeeter. You've been remarkably patient. I'll end 
the suspense." He dug into the briefcase and dropped a sheaf of 
computer printouts onto the table. Skeeter looked curiously into Kit's 
eyes, but the retired scout merely stuffed more of his expensive lunch 
into his weathered face, so Skeeter picked up the stack and riffled 

through it. And discovered he was holding copies of the arrest reports 
for each of the thirty-one crooks Skeeter had put out of business in 
the last seven and a half days. 
 
Skeeter had, during the past week, managed a feat even he hadn't 
thought possible. He had stunned the entire 'eighty-sixer population of 
Shangri-La Station virtually speechless. He'd only had to make 
citizens' arrests of seventeen pickpockets, five grifters, eight con 
artists, and a bait-and-switch vendor to do it, the latter peddling 
fake copies of an inertial mapping system that kept track of a person's 
movements away from a known point of origin, like a time-touring gate. 
The real gizmos had saved lives. Substituting fake ones could kill an 
unwary tourist, fast. 
 
Once La-La Land had recovered the use of its stunned, multi-partite 
tongue, of course, rumor had run wild. "It's a new scam," went the most 
popular version, "he's up to something." And so he was. Just not what 
the rumor-mongers thought he was up to. Skeeter had taken his new "job" 
far more seriously than either of the ones he'd lost, thanks to his 
frantic search for clues to Ianira's 
disappearance. To his own 
surprise, Skeeter Jackson made a profoundly diligent undercover 
detective. 
 
Judging from the printouts Skeeter now held, that fact was not lost on 
Kit Carson. He just didn't know what Kit had in mind to do about it. 
 
Kit was grinning at him, though. He leaned forward, still smiling, and 
tapped the printouts in Skeeter's hands. "Mike Benson, bless him, has 
been glowering for days over this. If he hadn't been so busy
 
trying to keep this station from exploding into violence, I 
expect he'd have called you in to explain by now." 
 
Belatedly, Skeeter realized he'd made the head of Shangri-La security 
look . . . Well, if not outright incompetent, downright foolish. 
Thirty-one arrests in seven and a half days was a helluva haul, even 
for TT-86. Kit was studying Skeeter intently, eyes glinting in the 
indirect lighting. "I must confess to a considerable curiosity." 
 
Skeeter sighed and set the reports down. "Not that I expect you to 
believe me," he met Kit's gaze, "but with Ianira and her family gone . 
. ." He blinked rapidly, told himself sternly that now was not the time 
to sniffle. His reputation for playing on a rube's emotions was too 
well known. "Well, dammit, somebody's got to make this place fit for 
the down-timer kids to grow up in! I was thinking about Ianira's little 
girls the other day, right about the time I saw a pickpocket snatch 
that Chilean lady's wallet. It made me so flaming mad, I just walked 
over and grabbed him. Maybe you haven't heard, but Artemisia and 
Gelasia call me 'Uncle Skeeter.' The last time I was anybody's uncle . 
. ." 
 
He shut his mouth hastily, not wanting to talk about the deep feelings 
he still harbored for little Temujin. He'd seen the child born nine 
months after he'd fallen through an unstable gate, the one that had 
dumped him at the feet of the khan of forty-thousand Yakka Mongol 
yurts, or gers, as the Mongolians, themselves, called their felted 
tents. Yesukai had named Skeeter his first-born son's honorary uncle, 
effectively placing his heir under the protection of the bogdo, the 

sacred mountain spirit the Yakka clan had believed Skeeter to be. He 
didn't talk about it, much. It was a deeply private thing, standing as 
honorary uncle to the future Genghis Khan. Skeeter's rescue by the time 
scout who'd pushed TT-86's Mongolian Gate had caused Skeeter to lose 
that "nephew." And now the Ansar Majlis had deprived him of his 
honorary nieces. 
 
Ianira's beautiful children . . . 
 
Kit's eyes had darkened; he spoke very quietly. "I'm sorry, Skeeter. 
We've all searched." 
 
He nodded, surprised Kit had believed him, for once. 
 
Kit pointed to the arrest reports with a lacquered chopstick. "What I'd 
really like to know is how you managed to catch thirty-one criminals in 
such a short time." 
 
"How?" Skeeter blinked, caught off guard by the question. "Well, jeez, 
Kit, it was dead easy." He felt the flush begin at the back of his neck 
and creep up his cheeks. "I mean, I was good at that kind of thing, 
once. It's not hard to spot the tricks of the trade, when you know 'em 
as well as I do. Did." 
 
"You realize," Kit said slowly, "a lot of people are saying you pulled 
the jobs yourself, then planted part of the 'take' on those people, so 
there'd be a fall guy to blame?" 
 
Skeeter's flush deepened, angry this time. "Doesn't surprise me. 
Although it's the stupidest thing I've heard in a while. One of those 
jerks had a stolen money roll with ten thousand bucks in it. If I were 
still in the business, do you honestly think I'd've turned over ten 
grand to station security?" 
 
Kit held up both hands. "Easy, Skeeter. I didn't say I agreed with 
them." 
 
"Huh. You must be the only up-time 'eighty-sixer who doesn't." 
 
"Not quite," Kit said softly. "But I have noted the problem. I've also 
noticed how hard you've been trying to get another honest job. At the 
same time you've been hauling in all these petty thieves and 
swindlers." He tapped the sheaf of arrest reports again. "And I know 
why you've been turned down, too." Kit sat back, then, studying him 
once more. "Tell me if I'm wrong, but it seems to me you're mighty 
dedicated to this, ah, new crusade of yours." 
 
"Damn right, I am," Skeeter growled, looking Kit square in the eye. 
"Mopping bathroom floors never did exactly challenge me. And I don't 
want the kids on this station growing up where somebody with light 
fingers can walk off with everything they've worked hard to earn." He 
added with a bitterness he couldn't conceal, "I never did roll an 
'eighty-sixer, you know. Family's family, whatever you think of me." 
 
Kit didn't respond to that, not directly. "So you intend to keep up the 
vigilance? Continue making citizens' arrests?" 
 

"I do." 
 
The former scout nodded sharply, as though satisfied. "Good. It occurs 
to me that your, ah, unique talents could be useful, very useful around 
here. How much did that ridiculous maintenance job of yours pay?" 
 
Skeeter blinked. "Five bucks an hour, why?" 
 
"Five bucks? That's not a salary, that's slavery! Barely enough to pay 
station taxes, let alone rent. What were you eating, sawdust?" 
 
Skeeter refrained from pointing out that a good many 'eighty-sixers 
subsisted on less. "Well, I didn't eat fancy, but I got by." 
 
The retired scout snorted. "I can just imagine what you were living on. 
Tell you what, young Jackson. You take yourself upstairs to my office, 
fill out the paperwork, I'll put you on payroll for a month, trial 
basis. Special roving security consultant for the Neo Edo. Set your own 
hours as you see fit, minimum eight a day, starting at, say, twenty 
dollars an hour. At the end of a month, if your arrest record justifies 
it, we'll see about making it permanent." 
 
Skeeter tried to scrape his jaw off the carpeted floor and failed 
utterly. 
 
Kit's sudden, glittering grin was terrifying. "Know of a better way to 
catch a con artist than send one of their own kind after 'em? My God, 
Skeeter, thirty-one arrests in a week? That's more than Security caught 
last year. I'm not faulting Mike or his people, but you've got a damned 
fine point about it being easy to spot the tricks when you've used 'em, 
yourself." 
 
Kit shoved back his chair and stood up. "Come on, Skeeter, I'll take 
you upstairs, introduce you to the personnel clerk. Robby Ames is a 
good kid, he'll show you the ropes. Then go home and get some sleep. 
Tomorrow morning, I'd appreciate a guided tour of Commons. I want to 
let things cool down out there, before we take a look-see at what we're 
up against, with Caddrick on station. And frankly, I'd like to watch 
you work. Maybe we could hit the Britannia crowd when the gate opens in 
the morning? There's sure to be a pile of pickpockets on hand for that. 
We'll figure out strategy while we're at it, stuff like should you 
stick to the Neo Edo proper or follow potential thieves off premises 
when they follow hotel guests?" 
 
Skeeter still hadn't managed to scrape his lower jaw off the floor. 
 
"Oh, and you'll need a squawky with all the Security frequencies and a 
training class on codes and procedures. I'll talk to a friend of mine 
in security about it." He chuckled wickedly. "When Mike Benson finds 
out, he'll eat nails and spit tacks." 
 
Skeeter Jackson suddenly realized that Kit was not only enjoying this, 
the offer was serious. For the first time since his return from 
Mongolia, somebody other than a down-timer trusted him. For a long, 
dangerous moment, he was blind, throat so tightly closed he could 
hardly swallow. Then he was on his feet, clearing his throat roughly. 
"You won't regret this, Kit. Swear to God, you won't regret it." 

 
"I'd better not!" But he was grinning as he 
said it and for the 
first time since Skeeter had known Kit Carson, the threat didn't 
terrify him. Kit stuck out a hand and Skeeter grasped it hard, suddenly 
finding himself grinning fit to crack his face in half. 
 
My God, he thought as he followed Kit Carson out of the Silkworm 
Caterpillar. A private eye! Working for Kit Carson, of all people, the 
man who'd once threatened to shove him down the nearest unstable gate, 
minus his privates. 
 
La-La Land would never be the same again. 
 
He wasn't entirely sure Shangri-La Station would recover from the 
shock. 
 
* * * 
 
Jenna Nicole Caddrick had spent a full eight days trapped in a little 
room at the top of a scrubbed, wooden staircase, staring out the window 
into the grimy, soot-filled working world of Spitalfields, London. She 
was too ill to travel even as far as the kitchen. Dr. Mindel's 
tinctures left her woozy and afraid for the tiny life growing inside 
her, but the gunshot wound to her head required treatment and she was 
too deep in shock to protest necessity. 
 
Her strength began to return, however, as the wound healed, and with 
healing came the restless urge to do something. She couldn't spend the 
rest of her life sitting beside a window, disguised as a Victorian man 
in a world she scarcely understood. And Carl's blood called out for 
vengeance, Carl's and Aunt Cassie's, both, murdered by her own father's 
hired killers. When Jenna woke early on the morning of her eighth day 
in London, she knew she had to do something to stop her father. She lay 
staring for a long time at the ceiling, stained where rainwater had 
seeped through the roof at some point before Noah had paid to have it 
repaired, and considered where she might begin. 
 
The first thing they had to do, of course, was survive. 
 
But there was plenty she could do, while surviving. And the first thing 
to enter Jenna's mind was the need to find Ianira Cassondra. The tug of 
bandages across the side of her head, where Dr. Mindel had shaved the 
hair close to treat the grazing path of a stranger's bullet,
 
brought a deep shiver. It hadn't been one of her father's hired 
killers, who'd shot her. A down-timer had done that. A native Londoner 
who'd saved Jenna's life, then realized what Ianira could do, with her 
gift for prophetic clairvoyance. Her erstwhile rescuer had calmly shot 
Jenna in cold blood, then had disappeared into the drizzling yellow 
rain with the Cassondra of Ephesus. 
 
Eventually, footsteps thumped up the wooden steps outside her bedroom. 
Jenna sat up, grateful for the lessening of dizziness from concussion, 
as Noah Armstrong pushed open the door with her breakfast tray. "Good 
morning." The detective smiled. 
 
"Good morning, Noah." She didn't know, yet, whether the enigmatic 
private detective was male or female; but it didn't really matter. She 

owed Armstrong her life, several times over. If Aunt Cassie hadn't 
hired the best, before the Ansar Majlis had shot Cassie Tyrol 
dead 
in New York . . . 
 
"You look better this morning," Noah 
smiled, grey eyes warm and 
friendly. Dresssed in a Victorian woman's long skirt and a plain brown 
bodice ten years out of fashion, its perenially high collar obscuring 
Noah's throat -- and therefore any hint of whether or not Noah 
possessed an Adam's apple -- the detective wore what might've been a 
wig or real hair pulled back into a bun at the nape of the neck. "Are 
you hungry?" 
 
She nodded. "A little." 
 
"Good." 
 
The cereal was hot and filling, the toast nicely buttered, the bacon 
fried crisp. Steaming tea sent up a fragrant cloud of steam. "Noah?" 
Jenna asked softly a few minutes later. 
 
"Yeah?" 
 
"We have to find Ianira." 
 
"Marcus and I are taking care of it," Noah said firmly. "You're staying 
right here. Where you'll be safe." 
 
"But -- " 
 
"No." The detective held her gaze, grey eyes hard as marble, now 
brooking no disagreement. "You're far too valuable to risk, Jenna. And 
you had a damned close call, the last time you were outside this 
house." Noah touched the side of her head. "This is nearly healed, 
thank goodness. And without infection, which is a small miracle." 
 
Jenna's lips twitched. "I thought it was all the carbolic you keep 
pouring over my scalp." 
 
The corners of Noah's eyes crinkled slightly. "Cleanliness is next to 
godliness, they say, particularly around here. Be that as it may, I 
won't risk seeing you shot dead, next time." 
 
She considered arguing. Then realized she was still too weak and shaky 
to do much of anything physical, anyway, so she subsided, at least for 
the moment. Maybe she could think of some way to help that didn't 
require leaving this house? "What are you and Marcus doing?" she asked, 
instead. "To find her?" 
 
Noah sighed, sitting in a chair beside the window. The corners of the 
detective's mouth had drawn down slightly. "We know the man who took 
her is a doctor, and a man of means. Wealthy enough to wear a silk top 
hat and a good frock coat. He frequents the area of the Royal Opera and 
Covent Garden, yet he clearly knows the streets of SoHo. Well enough to 
lose himself in that maze of nasty little alleyways. If I have to, I'll 
check out 
the identity of every physician, every surgeon in London." 
Noah leaned forward in the chair and touched Jenna's cheek gently. 
"Don't worry, kid. We'll find out who he is and we'll get her back." 

 
Jenna bit her lip. If -- no, when, it had to be when -- they finally 
did rescue Ianira, she would come to this house expecting a joyous 
reunion with her family, only to learn that three years had passed in 
her children's lives . . . 
 
Jenna, herself, wasn't over that shock, yet. 
 
Noah had been forced to stay down the Wild West Gate's timeline long 
enough to catch up to the Britannia Gate's timeline, which ran three 
years later than Denver's 1885. Would Ianira's little girls even 
remember their mother? If they could even find Ianira . . . London was 
a depressingly immense and sprawling city, teeming with more than five 
million people crammed in cheek-by-jowl, inhabiting everything from 
spacious palaces to ramshackle staircase landings and stinking gutters. 
The number of places to search would've overwhelmed even a die-hard 
optimist. 
 
Outside, angry voices in the street were shouting what sounded like 
abuse at their neighbors. Jenna's startlement gave way to the
 
beginnings of alarm as she stared from the window to Noah. 
"What's happening?" 
 
The detective moved to look outside and scowled. "Bastards." 
 
"What is it?" she asked sharply, trying to rise. 
 
"A gang of unemployed dock rats, hassling Dr. Mindel." 
 
Ugly taunts and anti-Semitic slurs slammed against the window like 
hailstones. At least it wasn't the pack of up-time killers looking for 
them. Jenna sank back down against the pillows and shivered. "But why? 
Dr. Mindel's one of the kindest men I've ever met." 
 
Noah's jaw tightened above the collar of the outdated dress. "Annie 
Chapman was just found murdered, over in Hanbury Street. Along with a 
leather apron in a basin of water. Half the East End now thinks a 
Jewish boot finisher killed her this morning." The detective glanced 
around at Jenna's involuntary sound and met Jenna's shocked stare. "Get 
used to it, kid. The East End is set to explode. Anti-Semitism's 
running wild, because everyone's convinced it has to be a foreigner 
killing these women. Which is another reason I don't want you outside. 
You're disguised as a man, Jenna, a foreign-sounding man. Those dock 
rats down there are going to make life damned dangerous for foreigners 
in these parts during the next several months. Believe me, it's just 
too risky out there." 
 
Jenna swallowed hard, listening to the ugly shouts in the street. She 
wasn't accustomed to such hatred, such naked prejudice. She touched her 
abdomen, where Carl's baby grew, and realized she couldn't risk 
herself. Not yet. Someday, her father would pay for what he'd done, 
wrecking her life, ending Carl's and Aunt Cassie's in a bullet-riddled 
pool of blood. But for the moment, she had to survive. 
 
She had never hated necessity more. 
 
* * * 

 
Ronisha Azzan was a woman with a major-league problem. 
 
Seated in Bull Morgan's office high above the snow-choked valleys of 
the Himalayan mountains, with her boss in jail and terrorists loose on 
station, she was preparing for a face-off with the most influential -- 
and dangerous -- politician of the era. Ronisha studied Granville 
Baxter, TT-86's Time Tours CEO, with whom she shared a Masai heritage, 
and wondered whether or not she had just made the biggest mistake of 
her career. 
 
"Are you out of your mind?" Bax demanded as the aerie's elevator hummed 
upwards with its first load of reporters. "Letting a pack of newsies 
into a meeting this critical?" 
 
Ronisha held the Time Tours' executive's gaze steadily, one of the few 
souls in Shangri-La Station tall enough to meet Bax's gaze eye to eye. 
"This is one meeting that has to be public. And you know why." 
 
The tall executive's lips thinned. "Bull's meeting was public, too!" It 
came out understandably bitter. 
 
"Yes, it was." She was only too aware of her precarious situation. 
"Bull's meeting was public. But I'm not Bull Morgan. And Bull Morgan is 
not me." 
 
Almost absently, she flicked invisible lint from her brightly colored 
suit, its rich African patterns reproduced in silk, rather than plain 
and ordinary cotton, and shook back over her shoulder three solid feet 
of intricate braids, most of them her own. Ronisha favored four-inch 
spike heels to go with her African textiles and elaborate coifs. She 
hadn't yet met the man she couldn't intimidate, given half a minute's 
time and a chance to crush his fingers in a handshake while she 
outmaneuvered him at his own game -- whether that game involved matters 
of the bedroom or the boardroom. 
 
Ronisha Azzan was deeply proud of her Masai heritage and at the moment, 
that heritage was very nearly her only weapon. The Masai were famed as 
lion hunters. And the biggest, nastiest man-eating lion in the universe 
had just strolled into her kraal. Ronisha smiled, not at all nicely. As 
Shangri-La Station's Deputy Manager, Ronisha Azzan was nobody's 
assistant anything -- a fact Senator John Paul Caddrick had yet to 
learn. If she could manage to keep her knees from shaking visibly while 
she taught him. 
 
Granville Baxter stared hard at her for a long moment, brows furrowed. 
Then her meaning struck home and he started to grin. A weak grin, given 
what they had yet to face, but a grin, nonetheless. "Woman, you are 
wasted in station management. You ought to be a tycoon someplace, 
rolling in money." 
 
"Oh, I don't think so. Somebody's got to do this job." The elevator 
doors opened with a faint ping, disgorging a cluster of reporters, most 
of whom stared up at her for a long, disconcerted moment. Newly arrived 
from up time with the senator, they hadn't yet met her. She rose from 
her half-leaning seat against the corner of Bull's desk. 
 

"Welcome to TT-86. Ronisha Azzan, Deputy Station Manager. Yes, set up 
right there, that's fine, anywhere along here. Glad to assist you. If 
you have any questions about power connections and cables, my 
administrative assistant can help you out. Bernie, see to it our guests 
have what they need. No, I'm sorry, we'll have to wait for the 
senator's arrival before I make any official statements . . ." 
 
From a corner of her eye, she saw Bax shake his head and mutter, 
"Ronnie, I hope you know what we're doing." 
 
Deep inside, where she wouldn't have let anyone see, Ronisha hoped so, 
too. 
 
Senator John Caddrick arrived ten minutes later. The elevator doors 
slid open with another soft ping to reveal the red-faced enemy, eyes 
nearly scarlet from the aftermath of the tear gas. Ronisha Azzan 
narrowed her own eyes as Caddrick halted for just a fraction of a 
second at the threshold between elevator and office, taking in the 
glare of lights, the shining camera lenses, and the small forest of 
microphones. Clearly, the senator had planned on intimidating a 
suitably cowed and trembling assistant manager, rather than walking 
into a live press conference. 
 
As he swept his startled gaze toward Ronisha, the elevator doors 
attempted to close automatically. He had to jump forward in unseemly 
haste to avoid the embarrassment of being carried all the way down to 
Commons again. Behind him, a staffer caught the doors and reopened them 
as Caddrick stalked forward in silence, leaving his legislative aides 
and a whole pack of armed, stone-faced federal marshals to trail into 
the aerie behind him. The senator made a visible, valiant, and not very 
successful effort to ignore the electrifying presence of the press 
corps. 
 
She took that as her cue to launch an offensive of her own. 
 
"Senator Caddrick," she said coolly, "welcome to Time Terminal Eighty-
Six. Ronisha Azzan, Deputy Station Manager. This is Granville Baxter, 
Shangri-La Time Tours CEO. On behalf of Shangri-La Station, please 
allow me to extend our heartfelt condolences regarding your recent 
losses. However . . ." and she let a hint of steel creep into her 
voice, "in accordance with up-time laws governing the safety of time 
terminals and their official residents and guests, I need to remind you 
of a few laws regarding conduct on time terminals." 
 
Caddrick's eyes widened slightly, then narrowed with a dangerous glint. 
 
Ronisha plunged ahead. "It is against 
inter-temporal law to incite 
riot, or to aid and abet the illegal discharge of chemical agents 
banned from use on any time terminal, whether by a private citizen or 
by a member of law enforcement." She flicked a gaze at the marshals, 
who carried short-barreled riot guns and stared straight through her as 
though she were vermin. Clearly, they didn't give a damn about breaking 
inconvenient laws on the other side of a time terminal's Primary. 
 
She faced Caddrick again. "It is illegal, as well, to willfully 
endanger the lives and property of station guests and residents. 
Senator, your actions here have put at risk the lives of several 

hundred innocents on Shangri-La Station. You have also violated several 
endangered species protection acts by putting at risk the only living 
population of prehistoric birds and pterodactyls in the world. If any 
of those animals die, you can be charged with several serious felonies. 
This station cannot and will not risk a repeat of the incidents you 
have created since your arrival. Have I made myself clear on these 
points?" Without giving him time to respond, she added, "Now, then. 
What, exactly, brings you to my time terminal? Please bear in mind that 
your answers will be recorded for posterity. Or the courts." She nodded 
pleasantly toward the utterly enchanted newsies and tried to ignore the 
terrifying presence of those cold-eyed marshals and their wicked riot 
guns. 
 
Speaking very softly, which in no way disguised the menace in his 
voice, Senator John Caddrick said, "Am I to understand you're going to 
put me in jail?" 
 
Ronisha drew herself up to her full height, augmented by stiletto 
heels, and forced a smile down the full seven inches of her superior 
stature to the senator's furious grey eyes. "Not at all, senator. But 
you do realize, I hope, that my first concern must be the safety of 
this station and its residents and guests. I cannot permit any 
situation to threaten human or protected animal lives on TT-86, no 
matter how well intentioned the action. Surely you, of all people, must 
understand that?" 
 
She could see it in his eyes, the look of shocked fury that said, You 
devious, black bitch . . . and coldly loathed him. Then he passed a 
hand across his eyes, a hand that visibly shook, and said in an 
unsteady voice, "Forgive me, Ms. Azzan, I'm not quite myself today . . 
. You see, I just received word that the Ansar Majlis brought my little 
girl onto this station. And with the press broadcasting riots and 
murders on TT-86, naturally we thought it prudent to bring along 
federal marshals . . ." 
 
Oh-oh. Silent alarm klaxons sounded. If Jenna Caddrick had been dragged 
through one of TT-86's gates by her up-time kidnappers, Shangri-La 
Station was in more serious trouble than even she had realized. A man 
like John Caddrick wouldn't need any additional ammunition to shut them 
down for good. And he was damned effective at playing to the press. 
 
So she played his game to the hilt, taking the senator's arm 
solicitously and guiding him to a chair. "Senator, please, sit down. 
There's no need for armed warfare between us. Everyone on TT-86 is in 
deep sympathy with your pain and loss." John Caddrick wasn't the only 
person in this room who knew the tricks of playing to the press. She 
wasn't 
Coralisha Azzan's grandchild for nothing. 
 
Ronisha glanced over one shoulder, looking for her executive assistant. 
"Bernie, a glass of scotch and soda for the senator, please." Her 
assistant handed it over and Caddrick sipped, hand still trembling 
visibly. Ronisha waited for just a moment longer, keeping her 
expression carefully concerned, then said quietly, "Now, then, senator, 
why don't you fill us in on exactly what you've learned that's brought 
you to us? Tell us how we can help." 
 
She seated herself in Bull Morgan's chair and composed herself to 

listen, switching on the digital pad that would send her handwritten 
notes directly to her computer, as well as turning on the room's 
meeting-recorder system. Cameras near the ceiling tracked silently, 
mirroring the swing of press cameras as Senator John Caddrick began to 
speak. 
 
"Ten days ago," the senator said heavily, "tragedy struck my family. 
Again. You must be aware that I lost my wife several years ago to a 
drunk driver? She was killed trying to get home to my daughter's 
birthday party. Jenna . . ." He blinked rapidly, eyes reddened and wet. 
"My daughter and I never got over it, particularly poor little Jenna, 
she was so young when my wife died. My wife's sister, Cassie Tyrol, 
became a second mother to her. Jenna Nicole adored her aunt. Wanted to 
follow her onto the stage, was studying film . . ." He paused, wiped 
his eyes distractedly with unsteady fingers. "Jenna met her aunt the 
day Cassie died, at a restaurant in New York. Cassie had flown in from 
New Hollywood to see her. There was an atrocity . . ." 
 
Ronisha knew all about the terrorist hit in New York. "Yes. I know. The 
Ansar Majlis." 
 
"This crazy damned Brotherhood!" Senator Caddrick bit out, voice harsh. 
"They've declared open warfare on the Lady of Heaven Temples. I've 
tried for years to warn Congress something like this was bound to 
happen, letting down-timers onto the time terminals in wholesale droves 
. . ." He shook his head. "Cassie was heavily involved in the Temple, 
you see, very public in her support. Her last film was about the 
Temple. It was a smash success and she donated the proceeds to the 
Templars . . . and now this Brotherhood . . ." his voice was breaking 
up, his eyes wet. 
 
John Caddrick fought himself under control again with visible effort. 
"They sent a death squad after poor Cassie. Murdered her, right in the 
restaurant. Jenna disappeared. Kidnapped by the Ansar Majlis. The FBI 
has been working on it, of course, trying to track down Ansar Majlis 
ringleaders in New York, but I hired a detective, a good one. Sid 
Kaederman's been trying to trace my daughter's possible movements after 
that attack in the restaurant. Mr. Kaederman believes Jenna was 
forcibly brought to TT-86 by her kidnappers. Jenna's bank account and 
bank box were emptied, the same day her aunt was murdered." 
 
He looked up, finally, and met Ronisha's gaze. "Some of her friends at 
college thought Jenna and her roommate had been planning a trip down 
time, against my express wishes, of course, but they thought she'd 
made arrangements to buy tickets and a false identity through some 
underworld mobster, so I wouldn't find out. Jenna's been hyped on film-
making all her life, same as her aunt, wanted to make historically 
accurate films. God knows, it was something she might have done, buying 
a time-tour ticket to make some idiotic movie. So I put Sid Kaederman 
to work on the lead. 
 
"When the Ansar Majlis forced Jenna to empty her bank account for them, 
they discovered her tickets and her false identification papers. They 
forced her to come here, to use them, so they could get out of New York 
without being detected. But even though we know they came here, and we 
know the names on the false identities she purchased in New York a year 
ago, we don't know which down-time gate they might have gone through. 

None of Jenna's friends knew which gate she planned to visit and we 
couldn't trace the mobster who sold her the time-touring tickets. She 
used a different source than she'd used to buy the phony identities and 
we never traced the ticket-scalper." 
 
John Caddrick drained the rest of the scotch in his 
glass, then 
leaned forward in his chair. "What I want, Ms. Azzan, is simple enough. 
I want my daughter back, alive and unharmed, whatever it takes." The 
rasp of steel in the senator's voice sent a chill of genuine terror 
down Ronisha's spine. "You may believe I've followed the reports of 
riots, kidnappings, and murders on this station with keen interest. If 
anything has happened to my little girl on this god-forsaken time 
terminal or down one of its gates, I will use my authority and 
influence to shut down this entire station. And you may rest assured, 
Ms. Azzan, these federal marshals will shut you down, if the situation 
warrants it." 
 
Ronisha slipped a hand into her lap and pressed the buzzer under the 
lip of Bull's massive desk, the one that alerted security headquarters 
trouble was brewing in the station manager's office. She wanted Mike 
Benson up here, stat, and kicked herself for not having summoned him 
sooner. 
 
"Senator," she had to force her voice to steadiness, "I think everyone 
in this room realizes how serious the situation is. Fortunately, we've 
obtained a very solid lead on the terrorists you came here hoping to 
trace. We have several of their henchmen under arrest and are fully 
informed as to the Ansar Majlis' plans. My chief of security has men 
acting on this information right now, sweeping the station to arrest 
several of the Ansar Majlis' key ringleaders, who arrived through 
Primary today." 
 
Caddrick's eyes shot wide. "You have information on their plans?" he 
echoed, voice flat with surprise. 
 
"Yes, we do. Several of the station's resident down-timers discovered 
the plot and fought a pitched battle against the terrorists, subduing 
them. Thanks to the down-timers, we have enough information to arrest 
the entire Ansar Majlis operation." 
 
Shock detonated behind Caddrick's eyes. "My God! Why, that's -- that's 
incredible! But that still doesn't tell us where Jenna is." Shock gave 
way to calculating hostility. 
 
"No, it doesn't," she agreed, stalling for time while thinking 
fiercely, Shag your butt, Benson, I need you up here, and played what 
she hoped would not prove to be her final trump card. "Because we're 
dealing with international and inter-temporal terrorism, I don't think 
it's unreasonable to call in an uninterested third party. To oversee 
the investigations which will have to be launched. I certainly don't 
want to give the impression this station has anything to hide. And I'm 
certain you don't want the investigation to take on the appearance of a 
personal vendetta." 
 
A few of the reporters suppressed delighted gasps. 
 
Senator Caddrick glared at her while a slow red flush crept up his 

neck. 
 
"Of course," Ronisha added, "we know it isn't anything of the kind. But 
surely you, of all people, must know how appearances can be deceiving. 
The public has a right to the truth, obtained in a fair, unbiased 
manner. Thank you, Senator, for insisting on an independent 
investigation by an unbiased team. If I recall inter-temporal statutes 
correctly, that kind of fact-finding mission would fall under the 
jurisdiction of the Inter-Temporal Court of the Hague. I propose we 
send a representative of the Bureau of Access Time Functions through 
Primary at its next cycle and request immediate assistance from an 
independent team of evaluators appointed by I.T.C.H." 
 
She and Senator Caddrick locked gazes across the desk. She'd just made 
an enemy for life and knew it; but John Caddrick had walked into this 
room already a mortal enemy, so no ground was lost by insisting on an 
unbiased review team. Under normal circumstances, the very last 
thing 
anyone on station would want was an investigation by the Inter-Temporal 
Court. Zealous I.T.C.H. officers had been known to shut down station 
operations over minor violations, putting stations under direct Court 
control until new management could demonstrate its willingness and 
ability to comply with the last dotted "i" and crossed "t" of the law. 
 
But these weren't ordinary circumstances. 
 
She was fighting for the life of the station. 
 
Senator Caddrick nodded slow agreement, despite the fury seething in 
his eyes. "Of course, Ms. Azzan. It was never my intention to conduct 
an official investigation personally, although I certainly will demand 
that one be launched immediately. I shall, of course, conduct a fact-
finding mission of my own while I'm here." 
 
There being nothing she could do to stop him, short of throwing him 
into the brig -- which would not improve the station's image -- Ronisha 
simply nodded graciously. "Now, then, senator, you said your daughter 
had obtained forged identification papers? She and her kidnappers are 
travelling under assumed names, then. What names? Any information you 
can give us will be critical in tracing them." 
 
"Yes, of course." The senator was digging into a pocket for a CM disk, 
which he held out. Ronisha accepted the disk just as the emergency 
phone on the corner of Bull's desk jangled, its tones shrill in the 
hushed office. Ronisha glanced at it with a sinking sensation in her 
middle. Whoever was on the other end of that line knew what Ronisha was 
in the middle of, up here, how serious this meeting was. 
 
"Excuse me, please," she said, picking up the phone. "Aerie, Azzan 
speaking. This had better be good." 
 
"Mike Benson, reporting in!" The security chief had to shout above the 
roar in the background. "We've got the Ansar Majlis ringleaders under 
wraps." 
 
"Fabulous," she said with a rush of relief. 
 
"Do you still need me to answer that silent alarm?" 

 
"Yes, please." 
 
"On my way." 
 
She hung up the phone and faced the expectant crowd in her office. 
"Now, then," she said pleasantly, "where were we, senator? You were 
about to give us the information on your daughter's forged 
identifications, I believe." 
 
Caddrick stared at her for long moments, clearly expecting her to 
explain the interruption. When she didn't, he glowered for a moment, 
then said coldly, "This disk contains the data we've gathered so far. 
Mr. Kaederman believes the Ansar Majlis ringleader, a notorious 
intersexual using the alias Noah Armstrong, used one of Jenna's forged 
identities to bring my daughter here. Jenna's kidnapper was probably 
travelling under the name of Benny Catlin." 
 
Across the room, Granville Baxter came out of his chair to tap commands 
into the nearest computer terminal, pulling up Time Tours' records of 
gate departures. 
 
"Perhaps, senator," Ronisha suggested, "you might give us some insight 
into your daughter's interests and habits? 
Anything we can learn 
about Jenna, about the way she thinks, what she might do under stress, 
will increase our chances of locating her." 
 
"Yes, of course. I brought some things with me, besides that disk." 
Senator Caddrick turned to an aide who hovered nearby. "Hand around 
those biographical packets, would you? And those photos of that 
bastard, Armstrong." 
 
While Bax worked at the computer, a sweating senatorial aide passed 
dossiers around the room, first to Ronisha and the Time Tours CEO, then 
to the newsies, who struck like piranha. There were several photographs 
of Jenna Caddrick, all of them recent, as well as a photograph of the 
Ansar Majlis terrorist, Noah Armstrong. Ronisha realized with a start 
of surprise why the senator had mistaken Skeeter Jackson for his 
daughter's kidnapper. From a full-frontal view, they didn't closely 
resemble one another, but there were distinct similarities of bone 
structure and coloring. From behind or at an oblique angle, the 
resemblance was strong enough to understand the mistaken identity. The 
brief document attached to the photos outlined Jenna Caddrick's habits, 
manners, routines, interests, and hobbies. 
 
At the other end of the crowded office, Granville Baxter glanced up 
from the computer screen, looked over the photos, then cleared his 
throat. "I found Benny Catlin's tour records, but I'm afraid we still 
have a serious problem facing us -- more serious than tracing Benny 
Catlin in London." 
 
John Caddrick's glare was lethal. "What could possibly be more serious 
than locating my daughter's kidnapper?" 
 
Bax held up the photograph of Noah Armstrong. "This." 
 
"What about it?" 

 
The Time Tours executive paused. Then sipped air and looked like he 
wanted to bolt for the nearest exit. Ronisha Azzan wasn't sure just 
what the bad news would be, but she was already quite certain she 
wasn't going to like it. 
 
Granville Baxter didn't disappoint her. 
 
"Well, senator, you see . . ." He held up a snapshot. "This photograph 
of your daughter's kidnapper . . . This isn't Benny Catlin." 
 
 
 
Chapter Two 
 
Of all the historians, criminologists, and reporters fortunate enough 
to win spots on the Ripper Watch team, none was more determined to 
obtain the truth of the Ripper story than Dominica Nosette. Not one of 
the other team members had a quarter the professional ruthlessness she 
possessed in her big toe. The only one who came close was her partner, 
Guy Pendergast. And Dominica was utterly delighted with Guy, because he 
had done what no one else had managed since their arrival in London. He 
had discovered the identity of Jack the Ripper. The mysterious doctor 
mentoring the irretrievably mad James Maybrick was the guiding genius 
of the two-man team known to history as the Ripper. And Dominica 
intended to vault herself to fame and fortune on the coattails of their 
murderous partnership. 
 
"His name is John Lachley," Guy had said breathlessly as they'd slipped 
out of Spaldergate House with their luggage, determined to break loose 
of their time guides' stranglehold. "He's a medical doctor, with 
training in the occult and ties to the East End. Came up out of SoHo, 
just west of Whitechapel. He's our man, I'll stake my reputation on it. 
Calls his house Tibor, mind. The same word our mystery Ripper used the 
night Polly Nichols died." Pendegast chuckled thinly. "And those fuzzy-
brained idiots with me were so busy doting on that Irish poet, William 
Butler Yeats, they missed the clue entirely!" 
 
John Lachley, they had since discovered, had ties to the royal family, 
as well, through the queen's grandson, Prince Albert Victor Christian 
Edward. And John Lachley had been born right in Whitechapel itself, in 
Middlesex Street, which explained the Ripper's familiarity with the 
streets. He'd gone to charity school, had John Lachley, and acquired 
his medical education in Scotland. Once known throughout the East End 
as Johnny Anubis, séance parlour medium and small-time occultist, Dr. 
John Lachley now lectured on mesmerism and other occult subjects to 
large audiences drawn from London's finest families. He was a member of 
the Theosophical Society, a respected physician with a surgery in 
Cleveland Street, a model subject of the crown in every way. 
 
That much, Dominica Nosette and Guy Pendergast had managed to discover 
thus far, working on their own without those repressive, overly 
cautious Time Tours guides curtailing their every move. But why John 
Lachley was working with James Maybrick to murder East End whores, and 
what was in the letters Lachley was slowly tracking down, killing the 
previous owners to keep some dark and clearly critical secret, Dominica 
had no idea. She intended to find out. 

 
The video she had already obtained of Lachley was worth a literal 
fortune, video footage showing him in company with the young prince, 
footage of him meeting the soon-to-be-notorious Aleister Crowley, and 
with the founders of the Golden Dawn magical order, Mathers and Waite 
and the rest. Whether or not these occultists were also involved in the 
conspiracy of the letters, Dominica didn't know. That, too, she 
intended to discover. 
 
"We're going to win that Carson Historical Video Prize!" she told Guy 
Pendergast as they set out from the flat they'd rented in SoHo. 
"Lachley will strike again September 30th. The night of the double 
event . . ." 
 
"Which means Elizabeth Stride and Catharine Eddowes must have 
possession of the letters he's after!" 
 
"Yes. And Mary Kelly must have another one. Guy . . ." Dominica mused, 
slanting a glance up at her partner. "How good are you at picking 
pockets?" 
 
"Picking pockets?" he echoed, brows drifting upward in startlement. 
 
She smiled. "Well, it occurs to me that we could probably unlock the 
key to this whole thing if we could lay hands on one of those letters. 
Just long enough to photograph it. Then we slip it back into the pocket 
you steal it from, long before he kills Stride and Eddowes. All we have 
to do then is follow him after the double-event murders. Videotape 
those, then collect our Carson Prize. And rather an enormous amount of 
money," she ended smugly. 
 
Guy Pendergast smiled slowly. "Dominica, my pet, you are brilliant." 
 
"Of course I'm brilliant! I didn't get where I am by being stupid. 
We'll have to tackle Stride, since Catharine Eddowes is leaving London 
to head out to Kent, picking hops. It might be interesting to videotape 
Eddowes out there, working the harvest." She frowned. "You know, it 
doesn't make sense, that. If she's in possession of something so 
valuable that Lachley is committing brutal murder to obtain it, you'd 
think a woman like Catharine Eddowes would try to convert it into cash. 
She's plagued her own daughter for money so often, the poor thing moves 
every few weeks around South London, just to keep her mother from 
tapping her for tuppence. Yet Kate Eddowes walks -- walks, mind you, in 
this weather -- all the way from London to rural Kent, just to break 
her back working in wet fields picking hops as a migrant agricultural 
laborer." 
 
"Maybe," Guy suggested dryly, "she hasn't cashed in on her letter 
because she can't read it." 
 
Dominica dismissed that as chauvinist nonsense. "Don't be a boor. She 
was educated in St. John's Charity School, Potter's Field, Tooley 
Street. And all her friends described her as a scholarly, intense 
woman. Of course she can read it." 
 
Her partner shrugged. "It was just an idea." 
 

"Well, when we get our hands on whatever Long Liz Stride has, we shall 
find out, shan't we?" 
 
Guy Pendergast chuckled. "Right." 
 
So they set their faces east and started combing the dismal streets of 
Whitechapel, looking for one particular Swedish-born prostitute who had 
barely two weeks left to live. 
 
* * * 
 
Victoria Station was jam-packed with Ripperoons. 
 
Skeeter, like most of the others jammed in the station's Commons cheek-
by-jowl, felt better for a good night's sleep. Memory of the previous 
evening's riot at Primary was fading in the face of anticipated news 
from London. After a century and a half of waiting, the world was 
finally going to learn who Jack the Ripper really was. If, of course, 
and Skeeter grinned to himself, the Ripper Watch experts in London had 
figured it out. 
 
Tourists who'd appointed themselves lay experts had gathered from all 
over Commons, surging into Victoria Station and talking 
nineteen 
miles to the minute, consulting Ripper-suspect biographies as they 
argued the merits of various theories. Skeeter, with Kit Carson at his 
heels, strolled through the madhouse crowd, eyes sharp for any sign of 
pickpockets or con artists working the throng. Voices like a mile-long 
swarm of locusts bounced off the girders high overhead with echoes that 
hurt the senses, expounding favored Ripper theories and wondering what 
had become of Senator 
Caddrick's daughter. 
 
" -- witness descriptions don't tally well with one another. I mean, 
they range from a guy in his thirties with fair skin, sandy hair and 
light brown mustache to a guy in his forties or fifties, dark hair and 
mustache, dark eyes and complexion, with a 'foreign' look. Personally, 
I don't think any of the witnesses saw the real Ripper. Except maybe 
Israel Schwartz, the Jew who didn't speak English. He saw Elizabeth 
Stride attacked . . ." 
 
" . . . whole slew of people claimed they were Jack the Ripper, 
including a manure collector who emigrated to Australia. Fellow got 
murderously angry when drunk, at least he did if a prostitute 
approached. Told his son he was the Ripper and intended to confess 
before he died, but never did. Confess, I mean. He died, no problem. 
1912." 
 
" -- they bring I.T.C.H. agents in to monitor this mess, the Inter-
Temporal Court will shut us all down!" 
 
"I heard it was Lewis Carroll -- " 
 
"The author of Alice in Wonderland? The Ripper? You gotta be kidding! I 
mean, so what if he liked to photograph naked little girls? That's 
pretty weird, but it doesn't fit the profile of a man who'd rip women 
open with an eight-inch knife!" 
 
"No, I don't think it was Aleister Crowley, even if he was a sick 

puppy. Worshipped anything evil and violent, claimed to be the prophet 
of the anti-Christ. But as a Ripper suspect, I think the evidence is 
pretty thin . . ." 
 
" -- somebody's going to shoot that bastard, that's what I think, and 
Caddrick's got it coming to him, walking onto this station and tear 
gassing a crowd full of innocent women and kids -- " 
 
" . . . convinced the prime minister did it, covering up for the 
queen's grandson Eddy. Although why he would've married a poor Catholic 
girl when he was screwing half the women in London, and supposedly 
several men, as well, is anybody's guess . . ." 
 
"Nuts," somebody else nearby muttered. "We are hip deep in nuts. 
Sheesh. I need another beer . . ." 
 
And finally, from the loudspeakers overhead: "Your attention please. 
Gate Two is due to cycle in three minutes. All departures, be advised . 
. ." 
 
Thank God, Skeeter thought. He glanced back at Kit and found the 
retired scout trailing him half a dozen paces back. Kit rolled his eyes 
at a mob of sign-carrying loons, chanting the praises of their Immortal 
Lord Jack and heckling the Time Tours guides trying to organize the 
outgoing Ripper Watch Tour, then indicated with a gesture, "Okay, 
hotshot, get busy!" 
 
So he worked the crowd, quartering it leisurely, keeping his gaze 
sharp. When the immense Britannia finally began its cycle, the roar of 
voices reached a fever pitch. Wagers rattled like hailstones off every 
echoing surface in Victoria Station. Skeeter prowled through the 
surging crowd, alert as a snow leopard and beginning to grow impatient, 
aware of Kit's presence behind him, watching, judging. He knew his 
particular brand of prey was out here. His senses twitched, searching 
for telltale movements, the little signs he knew so well. High 
overhead, the huge gate dilated slowly open . . . And Skeeter rocked to 
a halt. His gaze zeroed in, a stooping hawk spotting his next meal. The 
pickpocket was stalking a man in his fifties whose tanned face, lean 
build, and expensively casual clothes shouted, California millionaire. 
The pickpocket lifted a fat wallet from the Californian's jacket with a 
practiced stumble and a hasty apology given and accepted with ease. 
 
Skeeter grinned. Gotcha! 
 
The handcuffs he slipped out of his pocket weren't real. He'd picked 
them up cheap from a station outfitter's bin of discount toys. But they 
were functional enough for Skeeter's purposes. He slid forward between 
the Californian and the pickpocket just as the latter slipped the 
wallet into his own jacket. Skeeter tapped the thief on the shoulder. 
"Hi, there!" 
 
And clicked the cuffs around the guy's wrists before he could blink. 
 
"Hey! What the -- " 
 
"Security!" Skeeter bawled, grabbing the guy's jacket lapel. "Got a 
pickpocket over here! Say, mister," Skeeter got the victim's attention, 

"this guy just lifted your wallet." 
 
The tourist gasped, hand flying to his extremely empty pocket. "Good 
God! I've been robbed! Why, you sneaking -- " 
 
Security arrived before the irate Californian could take a swing at the 
struggling pickpocket. "What's going on?" The uniformed security guard 
sported a bruise down one cheek from the previous day's riot. 
 
"Caught this guy lifting a tourist's wallet," Skeeter explained. "It's 
in his front jacket pocket. Oh, those cuffs are toys, by the way. Just 
thought you might want to know." 
 
Skeeter indulged a grin at the look on all three faces, then melted 
into the crowd, leaving the stunned security officer to deal with the 
irate tourist and the even more irate pickpocket. He could hear the 
latter howling his outrage all the way through Victoria Station. 
Skeeter chuckled. This was almost as much fun as picking pockets, 
himself. More, maybe. Less risk involved, certainly. He was still 
chuckling when Kit caught up, grinning fit to crack his face. 
 
"That was impressive. Kids' toys!" 
 
"Yeah, well, sometimes you gotta make do." 
 
"As far as I'm concerned, you won't have to 'make do' with toy 
handcuffs any longer. You're definitely hired. I was watching close, 
following your gaze, and I didn't see a thing." 
 
Skeeter's face went hot, but it was a proud flush. He'd done a good job 
and Kit knew it. High overhead, the returning tour started pouring 
through the open gate. A Time Tours guide rushed down the stairs, well 
in advance of the tourists, clutching a heavy pouch. Waiting newsies 
mobbed him. 
 
"Who is it -- ?" 
 
" -- that a videotape?" 
 
"Has the Ripper Watch Team solved -- ?" 
 
The grim-faced guide vanished into the Time Tours ticket office and 
slammed the door, leaving the newsies screaming at sound-proofed glass. 
 
"You know," Skeeter mused, "that guy didn't act like an excited courier 
carrying the news of the decade, did he?" 
 
"No," Kit agreed, expression thoughtful. 
 
A moment later, the rest of the tour reached Commons floor and word 
spread like racing wildfire: Two killers! 
 
"James Maybrick, after all -- " 
 
"Complete unknown! Some doctor, nobody has the faintest idea who -- " 
 
"Working together -- !" 

 
And hard on the heels of that shock, yet another, potentially fatal to 
the entire station: Missing tourist! 
 
" -- shot two up-time baggage handlers to death -- " 
 
" -- said he vanished over in SoHo -- " 
 
"Oh, my God," Skeeter groaned. "Another missing person!" And another 
shocking murder spree for TT-86 to explain to the press and the 
government agencies and Senator Caddrick. 
 
"Who was he?" a woman dressed as a Roman matriarch demanded at 
Skeeter's elbow. 
 
"I don't know!" 
 
"Someone said he's a graduate student . . ." 
 
" . . . heard his name was Benny Catlin . . ." 
 
Benny Catlin? 
 
That name rang alarm bells in Skeeter's memory. Lots of them. Big, fat, 
warped ones. Benny Catlin was the name on all that luggage Skeeter'd 
hauled through the Britannia Gate, last time out. What was a graduate 
student doing with that much luggage? Skeeter hadn't met a grad student 
yet with enough money to haul five enormous steamer trunks through any 
gate, much less the Britannia. And that trunk Skeeter had almost 
knocked off the platform had belonged to Benny Catlin, too. Which meant 
the white-faced, mutton-chopped, short little jerk who'd started 
screaming at him was their missing man. And a double murderer. 
 
He narrowed his eyes, wondering just what Benny Catlin had stowed in 
all that luggage. And whether or not the tourist responsible for 
Skeeter losing his job as baggage porter might look anything like the 
mysterious doctor in the Ripper Watch video. The thought unsettled him. 
Not that an up-timer might've committed the murders. That theory had 
been kicked around so many times, it was old news. But Skeeter might 
have carried through the murderer's own luggage, had maybe talked to 
Jack the Ripper, himself, without realizing it. 
 
And that was a decidedly uneasy thought. That a serial killer as 
seriously depraved as the Ripper could pass through society looking and 
behaving like a completely normal person, while inside . . . Skeeter 
shivered. And was damned glad he hadn't stayed in London, after all, 
which he'd planned to do before Ianira's disappearance. If he'd stayed, 
he'd doubtless have been pressed into searching for the missing Benny 
Catlin. And hunting Jack the Ripper was not Skeeter's idea of a sane 
way to pass the time. He'd stick to stalking pickpockets and small-time 
grifters. Those, at least, he could understand. 
 
He didn't want to understand serial killers. 
 
Not ever. 
 
"Skeeter?" 

 
Kit's gaze was centered squarely on him, brows twitching downward in 
concern. 
 
"Yeah?" 
 
"What's wrong?" 
 
"I think I saw Catlin, the day the gate opened last week." 
 
"Really? What do you remember about him?" 
 
Skeeter described Catlin, then added, "He had too much luggage for a 
grad student. Five big steamer trunks. Expensive ones." 
 
"He's not the guy whose steamer trunk almost went off the platform, is 
he?" Kit asked abruptly, eyes narrowed. 
 
Skeeter blinked in surprise. Then rubbed the back of his neck, 
embarrassed. "Uh, yeah. I think so. That was the name on the luggage 
tag. And he was white as any ghost, trying to keep it from falling." 
 
"I think," Kit said in a tight, dangerous voice, "we'd better tell 
Ronisha Azzan about this, because it looks to me like Catlin may well 
have been one of the Ansar Majlis goons on Armstrong's payroll. I find 
myself wondering what -- or who -- was in that trunk. And I'll bet 
Ronisha Azzan will, too." 
 
"Aw, nuts . . . Kit, I heard she was meeting with Senator Caddrick 
again this morning, trying to figure out where his kid went. And if he 
sees me, he's gonna remember I assaulted him, back at Primary. That 
kind of attention, I don't need." 
 
"Nonsense," Kit said firmly. "Nobody's going to jail the guy who 
figured out where his kid's kidnappers went." 
 
Skeeter had a terrible feeling he would find himself dragged down the 
Britannia Gate eight days from now as part of the search teams, after 
all. He wondered briefly if a bullet would've been waiting for him, if 
he'd stayed to haul those heavy steamer trunks to Catlin's hotel? 
Skeeter sighed, then ran a hand through his hair. Why was it, going 
legit had turned into the hardest thing he'd ever tried to do? And 
considering his background, that was saying a lot. 
 
"Well," he muttered, "I guess I'll just have to play it by ear, won't 
I?" 
 
"That's the spirit!" Kit grinned. "Come on, Skeeter. Let's go find you 
a security squawky someplace, then maybe by the time we've done that, 
Ronnie's followup meeting with the senator will be over?" 
 
Skeeter managed a weak grin of gratitude. "Okay. Thanks." 
 
Wondering if he knew what he was doing, he followed Kit Carson's lead. 
Just go with Kit, he told himself, and tried not to think too closely 
about where the grizzled old scout would end up leading him. He was 
quite sure he did not want to find out. 

 
* * * 
 
Mary Jane Kelly was afraid of the man she'd come to visit. Black magic 
and demon worship and an appetite for the unholy . . . 
 
Marie Jeannette, as she'd been born, knew the whispers were not just 
hideous rumour, either, they were terrifying fact. He'd told her so, 
himself, on his many visits to the high-class West End house where 
she'd worked at the time, the one she'd been thrown out of shortly 
afterward for excessive drinking, a habit she'd picked up after 
becoming this particular gentleman's favorite. 
 
"A whore," he'd smiled down into her eyes, "is my ideal of the perfect 
unholy woman. A sower of immorality, a merchant of sin. A perfect 
vessel for wreaking the destruction of prudish social convention and 
absurd, medieval morals. Don't you agree, my dear?" 
 
Whatever the customer wants, had been her initial response to his 
blazing eyes and strange appetites. The fear had come later, when he 
whispered between savage thrusts, mouth half full of her left breast, 
"The Second Coming will bring a Great Year to its close . . . and the 
powers of hell will destroy all the weak and foolish lunacy Christians 
call goodness. And I . . ." he murmured darkly as he gave her a 
particularly hard pounding, excitement glittering in his eyes, "I 
worship those powers of hell. I shall rule upon this earth when the 
destruction sweeps away godliness and everything it stands for. I shall 
be the most powerful of men, preparing the way for the anti-Christ . . 
. Does this shock you, my dear? Or," he laughed and kissed her hard, 
"does it excite you?" 
 
Of all the men who'd paid to use her body, rich men who'd plied her 
with furs and beautiful clothes and trips to faraway, exotic places 
like Paris, East End costermongers reeking of gin and dead fish, 
violent louts who'd blacked her eye, afterwards, and the half-grown 
boys brought to a certain fancy West End address by their wealthy 
fathers to learn what to do with a woman, of all those many men, none 
frightened twenty-six-year-old Mary Kelly as deeply as Mr. Aleister 
Crowley. 
 
But Mary Jane Kelly had been living in fear so deep, she would almost 
rather have faced Satan, himself, than continue in this terror. So she 
had brought herself, quaking in her once-fine boots, to Satan's very 
doorstep, praying that Mr. Crowley's ambitions would cause him to find 
her plight interesting -- and that his dark powers would help keep her 
alive. The butler who answered the door sniffed irritably, but allowed 
her to step out of the cold wind into a polished, gleaming hall to wait 
while he took her message to his master. 
 
Moments later, the butler was ushering her into a study whose bookcases 
were crowded with hundreds of ancient, mouldering books and 
manuscripts, and whose shelves were lined with items she decided 
queasily she didn't really wish to look at too closely. The only 
crucifix in the room was upside down. It hung above a lit, black 
candle. 
 
"Why, Mary Kelly, it is you! I've missed you enormously, my dear!" 

 
Mr. Crowley had not changed. He came around the desk, hands 
outstretched, and kissed her cheek, surrounded by a black aura of 
danger that set her quaking in her boots again. She could still 
remember gulping down whole bottles of gin, brandy, anything she could 
lay hands on, trying to forget what it had felt like, with this man in 
her. What am I doing here, God help me, I haven't any other choice, 
they'll kill me, else . . . and the baby, too, can't let 'em kill my 
baby . . . 
 
Pregnant, utterly penniless, Mary Kelly had nowhere else to turn. 
 
"Sit down, please." He ushered her to a chair, drawing another up close 
beside her. "What brings you here? Your hands are like ice, Mary, would 
you like a brandy to warm you?" 
 
"Please, yes . . ." Her voice was shaking as badly as her hands. 
 
He splashed brandy into a snifter, handed it to her, watched her gulp 
it down. 
 
"What can I do for you, then?" 
 
She lowered the empty glass to her threadbare lap. "I need . . . I'm in 
terrible trouble, you see, and I thought . . . I thought you might be 
interested in . . . the reason why." 
 
He tipped his head to one side, eyes merry. "If you're going to tell me 
I'm the father of whatever brat you might be carrying, I would point 
out it's been more than seven months, my dear, and you clearly are not 
seven months gone with child." 
 
Her face flamed. "No, it's not the baby, that's Joseph's, right enough, 
and he's been good to me. It's this . . ." She dug into her pocket, 
brought out the grimy sheets of foolscap which Joseph had brought home 
for her to translate, after buying them from Dark Annie. Poor Joe, he'd 
thought these hideous little letters would be their ticket to wealth. 
But Annie was dead, monstrously so, as was the woman she'd got them 
from, and after reading these letters, Mary was terrified that she 
would be next, she and whoever else had been insane enough to lay hands 
on one of these sordid little missives. 
 
He glanced at the writing, frowned. "This is in Welsh, is it not?" 
 
She nodded. "My man . . . he bought them, you see, from Annie, when she 
needed medicines, asked me to read them out for him. There were others 
. . ." Her voice had begun to shake again. "Annie had them from Polly 
and now they're both dead! Murdered and cut apart by this madman in 
Whitechapel!" 
 
Aleister Crowley was staring at her. "My dear," he said gently, 
"whatever is in these letters?" 
 
In a low, trembling voice, she told him. Word for word, she told him 
exactly what the letters said. And he saw it as quickly as she had 
done. 
 

"My God! Eddy? Collars and Cuffs? It must be . . ." 
 
She nodded. "Yes. It must be him. And the queen must have ordered all 
this hushed up, I can't think why else Polly Nichols would have been 
killed so horribly, or poor Annie Chapman, who was so sick, she could 
hardly stand up." 
 
Crowley began to laugh, very softly. "Victoria, order this done? Oh, 
no, my dear, the queen is entirely too good to condone what's been done 
by our friend the Whitechapel fiend. Oh, she's no fool, and if she knew 
about these," he tapped the letters in Mary's shaking hand, "she might 
well try to hush it all up. But order someone to cut the owners of the 
letters to pieces in the streets? No. She would not wish for that kind 
of publicity, for that sort of scrutiny. The police and the press are 
simply agog over our friend the Whitechapel Murderer. I must say," he 
chuckled, "quite a reputation, he's given himself, isn't it? This 
business must be driving the authorities mad. No, Victoria would never 
be stupid enough to generate that sort of publicity. Take my word for 
it, Mary dear, someone else is committing these murders. Someone close 
to Eddy, no doubt. Someone with a great deal to lose, should Eddy's 
indiscretions become public knowledge." He sat tapping his fingertips 
against the arm of his chair for long moments. "Well, now, this is 
quite an intriguing little mystery you've handed me, my dear. One 
presumes you want money?" 
 
She shook her head, bit her lip. "I . . . I don't want to be . . . next 
. . ." 
 
"Ah. Of course you don't." 
 
"I've got a baby coming," she got out in a rush, "and a man who wants 
to marry me, when he gets another job, even though he knows what I've 
been. Joseph's a good man, wants to take me off the streets, and he 
didn't know what this horrible little letter was when he bought it, he 
was just doing Annie a favor, because she was so sick and needed the 
money for medicine . . ." 
 
He took her trembling hands in his own and patted them, brought them to 
his lips. Mary shuddered, fighting more terror than she'd ever known in 
her young life. 
 
"Here, now, no need for such hysteria, my dear. Of course you're 
frightened, but you've done exactly the right thing, coming to me for 
protection." He dried her wet face with his hands, brushed her heavy, 
strawberry-blonde hair back from her brow, planted a kiss there. "I'll 
take very good care of you, my dear. Just leave the letter with me, 
that's a good girl. I've a fair idea who might be profiting from these 
murders, knowing Eddy as I do, and the way certain men think. Yes, I'll 
take very good care of you, my dearest . . ." 
 
He was kissing her, unbuttoning her dress, sliding his hand up under 
her skirt. 
 
He gave her two whole crowns, after, worth half a pound sterling. 
 
Kissed her and told her to buy herself a lot of gin and a pretty new 
shawl and not to worry, he would see to it that she was never molested 

by whoever was hunting down Eddy's sordid little letters. When she left 
the house, pulling her threadbare shawl tightly about her shoulders 
against the cold bite of the wind, Mary Jane Kelly was trembling far 
harder than she'd been when she'd arrived an hour previously. What've I 
done, letting him do that horrible ritual over me, like that, when he 
was in me, what in God's name have I done? 
 
She bit her lip and started for home. Surely, anything was better than 
being cut into pieces and having her insides strewn across the ground? 
Surely it was? But she felt dirty and cold and unclean down to her 
soul, which she never had felt even when letting the meanest, dirtiest 
louts in the East End spend inside her. She brushed wetness from her 
eyes and pressed a hand against her belly, where a child was growing. 
Whatever else, she had to think about far more than just herself, now. 
Which was why she could have done nothing else, today. 
 
But, oh, God, she was so afraid. 
 
And Mr. Aleister Crowley frightened her only a little less terribly 
than the rest. 
 
* * * 
 
"Kit!" 
 
Kit Carson glanced around, peering into the nervous crowds thronging 
Commons, many of them wondering in shrill tones what would happen and 
would their vacations be cancelled and could they get a refund if 
Senator Caddrick closed down TT-86? He found Robert Li bearing down on 
him and smiled at his long-time friend. 
 
"Hi, Robert. What's up?" 
 
The antiquarian stared. "What's up? You are kidding, aren't you? Kit, 
are you out of your gate-addled mind? Skeeter Jackson, Neo Edo's house 
detective?" 
 
Kit chuckled. "Oh, that. Is that all?" 
 
His friend's expression altered to one of deep pity. "Oh, God, it's 
true. You have lost your mind." 
 
Kit's lips twitched. "Glad to know you think so highly of me, pal. No, 
I haven't lost my mind. But you -- and just about every other 'eighty-
sixer on station -- have apparently lost your sense of fair play." 
 
Robert Li blinked, the fair skin of his maternal Scandinavian heritage 
at odds with features bequeathed him by a paternal Hong Kong Chinese 
grandfather. "Come again?" 
 
"Skeeter," Kit said gently, ticking off the points on his fingers. 
"One, that boy never rolled an 'eighty-sixer. Never. And if you'd think 
about it, you'd figure out why. Two, he hasn't been the same ever since 
that gawd-awful wager of his with Goldie went sour and Marcus ended up 
in chains down the Porta Romae. Three, Ianira trusted him implicitly. 
And Ianira Cassondra is no fool." Kit ran a hand through his thinning 
hair, unable to hide the grief mere thought of Ianira and her missing 

family brought. "That boy has damn near killed himself looking for 
them. Lost the only two honest jobs he could find on station doing it, 
too. And even then, he still didn't go back to picking pockets. The 
down-timers have been feeding him, Robert, because he hasn't had enough 
cash to buy a hot dog. So what's he been doing? Looking for a job 
nobody'll give him, tracking down terrorists in Shangri-La's basement, 
and arresting thirty-one small-time crooks in a single week. Without 
anybody asking him or paying him to do it. So yesterday, when he pulled 
Rachel Eisenstein out of that disaster at Primary, I decided it was 
high time somebody around here gave that kid a fair break. He's earned 
it. Especially with Caddrick likely to press charges for assaulting 
him, for God's sake. After what Caddrick did, roughing him up, that boy 
is gonna need all the help he can get." 
 
Robert Li closed his mouth. Blinked. "Good God," the antiquarian said 
softly. Then, slowly, "All right, I'll concede a point when I've been 
wrong. But you've gotta admit, it's unlikely as hell." 
 
Kit grinned. "Oh, sure it is. And that," he chuckled, "is why I'm 
having so much fun. What's that you've got with you?" He nodded at the 
sheet of paper his friend was carrying. 
 
"This? Oh, it's a flier on Jenna Caddrick and that terrorist who 
grabbed her, Noah Armstrong. Mike Benson's ordered a stationwide hunt, 
looking for any eyewitnesses who might remember seeing them. I was 
trying to find you, to ask if you'd seen one of these yet, when I heard 
the news about you hiring Skeeter." 
 
"No, I haven't seen it." Kit took the flier curiously, glancing at the 
photos, and ran down the brief descriptions. "I read about Cassie 
Tyrol. Damned shame." 
 
"What's a shame?" Skeeter's voice asked at Kit's elbow. 
 
He glanced up and took approving note of the security radio he'd sent 
Skeeter to obtain. "Good, you got the squawky. Cassie Tyrol is what's a 
shame. She was Senator Caddrick's sister-in-law, poor soul, can you 
imagine being related to that? Have you seen one of these yet?" 
 
Skeeter took the flier curiously. "No." He narrowed his eyes slightly. 
"Don't know why Caddrick thought this creep was me," he muttered, 
frowning at the photo of Armstrong. "Guy looks sorta familiar, though. 
Not sure why . . ." The former con artist's frown deepened slowly. 
Then, seemingly struck by inspiration, Skeeter dug into a pocket and 
came out with an ink pen. He started drawing over the top of the 
photograph, startling Robert Li into leaning forward. 
 
"What in the world are you doing?" the antiquarian asked. 
 
"Just an idea," Skeeter muttered. He was sketching in a drooping 
mustache, sideburns. The pen fairly flew across the page, sketching in 
a bandana, a sombrero pulled low . . . 
 
"My God," Kit whispered, recognizing the face taking shape. "It's Joey 
Tyrolin!" 
 
Robert started slightly, swinging his gaze up to meet Kit's. "Joey -- ? 

That drunk pistolero we saw the other week, headed to Denver? That was 
Noah Armstrong? We were that close to a murdering terrorist and didn't 
even know it?" 
 
Another resemblance clicked in Kit's mind. "Joey Tyrolin! Skeeter, you 
genius! By God, I knew I'd hit on a brilliant idea, hiring you! Jenna 
Caddrick's aunt's name was Cassie Tyrol. Jocasta Tyrol -- Joey 
Tyrolin!" 
 
Skeeter wasn't smiling, however. In fact, he wasn't even standing 
beside them, any longer. He'd bolted through the crowd. He came back 
with another flier, one he'd ripped off the nearest concrete post. Kit 
had seen those fliers plastered up everywhere, with photos of the 
station's missing down-timers. Skeeter was sketching over Julius' 
photo. Skeeter's lips thinned to a grim line as he drew in long hair 
pulled back into a bun beneath a wide-brimmed calico bonnet. Then he 
held up the altered sketch of his missing young friend. "And this is 
the woman Joey Tyrolin tangled with at the Wild West ticket kiosk. The 
one Tyrolin's porter dropped a trunk on. I worked that gate departure, 
looking for some trace of Ianira and her family, and dammit, I didn't 
even recognize that boy!" 
 
Kit remembered the incident clearly. "You're right." He took the 
altered sketches and scowled down at them. "Miss Caddrick must have 
used the name Joey Tyrolin on that fake I.D. she bought in New York. 
And Armstrong simply appropriated the I.D. and her tickets. If 
Armstrong was in that departures line, you can bet Jenna Caddrick was, 
too." 
 
"Probably in one of the suitcases that porter dropped," Skeeter 
growled. "What I want to know is, how the hell did Julius get tangled 
up with terrorists? I know that boy. He wouldn't get involved in 
something like that, not without a damned good reason." 
 
Robert Li said slowly, "Those Ansar Majlis leaders you caught are 
denying it, but it's pretty clear they paid Armstrong to hit Jenna 
Caddrick. So it's a good bet Armstrong masterminded the hit on Ianira, 
too. If I remember right, Julius disappeared about the same time her 
whole family vanished, didn't he? But surely the boy wouldn't have 
helped the Ansar Majlis voluntarily?" 
 
Kit glanced at Skeeter, reading murderous hatred in the younger man's 
eyes and the set of his jaw. The one-time con artist said through 
clenched teeth, "If Armstrong blackmailed him with a threat to Ianira's 
life, he would've done anything that pack of cutthroats demanded. And 
waited for a chance to slit their throats, later." 
 
A chill shivered its way up Kit's spine. This was a side of Skeeter 
he'd never witnessed, the side that had survived twelfth century 
Mongolia and the worst childhood any 'eighty-sixer on station could lay 
claim to. Slowly, Kit nodded agreement. "Yes, I think you're reading 
this situation very clearly, Skeeter. Julius would've done anything to 
save Ianira, if Armstrong had kidnapped her as well as Jenna Caddrick. 
Armstrong's pals in the Ansar Majlis might well have been holding the 
boy prisoner with Marcus and the girls, probably forced him to help 
them all escape the station. And my bet is, Armstrong sent at least one 
of his men down the Britannia with the fake I.D. Jenna Caddrick's 

roommate was supposed to use. Benny Catlin wasn't anything more than a 
decoy, to make us think her kidnappers had gone to London, when they 
planned to take her to Denver, all along." 
 
Robert Li swung his gaze from Kit back to Skeeter. "Okay," he grinned 
suddenly, "I'm convinced! Damned smart move is right, hiring this 
genius. Question is, what do we do now?" 
 
Kit eyed Skeeter narrowly. "How well do you ride a horse?" 
 
Skeeter Jackson's sudden, lethal grin blazed like a noonday sun. "If 
it's got hooves, I can ride it." 
 
"In that case, we visit Time Tours, Incorporated. Because your new boss 
just came out of retirement. It's been a while since I visited Denver." 
 
Robert Li's mouth dropped open. Then the antiquarian started laughing. 
"Oh, my God! Wait until word gets out! Goldie Morran, for one, may 
strangle from simple shock. Kit Carson and Skeeter Jackson, partners in 
crime? I just wish I could get away from the studio long enough to go 
with you!" 
 
Kit clouted him across one shoulder. "The price of being the only 
I.F.A.R.T.S. agent on station. But there is something you could do . . 
." 
 
"Why do I have the feeling I ought to be counting my fingernails and 
locking my safe?" 
 
Kit grinned. "You wound me. Head over to Connie's, if you don't mind? 
We've only got six days before the Wild West Gate re-opens, which means 
we should've started outfitting last week, not to mention all the 
training Skeeter needs before we step through. I'd head straight to 
Connie's, but Skeeter and I have to break the news to Ronisha. And the 
senator." 
 
Skeeter visibly lost color. 
 
"Well, since you put it that way," Robert said hastily, "I'd rather ask 
Connie for favors than go near Caddrick, any day of the week." 
 
"Thought you'd see it my way. C'mon, Skeeter. The senator's not going 
to throw you in jail, not when you're the genius who figured out where 
his little girl disappeared to." 
 
Skeeter swallowed once. "Well, okay." 
 
"C'mon, Jackson. Time's wasting." 
 
Skeeter's grin was a little forced, but it was a brave effort. 
 
Personally, Kit could hardly wait to beard this particular lion. One 
thing he had very little tolerance for was a cocky politician. 
Particularly one threatening to shut down his station. Senator John 
Caddrick didn't know it yet, but he'd made the worst enemy of his life. 
Kit fully intended to enjoy his revenge. 
 

 
 
Chapter Three 
 
Ianira Cassondra wasn't sure how long she'd been imprisoned. 
 
The man who'd brought her to this room had kept her drugged for endless 
days. She knew only that she was somewhere in London, separated from 
the only people who could help her, and that her life remained in far 
too much danger from up-time threat to risk returning to Spaldergate 
House and its Britannia Gate, to seek help from friends on the station. 
She was as much on her own as she'd been in Athens, married to an 
inhuman merchant who valued her only for the male children she had been 
unable to produce. Her first husband had terrified Ianira. But the man 
who held her captive now . . . 
 
He was mad, this Dr. John Lachley. He was also the ruling half of a 
killing team the up-time world knew as Jack the Ripper. John Lachley 
could not come within touching distance of her without Ianira slipping 
into shock and the most monstrous visions she had ever suffered. When 
she heard footsteps on the stairs outside her imprisoning bedroom, 
Ianira broke into a cold sweat and uncontrollable tremors. But the door 
opened to reveal only the manservant, Charles. He carried a meal tray. 
"Mrs. Seddons sent up your supper," he said gently, his warm regard 
filled with pity. 
 
The food would be drugged, of course. 
 
It always was. 
 
"Thank you," Ianira whispered, voice hoarse. 
 
Outside her bedroom window, twilight settled over the rooftops and 
chimney pots of London. She stilled shaking hands, having waited and 
planned for this moment, terrified that something would go wrong, now 
that it had come. Charles set the tray on the little table beside her 
bed, then settled into a chair to watch her eat. They did not leave her 
alone at mealtimes, making sure she swallowed the drugged food that 
kept her witless and utterly helpless in their hands. The manservant 
and the cook, Mrs. Seddons, had been told Ianira was in deep shock and 
suffering from delusions. She no longer even tried to speak with them. 
What John Lachley had done to her after her first attempt to enlist the 
servants' aid . . . 
 
Ianira shuddered under the bedclothes. There wasn't enough hot water 
and soap in all of London to wash away what he'd done to her. 
Afterward, Ianira had planned a different route to freedom. So she sat 
up, trembling violently, and reached for the tray. Which she promptly 
dropped, spilling the contents across the carpets with a crash and 
clatter of broken china and tumbled silver. 
 
Charles lunged to his feet with a dismayed cry, making certain she was 
unharmed first, then eased her down against the pillows and said, "Let 
me clear this away and bring another tray for you . . ." 
 
The moment Charles left the room, Ianira lunged out of bed. She flung 
herself to the window, dragging up the heavy wooden frame, and 

scrambled out across the sill. Her bedroom was three floors up, but it 
faced the back of the house, overlooking a dismal, wet garden. The 
sloping roof of the rear porch broke her fall when she let go, jumping 
down in her nightdress and nothing else. 
 
She landed with a grunt and a thud, rolled helplessly across slick, wet 
roofing slates, and grabbed for the metal drain at the edge. She hung 
for a moment by both hands, bruised and shaken, then dropped the rest 
of the way to the ground. She fell sprawling into shrubbery and wet 
grass with a spray of water from the soaked branches. Ianira lay 
stunned for a long moment, then managed to roll to hands and knees and 
lifted her head, looking up through wild, fallen hair. She could hear 
shouts inside the house and the pounding of running footsteps. With a 
whimper of terror rising in the back of her throat, Ianira came to her 
feet and ran across the wet grass, limping on a bruised hip. 
 
The garden had to be escaped, whatever the cost. A high wall surrounded 
it on all sides. So Ianira ran for the front of the house, slipping and 
stumbling through mud that squelched beneath her bare feet, hiking her 
nightdress up to her knees. She found a gate and shoved at it, managed 
to find the latch and wrenched it open. She flung the heavy wooden gate 
back with a solid whump and ran down a carriage drive, past a small 
carriage house where she could hear a horse shifting in a wooden stall, 
kicking the side of its home in rythmic boredom. A horse . . . 
 
She didn't know how to ride, but surely a horse could take her farther 
and faster than she could run on bare, bruised feet? Ianira lunged into 
the carriage house, groping through near darkness to the stall where 
the animal snuffled through its feed trough, looking for stray oats. 
Teeth chattering, Ianira forced herself to calmness, found a lead rope 
hanging from a peg, and slipped open the stall door. "Hello," she 
whispered to the startled creature. "Let us go for a ride, we two." 
 
She clipped the lead rope to the horse's halter and led him out past 
the dark silhouette of Dr. Lachley's carriage. She clambered awkwardly 
onto the animal's back by means of the carriage's running board. Then 
she guided him with a soft nudge and whispered words of encouragement, 
bending low as they clopped through the carriage house door. She turned 
toward the street --  
 
"There!" 
 
The shout came from the garden behind her. 
 
She thumped muddy heels against the horse's flanks and the startled 
animal jumped forward, breaking past the front edge of the house at a 
jogging trot. She clung to the mane and gripped the horse's sides with 
bare legs, clinging for dear life. A dark shape loomed directly in 
front of them. Someone shouted and flung something straight at them. 
The horse screamed and reared, trying to shy away from the sudden 
threat. Ianira lost her grip and plunged backwards with a ragged scream 
of her own. She hit the ground with a sickening thud and lay winded, 
unable to move. The horse clattered away, riderless. 
 
Then he was on top of her, grasping her wrists, checking for broken 
bones. 
 

Ianira struck out wildly, trying to rake his face with her nails. 
"Don't touch me!" 
 
"She's delirious again, poor thing." John Lachley dug his thumb into 
the hollow of her throat, silencing her and cutting off her air. Ianira 
struggled until darkness roared up to swallow her awareness. When she 
could see and breathe again, he was carrying her up the stairway to her 
prison once more. She could feel the rough texture of his woolen coat 
against her cheek, could feel the dampness where he'd just come in from 
the raw night. Ianira clenched her eyelids down over burning wetness. 
Another five minutes . . . Had she only been given another five minutes 
. . . 
 
"You're sure she's taken no injury?" A man had spoken, somewhere behind 
her captor. She didn't know that voice, tried to stir, was held 
savagely still against Lachley's chest. She moaned softly as he 
answered his unknown companion. 
 
"I'll examine the poor thing at once, of course, Crowley. Dreadfully 
sorry to've brought you slap into this." 
 
"On the contrary," Crowley said with a hint of delight in his voice, "I 
am amazed and intrigued. Who the devil is she?" 
 
"So far as I've been able to ascertain, a foreigner who fell prey to 
footpads the moment she set foot on English soil. Poor thing's been 
raving for over a week, out of her mind with terror and delusions. I've 
had to sedate her to keep her from doing herself a mischief in her 
delirium." 
 
"Seems devilishly determined to escape, I'd say." 
 
"Yes," Lachely said dryly, carrying her back into her room. "The 
footpads were brutalizing her. She hasn't been in her right mind since, 
poor child. Imagines we're all footpads, intent on finishing what they 
started. I'm determined to see her through the crisis, learn who she 
really is, perhaps make some sort of amends for the wretched abuse 
she's suffered at English hands." 
 
"Rather a striking child, isn't she? Mid-twenties, I'd guess. Has the 
look of the East about her." 
 
"Indeed," Lachley placed Ianira in her bed once again, "she speaks 
Greek like an angel. Now, then . . . Ah, Charles, good man. You've 
brought it." 
 
Ianira struggled to escape the needle. "No, please . . . I will tell no 
one, please, just let me go . . ." 
 
It was no use. He injected her easily, holding her down until the drug 
roared through her veins, leaving her limp and helpless. With the drug 
came the visions, terrifying, of the women who had died under this 
man's brutual hands, of the knife in the other man's hands, striking in 
the darkness, directed by her captor . . . And the ghastly chamber 
beneath the streets, which reeked of stale blood and decaying flesh . . 
. 
 

Crowley's voice came from far away. "Poor thing's raving." 
 
"Yes. The way she babbles like that, I can't help wonder if she didn't 
escape this hideous Whitechapel fiend, only to fall prey to footpads." 
 
"She's no common streetwalker," Crowley's voice said, roaring dimly in 
her ears. 
 
"No. But how are we to know the Whitechapel murderer won't attack 
ladies, as well as common slatterns, given the opportunity? She's 
clearly only just arrived from the docklands, after all, and if she was 
separated from her family in the crush of the crowd and didn't know how 
to summon help . . ." Lachley's voice was fading in and out of Ianira's 
awareness. She managed to open her eyes and found him leaning down over 
her. Lachley smoothed her hair back from her brow and smiled down into 
her terrified gaze, promising dire punishment for what she'd attempted, 
tonight. Ianira shuddered and turned her head away, closing her eyes 
again over despair. What he would do to her if she tried to warn 
Crowley that Lachley was the Whitechapel murderer . . . 
 
The horror of it was, Crowley wouldn't believe her. 
 
No one would. 
 
She sank, helpless and despairing, into darkness. 
 
 
 
Ronisha Azzan had already been in the war room for an hour that 
morning, hard at work on the Jenna Caddrick abduction case, when 
security escorted the senator up from the Time Tripper Hotel. He 
arrived flanked by staffers carrying briefcases, intimidating by 
themselves, but the federal agents were conspicuously absent. That 
unexpected pleasantness allowed Ronisha to relax a fraction -- but only 
a fraction, because the senator's grey eyes blazed with a look that 
boded ill for her immediate future, leaving her to wonder if he'd spent 
a bad night or if he woke up every morning in a foul temper. 
 
Bax arrived on the senator's heels, carrying a sheaf of printouts and a 
CM disk. If the bags under his eyes were any hint, the Time Tours CEO 
had definitely spent a bad night, working as hard as Ronisha had. She 
nodded Bax toward the coffee; he poured himself a deep cup before 
sliding into a chair at the war room's immense conference table. 
Ronisha turned her attention to their unwelcome guest. "Good morning, 
Senator. I hope you slept well?" 
 
Caddrick scowled. "As a matter of fact, a bunch of goddamned maniacs 
kept me awake all night, in the room under mine. Am I to understand 
that you actually permit lunatics on this station to worship Jack the 
Ripper as their personal god?" 
 
Ronisha shrugged. "Last time I checked, we still had freedom of 
religion, Senator. As long as they don't actively threaten anyone, they 
can worship whomever they like." 
 
Caddrick flushed. "So you have no intention of protecting the public 
safety? Or of enforcing public disturbance laws?" 

 
His staffers began scribbing notes. 
 
Ronisha bristled. "I will enforce whatever laws and policies are 
necessary to keep the peace on this station, Senator. As a number of 
federal agents have already discovered. Now, since the issue of the 
Ripper cults is not germane to the business at hand, I suggest we 
tackle the subject of your daughter's possible whereabouts." 
 
"That suits me!" Caddrick snapped. "And let me make one thing very 
clear. If you don't produce my little girl, alive and uninjured, I will 
personally see to it that your career is over! You will never work 
again, not in the time-touring industry, not anywhere else. And don't 
think I can't do it. I've destroyed far more important careers than 
yours!" 
 
An ugly silence fell, into which Granville Baxter, at least, copiously 
perspired. 
 
Ronisha had been expecting it, of course, but anticipation of such a 
threat didn't lessen the impact. The bottom of her stomach turned to 
solid lead. "Senator," she said softly, refusing to roll belly up at 
the first tightening down of political thumbscrews, "I want you to know 
that's a mud-ugly road you're walking down. You just take a good look 
at who's sitting in the station manager's chair right now. Then you 
think real hard about it. Real hard. You are not the only person on 
this station who can bring out the big guns. The last five politicians 
of your caliber to tangle with the African-Origin Business Women's 
Caucus did not fare well at the polls, their next election bid. Not 
well at all. And since we both share the same goal, finding your 
daughter and returning her safely to this station, there's no need to 
head down that particular road, now is there?" 
 
Dust could be heard falling onto the tabletop. 
 
Bax actually looked sick and the senator's staffers turned white as 
ice. 
 
John Caddrick stared at her for long moments, his expression a 
shuttered mask, grey eyes narrowed into calculating slits. She did not 
back down under that cold, thoroughly reptilian gaze. When the mask 
unfroze just enough for one corner of his mouth to quirk in a sardonic, 
unpleasant little smile, she knew her warning had been heeded. She'd 
have to watch her back; but he wouldn't try anything else heavy-handed. 
Not for a while, yet. And if she could produce one live and kicking 
kid, maybe not ever. Caddrick might be a thorough-going bastard, but he 
wasn't stupid. 
 
"I'm glad we understand one another, Senator. Now, I would suggest we 
study your daughter's profile for clues, hers and her kidnapper's, and 
track each potential gate they might have used." 
 
"That's the best suggestion you can make, after an entire night to work 
on this? Next, I suppose, you will magic Jenna out of a silk top hat?" 
The scorn in his voice relegated Ronisha to the back of the 
intelligence bus. 
 

Ronisha narrowed her eyes and bit down on her tongue. You will eat 
yours one day, Senator, and choke on it raw! I just hope I'm there to 
watch. "Right now, we're doing what can be done, regardless of how 
little you may like it. Since we have not been able to identify either 
Jenna or her kidnapper from tour records, I suggest we take a look at 
Jenna's most active interests." She ran down Jenna's dossier. 
"Historical re-enactment, horseback riding . . . She keeps two horses 
in a stable on Long Island?" 
 
The senator nodded. "Her aunt pays for them. Paid, rather, before the 
shootings." 
 
Bax cleared his throat reluctantly and leaned forward, steepling his 
fingertips. "Well, horsemanship skills would stand her in good stead 
down Shangri-La's gates. Horses were the primary means of land 
transport for thousands of years, after all. Jenna's kidnappers will 
doubtless take advantage of that, since most up-timers know very little 
about horses. Some of the tour gates, however, are better choices for 
your daughter's kidnappers than others." 
 
"Meaning?" The senator's scowl boded ill for Bax's future. 
 
The Time Tours executive, however, was made of stern stuff. Holding a 
job like his, he had to be. "Well, Senator," he cleared his throat 
again, "Athens in the age of Pericles, for instance, is not a likely 
choice. Neither Jenna nor her abductors would have the language skills 
to blend in and disappear, not without help from temporal guides. The 
majority of Philosopher's Gate tourists are wealthy Greek tycoons, 
artists, and classics scholars. You've got the same problem with Porta 
Romae and its destination, Claudian Rome -- neither your daughter nor 
her kidnappers are likely to speak classical Latin. Or Greek or Aramaic 
or any of the other dozen or so languages spoken in Rome. 
 
"That's not to say they couldn't easily lose pursuers, choosing Rome, 
they could. But it would create a whole list of problems for them to 
overcome. Like, how the money works, where to find living space, how to 
earn a living, obtain food and clothing, avoid all the pitfalls Rome 
offers the unwary and ignorant visitor." 
 
Caddrick's continued withering glare brought beads of sweat to Bax's 
forehead, but he kept gamely at it. "According to this profile, your 
daughter favors more modern history, particularly the periods after the 
use of gunpowder in personal arms became widespread." He frowned 
slightly, pursing his lips and tapping them with doubled forefingers, 
clearly thinking through some chain of surmised options. 
 
"Spanish Colonial South America is closer to her period of interest, 
but it wouldn't be a good choice for her kidnappers, either. One 
presumes they'll be armed, which could pose problems for them down the 
Conquistadores Gate. Under the Spanish colonial system, firearms were 
tightly restricted to the upper classes. Very few Conquistadores 
tourists opt for the role of peon, for obvious reasons. Your daughter's 
kidnappers, however, would have difficulty passing themselves off as 
Spanish nobility, again because of language difficulties. Most 
Conquistadores Gate tourists are of Hispanic descent, with the balance 
taken up mostly by Amer-Indians." 
 

"I don't give a damn about Amer-Indian tourists!" Caddrick snapped. 
"What about the other gates?" 
 
Bax started down the list. "The Mongolian Gate is out of the question. 
It hasn't cycled in months. Same with the Colonial Williamsburg Gate. 
The Anachronism's timing is off, too, and besides, a Society for 
Creative Anachronism tournament is the last place your daughter's 
kidnappers would try hiding." When Caddrick gave him a baffled look, 
Bax explained. "The SCA is a tightly-knit organization of people who 
recreate the middle ages, complete with jousting, knights battling in 
homemade armor, trained hunting falcons, you name it. They're very 
clannish and you have to be a member in very good standing to go on a 
tournament through the Anachronism Gate. Outsiders wouldn't stand a 
chance of slipping through undetected." 
 
Senator Caddrick's expression made it clear that he considered 
tournament-bound medieval knights in homemade armor to be unstable 
lunatics, fitting in with the rest of Shangri-La Station's environment. 
Bax made an aborted movement to blot his glistening brow, then plowed 
steadily through the rest of his list. "The Shogun's Gate into medieval 
Japan is completely out of the question, of course. The Japanese under 
the Tokugawa Shogunate actually killed any occidental unfortunate 
enough to be shipwrecked on Japanese shores. Firearms were outlawed too 
-- any mere peasant could kill a samurai with one, which made them too 
dangerous to have around. Firearms hadn't been invented yet at the time 
of Thor's Gate, of course, and the Viking age would also present 
insurmountable language barriers. Did Jenna speak any foreign 
languages?" 
 
Before the senator could comment, the Security channel sputtered with 
static. "Hey, would somebody let us through the mess out here? We need 
to see Ronisha Azzan, ASAP." 
 
Ronisha stared at the speakers. Skeeter Jackson was the last person 
she'd expected to hear on a Security channel. She leaned over and 
punched the intercom that patched her into the security network. 
"Skeeter? What are you doing on a security squawky?" 
 
"Later! Listen, would you tell these goons down here to let us through? 
We need to meet with you. I wouldn't interrupt, but it's important. 
Real important. Kit Carson's with me." 
 
Ronisha scooted her chair back. "I'd better see what this is about," 
she said a trifle grimly, nodding to the senator and Bax. "Skeeter, 
I'll meet you at the aerie. Bax, see what you can do with that profile 
while I'm gone." She dialed Mike Benson's code and told him to let Kit 
and Skeeter through, then climbed the stairs to the fifth-floor 
manager's office. Two security agents followed, making her feel a 
little better about walking into a potential trap set by disgruntled 
federal marshals. They hadn't taken kindly to her order to lock down 
their weapons, a precaution she'd taken to safeguard visitors and 
residents. After what those agents had done with their tear-gas 
cannisters, she did not want a bunch of uniformed thugs running around 
with riot guns, stirring a hornet's nest that had already been shaken 
several times. The last thing they needed was some trigger-happy fed 
opening fire on somebody like the Angels of Grace Militia. 
 

Trying to shove that ghastly image aside, Ronisha emerged into the 
glass-walled office just as the elevator from Commons hummed to life. 
Moments later, Skeeter Jackson and the world's most famous time scout 
stepped onto the thick carpet. They'd come alone. Kit Carson was all 
but bouncing on his toes, eyes alight with a wild kind of exultation. 
"Hi, Ronnie. Got a minute?" 
 
"Good God, Kit, what is it? You know what we're in the middle of, 
here." She'd never seen the ex-time scout so excited. 
 
"It's Jenna Caddrick's kidnapper. We found him! Skeeter did, that is. I 
had the good sense to put Skeeter on the payroll as a detective for the 
Neo Edo -- which is why he's got a squawky, since you asked -- and the 
first thing he did was solve the mystery of where Noah Armstrong went." 
 
"You found Armstrong? Where? My God, Skeeter, say something!" 
 
La-La Land's most notorious miscreant -- Neo Edo's house detective? -- 
smiled wryly and handed over a couple of improvised sketches. He'd 
drawn over the top of a flier with Noah Armstrong's photo. "That's what 
Armstrong looked like when he went through the Wild West Gate. Dressed 
as a pistolero named Joey Tyrolin. Pretended to be drunker than a 
British lord, stumbled around bragging about how he was going to win a 
shooting competition. Now for the bad news. Our missing down-timer, 
Julius, went through with him. Posing as a woman and probably under 
duress. You ought to be able to pull the gate records to find out which 
name Julius was using. He was dressed as the woman Joey Tyrolin's 
porter dropped a trunk on." He handed over a second sketch. 
 
She stared from one altered photograph to the other, mind racing back 
to the events at the Denver Gate's last opening; then pivoted on one 
stiletto heel and headed for the telephone. "Good work, Skeeter, very 
good work. Denver opens -- " she peered through the windows to the 
nearest chronometer hanging from the Commons ceiling " -- at nine-fifty 
a.m., six days from now. Be there. You're joining the search team. If I 
remember right, you've been down the Wild West Gate before and you're 
good in a scrap. And clearly, you've got more than laundry fuzz between 
your ears." 
 
Kit said drolly, "Better make that two reservations for Denver, Ronnie. 
I'm going, too." 
 
Telephone halfway to her ear to arrange for Skeeter's gate pass, 
Ronisha aborted the motion midair. She stared, mouth coming adrift. Kit 
and Skeeter started laughing. "Okay," she muttered. "You're going, 
too." She punched the direct-line intercom to the war room. "Bax, 
outfit a search team through the Wild West Gate, stat. Skeeter Jackson 
and Kit Carson have located Noah Armstrong. He's posing as Joey 
Tyrolin, in company with those kids headed for the Colorado pistol 
competition. And I've got a sketch up here to match against photos of 
all the women who went through on that tour. I want you to put a name 
to one of them. The one Tyrolin's porter dropped a trunk on. You 
remember the incident? That lady was our missing down-time teenager, 
Julius. Looks like Armstrong forced the boy to help him escape by 
threatening Ianira and her family." 
 
Startled sounds came over the speaker, then Bax replied strongly. "I'm 

on it." 
 
Ronisha closed the open circuit and jabbed a lacquered fingernail down 
onto one of the phone's memory buttons, linking her to security. "Mike, 
send somebody to every outfitter on station. Jenna Caddrick's abductors 
went down the Wild West Gate. They had to pull together an outfit for 
Denver, so somebody on Shangri-La ought to remember them. Get somebody 
on it. Several somebodies." 
 
"On the way." 
 
"Skeeter. you and Kit get busy outfitting. I'll join you -- where? 
Connie Logan's is your favorite outfitter's, isn't it, Kit? I'll 
authorize the expenditures from station coffers. Kit, you're priceless. 
With a little luck, we may yet keep Shangri-La open for business." 
 
"That is," Kit said dryly, "the basic idea. C'mon, Skeeter. Did I say 
twenty an hour? Make it fifty." 
 
Skeeter looked like a man in deep shock. 
 
Ronisha sympathized. 
 
Skeeter and Kit, the latter grinning like the devil's own favorite imp, 
sauntered into the elevator, Kit whistling merrily as the doors slid 
closed. Ronisha stared after them for a long moment, still nearly 
speechless, herself; then she was on the telephone again, tracking down 
every Wild West guide who'd ever worked the gate, for somebody to guide 
the search team out to the site of that black powder shooting 
competition. 
 
* * * 
 
Six days wasn't much of a head start to plan a time tour, when the so-
called tour was a search-and-rescue mission into dangerous country by 
horseback, on the trail of armed terrorists holding hostages. If he'd 
had time, Skeeter might have panicked. Fortunately, Skeeter Jackson had 
plenty of practice in falling slap into unexpected little "situations" 
and landing more or less on his feet. Nor had he truly panicked in 
quite a while. At least, not since encountering that enraged gladiator, 
Lupus Mortiferus. 
 
An hour after leaving the aerie, Connie's staff was busy packing away 
his new wardrobe and Skeeter was bent over a table in the infirmary, 
getting a backside full of needles. He'd already received the necessary 
immunizations once before, of course, having been down the Denver gate 
on a trip wheedled out of a rich mark. But his records showed a need 
for several booster shots, so he dutifully reported to the infirmary, 
where he listened to some tourist complain bitterly about the sting as 
injection after injection went in. Rachel Eisenstein's voice floated 
in, calm and unsympathetic. "If you'd followed the instructions in your 
tour-planning immunization schedule, you could have had this over with 
weeks ago, one at a time." 
 
"But I'm going to be too sore to sit in a saddle!" 
 
"That is not," Rachel said briskly, "my problem." 

 
Skeeter grinned as unhappy curses, centering mostly around the sadistic 
bent of doctors in general and women doctors in particular, issued from 
the cubicle, interspersed with complaints about the waste of paying 
good money for a tour the price of the Wild West Gate if one had to 
spend the entire trip as a walking, talking pincushion. 
 
"Tourists," Skeeter grimaced. "You'd think they'd remember to bring 
their brains along, when they leave home." 
 
"You just said a mouthful," the nurse behind him agreed. "There, that's 
it. Last one. Six boosters, all guaranteed to keep you from coming down 
with a full-blown case of what ails you. Get going. Kit's chewing 
nails, waiting to drag you over to the library." 
 
"Oh, God . . ." 
 
The next six days passed in a blur of frantic activity. Kit Carson put 
Skeeter through the most rigorous training he'd ever endured. He 
learned that speaking "Old West Slang" was not as simple as imitating 
John Wayne movie dialogue, which was what he'd done in the cathouses 
and gambling dens of Denver on his last trip -- major portions of which 
he preferred not to recall too closely. And loading bullets for black-
powder guns, even replica models made of higher quality steel, with 
closer tolerances, was nowhere near as simple as shoving a cartridge 
into a six-shooter and pulling the trigger. Not if you wanted to hit 
what you were shooting at when the six-shooter went bang. And Skeeter 
had never even heard of "balloon head cartridges." The only thing he 
really comprehended was that you could get slightly more black powder 
into them, which was fine by him. More bang for the buck was a great 
idea, in his opinion, going after the Ansar Majlis down time. 
 
He also learned how to reload them. And while he measured bullets and 
sorted them out by weight and discarded those with any slight flattened 
spots or surface bumps, Kit taught him Old West Slang. He learned why a 
man should never bake a bang-tail before bedding-down the remuda and 
why a gentleman never called a lady a Cypriot. If he did, the lady's 
husband or father might shoot him over it. Might as well just come 
right out and call her a whore. 
 
And so it went, until Skeeter thought his brain would burst. 
 
He spent two entire days at the firing range, where Ann Vinh Mulhaney 
put him through hours of shooting lessons, both live-fire and inside 
the computer simulator she'd built, a room-sized Hogan's Alley affair 
with 360-degree rear-projection screens and plenty of real props to use 
as cover. He spent most of the first day in the computer simulator, 
working on target acquisition skills and reacting to armed threat and 
finding out just how many ways one can miss with a firearm at close 
range under stress. The second day was less fun than the room-sized 
shooting gallery, but just as instructive. Skeeter could hold his own 
in a knife fight, but he'd never fired a gun. Ann doled out electronic 
earmuffs, which allowed her to continue the lecture, while filtering 
out the sharp, damaging reports of guns discharging the length of the 
weapons range. "I had to kick a tourist off the line and he wasn't 
happy about it," she said, dragging him toward an empty lane. "Kit 
wants you on this firing line all day, Skeeter, which means we've 

barely got time for adequate weapons selection, load selections, firing 
procedures, shooting practice, and cleaning lessons." 
 
"Cleaning lessons?" Skeeter blurted, genuinely startled. 
 
Kit nodded impatiently as they joined him at the firing line. "The 
priming compounds used in 1885's black powder cartridges were corrosive 
and black powder's residue attracts moisture. There's a reason those 
old time gun slingers were fanatical about cleaning their weaponry." 
 
"Wouldn't it make more sense for me to carry what I'm familiar with? 
Like a big Bowie-style knife? I'm pretty good with a fighting knife, 
but what I know about guns wouldn't fill a teacup." 
 
"We'll see Sven before we leave the weapons range. But we're going up 
against armed terrorists holding hostages. Believe me, if things get 
rough down that gate, you'll want the ability to reach out and punch 
somebody well beyond arm's length." 
 
"What are you carrying?" Skeeter asked, eying the pile of weapons Ann 
had set out on the shooting bench. 
 
"I've always favored the S and W Double Action Frontier. I lost a 
light-weight model called a Wesson Favorite in the Silver Plume, 
Colorado, fire of 1884, just about a year before the time we're going 
to. This one," he held up a revolver, "is in .38-40 and has a six and a 
half inch barrel. Some folks might call it a horse pistol, because it's 
almost as big as the pistols from before the War Between the States, 
and most people carried it in a strap over the saddle horn. I'll wear 
it on my belt, though." 
 
Kit picked a small handgun from the pile on the bench. "For a hideout, 
I'll be taking my little five-shot S and W .38 double action. The 
second model with a three and a quarter inch barrel, for 
concealability. And for a long gun," he hoisted a rifle, working the 
action with a sharp metallic clack to demonstrate its mode of 
operation, "I'll bring a Winchester 73 rifle, in .38-40 caliber, same 
as the big Smith and Wesson. It won't be good out beyond two hundred 
yards or so, but my eyes aren't what they used to be, so something like 
a Sharps would be a waste of time for me. And you don't know enough to 
bother with one, either." 
 
"Why don't you just put a good scope on it?" Skeeter asked, brows 
twitching down. Then, answering his own question, "Because it's an 
anachronism, right?" 
 
Kit chuckled. "Actually, rifle scopes were in use as early as the Civil 
War, a good twenty years before the Denver Gate's time period. But we 
won't be taking period-scoped weapons. They had too many problems to 
bother with them. They were so hard to see through, shooters of the day 
compared them to peering through a rusty pipe. And they weren't very 
well sealed, so if you carried one around on a hot, muggy day, the 
minute the temperature dropped, at night, for instance, moisture would 
condense inside the scope. Very bad for scopes. And they were fragile. 
Most of them used black-widow spiderweb silk for cross hairs, which 
broke very easily, and steel wire cross hairs were more prone to 
breakage than spider silk." 

 
Ann fished out a couple of ordinary telescoping spyglasses made from 
brass tubing, just like the ones in old movies about sailing ships, and 
a couple of pairs of early-style field glasses. "These gather light 
much more effectively and offer better magnification, too. You should 
do just fine with the iron sights on the firearms and one of these for 
distance reconnaisance." 
 
The first gun they armed Skeeter with was one of Ann's Royal Irish 
Constabulary Webleys. "Unlike the later military issue Webley," Ann 
said briskly, "which was a clunky monster of a top-break pistol like 
Kit's Smith and Wessons, the RIC is a good concealment gun, with a 
solid frame and a loading gate more like the big Colt you'll also 
carry. It's bigger than Kit's .38, and it shoots a bigger cartridge, 
which is a distinct advantage for an amateur shooter. You might find it 
easier to handle because of its size, plus bigger bullets might make up 
for some of your lack of expertise with handguns." 
 
The Webley had a tiny, stubby little barrel, only two and a quarter 
inches long, but the thing had plenty of heft when Skeeter accepted it. 
When he swung it around to see how the gate at the side of the cylinder 
opened, Ann grunted in exasperation and grabbed his wrist, levering the 
barrel around so that it faced downrange, not at her midsection. 
 
Skeeter reddened to his undershorts. "Oops. Sorry!" 
 
"Always point a firearm downrange. Even if you're absolutely positive 
it's not loaded. Imagine a laser beam coming out the end of that 
barrel. Anything that laser touches is at risk for having a hole blown 
through it, if you have an accidental discharge. Now, then, let's put 
you through the paces for loading, firing, and unloading." 
 
Skeeter learned how to use that little Royal Irish Constabulary Webley 
better than he'd ever dreamed he could. Ann was a crackerjack teacher, 
patient and thorough and very clear in her instructions. After more or 
less mastering the Webley and overcoming his movie-instilled desire to 
"throw" bullets by jerking his hand forward, Skeeter graduated to a big 
six-shot Colt Double Action Army in .38-40 with a four and three 
quarter inch barrel, which Ann referred to as the "The Thunderer." 
 
"This one uses the same cartridge Kit will be using in his belt 
revolver and his rifle, so you guys will have at least some ability to 
interchange ammunition." 
 
"But why the shorter barrel?" Skeeter asked. "Kit's other gun has six 
and a half inches!" 
 
"So you can draw it faster," Ann explained. "You're not as experienced 
with this as Kit, so don't argue. You need a weapon you can draw, 
point, and shoot fast and easy, without needing a lot of drilled-in 
practice on sight pictures and target acquisition techniques. I'm not 
going to turn you into a champion marksman, never mind Kit's equal, in 
the time you have before the gate goes, Skeeter. I'm going to teach you 
the point-shoulder technique, which ought to work pretty well out to 
ten yards or so, and you don't need a long barrel to do that. We're not 
comparing your anatomy, here, we're trying to keep you alive. So a 
four-inch barrel is what you get, my friend." 

 
Skeeter reddened again and opted to keep his mouth shut. 
 
For a long gun, Skeeter discovered he would be carrying a twelve gauge 
double-barrel shotgun, which he learned how to use with buckshot. It 
felt a little -- granted, a very little -- more like shooting a bow, 
which he knew how to use, than the handguns had. As long as his target 
was within fifty yards, Skeeter stood some chance of success with the 
shotgun, if he remembered to cock the hammers first. "I hope," he 
muttered to himself, after hours of practice with each gun, "we won't 
have to rely on my marksmanship to get out of this alive." 
 
Kit, who had been steadily punching neat, absurdly tiny groups of holes 
in his paper targets, glanced over at Skeeter's dismal ones and 
grimaced. "I hope not, either. Keep practicing." 
 
Skeeter felt a great deal better about the pair of Bowie knives Sven 
Bailey presented him with, one to wear openly in a sheath and one that 
was somewhat smaller, like a camp knife, to carry concealed under his 
shirt. "This is more like it," Skeeter nodded, far more at home with a 
blade in his hand. "And much better quality than what I grew up using 
in Yesukai's camp." 
 
"Just try to bring them back undamaged," Sven glowered. The bladed 
weapons instructor was no taller than the diminuitive projectile 
weapons instructor, but broader and heavier boned. The epithet "evil 
gnome" had been hurled Sven's way more than once, although usually not 
to his face. Sven Bailey was widely acknowledged the most dangerous man 
on TT-86, which was a considerable accomplishment, given Kit Carson's 
presence on station. 
 
"I'll take care of them," Skeeter promised with a gulp and a hasty 
retreat from Sven Bailey's armory. 
 
Skeeter's final lesson of the day, after another intensive round of 
firing practice, involved properly cleaning a black-powder firearm in 
the field, using 1885 techniques and equipment. "Clean your firearms 
after every use," Ann explained as Skeeter learned how to disassemble 
each of his borrowed weapons, "or you'll end up with a rusted, corroded 
piece of junk. That can happen fast, in a matter of days." 
 
"What do you use?" Skeeter asked dubiously, eyeing the stack of filthy 
firearms. 
 
"Soap. Not detergent, mind, but soap and water. Modern shooters usually 
use one of the liquid-formula soaps or even chemical cleaners that 
don't require water, but you won't have that luxury down the Wild West 
gate. You'll carry soap flakes or shave thin strips from an ordinary 
soap bar, dissolve them in hot water, and scrub the disassembled pieces 
with gun brushes. Then you oil every piece thoroughly to prevent rust. 
You'll carry a small flask of a modern substitute that looks and feels 
like sperm-whale oil and works even better, without killing an 
endangered species." She nodded to the heavy little flask Skeeter held. 
 
Kit grunted softly, scrubbing hard at his disassembled Frontier Double 
Action with a stiff, soapy brush. "Beats what I've used, on occasion. A 
lot of shooters in the Old West carried strips of leather wrapped 

around lumps of lard. It works, but man, oh, man, does it smell." 
 
Skeeter chuckled. "Hot iron, burnt powder, and rancid pig fat? Yeah, 
I'll bet it does. Of course," he added wryly, "I did grow up with 
people whose idea of haute cuisine was tsampa and kvess. Anything 
rancid smells bad, take my word for it. Okay, show me how to shave soap 
flakes and disassemble these babies." 
 
Once Kit and Ann were satisfied that Skeeter could load, shoot, 
disassemble, clean the pistols and shotgun, then successfully 
reassemble them in working order, Ann loaded him down with ammo and 
cleaning supplies, gunbelts and holsters, all the miscellaneous gear 
he'd need for carrying the weapons down the Wild West Gate. Then, and 
only then, did Ann and Kit consent to let him leave the gun range. 
Reeking of burnt gunpowder and gun oil and reeling on his feet, Skeeter 
took the elevator up with Kit, who clapped him on the shoulder and told 
him he was doing fine, just fine, then got out on a different floor and 
left Skeeter to make it home under his own steam. 
 
The hot shower he crawled into felt marvellous. As water sluiced over 
his skin, carrying away sweat and the reek of burnt powder, Skeeter 
discovered he couldn't shake the feeling that something important was 
eluding him, niggling at the back of his mind, something that didn't 
quite fit. 
 
He cast back through his memory to the day of the first station riot, 
the day Ianira Cassondra and her family had vanished without a trace. 
He finally put his finger on what was bothering him. If Jenna 
Caddrick's abductors had kidnapped them, who had rescued Marcus and the 
girls at the daycare center? Somebody had shot dead two terrorists 
attempting to snatch the girls. It just didn't make sense that the 
Ansar Majlis would've killed two of their own, did it? The terrorist 
leaders he and Kit had nailed were hotly protesting the kidnapping 
charge, claiming they'd never touched Jenna Caddrick. 
 
Nobody on station believed them, of course, but given what had happened 
during that first station riot, it was just possible they were telling 
the truth. What if someone else was involved? Someone who'd known those 
murderous fanatics were planning to kill Ianira and her family? It was 
certain that somebody had broken up the attempted kidnapping at the 
daycare center -- there'd been plenty of terror-stricken witnesses. 
Where was that somebody now? And who had he been? And if the Ansar 
Majlis hadn't snatched Caddrick's daughter, who had? 
 
Skeeter narrowed his eyes and slicked back wet hair, scrubbing at his 
hide with soap while he went over the whole thing in his mind again, 
from the first sign of trouble to the disastrous end of the first 
station riot. Come to think of it, there'd been two people involved in 
the initial attack on Ianira, neither of whom fit the profile of 
terrorists carrying out a hit mission. There was that wild-eyed kid 
who'd shot the construction worker -- one of the same crew that had 
later tried to kill Bergitta -- and somebody else, who had knocked 
Skeeter and Ianira to the floor. 
 
At the time, Skeeter had thought that second person had shoved them out 
of the way to keep the wild-eyed kid from killing Ianira, but now he 
wasn't so sure. Killing that construction worker might've been 

accidental, if the kid had been aiming at Ianira. But maybe that kid 
had been aiming at the construction worker, instead? Who'd been 
standing right behind Ianira? If that were true, they might not be 
looking at a relatively simple case of kidnappers running with a 
hostage and setting up a hit against Ianira on their way through the 
station. 
 
Not at all. 
 
A scowl tugged the edges of Skeeter's mouth down as spray cascaded down 
his chest. The senator's hired detective hadn't mentioned anything like 
this in his report. Skeeter narrowed his eyes, trying to recall every 
detail of that first riot. He'd glimpsed the wild-eyed kid brandishing 
a black-powder pistol, right about the time someone crashed into 
Skeeter and Ianira, sweeping them to the floor. And the kid had yelled 
something, too. The word "no," and a cry of fear, all slurred together 
like, "No! Ahh -- " 
 
Skeeter gasped and swallowed a mouthful of water. 
 
Not "No, ahh -- " 
 
Noah! Noah Armstrong! 
 
Skeeter blinked water out of his eyes, mind whirling in sudden 
confusion. Noah Armstrong was the terrorist leader who'd grabbed Jenna 
Caddrick. The Ansar Majlis killer who wanted the Lady of Heaven Temples 
destroyed. But why would a terrorist's hired gun intervene to stop his 
own hit, when that hit was about to be successfully carried out by his 
own minions on station? A coil of ice-cold fear slithered its way into 
the pit of Skeeter's belly despite the hot water cascading down his 
skin. Just what had they stumbled into the middle of, here? 
 
If Noah Armstrong had been trying to stop Ianira Cassondra's murder . . 
. Then the information the senator had given them about Noah Armstrong 
and his plot to kidnap Jenna was suspect. Which meant the FBI and the 
senator's paid detective were wrong, too, dead wrong. He'd have to tell 
Kit, warn him about what they might be walking into, down the Wild West 
Gate. But not here, not on station. Not within reach of Senator 
Caddrick's electronic ears and eyes. Skeeter muttered under his breath 
and finished his shower. More trouble we need like a white rhino needs 
Chinese horn hunters. 
 
But if Skeeter was right, more trouble had landed squarely in their 
laps. Even worse, it looked like Skeeter was going to have to get them 
out of it. And that made for a very long and sleepless night. 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Four 
 
The man travelling under the name Sid Kaederman knew something had gone 
seriously wrong the moment he stepped into Time Terminal Eighty-Six. 
While children shrieked and zoomed in and out of line, parents burbled 
enthusiastically about which gates they planned to tour, bored couriers 

waited to haul through deliveries of critical supplies, and newlyweds 
cooed, glued together at lips and palms, Sid Kaederman focused his 
entire attention on the angry, close-mouthed station security and BATF 
agents scrutinizing new arrivals and their identification papers. 
 
By the time his own turn for scrutiny came, Sid Kaederman -- whose real 
name and face were a far cry from the ones he currently carried -- was 
sweating blood and planning out in exquisitely barbaric detail exactly 
what he would do to John Caddrick and his missing offspring when he 
finally caught up to them. The time terminal's public address system 
blared nonstop, belting out messages in half-a-dozen different 
languages until Sid's eardrums ached and his temper approached 
breakpoint. He bit down and held it, though, not daring to draw 
attention to himself. 
 
He shuffled forward in a long, snaking line, as thick and variagated as 
a reticulated python, and cleared various checkpoints: baggage 
handling, ticket verification to validate his Primary Gate pass, 
medical stations where his records were scanned in and checked against 
his identification paperwork. Sid had no real qualms about the quality 
of his I.D. He could afford the best in the business. It was the other 
security arrangements that worried him. Adding insult to injurious 
invasion of his accustomed privacy, Sid Kaederman found himself, along 
with every other in-bound tourist entering the station, subjected to 
the most thorough search of luggage and person conducted in the history 
of TT-86. 
 
Station officials were clearly trying to prevent contraband weaponry or 
explosive devices from entering the embattled station. Fortunately, Sid 
possessed a cover story that gave him a perfectly legitimate reason to 
be armed: a private detective in Senator John Caddrick's employ. He 
showed his paperwork for the firearms he'd brought along and received 
his clearances from Time Tours and BATF security, then stalked into TT-
86 nursing a silent, volcanic rage. 
 
Shangri-La Station, for all its vaunted fame, was little more than a 
fancy shopping mall with hotels and bizarrely dressed patrons playing 
dress up in outlandish costumes. The station itself didn't much impress 
him, beyond its apparent lunacy of construction, with stairways to 
nowhere and steel platforms hanging midair for no apparent reason. What 
got Sid's immediate attention, however, was the feel of the station. 
The mood of Time Terminal Eighty-Six was explosive. If that seething 
anger had been aimed at the proper target, Sid would've been delighted; 
his plans called for riots and mayhem directed at specific, carefully 
chosen groups and individuals. But the meticulously planned fury his 
operatives were orchestrating against down-timers and time tourism, a 
campaign of terror and intimidation which formed a critical piece of 
Sid's long-term plans, was notably distorted on TT-86. 
 
People were angry, all right. Murderously angry. 
 
At exactly the wrong target. 
 
"Who does Caddrick think he is?" a slender woman in expensive Victorian 
attire demanded, voice as strident as the colors of her costume. "That 
creep waltzes in here with a pack of armed thugs like he owns the 
place. Teargasses half of Commons and tries an armed takeover of the 

whole station . . ." 
 
" . . . keeps it up, somebody's gonna shoot that son of a bitch! And 
I'll dance on his grave when they do!" 
 
" . . . heard Caddrick can't even leave his hotel room. He's terrified 
the Angels of Grace will break his neck. And for once, I agree with 
that bunch of lunatics . . ." 
 
" . . . hear about his fight with Kit Carson? The senator demanded a 
suite at the Neo Edo. Kit turned him down flat! God, I wish I could've 
seen his face. Jackass had to settle for the Time Tripper, because 
everybody else was full up for the Ripper Season! I hope Orva puts 
stinging nettle in his bedsheets . . ." 
 
The running commentary dogged Sid's heels from the precinct surrounding 
Primary clear through the sprawling insanity of the station, all the 
way to the lobby of the Time Tripper Hotel, a modest hostelry that 
clearly catered to tourists on a limited budget. Smiling tightly at the 
thought of Caddrick's well-earned discomfiture, he placed a call to the 
senator's room from the lobby's courtesy phone. Ten minutes later, Sid 
found himself in a tawdry little hotel room littered with empty liquor 
bottles, facing down the disgruntled senator. John Caddrick's air of 
calm self-assurance faltered slightly when Sid allowed the steel to 
show in his gaze. The staff weenie who had escorted Sid up from the 
lobby hesitated nervously. 
 
"That'll be all," Caddrick snapped. 
 
The man fled. The moment Caddrick's aide closed the door, Sid exploded. 
 
"What the goddamned hell do you think you've been doing?" 
 
Caddrick backed up a pace, eyes flickering in visible dismay. Sid 
advanced on him. "Are you trying to get us all electrocuted? My God, 
Caddrick, what possessed you to walk in here with federal marshals, 
trying to take over the whole goddamned station?" 
 
"Now, listen just a minute -- " 
 
"No, you listen!" Caddrick actually jumped, then closed his mouth, lips 
thinning as his face lost color. Sid jabbed a finger at the nearest 
chair. Caddrick thought about arguing, thought better, and sat. Sid 
stood glaring for a long moment, wrestling his temper under control. 
 
"You are out of your mind, Caddrick, stirring up a hornet's nest like 
this. Grandstanding for the press will earn you a one way stroll to the 
gas chamber, if you're not damned careful. And I, for one, am not 
taking that walk with you. Get that very clear, right now! I'm here to 
contain the damage as best I can. It was bad enough your kid slipped 
through the net we threw up around New York. But now you've got the 
Inter-Temporal Court diddling in the middle of our business. I heard 
the station courier sent through placing the call the instant he came 
through Primary into the up-time lobby. Do you have any idea what an 
investigation by I.T.C.H. means?" 
 
Caddrick had enough intelligence, at least, to lose an additional shade 

of color. "Yes." He swallowed hard enough to bounce his Adam's apple 
like a nervous bird. "I do know. That goddamned bitch of a deputy 
manager -- " 
 
"No! Don't lay this one on the station, Caddrick. You're responsible 
for this mess. Haven't you figured out by now, there are some people 
you can push and bully and others you have to slip up behind with a 
silenced gun, if you want to neutralize them? Didn't you even bother to 
do a little basic personnel research? That deputy station manager 
you're bleating about is the granddaughter of Coralisha Azzan!" 
 
The senator had the grace to blanch, widening his eyes in alarm. 
 
"Yes, you begin to see just how badly you've stepped in it, don't you? 
That woman is not going to back down, not for you or God or anybody 
else. And word out there is," he jerked his thumb toward the station 
Commons, "you've also managed to piss off Kit Carson. For God's sake, 
Caddrick, you'd better not buy that drivel about Kit Carson being a 
washed up has-been, playing hotel manager and hiding from the world. 
That bastard is one dangerous old man. And he's just as likely as the 
Inter-Temporal Court to start poking into your affairs, just to get 
even for threatening his station." 
 
"But -- " 
 
"Shut up, dammit!" He had to grab his temper in both hands to keep from 
cracking the idiot across the mouth with the back of his hand. "I told 
you to lay low, Caddrick, told you to keep your nose out of this! 
Playing choked up Daddy for the press cameras up time is one thing. 
Throwing your weight around TT-86 and threatening an armed takeover of 
a major time terminal . . . Jeezus H. Christ, Caddrick, I think you've 
actually started to believe your own biographers! Nobody, not even John 
Paul Caddrick, is that invincible." 
 
"What the hell was I supposed to do?" Caddrick snarled. "Sit around 
with my thumb up my ass while Jenna and that putrid little deviant 
Armstrong slipped back through this station with their evidence and 
took it straight to the FBI?" 
 
Sid just looked at him, unable to believe the man's colossal stupidity. 
"Slip back through the station?" he repeated softly. "Are you out of 
your mind? No, you have to be in possession of a mind, first, to be out 
of it. For your information, Armstrong and your misbegotten little girl 
won't risk setting foot back on this station for the next year. 
Armstrong is nobody's fool, Caddrick. That bastard's given us the slip 
three times, already. There was never any danger of Armstrong or Jenna 
slipping back through this station with their evidence. Not before we 
could trace them and shut them up for good. Time was on our side, not 
theirs. But no, you had to stick your big, fat foot right in the middle 
of the biggest hornet's nest I've ever seen, and smash it for good 
measure." 
 
"All right!" Caddrick snapped, "you've made your point! But things 
aren't nearly as grim as you seem to think. We know where Armstrong 
took Jenna and that down-timer bitch, Ianira Cassondra. They went 
through the Denver Gate. The station's mounting a search and rescue 
mission, naturally. It leaves in three days. All we have to do is put 

you on the team. Armstrong and Jenna won't live to testify, not to Kit 
Carson or anyone else on the search team." 
 
"Kit Carson?" Sid echoed. "What does he have to do with it?" 
 
"Carson," the senator muttered, unwilling to meet Sid's eyes, "took it 
upon himself to lead the damned search mission." 
 
Sid Kaederman counted twenty. Twice. 
 
"All right," he finally grated out. "What other nasty little surprises 
do you intend springing on me?" Sid listened in appalled silence as 
Caddrick related the state of affairs on TT-86. When the senator 
finally wound down, Sid promised himself to see Caddrick's career down 
in flames. "What's done is done," he muttered. "And as much as it pains 
me to say it, I would suggest you throw your excessive weight around 
the station manager's office one more time, because I don't think 
there's a chance in hell Kit Carson is going to allow me on that search 
and rescue mission without threats from you to put me there." 
 
Caddrick glared at him, hatred burning in those famous grey eyes, but 
he picked up the telephone and dialed. Sid found the hotel room's wet 
bar, downed a full tumbler of scotch, and waited. 
 
* * * 
 
Kit Carson was too busy to watch Primary go through its antics. With 
only three days until the Denver Gate cycled, he was putting Skeeter 
through as much cram-session training as possible. Nor did Kit have any 
intention of being caught near the start of another potential riot. 
Skeeter Jackson, sweating and swearing where he'd just fallen to the 
gym floor's protective mat yet again, victim of Kit's smooth Aikido, 
wiped wet hair out of his eyes with the back of a sweaty arm and glared 
up at him. 
 
"Hey, boss?" 
 
"Yes?" Kit balanced lightly on the balls of his feet, waiting. 
 
"You are gonna let me live long enough to walk through the Wild West 
Gate, aren't you?" 
 
Kit just grinned, which left Skeeter muttering under his breath again. 
Kit understood enough basic Mongolian to catch the gist of what he'd 
just said, if not the specific details. "Good God, Skeeter, where'd you 
pick up language like that?" 
 
The newly fledged Neo Edo house detective grunted and heaved himself 
back to his feet. "Pretty little thing named Houlun." 
 
Kit blinked in surprise. "Yesukai's captive bride?" 
 
It was Skeeter's turn to stare. "Good grief. You're the only person 
besides Nally Mundy who's ever heard of her." 
 
Kit found himself laughing. "I've forgotten more history than Doc Mundy 
ever knew, bless him. And he would've made a fine time scout, if his 

health hadn't been so frail. So, Houlun could swear like a sailor, 
could she?" 
 
Skeeter rolled his eyes. "Oh, man, could she ever. Well, she did have 
reason to be pissed off. Yesukai kidnapped her right out of her wedding 
procession to a guy from another clan. I was there when it happened. 
After I'd learned enough Mongolian to figure out what she screeched at 
him all the way back to Yakka Clan territory, I turned red for a solid 
week. I was only eight, after all." 
 
Kit chuckled. "Someday -- " and Skeeter's headlong rush toward Kit 
transformed itself into an abrupt need for the ex-thief to become 
airborne " -- I'd love to hear the whole story." 
 
"Oof . . ." Skeeter knew, at least, how to land, which made Kit feel 
better about the younger man's chances in a fight. He groaned and 
rolled over onto hands and knees. "No way. I ain't gonna live long 
enough." 
 
"You're just soft from easy living. Now, let's try it again -- " 
 
"Hey, Kit!" Sven Bailey poked his head out of his office. "Phone! 
Ronisha Azzan. And she doesn't sound happy." 
 
Kit and Skeeter exchanged startled glances. 
 
"Now what?" Skeeter muttered. 
 
"We'll find out. Take five." Kit jogged over to Sven's office, where 
the bladed-weapons instructor had gone back to sharpening a gladius. 
Kit grabbed the phone left lying on the desk. "Kit Carson." 
 
"We've got trouble." 
 
Echoing Skeeter, Kit said, "Now what?" 
 
"You'd better get up here. Skeeter, too. We're adding somebody to the 
search team. And you're not going to like it." 
 
"With Denver cycling in three days, I already don't like it. Who?" 
 
Ronisha said very dryly, "A detective. Senator Caddrick's. He just 
arrived through Primary. He and the senator are in the aerie, demanding 
to see you." 
 
Hoo, boy . . . 
 
"We'll be there in five." Kit didn't plan on showering first, either; 
honest sweat never hurt anybody and the senator deserved it, thrusting 
some up-time detective down their throats, without adequate time to 
prepare him for down-time work. 
 
"What's Caddrick done now?" Sven asked, glancing up from a whetstone, 
where he was putting a keen edge on the thrusting tip of his favorite 
Roman short sword. 
 
"Saddled us with some up-time detective." 

 
"Oh, great. That's all you need." 
 
"You're telling me. I'll see you later. If Caddrick doesn't toss us in 
jail for telling him what I think of his idea." 
 
Sven snorted. "Yeah, right. Bull Morgan's one thing. Kit Carson, not 
even Caddrick's stupid enough to tangle with." 
 
Rarely -- very rarely -- world-wide fame had its advantages. Kit 
grinned, then headed out at a jog. "Skeeter, heads up, we got trouble. 
We're going to the aerie." 
 
Skeeter, rubbing gingerly at bruises, whipped around. "The aerie?" 
 
"Come on, I'll fill you in on the way." 
 
"But, Kit! I smell worse than my last pony at the end of a Mongolian 
summer!" 
 
Kit's grin blazed. "Good." 
 
Skeeter, bless his quick mind, chortled and fell into step beside him. 
"Caddrick, huh? Now what?" Kit told him. Skeeter rolled his eyes. "Oh, 
God, do me a favor, huh? This detective, whoever he is, make him spend 
six whole hours weighing and sorting bullets while learning how not to 
bake a bang-tail, will you?" 
 
Kit chuckled all the way to the aerie. 
 
Once they arrived, however, all desire to smile fled. Senator John Paul 
Caddrick was in the middle of a tirade, demanding to know where the 
search team was, did they think he had nothing better to do than cool 
his heels, waiting, when there was work to be done and if Ronisha Azzan 
wanted to keep her job, she'd better produce them in the next sixty 
seconds or less . . . 
 
"Save your threats," Kit growled as he left the elevator where Skeeter 
was visibly gulping for courage. "They don't impress me. Now what's 
this garbage about adding somebody to my search team?" 
 
John Caddrick rounded on him, mouth opening for something doubtless 
intended to be earthshattering. Then he rocked back on his heels and 
thought better of it. "As I live and breathe . . . Your manners always 
were atrocious, Carson." 
 
Kit ignored the insult and came straight to the point. "What's this 
about saddling me with a detective you want to tag along?" 
 
Caddrick started to reply, then evidently caught a whiff of Kit's gym-
clothes perfume, because the senator stepped back a pace, nostrils 
pinching shut, as Kit advanced. It was a minor psychological victory, 
forcing the senator to give ground, but it served to put Caddrick 
slightly off-stride and that was exactly where Kit wanted him. He 
pressed his momentary advantage. 
 
"You do realize how stupid it is, how dangerously stupid, sending 

somebody without down-time experience on a mission like this? And with 
only three days' worth of prep time? We're not heading for New 
Hollywood, Caddrick. People who don't know what they're doing can get 
themselves killed all sorts of messy ways in 1885, even without chasing 
armed terrorists." 
 
"I would point out," Caddrick said coldly, "that Wardmann-Wolfe agents 
are the most experienced in the business. Sid Kaederman has more than 
impressed me with his credentials. He's the man for this job and I 
insist he be added to the search team." 
 
Kit flicked his gaze to the man seated behind Caddrick, a serenely 
unruffled man with dark hair and fair skin who looked to be in his mid-
thirties and might have been as much as ten years older. Or younger. He 
was already dressed for the Denver Gate, in a fancy-cut Eastern 
gentleman's suit with an embroidered silk vest. He sported a silver-
headed cane that doubtless concealed a lethal sword. Christ, he looks 
like a riverboat gambler. That's all we need. Short, compact, probably 
well muscled under that fancy costume, he had the kind of face that 
would've looked equally at home in a Wall Street brokerage firm, on a 
fishing trawler in the North Sea, or cutting through a bank vault with 
acetylene torch and plastic explosives. His gaze, as he returned Kit's 
appraising stare, was direct enough, yet hooded and wary as any 
predator's faced with an unknown opponent. 
 
"Mr. Carson," he said softly, rising with abrupt, easy grace that spoke 
of superb conditioning, but probably not much martial arts training, 
"Sid Kaederman's the name." 
 
He offered a hand. Kit shook it, detecting in the process a slight 
roughening of callus along the pad of his index finger, suggesting long 
hours of practice on a firing range, using a trigger with grooves cut 
into it. "Mr. Kaederman. How many temporal gates have you stepped 
through? And how well can you handle a horse?" 
 
A tiny smile came and went. "I've never been down a time gate, 
actually. I confine my work to the up-time world. And rarely indulge in 
vacations. As for horses, I've never had any trouble dominating lesser 
creatures. I can ride well enough to suit even you." 
 
Kit ignored the veiled insult. "A search-and-rescue into the Rockies of 
1885 on the trail of known terrorists with hostages isn't a quick jog 
down a bridle trail at some dude ranch or urban riding club. And I 
won't be putting you on the back of a well-trained hack used to 
beginners. The Old West doesn't bear much resemblance to the up-time 
urban world where Wardmann-Wolfe agents pick up most of their clients. 
Just exactly what does qualify you for a mission like this? If you 
don't mind?" 
 
A glint that might have been humor -- or something else entirely -- 
appeared in Kaederman's dark eyes. "Apart from anything else, I'm going 
because my employer will shut down this station if I'm not on the team. 
Senator Caddrick has made it quite clear that he doesn't trust any 
effort put forth by this station. More to the point, we're dealing with 
Ansar Majlis. Terrorists, I do understand. Very thoroughly." 
 
Caddrick had them over a barrel and Kit knew it. Worse, he knew that 

Sid Kaederman knew it, too, and was amused. Kit shrugged, conceding 
defeat in the only way possible. "If you're thrown by your nag the 
first time it steps on a rattler or hears a puma scream, you're on your 
own. As team leader, I won't take the time to nursemaid an injured 
greenhorn back to the Denver gatehouse. If you don't have an acceptable 
kit thrown together by the time the gate cycles, too bad. You'll either 
miss the gate or find yourself on your own to furnish it down time, 
because I won't wait for you to buy or rent items you should've been 
acquiring days ago." 
 
"I'll do my best not to disappoint." Dry, self-assured, amused once 
again. 
 
Kit snorted. "Frankly, Kaederman, I don't give a damn whether you 
disappoint me or not. Do your job or you'll be looking for another one. 
Senator," he glanced at Caddrick, "since you insist on including Mr. 
Kaederman on the search and rescue team, you can pay the bill. Send him 
to Ann Vinh Mulhaney for appropriate historical arms. I'd suggest a 
Remington suite," he added, glancing at the fancy cut of Kaederman's 
clothes. 
 
The senator blinked. "A what?" 
 
Caddrick, who had introduced some of the most draconian anti-gun 
legislation in the history of Western civilization, clearly had no idea 
what Kit was talking about. 
 
Kit glanced directly at Kaederman. "As a Wardmann-Wolfe detective, you 
doubtless know how to use modern guns. But you won't have the slightest 
idea what to carry for 1885." 
 
"Black-powder firearms can't be any more challenging than service-rifle 
competitions." 
 
Kit raised his brows. "You've done long distance shooting, then? All 
right. We'll start you out with, say, the Remington Model 1875 single 
action revolver in .44-40 and a Remington Number Three rifle in .45-70, 
the Hepburn falling-block model. Tell Ann to put Creedmore sights on 
it, and if you take the time to learn it, that'll give us a half-mile 
range if we end up in a long-distance shootout with the Ansar Majlis. 
And put a .41 Remington derringer in your fancy coat pocket, Mr. 
Kaederman, if you want a hideout gun. Just be careful you don't blow 
your foot off with it. Those derringers don't have safety mechanisms 
and the firing pins are longer than the breech faces. Drop one hammer 
down, it'll blow a .41 caliber hole in your gut. Get Ann to show you 
how to safely load and unload it. Tell her to bill the senator. Meet me 
in the station's library first thing after dinner. You've got a lot of 
research ahead, if you want to go on this mission. Now, if you'll 
excuse us, Mr. Jackson and I have some unfinished business waiting." 
 
Senator Caddrick sputtered, "Now, wait just a damned minute -- " 
 
Kit narrowed his eyes and held Caddrick's gaze coldly. "Those are my 
terms, S enator. You hired him. So don't try to blackmail the station 
into paying his expenses. Those are your problem. Mr. Kaederman," he 
nodded curtly, "I'll see you at the library, six-thirty sharp. Don't be 
late." 

 
Skeeter all but tripped over his own feet, rushing into the elevator 
ahead of Kit. Senator Caddrick was still sputtering. But as the 
elevator doors slid shut, Sid Kaederman gave Kit a small, satisifed 
smile and a tiny flick of the fingers at his brow, acknowledging a 
minor victory in the murderous little game in which they were 
embroiled. Skeeter Jackson rearranged sweat on his forehead with a 
glistening forearm. "Sheesh, Kit, you really do like to live 
dangerously, don't you?" 
 
"Skeeter," he sighed as the elevator carried them down toward Commons, 
"there's only one thing infinitely worse than running a luxury hotel on 
a time terminal." 
 
"What's that?" 
 
"Not having a time terminal to run that hotel on." 
 
To that, Skeeter had no reply whatsover. 
 
* * * 
 
Catharine "Kate" Eddowes generally enjoyed her annual trek out to the 
fields of Kent to work the harvest. Picking hops wasn't as difficult as 
some jobs she'd done and the Kentish countryside was almost like a 
great garden, full of flowers and green fields and fresh, crisp air. 
Moreover, John Kelly, with whom she had shared a bed more or less 
continuously for seven years, almost always benefitted from the change 
to the countryside, where the cleaner air eased his constant cough. 
 
But this year, things were different. 
 
Late September was generally warm and beautiful. But the whole summer 
had been unseasonably chilly and full of rain. By the time they arrived 
in Kent, the late September weather was raw. Working sunup to sundown 
in wet, cold fields, John Kelly's health deteriorated alarmingly. 
 
"It's no use, John," she finally said. "We can't stay the season, this 
time. You'll catch your death, so you will, and then what'll become of 
me, luv? I need you, John Kelly." 
 
Tears of defeat and shame caused him to turn aside, but by nightfall, 
his cough had grown so alarmingly worse, he agreed to abandon the hop 
harvest, even though it meant giving up money they both needed. They 
had no choice but return to London, where they could at least find a 
dry room for Kelly to sleep in at night. It was a long walk from 
Hunton, Kent back to London, but they hadn't any money for a train, so 
walk it they did, in the company of another couple they'd met working 
the same fields. 
 
"We're off for Cheltenham," their newfound friends said as they came to 
the turning for London, "so we'll say goodbye and luck to you. Kate, 
look here, I've got a pawn ticket for a flannel shirt up there in 
London, why don't you take it? It's only for two pence, but the shirt 
might fit your old man, there, and I'd say he needs a bit of a warm 
shirt, what with that cough of his." 
 

"Thank you." Catharine accepted the crumpled pawn ticket gratefully. "I 
worry about John's health, with the cold weather coming and us with no 
money. It's good to us, you are." She slipped the ticket into one of 
her pockets, next to the wrinkled letter she'd bought from Annie 
Chapman, poor soul, the letter she'd been too terrified to have 
translated, after what had happened to poor Annie. And Dark Annie had 
confessed to buying the letters from Polly Nichols, who was also 
brutally dead. 
 
Maybe the smartest thing would be to get rid of the letter altogether? 
 
Just throw it away or burn it, never even try to have it translated? 
 
As they waved goodbye and set out walking again, taking the fork in the 
road that would lead them back to London, Catharine stole worried 
glances at John. His color wasn't good and his breathing was labored. 
His kidney complaint had flared up again, too, given the number of 
times he had to stop along the roadside and from the way he rubbed his 
side and back from time to time, when he thought she wasn't looking. 
They needed money for a doctor and medicine, just as poor Annie had, 
and they'd very little left to sell or pawn to obtain it. They'd so 
counted on the money from the hop harvest to see them through the 
winter and now there wouldn't be anything in reserve at all, with the 
coldest months yet to come. 
 
I'll have to find out what's in the letter, Kate realized with a 
shiver, I'll have to find who wrote it, if I want my John to live 'til 
spring. Too bad them coppers won't put up a reward for that Whitechapel 
murderer what's done in Polly and Annie. She didn't want to try 
blackmailing the author of the filthy thing, not after what had become 
of its previous owners, but she didn't know what else to do. 
 
Well, she told herself, there are plenty of Welshmen in the East End, 
so there are, surely one of them can tell me what's in this precious 
letter of Annie's. Pity John doesn't speak Welsh, then I wouldn't have 
to worry about sharing the money with whoever translates it for me. 
Maybe I can pawn the flannel shirt somewhere else and use the money to 
pay someone to read it out for me in English? 
 
Her stomach rumbled, as empty as the pocket she reserved for cash when 
she had any. John Kelly, striding gamely along despite his labored 
breathing, glanced over and smiled briefly. "Heard that, luv," he 
chuckled. "Hungry, are we?" 
 
"I could stand a meal," she admitted, aware that he would be just as 
hungry as she and in greater need of food, what with fighting off two 
kinds of illness. "Don't fret about it John Kelly, we'll get to town 
all right, even if we're hungry when we get there, and you always 
manage to earn a few pence, luv, so we'll have ourselves a hot supper 
soon enough." 
 
And she could always earn a few pence, herself, if it came to that. She 
only resorted to selling herself when their circumstances became truly 
desperate. But whenever he fell ill, they had to have money, and Kate 
Eddowes was not too proud to earn fourpence any way she could. And her 
daughter, doubtless prompted by her new husband, had taken to moving 
about the south end of London with such frequency, Kate often found it 

difficult to trace the girl and ask for tuppence. 
 
She'd try to find her daughter again when they got to town, first thing 
after securing a bed at their old lodging house, down to 55 Flower and 
Dean Street. They'd pawn something to raise the money for food and the 
bed, then she'd find her little girl and try to get more cash, and if 
that didn't work, then she'd jolly well find some drunken Welshman who 
wanted a quick fourpenny knee trembler and trade herself for a 
translation of Annie Chapman's letter. Once she had that, there'd be 
plenty of money for John Kelly's medicines and her own gin and as many 
warm, dry beds as they wanted, for the rest of their lives. And whoever 
had butchered Polly Nichols and Annie Chapman would find himself 
dangling from the end of a gallows rope. Kate Eddowes had once made a 
fair living, writing and selling cheap books of lives at public 
hangings. She suppressed a wry smile. Wouldn't it be ironic, now, if 
she ended up making her fortune from a little gallows book about the 
Whitechapel Murderer? 
 
* * * 
 
A fierce sky shimmered like an inverted bowl of beaten bronze. Dust, 
hot and acrid, bit Skeeter's throat despite the bandanna tied across 
his lower face. Skeeter shifted his weight in the saddle once again, 
nursing a blinding headache and a prickle of heat rash under his dirty, 
grit-filled clothes. The constant shift and sway of his horse under 
aching thighs reminded Skeeter forcefully how long it'd been since he'd 
done any sustained riding. He was a good rider. Skeeter had, in a 
different lifetime, felt at home on anything a saddle could be thrown 
across. But after years of easy living on Shangri-La Station, he was 
simply -- sadly -- out of practice. And thanks to Sid Kaederman's 
irritating, smug presence, somehow contriving to be constantly 
underfoot without ever becoming downright intrusive, Skeeter hadn't 
found even three seconds alone with Kit to air his suspicions about 
Noah Armstrong. 
 
Why couldn't Armstrong have picked January to go on the lam, rather 
than July? Heat fell like water down into the narrow draw where their 
string of ponies clattered and clopped along a so-called trail. And why 
couldn't that pack of black-powder enthusiasts have picked a spot 
closer to civilization for their Wild West shootout? He and Kit had 
figured Armstrong would ditch the time tour first chance, heading for 
someplace crowded. San Francisco, maybe. Chicago or New York, if he 
really wanted to get lost. Searching an entire continent for Noah 
Armstrong and his hostages had not been Skeeter's notion of a good 
time, although he cheerfully would do just that, to catch up to Ianira 
and her family. 
 
But Armstrong hadn't done that. Travelling in the guise of Joey 
Tyrolin, drunkard and braggadocio, Armstrong hadn't even ditched the 
black-powder competition tour. Instead, the terrorist ringleader had 
ridden up into the mountains with the rest of the eager shooters, 
presumably with his hostages still under duress. Why Armstrong had 
stuck to the competition group, not even Kit could figure. And Sid 
Kaederman, who had boasted so suavely of understanding terrorists, 
offered no explanation at all, merely shrugging his shoulders. 
 
So Kit and Skeeter and the Wardmann-Wolfe agent followed their trail, 

which meant they took the train from Denver down to Colorado Springs, 
then saddled up and headed west toward Pikes Peak for the distant, 
abandoned mining camp where the competition was underway. Kurt Meinrad, 
the temporal guide detailed to their mission by Granville Baxter, had 
rounded up a short train of pack mules to haul their supplies. An hour 
onto the trail, Sid Kaederman began to shift ceaselessly in his saddle, 
obviously suffering from the unaccustomed activity. He finally urged 
his horse up alongside their guide's. "Why did that pack of idiots come 
clear out here to hold some stupid competition? Why not just stay in 
Denver? There weren't any gun-control laws in effect yet, so why come 
out to the middle of nowhere?" 
 
Meinrad, face weathered to old leather by years of guiding time 
tourists through these mountains, turned easily in his saddle. "They 
wanted the feel of a real Old West event, which isn't possible in 
Denver. The city's too grown up, too civilized. Millionaires who made 
their fortunes in the gold and silver booms have turned Denver into a 
miniature copy of cities back East, with fancy houses, artwork imported 
from Europe, and some of the most snobbish society you'll ever meet. 
Nouveau riche are always edgy about proving how superior their cultured 
manners are and the Denver Four Hundred are among the worst." 
 
Kaederman just grunted and shifted again, trying to get comfortable. 
 
"What they wanted was an abandoned mining town back in the hills, with 
plenty of old buildings and rusting equipment lying around to be shot 
at and hidden behind. The trouble is, not many camps are abandoned yet. 
The big strikes started in the 1850s, at places like Central City, with 
more coming in the '70s, at Animas Forks and Apex and Leadville. 
They're all boom towns, full of miners and drunken hopefuls and 
prostitutes and enterprising merchants making fortunes selling supplies 
at outrageous prices. You can't hold this kind of competition in a boom 
town, so we decided on Mount MacIntyre." When Kaederman gave him a 
baffled look, Meinrad chuckled. "The town's been deserted for years. In 
fact, the legendary Cripple Creek strike was actually ignored for 
twelve years, because of Mount MacIntyre." 
 
Skeeter, intrigued despite Kaederman's irritating presence, asked, "How 
come? Even I've heard of Cripple Creek. I can't believe gold-hungry 
miners would ignore a strike that rich for twelve whole years!" 
 
Meinrad grinned. "Well, a guy name of Chicken Bill claimed he'd struck 
ore that assayed out at two thousand dollars to the ton -- quite a 
motherload, even for this area. Trouble was, the whole thing was a 
hoax. Miners flooded in and ripped the countryside to shreds, looking, 
and all they found was dust and bedrock. Folks got to calling it the 
Mount Pisgah Hoax, through a mix-up in locales, so when drunken old Bob 
Womack found ore worth two hundred dollars a ton at Mount Pisgah back 
in '78, nobody would believe it. They still don't. It'll be another 
five years, 1890, before a German count by the name of Pourtales proves 
Womack right. Then, of course, Cripple Creek becomes a legend, 
particularly after the fires of '96 burn the whole town to the ground. 
By 1902, they'll be bringing twenty-five million a year out of Cripple 
Creek's gold mines, but right now, the whole region is deserted, thanks 
to the Mount Pisgah Hoax." 
 
Skeeter chuckled. "Which really happened at Mount MacIntyre. Sounds 

like the perfect place to hold a black-powder competition. And if folks 
do a little prospecting on the sly, down toward Mount Pisgah, who's 
going to complain?" 
 
Meinrad laughed. "Certainly not the BATF. They'll get their cut of any 
nuggets brought home. Anyway, there's enough local color to give our 
competitors all the Old West they can stomach." He glanced at the 
unhappy detective, who was shifting uncomfortably in the saddle again. 
"Don't worry, Kaederman, you'll survive, although your thighs might not 
thank you for it. You shouldn't develop saddle galls, that only happens 
when your clothes and your gear don't fit proper, but if you do, you 
can smear them with a salve I always bring along for the greenhorns." 
He grinned and tapped his saddle bags. "Antiseptic, antibiotic, and 
plenty of anesthetic to deaden the pain." 
 
The thought of the insufferable Mr. Kaederman smearing saddle galls in 
his fancy backside cheered Skeeter no end. Kaederman's performance for 
the press at their departure had been enough to earn Skeeter's enmity 
for life, standing there sucking up to that overweening toad, Caddrick, 
calmly assuring the newsies that he would personally see Jenna Caddrick 
safely back to her father's care, a job clearly beyond the capabilities 
of the station's search team. 
 
Skeeter would've given a great deal to jab a straight pin in the man's 
rump during that so-called press briefing, just to watch him yelp. He 
already dreaded the hullaballoo waiting for their return. The next 
newsie who stuck a microphone in Skeeter's face and shouted, "Is it 
true you're running a con-game on the senator, taking advantage of his 
bereavement?" would get a mouthful of unpleasantness, courtesy of the 
nearest object not fastened to the floor. 
 
Meanwhile . . . 
 
There were two ways to reach the dud mines at Mount MacIntyre, from 
Colorado Springs. They could loop around to the north, through Woodland 
Park Divide then down through Florissant toward Cripple Creek, or they 
could ride south past Victor, then swing north around the flank of 
mountains in the way. Either route would take time, but the northern 
trail was longer, so Meinrad chose the route down past Victor. They'd 
left the Colorado Springs rail station near midmorning, moving at a 
steady lope that wouldn't put too great a strain on the horses. By the 
time the sun was low over the shoulders of the Rockies, Skeeter was 
bushed, far worse than their tough mountain ponies. The canyon they'd 
been following finally opened out into a moonscape of blasted, barren 
hillsides where nothing but scrub grew along deep, eroded gullies. Gold 
mining country. 
 
They straggled along in a stretched-out line, rounding enormous mounds 
of broken rock and silt left to bake in the hot sun, and came at length 
to a ridge above a ramshackle town. The mining camp sprawled between 
piles of tailings, sluice flumes, open-pit mine works, boarded-over 
mine shafts, and the meanders of a sparkling river which caught the hot 
sun in diamond flashes. Water rippled and spilled its glittering way 
over and around immense boulders which had been blasted down from the 
surrounding mountainsides. 
 
A sharp report cracked on the still air, prompting Skeeter's pony to 

shift under his thighs. He controlled the uneasy animal with his legs, 
settling it down to blow restively and champ its bit. A long, dry 
wooden flume teetered its way a good three-hundred feet down a barren 
hillside to the valley floor. Down beside it, a cloud of blue-grey 
smoke puffed out onto the hot afternoon air. The smoke hung above the 
flume's broken sides for a moment before gradually dissipating. A 
hundred feet away, another puff of smoke appeared as a second shot was 
fired from the vicinity of a ramshackle livery stable. 
 
Then a galloping horse burst out of the stable and shot across a broad 
stretch of open ground at a dead run. The rider, leaning low over his 
horse's neck, drew smoothly from a right-handed hip holster and fired 
at the side of the flume. Smoke bellied out and hung on the still air. 
Dust swirled up from thundering hooves as the rider holstered his six-
gun, then reached across to his left hip and pulled a second enormous 
pistol from a cross-draw. He fired again as the galloping horse shot 
past the flume. He reholstered at full gallop and raced down to a shack 
at the edge of the clearing. 
 
The sweating rider pulled up hard on the reins and hauled his mount to 
a slithering stop. Then he drew from his right-hand holster again and 
twisted around, firing a shot at the flume over his shoulder. Kicking 
his horse into motion, he reholstered once more as the animal swept 
around the shed and galloped back toward the rickety wooden 
watercourse. Another cross-draw shot from the left-hand hip and the 
horse raced past the flume to the livery stable. A sharp whistle 
sounded as the horse galloped back inside, hidden by a cloud of dust. 
 
"Time!" a man's voice rang out from one of the abandoned houses. Then, 
"Reset! And . . . Next shooter up!" 
 
This time, Skeeter saw a man crouched behind the flume, positioned 
several yards uphill from the mounted rider's target. The guy at the 
flume ran downhill and yanked targets from either side of the 
dilapidated wooden structure, hastily tacking up new ones for the next 
contestant. He ran back uphill and jumped into a pit which protected 
him from flying lead. He then drew a revolver and fired into the air. 
At that signal, another shot rang out from the livery stable. 
 
This time Skeeter saw the puff of dust fly up from the dry, brittle 
wood as lead struck a target. Then a second galloping horse shot out 
into the open, the second rider also leaning low. This contestant wore 
his six-guns butt forward. The rider fired both shots at the flume as 
his horse, a big paint with brown splotches down its flanks, raced 
past. Again, the rider galloped to the shed, where he pulled up hard, 
his single-leather reins hooking down under his belt buckle as he 
snugged his horse's head back for the sliding stop. He fired the over-
the-shoulder shot and reholstered, then urged his mount forward, 
letting the reins slide forward. 
 
The single leather strap hooked itself under his second, butt-forward 
pistol, and dragged it out of the holster neat as anything. The gun 
flipped midair and landed in the dust with a disastrous thunk. The 
rider froze in dismay for a long, penalizing second. Then he scrambled 
out of the saddle and retrieved his piece, lunged back into the saddle 
again with a one-footed dancing hop, and urged his mount around the 
shed. He had to circle it again, to give himself time to reholster his 

gun and draw it correctly for the shot on the return gallop. 
 
Skeeter chuckled. "I'll bet that guy's cussing a streak by the time he 
gets back to the livery stable." 
 
Kit glanced around. "Yes. And if that was a real shootout, down there, 
he'd probably be an embarrassed corpse right about now." 
 
Skeeter sobered. "Point taken." 
 
The judge in the abandoned house called, "Time!" and Kurt Meinrad put 
hands to lips and gave out a loud, drawn-out whistle. Then he yelled, 
"Halluuuu!" For a moment, all was still in the abandoned mining town; 
then doors were flung open and abruptly the place swarmed with life. 
Men in faded, dusty denim work pants and checked shirts or fringed 
buckskins came out of hiding from a dozen buildings. Women, too, some 
clad in buckskins like the men, others in long prairie skirts and 
frontier-rugged dresses, with wide-brimmed bonnets to shade their faces 
from the fierce sun, came running excitedly from seemingly abandoned 
structures. Down beside the disused ore flume, the target changer waved 
up at them and returned Meinrad's vigorous greeting. 
 
"Move out," Meinrad called. 
 
Kit Carson's thump of heels to his pony's sides was almost as weary as 
Skeeter's own. The retired scout hadn't been in a saddle any more 
recently than Skeeter had -- and while Kit was as lean and tough as old 
belt leather left too long in the sun, he wasn't getting any younger. 
The sight of the toughest man Skeeter knew, just as whacked out as he 
was, cheered Skeeter a little. They rode silently into "town" while the 
re-enactment shooters assembled in front of the ramshackle livery 
stable. Someone had refurbished the stalls and corral sufficiently to 
house several dozen horses, but only a dozen or so were in sight. He 
spotted drifts of smoke from the chimneys of several tumble-down 
houses, their windows long since broken out by storms and wild animals. 
 
A thickset man in his thirties, holding a Spencer repeater propped 
easily across one shoulder, blinked up at their guide. Skeeter 
recognized the man vaguely as one of Time Tours' Denver guides, who 
spent most of his career down time. The guide was staring at them in 
open puzzlement. "Kurt Meinrad! I didn't figure they'd send you out 
here! Weren't you supposed to be on vacation by now? Not that I'm sorry 
to see you. I told that courier we needed the best help there was. You 
must've been sitting in the Denver gate house, to get here this fast." 
 
Skeeter swung himself out of the saddle as Meinrad and Kit, the latter 
all but unrecognizable under gritty dust, dismounted. The ground was 
hard under Skeeter's boot soles, baked dry by the blazing summer sun. 
The town smelt of woodsmoke, sulphurous gun powder, hot sunlight on 
dust, and human sweat. Skeeter reeked of overheated horse. 
 
"Courier?" Kit asked sharply. "What courier? We're not here because of 
any courier." 
 
The Time Tours guide with the Spencer glanced at Kit, then did a 
classic double-take. "Good God! Kit Carson? No, they certainly wouldn't 
have sent you to answer my call for help. What in God's name are you 

doing here?" 
 
Kit shook his head. "Never mind that now. Why'd you send out a courier? 
What kind of trouble did you need help with?" 
 
"Two murders, is what," the man grunted, spitting tobacco juice to one 
side with a brown splat. "Two stinking murders and four disappearing 
tourists." When Skeeter groaned under his breath, the man glanced from 
Kit to Skeeter to Sid Kaederman and shot a worried look at Kurt 
Meinrad, then held out a meaty hand to Kit. "Orson Travers. Let's get 
you settled in before I give you the details. It's hot as blazes out 
here and you men look to need a good, cold drink before we start poking 
into this mess." 
 
Kit nodded, clearly impatient with the delay, but acknowledged their 
need to slap the dust off and slake their thirst and care for their 
horses. "Pleasure to meet you, Mr. Travers. This is Skeeter Jackson, 
Neo Edo House Detective. And Mr. Sid Kaederman, private detective with 
the Wardmann-Wolfe Agency." 
 
"Gentlemen," Orson Travers said gravely. "My drovers'll see to your 
ponies and settle your pack mules. We'll go up to the saloon and talk 
things out. I got a funny feeling our trouble's related to whatever 
you're doing here with two detectives." 
 
So did Skeeter. And from the look on his face, so did Kit. What Sid 
Kaederman thought, Skeeter didn't care. John Caddrick's pet snoop could 
jump over the nearest cliff, if he wanted to do something really 
useful. 
 
"Saloon is up that way," Travers pointed. 
 
Shortly, Skeeter found himself in a mended wooden chair sipping cool 
water from a chipped enamel cup. Tourists crowded into the ramshackle 
saloon to listen. Skeeter didn't see a single face in that crowd that 
could possibly have belonged to Noah Armstrong or Jenna Caddrick, let 
alone his missing friends. He was seriously worried that he knew 
exactly who was dead and who was missing. 
 
"All right," Kit said quietly when the last of the tour group had 
crowded in. "You say you've lost six people. I'm betting your bad news 
will tie in with ours. We're here on a search and rescue mission. One 
that will either keep Shangri-La operational or see the station closed 
down, depending on how well we do our jobs." He studied the whole group 
closely. "I don't see Joey Tyrolin anywhere. Or Cassie Coventina." 
 
Orson Travers ran a hand across his sweat-soaked face and hair. "No, 
you won't. That's the trouble I mentioned." Travers grimaced. "There 
was an ambush, out on the endurance course. Two tourists dead, shot to 
death by God only knows who. One of their horses, too. And another 
tourist lit out during the confusion, just skied up with everything he 
owned. Took his porter with him, the porter and his kids, who weren't 
even supposed to be out here. Bull Morgan and Granville Baxter will 
have my job," he added glumly, "losing six members of my tour group in 
one day." 
 
Skeeter hardly dared breathe. Who was dead and who was on the run? The 

porter with the children could be nobody but Marcus, with Gelasia and 
Artemisia. Only who was with them? Ianira? Might his friends be safe, 
after all, running for their lives out in the mountains? But two people 
were dead -- and there'd been six hostages. Quite abruptly, Skeeter 
needed to know just who had died, up here. He found himself on his 
feet, voice grating harshly through the dust and weariness. "Show me 
the bodies." 
 
Travers hesitated. "There's more to this than you realize, Mr. Jackson 
-- " 
 
"Show me the goddamned bodies!" 
 
Kit was on his feet, as well. "Easy, Skeeter," he said, voice low. 
Then, to Travers, "You'd better show us. I take it you didn't send the 
bodies back with the courier?" 
 
"I thought I'd better wait until the search party got back. I was 
hoping to find our deserters and send them back together, but the 
trackers haven't shown up yet, so I sent a rider on ahead to Denver. I 
wanted him to get there before the gate cycled, but if you didn't run 
across him, he obviously didn't make it." Travers nodded toward a 
doorway at the rear of the room. "We embalmed 'em from the medical kits 
and put 'em in body bags, back in the saloon's storage pantry. It's the 
most secure place in town. Didn't want the local wildlife getting to 
them, after all. Our surgeon went with the search team, just in case." 
 
"Paula Booker?" Kit asked sharply. 
 
Travers nodded. "After what happened on the trail, there was no 
stopping her. Said she could've saved one of 'em, if she'd gotten to 
him in time. I've never seen a woman so upset in all my born days." 
 
Kit sighed, weariness etched into his grizzled features. "Open it up, 
please. Let's get this over with." 
 
Skeeter and Kit followed Travers into the next room, leaving Kaederman 
to bring up the rear. None of the tourists volunteered to go with them. 
A sickening, sweet stench met them when the heavy door groaned open. A 
moment later, zippers went down on the body bags and Skeeter found 
himself staring at two dead men. One was a stranger, thank God. The 
other . . . 
 
Even expecting the worst, Skeeter lurched, the shock took him so hard. 
The dusty room, the sun-baked mountains beyond the broken windows, 
swooped and dove for a long, dizzy instant. Skeeter clutched at the 
open doorframe. He heard his voice, distant and strange, saying, "I'm 
gonna break the neck of the bastard who did this . . ." 
 
Julius had been gut-shot. He'd clearly survived the fatal wound long 
enough to reach camp and Paula Booker, because someone had taken 
stitches before he'd died. Kit's hand settled on Skeeter's shoulder. 
"I'm sorry, Skeeter." The scout's voice had filled with a compassion 
that would've touched him, had the pain not been so sharp and terrible. 
 
"Dammit, Kit! That boy wasn't even seventeen yet!" Skeeter jerked 
around, half-blind and not wanting Kit to notice. He was set to stride 

out of the monstrous little room, to get outside, to breathe down some 
fresh air, when he noticed Sid Kaederman. The detective had come up 
quietly behind them to peer past their shoulders. Even through 
Skeeter's blinding grief, Sid Kaederman's sudden deathly stillness 
brought Skeeter's instincts to full, quivering alert. He'd seen that 
kind of lethal tension before, in one or two of Yesukai's most deadly 
warriors, men who would've cheerfully slit a friend's throat for 
looking crosswise in their direction. The look in Kaederman's eyes set 
the tiny hairs along Skeeter's nape starkly erect. 
 
Kaederman was staring down at the bodies. And for one unguarded moment, 
Skeeter glimpsed a look of naked shock in his cold eyes. Skeeter 
followed Kaederman's gaze and realized he wasn't staring at the 
murdered down-time teenager, but at the other corpse, a man who'd been 
shot several times through the back, by the look of the wounds. 
Kaederman's sudden stillness, the stunned disbelief in his eyes, set 
inner alarms ringing. 
 
Without warning, Kit had Skeeter by the arm. "Easy, Skeeter, you're 
awfully white around the mouth. Let's get you outside, get some fresh 
air into your lungs. I know what a terrible shock this is . . ." The 
former scout was literally dragging him across the saloon's warped 
floor, past the gawking tourists, outside into the hot sunlight where 
the air was fresh and a slight breeze carried away the stink of death. 
An instant after that, the scout thrust a metal flask into his hand and 
said a shade too loudly, "Swallow this, Skeeter, it'll help." 
 
Whatever Kit was up to, Skeeter decided to play along, since it had 
taken them out of Kaederman's immediate presence for the moment. 
Whatever was in the flask, it scalded the back of his throat. Skeeter 
swallowed another mouthful as Kit steered him down toward the livery 
stable, one hand solicitously guiding him by the arm, as though taking 
a distraught and grieving friends away from curious eyes. When they 
were far enough from the saloon, Kit muttered, "What the hell did you 
see in Sid Kaederman's face, Skeeter, that caused you to come out of 
shock so fast? One second, you were falling apart, ready to bawl, and 
the next you looked like you were ready to kill Kaederman where he 
stood." 
 
Skeeter glanced into Kit's hard blue eyes. "That why you hustled me out 
of there so fast?" 
 
Kit snorted. "Damn straight, I did. Didn't want Kaederman to notice the 
look on your face. Left him staring at the bodies." 
 
"Huh. Well, that's exactly what stopped me in my tracks. The way he was 
looking at those bodies. Got any idea why the senator's pet bloodhound 
would go into shock, looking at a dead drover? Because for just a split 
second, Sid Kaederman was the most stunned man in this entire camp. 
Like he knew the guy, or something, and didn't expect to find him dead 
on a pantry floor." 
 
Kit let out a long, low whistle. "I find that mighty interesting, don't 
you?" 
 
"Interesting? That's not the half of it. There's something screwy about 
Caddrick's story, all that guff he fed us about Noah Armstrong. Either 

Caddrick's lying, or somebody fed him a line, because I'm starting to 
think Noah Armstrong didn't kidnap anybody. And maybe he's not a 
terrorist, at all." 
 
Kit halted mid-stride, his lean and weathered face falling into lines 
of astonishment. Grimly, Skeeter told him, all of it. About the wild-
eyed kid who'd shouted Noah's name. "And I'm willing to bet," Skeeter 
added, "it was Noah Armstrong who shot the Ansar Majlis gunmen in the 
daycare center, when those bastards tried to grab Ianira's kids. They 
lit out through the Wild West Gate, came up here, and after somebody 
murdered Julius, Noah Armstrong went on the run with Marcus and the 
girls. Only . . . Why was Julius posing as a girl?" That part bothered 
Skeeter. It didn't fit anywhere. 
 
"I wonder," Kit mused softly, "just who Julius was supposed to be? Why, 
indeed, pose as a girl? Unless, of course, he was acting as a decoy for 
someone." 
 
"Jenna Caddrick?" Skeeter gasped. 
 
"Isn't any other candidate I can see. But why? And if Noah Armstrong 
isn't Ansar Majlis, then who the hell is he? And how did he know there 
would be an attack on Ianira and her family?" 
 
"I've been asking myself those very same questions," Skeeter muttered. 
"Along with the name of that wild-eyed kid in the crowd." 
 
"You said he was carrying a black-powder pistol?" 
 
Skeeter nodded. 
 
"It would be very interesting," Kit said, scratching the back of his 
neck absently, "to know if that gun had once been registered to Carl 
McDevlin." 
 
Skeeter stared. "You mean -- that kid might've been Jenna Caddrick? 
Disguised as a boy?" 
 
Kit's grimace spoke volumes. "She disappeared in the company of Noah 
Armstrong, whoever he turns out to be. And we know Jenna's a Templar. 
That gives her a powerful motive to protect Ianira's life. Jenna would 
certainly be in a position to suspect Ianira's life was in danger, 
after the attack that killed her aunt and roommate." 
 
Skeeter whistled softly. "I don't like this, Kit. Not one stinking 
little bit." 
 
"Neither do I," Kit growled, kicking savagely at a dirt clod under his 
boot toe. It exploded into a shower of dust. "But then, I already 
didn't like it, and I've never had any reason to trust a single word 
that came sideways out of John Caddrick's mouth. The question I want 
answered is what motive Caddrick would have for lying about Noah 
Armstrong. Surely the FBI would be able to corroborate or disprove his 
claim that Armstrong is a terrorist?" 
 
Skeeter said uneasily, "Maybe Caddrick bought the FBI? It's been done 
before." 

 
Kit shot him an intense, unreadable glance, then swore in a language 
Skeeter didn't recognize. "Skeeter, I really hate it when you say 
things like that. Because I have this terrible feeling you may just be 
right." 
 
"Great. So what are we going to do about it?" 
 
"First," and Kit's face closed into a lean, deadly mask, "we find out 
just what happened in this camp that left two men dead and Marcus on 
the run for his life, with his kids. Then, we track down Armstrong and 
our friends. Before another pack of Ansar Majlis killers beats us to 
it." 
 
As they headed back for the dusty saloon, Skeeter wondered uneasily 
about yet another mystery: just what Sid Kaederman's role in this 
lethal mess might be. 
 
 
 
Chapter Five 
 
John Lachley laid a sheet of blotter paper gently across the 
glistening, blood-red ink of the missive he'd just finished, then held 
the newly penned letter up to the light to read it again, judging the 
effect. It hadn't been easy, writing in the style of Maybrick's 
disjointed ramblings. He'd worked very hard to sprinkle the man's 
irritating Americanisms into the language. But he was proud of the 
results. 
 
 
 
"Dear Boss . . ." the letter began. 
 
 
 
I keep on hearing the police have caught me but they wont fix me just 
yet. I have laughed when they look so clever and talk about being on 
the right track. That joke about Leather Apron gave me real fits. I am 
down on whores and I shant quit ripping them till I do get buckled. 
Grand work the last job was. I gave the lady no time to squeal. How can 
they catch me now. I love my work and want to start again. You will 
soon hear of me with my funny little games. I saved some of the proper 
red stuff in a ginger beer bottle over the last job to write with but 
it went thick like glue and I cant use it. Red ink is fit enough I hope 
ha. ha. The next job I do I shall clip the ladys ears off and send to 
the police officers just for jolly wouldn't you. Keep this letter back 
till I do a bit more wo7rk, then give it out straight. My knife's so 
nice and sharp I want to get to work right away if I get a chance. Good 
luck. 
Yours truly, 
Jack the Ripper 
 
 
 
Dont mind me giving the trade name. 
 

 
 
P.S. Wasn't good enough to post this before I got all the red ink off 
my hands curse it No luck yet. They say I'm a doctor now. ha ha 
 
 
 
John Lachley dated the letter September 25th and blew the final line of 
red ink dry, then chuckled to himself. He'd instructed Maybrick to 
bring his diary to London during his last visit, and had read the 
depraved drivel scrawled in it with avid curiosity. He'd copied the 
madman's way of writing, including his insane insertions of the words 
ha ha and other underscored phrases here and there. When Maybrick's 
diary was discovered in Liverpool, this letter would help to hang him. 
 
Perhaps he'd write out a few more letters and cards, drop them in the 
post over the next few days? After all, once he'd recovered Eddy's 
wayward missives from Stride and Eddowes, he would no longer need 
Maybrick for anything save a weight at the end of a gallows rope. He 
grinned down at the bloody signature line, intensely proud of the 
appellation he'd thought up. Jack the Ripper . . . Poor James, who 
referred to himself in his diary as Sir Jim. He'd protest innocence of 
writing this all the way to the drop. Yes, Lachley smiled, he would 
write out a few more letters, perhaps scrawl one or two across a 
newspaper article, something with the word Liverpool in it . . . 
 
A tap at the study door roused him from delightful musings. He hastily 
slid the letter into his desk drawer and locked it. "Yes? Come!" 
 
His manservant bowed in the doorway. "You asked to be notified when 
your patient woke, sir." 
 
"Ah, yes, thank you, Charles. I'll see the young lady directly." 
 
"Very good, sir." 
 
Lachley climbed the stairs while planning where to send his traitorous 
little missive. The editor of the Daily News, perhaps, a respectable 
newspaper with a large circulation and a keen appetite to solve the 
mystery of the Whitechapel Murderer. Or maybe the Central News Agency. 
He wished he might see the face of the editor when that letter landed 
on the gentleman's desk. Chuckling at his own joke, Lachley entered the 
room of his comely young captive. 
 
"Good afternoon, dear lady!" 
 
The girl was awake, listless from the effects of the drugs he fed her 
daily. A spark of terror flared in her eyes as he sat beside the bed. 
He took her hand, felt the chill of her fingers. "Now, then. Let us 
chat, Miss Ianira." 
 
A shudder, very faint, ran through her. 
 
He patted her hand. "I have seen what you are capable of, my dear. I 
intend to make excellent use of your skill." He brushed hair back from 
her brow, stroked her ashen skin. "How pale you are, today. Come now, 
you must surely see the advantages of a connection with me? I can give 

you all of London, all of Britain's power and wealth." He stroked her 
hand again. "I've obtained the license, you know. Special 
dispensation." He chuckled. "Knowing Eddy really is such a tremendous 
help. It isn't easy, getting a special license from the dear old C of 
E. Clergy are such ruddy sticklers for details. However," he smiled 
brightly, "you will soon be Mrs. John Lachley and I will strew pearls 
of gratitude at your feet." 
 
A choked sound escaped pale lips. "No . . ." 
 
He frowned. "No? Of course you shall marry me, dear girl. I cannot have 
you living under my roof, unmarried. People will talk and talk is one 
thing I cannot afford." 
 
She was struggling to speak. "My husband . . . children . . ." 
 
Astonishment swept through him. "Married? You are married?" Then he 
began to laugh. "Widowed, you mean. I shot your dear husband dead in 
the street. Put a bullet into his head." 
 
She strained away from him, dark eyes wide with revulsion. "No! Not 
Jenna . . . Marcus." 
 
Lachley frowned again. "The man I shot was not your husband?" 
 
The girl lay trembling, tears sliding down her face. She had given him 
only one name to call her by, despite the drugs he'd fed her, refusing 
against all efforts he'd made thus far to reveal her full name. 
 
"What is your husband's surname, girl?" 
 
She shook her head. "What . . . what is a surname?" 
 
"A last name!" he snapped, growing impatient. "Dammit, I know they use 
surnames even in Greece!" 
 
"Not Greek . . ." she whispered. "Poor Marcus, sold in Rome . . . He'll 
be frantic . . ." 
 
She was babbling again, raving out of her head. He gripped her wrists, 
shook her. "Tell me your last name, girl!" 
 
"Cassondra!" she shrieked the word at him, fighting his hold on her. "I 
am Ianira, Cassondra of Ephesus!" 
 
"Talk sense! There is no city of Ephesus, just a ruin buried only the 
ancients know where! How did you come to London?" 
 
"Through the gate . . ." 
 
They were back to that again. The sodding gate, whatever the deuce that 
was. She babbled about it every time he questioned her. Lachley changed 
his line of attack. "Tell me about the letters. Eddy's letters." 
 
Her eyes closed over a look of utter horror. "Lady, help me . . ." 
 
Losing patience, Lachley poured the drug down her throat, waiting for 

it to take effect, then put her into a deep trance. She lay without 
moving, scarcely even breathing beneath the coverlet he straightened 
over her. "Now, then," he said gently, "tell me about the letters." 
 
Her lips moved. A bare whisper of sound escaped her. "Eight letters . . 
." 
 
"Tell me about the eight letters. Who has them?" 
 
"Morgan . . . down in the vaulted room with the tree and the flame that 
always burns . . ." A shudder tore through her despite the grip of the 
strong medication. "Polly is dead . . . and poor Annie, who could 
scarcely breathe . . . Stride carries Eddy's words beneath the knife . 
. . Kate fears the letter in her pocket, picks hops in the countryside, 
afraid to touch it . . . and the pretty girl in Miller's Court, she'll 
die cut into pieces, poor child, for a letter she learned to read in 
Cardiff . . ." 
 
"What girl in Miller's Court?" 
 
Ianira's eyes had closed, however, so deep in the grip of the drug that 
no amount of slapping would rouse her. Lachley paced the bedroom in 
agitation. What girl in Miller's Court? Annie Chapman hadn't mentioned 
any such person! He narrowed his eyes, thinking back to that last 
conversation with the doomed prostitute. They'd been interrupted, he 
recalled, just as she'd been telling him who she'd sold the letters to, 
mentioning Elizabeth Stride and Catharine Eddowes. He'd thought she was 
finished, after giving those two names, but wondered now if perhaps 
that interruption had kept him from learning the name of a third person 
in possession of Eddy's incriminating letters? 
 
He swore savagely, wondering what in God's name to do now. 
 
The bitch must be found, of course, found and silenced. 
 
She lived in Miller's Court, Ianira had said. He knew the place from 
his childhood. Miller's Court was not a large space, after all. How 
many girls from Cardiff could there be, living in that dismal little 
square? He closed his eyes against such a monstrous spectre. A Welsh 
girl, in possession of Eddy's Welsh letters . . . Had she already sent 
a blackmail demand to the palace? Were Eddy's power and position in 
mortal peril, after all? Because Annie Chapman, the stupid bitch, had 
neglected to mention a third recipient of her letters? 
 
He drew a deep, calming breath. Surely no blackmail demand had been 
sent, yet. Eddy would've come to him in a high state of panic, if one 
had. Hopefully, Polly and Annie's grisly fate had frightened the Welsh 
tart too deeply to act. Still, she had got to be found and done away 
with, the sooner the better. God, would this nightmare never come to an 
end? With yet another woman to trace and destroy, perhaps Lachley ought 
not send his damning Ripper letter to the press, after all? A moment's 
consideration, however, convinced him to risk it, anyway. Maybrick 
would be in London at the end of the week, so this girl in Miller's 
Court could be eliminated on the same night as Stride and Eddowes. 
Three women in one weekend was a bit much, true . . . 
 
But he hadn't any real choice. 

 
He spared a glance for the mysterious Ianira, pale and silent in her 
bed. "You," he muttered aloud, "must wait a bit. Once this business is 
done, however, I will discover the identity of your husband." 
 
Christ, yet another murder to be undertaken. 
 
This mess occasionally bade fair to drive him insane. 
 
* * * 
 
The silence in the dusty little Colorado mining town was so utterly 
complete, Skeeter could hear the distant scream of an eagle somewhere 
over the sunbaked mountains. The scrape of his chair as he dragged it 
harshly around and sat down caused several women to jump. Julius' too-
young face, waxen with that ghastly, bluish color death brought, 
floated in his mind's eye, demanding vengeance. The dark look he bent 
on Sid Kaederman went unnoticed, because the detective was busy glaring 
at Orson Travers. Clearly, the Time Tours guide had stalled him off 
until Kit and Skeeter's return. The silence lay so thick, the creak of 
wooden floorboards as tourists shifted sounded loud as gunshots. 
 
The moment Kit settled into an easy stance beside Skeeter's chair, Sid 
Kaederman growled, "All right, Travers, you want to tell us just what's 
been going on?" 
 
"Yes, let's have the details, please," Kit agreed. "This is messier 
than you can possibly guess." 
 
Orson Travers, an unhappy man made monumentally unhappier by Kit's 
pronouncement, cleared his throat. "There wasn't any hint of trouble on 
the way up here. Oh, it was a rowdy enough bunch, lots of high spirits. 
We packed our gear in by mule from Colorado Springs, whipped the town 
into shape for the competition, refurbished a couple of houses to bunk 
down in, built the target stands and laid out the course of fire for 
the running action events. All that prep work was part of the package 
tour, using nineteenth-century techniques to build the competition 
course and refurbish the camp. And we planned the wedding, of course -- 
" 
 
"Wedding?" Kaederman interrupted, startled. 
 
A pretty girl in a muslin gown blushed crimson and leaned against a 
tall, gangly kid in buckskins. He grinned. "Got ourselves hitched 
proper, brought a preacher with us and all, held the ceremony over at 
the trading post last week." 
 
"Oh, it was so wonderful!" his bride put in excitedly. "There were real 
Indians and mountain men and everything! And the silliest salesman you 
ever saw, selling ordinary crescent wrenches, called them a new high-
tech invention out of Sweden, patented only three years ago. People 
were paying outrageous prices for them! It was amazing, I'd never seen 
anything like it, fur trappers and miners buying crescent wrenches!" 
The blushing bride was clearly determined not to let the tragedy of a 
double murder mar her honeymoon. 
 
Kit smiled. "Congratulations, I'm sure it was a wedding to remember. 

Now, what the hell happened?" He swung his gaze back to the Time Tours 
guide. 
 
Travers sighed. "The action and endurance course runs through the hills 
and gullies around town. The idea is, you stalk and shoot every full 
round of the course over a period of several hours, to test your 
endurance and accuracy under pressure. Well, Cassie Coventina, or 
rather, the kid we thought was Cassie Coventina, was moving steadily 
through it on horseback, just as planned. We put spotters out along the 
route to act as judges and scorekeepers, but she -- I mean he -- never 
made it to the first target. Let me tell you, it was one helluva shock, 
when Dr. Booker stripped that kid off and we discovered Cassie 
Coventina was a teenage boy in drag!" 
 
Skeeter bridled. Kit pressed a restraining hand against his shoulder. 
"Never mind that, Travers, just tell us what happened." 
 
The thickset guide shifted uncomfortably. "Someone ambushed him. Killed 
the kid and his horse. We found it on the trail, later. Joey Tyrolin 
claimed he and his porter followed the kid out onto the course. They 
weren't supposed to be out there, but Tyrolin was always so damn drunk, 
he pretty much did what he pleased. Guy claimed all he wanted to do was 
watch. Said he and his porter rode up right after the kid was ambushed. 
Tyrolin gave chase and killed the attacker -- one of the drovers," 
Travers added unhappily. "A tourist who signed up to work the tour, so 
he could get a cheaper ticket." 
 
"And Tyrolin killed him?" Kaederman asked softly. 
 
An underlying tone in the man's voice, a tone Skeeter would've sworn 
was agitated anger despite those curiously chilly eyes, brought 
Skeeter's hackles up again. 
 
"Oh, yes, Tyrolin killed him. Was bold as brass about admitting it, 
too. Said the man shot at him when he gave chase, so he fired back. 
Killed him stone dead. I'd have said it was a case of self-defense, if 
Tyrolin hadn't bolted out of camp with his porter and those kids, right 
after. While everybody was rushing around trying to set up an emergency 
field surgery, they just packed up their gear and rode off. We sent 
riders after them, of course, and half the tour group volunteered to 
help search. Not that we let anybody but guides and regular Time Tours 
drovers out of camp, after what happened with Tyrolin and that tourist. 
And the kid, poor bastard." 
 
"I don't suppose," Kaederman put in, "you happen to have a photograph 
of Tyrolin and his porter?" The tension in his voice caught Skeeter's 
attention once more. Kaederman wanted that picture badly. 
 
"Never mind the photo just now," Kit overrode him. "I presume you 
dispatched your courier to inform Denver of the double murders? After 
sending out the search party on Tyrolin's trail?" 
 
"Yes. I'm the only guide left in camp right now. I sent everyone else 
and half the drovers out after them. Along with Dr. Booker. She 
insisted on going, in case her surgical skills were needed." Travers 
sighed. "So that's what happened on our end, but you haven't told us 
why you're up here, looking for Joey Tyrolin, too. Don't tell me he was 

a wanted criminal, up time?" 
 
Kaederman said coldly, "You might say that. A terrorist, to be exact." 
 
Gasps broke from the tourists. A couple of the women let out tiny 
shrieks. 
 
Kit said a little wearily, "We've got troubles of our own on station 
just now. Big troubles." 
 
"He's not kidding, either," Skeeter muttered. "Senator John Caddrick's 
on station. Threatening to shut us down if we don't bring back Joey 
Tyrolin. Among other things." 
 
"Caddrick?" Orson Travers' face washed white. 
 
"Yes," Kit nodded. "And it gets better. Joey Tyrolin's real name is 
Noah Armstrong. A member of the Ansar Majlis, that terrorist cult out 
of the Middle East. They murdered Cassie Tyrol in New York and 
kidnapped Caddrick's only child. Not to mention kidnapping Ianira 
Cassondra and her entire family. Between the Templars and the cult 
crazies flooding into the station and starting riots, we've had several 
critical injuries and nine murders. And if we don't find Jenna Caddrick 
and bring her back safely, her father will shut down Shangri-La for 
good. The Inter-Temporal Court's been called in, as a last-ditch 
measure to try and keep the station operational. Mr. Kaederman, here, 
was hired by the senator to help search for his daughter." 
 
Travers looked like a slight breeze would've knocked him over. 
 
Someone from the back of the crowd whispered, "Oh, my God. And we let 
the terrorist responsible get away!" 
 
"Yes," Kaederman said with enough frost to freeze every cup of water in 
the room, "you did. And we're here to find him. Now, does anyone have a 
photo of Tyrolin and his porter? I want to make a positive 
identification of that bastard before we ride out after him and his 
hostages." 
 
"I have a photo," a woman spoke up, pushing her way to the front. "I 
should have several, in fact." She ignored Kaederman, addressing Kit, 
instead, which left the Wardmann-Wolfe agent bristling. "Ellen Danvers, 
Mr. Carson, professional photographer. Hired to do the wedding party. 
I've been taking pictures steadily with a digital camera. I can bring 
all the disks for you to study, if you like." 
 
Three minutes later, Skeeter found himself staring at a photograph of 
Marcus on the miniature screen at the back of Ellen Danvers' digital 
camera. He was clearly in disguise, but a guy didn't live through what 
Skeeter'd lived through, trying to rescue his friend from slavery, 
without getting to know that friend's face well enough to recognize him 
under any circumstances. The only reason he'd failed to spot Marcus at 
the gate's opening was Joey Tyrolin's masterful performance, drawing 
attention away from everything else within a thousand paces. 
 
Ellen Danvers scrolled through shot after shot. "Joey Tyrolin was 
camera shy, considering how drunk he was all the time. I didn't get 

many shots of him. In fact, I had to work hard to get any photos of his 
face at all, and my client specifically asked for candids of the entire 
competition group." She'd used up dozens of disks taking pictures of 
just about everything but the horse dung. 
 
"There," Miss Danvers paused the scroll, freezing a frame for them to 
look at. "That's them. Joey Tyrolin and his porter. And these are the 
porter's little girls. Beautiful children, both of them." The 
photographer's gaze was troubled as she glanced up at Kit. "We had no 
idea they were Ianira Cassondra's daughters, or that the porter was her 
husband. Are they really hostages?" 
 
Sid Kaederman answered, voice still colder than spiked icicles. "They 
most certainly are, if they're even still alive. This," he tapped Noah 
Armstrong's photo, "is one of the most dangerous men in the world. Or 
rather, one of the most dangerous people. Armstrong's an intersexual, 
neither male nor female, able to assume any disguise he pleases. 
Armstrong's the cleverest, deadliest bastard I've ever run across. God 
help those kids, in the clutches of a monster like that." 
 
Skeeter peered sharply at Kaederman, wondering about the level of 
venom. Was Kaederman that prejudiced against intersexuals? Lots of 
people were, Skeeter knew, although Kaederman didn't strike him as the 
type who would hate without reason. He could be playing some other 
game, however, painting Armstrong as the one thing Skeeter was 
beginning to suspect he wasn't: a terrorist. 
 
Ellen Danvers, of course, with no reason to suspect Kaederman's motives 
or honesty, had paled, her expression stricken. "Those poor little 
girls! Can you find them?" 
 
"We'll give it our best shot," Kit said quietly. "Let's check our gear 
and rations. I want to ride out within the hour." 
 
Skeeter stayed where he was until Kit and the Wardmann-Wolfe agent had 
left the room. As the meeting broke up and the tourists milled around 
outside, trying to help and mostly dithering and getting in everyone's 
way, Skeeter took Ellen Danvers quietly aside and asked to see her 
photos again. 
 
"All of them?" she asked. 
 
He nodded, studying each of the shots in turn, looking carefully at 
every digitally recorded face. "You're sure you took pictures of every 
single person in the group?" he asked at length. 
 
"Yes, quite sure." 
 
"And there wasn't any way they could've been hiding someone else? In 
their luggage, say?" 
 
"No, I don't think that would've been possible. Not an adult, anyway. 
The porter smuggled the children in his trunk, but they're such little 
things. I can't imagine how anyone could have stuffed an adult into one 
of those trunks." 
 
"But they took their luggage with them? Steamer trunks, pack horses, 

all of it?" 
 
Puzzled, she nodded. "Yes. Why?" 
 
Skeeter merely shook his head. "Just a theory. Nothing I want to 
discuss, yet." He wondered if Kit had noticed, or Kaederman, for that 
matter, that the one face missing from Ellen Danvers' impressive 
collection of photos was Jenna Caddrick's? Nor did Ianira Cassondra 
appear in any of her shots, which struck Skeeter as both ominous and 
profoundly odd. If neither Jenna nor Ianira had come with Armstrong and 
Marcus, just where had the two women gone? Were they, in fact, hidden 
away in the steamer trunks? Or buried somewhere in a shallow grave? 
Skeeter's gut churned queasily. He didn't want to share those 
particular thoughts with anyone just yet, not until he could get Kit 
alone once more. He said only, "Thanks for letting me look through 
these again." 
 
"Of course. Do you think there's much chance you'll be able to find 
them?" 
 
Skeeter hesitated. "We'll do the best we can. I'm a good tracker. So's 
Kit. But they've got a good lead on us and it's a big country, out 
here. Frankly, I'm not holding out much hope. And I've got more reason 
than most to find them. Marcus is the closest friend I have in the 
world." 
 
Ellen Danvers' eyes misted. "I'm sorry, Mr. Jackson." 
 
"Thanks." He handed back the camera. "I'd appreciate it if you didn't 
mention this conversation." 
 
"Of course." She hesitated. "You don't trust the senator's detective 
much, do you?" 
 
Skeeter's laugh was as colorless as the burnt sky overhead. "Does it 
show that much? Would you trust a man working for Senator John Paul 
Caddrick?" 
 
She bit one lip. "Well, no, not as far as I could throw him, which 
isn't very far. Good luck, Mr. Jackson. And be careful." 
 
Her concern surprised Skeeter. He hadn't realized ordinary people could 
care so much. "Thank you, Ms. Danvers. I appreciate that, more than you 
know." 
 
He left her peering at the screen on her camera, studying the photos, 
clearly wondering what, exactly, he'd been looking for. Ellen Danvers 
was a smart lady. He wouldn't be at all surprised if she didn't tumble 
to it on her own. 
 
If she did, he hoped she kept it quiet as a tomb. 
 
* * * 
 
Elizabeth Stride was known throughout the East End for her stormy 
temper and her explosive relationship with her lover, Michael Kidney -- 
a violent relationship she wasn't particularly ashamed of, any more 

than she was ashamed of the way she made her living. When Liz's younger 
lover drank, which was frequently, Michael grew abusive. And when she 
drank, which was even more often, Long Liz Stride grew belligerent. And 
when they quarelled, which was nearly every time they drank, Liz 
usually ended by slamming Michael's door behind her -- if he hadn't 
padlocked her in again to keep her off the streets. 
 
On Wednesday, September 26th, after another violent and drunken row, 
Long Liz Stride found herself on the streets once more, fuming and 
furious and looking for a bed at her favorite lodging house, 32 Flower 
and Dean Street. The kitchen was filled with more than a dozen women 
and girls of all ages, most of them cold and frightened and in various 
stages of drunkenness. All of them whispered about the shocking murders 
which had struck down so many women just like them since Easter Monday. 
 
" -- scared to let a man touch me, I am," one girl of seventeen was 
whispering miserably, "but I got to eat, 'aven't I? What's a lady to 
do, when she's got to eat and there ain't no other way to put bread in 
'er Lime'ouse Cut, but lift 'er skirts for whatever man'll pay 'er to 
do it?" 
 
Liz had, until recently, entertained her own ideas about the infamous 
Whitechapel Murderer, as the newspapers had taken to calling him. She 
had spent a hard-earned shilling to buy a short, blunt knife to carry 
in her pocket as protection, after what had happened to Polly Nichols 
and Annie Chapman. Ever since Dark Annie's murder, Liz had been 
terrified to do anything about her own letter. But surely, if Annie had 
been killed because of these letters, the killer would have dragged out 
of the poor woman the identity of everyone she'd sold the letters to? 
Logically, a killer looking for those letters would've found that out 
first thing, then come after anyone who'd bought one. But nearly two 
weeks had passed and no one had come knocking on her door, so the 
newspapers must be right and poor Annie had simply fallen victim to a 
madman, same as poor Polly Nichols, a week before. 
 
Besides, there were those other women killed, Martha Tabram on August 
Bank Holiday and Emma Smith on Easter Monday, and they couldn't have 
had anything to do with Annie Chapman's letters, which, by her own 
admission, she'd had from Polly, rest her soul. Still, Liz bought that 
knife, and she was careful not to approach any potential customers 
resembling the descriptions of the killer. 
 
As Liz hesitated on the doss house's kitchen threshold, a woman she'd 
met during her last visit called out a greeting. "Why, Liz," Catharine 
Long exclaimed, gesturing her to a vacant chair beside the hearth, "I 
haven't seen you here in three months! Whatever's happened?" 
 
Liz joined her, grateful for the warmth of the coal fire. The weather 
outside was blustery and wet, cold enough to turn her ungloved fingers 
red. "Oh, I had words with my man, is all. I'll let him cool his temper 
for a few days, then he'll see the error of his ways and I'll go back 
to him, drunken fool." 
 
"But will he take you back, Liz?" 
 
She smiled a little grimly. "Oh, yes, Michael will take me back." She 
patted her pocket, where several folded sheets of foolscap rested, down 

beneath that sharp little knife. Surely it must be safe to do something 
about her little investment now? And with the blackmail money she would 
obtain, Michael would certainly take her back, temper or no. All she 
had to do was find a Welshman in one of the ironworks sprawled through 
the vast shipyards to translate her letter and she would be rich. More 
than rich enough to tempt any man she wanted. 
 
"Yes," she said again, her slight smile at odds with the atmosphere of 
terror and misery in the kitchen, "Michael will take me back, 
Catharine. So tell me the news, it's been an age since I saw you." 
 
"Oh, I'm fine enough, Liz. But these killings . . ." Catharine Long 
shuddered. "And the police are such hopeless fools. You heard what Sir 
Charles Warren's done?" 
 
Liz shook her head, not particularly interested in what the head of the 
Metropolitan police force did. As long as a woman kept moving and 
didn't try to stand in one place, coppers generally didn't bother her. 
"No, I haven't heard." 
 
"He's taken every single East End detective off the beat! Assigned them 
to patrol west London. And he's switched about the West End detectives 
to patrol Whitechapel and Spitalfields and the docklands. Have you ever 
heard of suchlike? Why, the detectives out there don't even know the 
street names, let alone the alleyways this madman must be using to 
escape!" 
 
A woman seated beside them moaned and rocked back and forth. "They 
don't care about us, so they don't! All they want is to show the ruddy 
newsmen they've put a few coppers on the street. Not a man Jack of 'em 
gives a fig for the likes of us. Now if it was fine ladies he were 
cuttin' up, they'd have a policeman in every house, so they would . . 
." 
 
Liz and Catharine Long exchanged a long, silent look. It was only too 
true, after all. Despite the show of putting extra men on the beat, 
both women knew they would have to defend themselves. Liz clutched the 
handle of her knife through her worn skirts and held back a shiver. 
Perhaps she ought to just burn the letter? 
 
That won't do you any good if he comes after you, she told herself 
grimly. Might as well get some money out of it, then leave London, 
maybe go across to America. 
 
She'd find someone to translate the sheets of foolscap for her, get out 
of this hellhole, live decently for a change. Meanwhile, she'd do a bit 
of charring to earn her keep, maybe offer to clean some of the rooms in 
the lodging house for a few pence. She might even ask around the Jewish 
community to see if anyone needed a charwoman for a few days. She'd 
done a great deal of char work for Jewish businessmen and their plump 
wives. They knew her to be dependable when she could get the work. And 
not a lot of charwomen would work for a Jew just now, not with these 
Whitechapel murders being blamed on a foreigner, same as that Lipski 
fellow last year, who'd poisoned that poor little girl, barely gone 
fifteen. 
 
Long Liz didn't care how many people in the East End hated Jews or 

called them dirty, foreign murderers. Work was work and she certainly 
didn't mind cleaning houses, if it came to that. Charring was better 
than selling herself and she'd done that enough times to keep body and 
soul together, not only here in London, but back in Sweden, too, so 
what was a little thing like charring for a few Jews? Besides, she 
wouldn't need menial work much longer, would she? Not with money to be 
made from Annie Chapman's legacy. 
 
"Say, Catharine," she asked quietly, leaning close to her friend so as 
not to be overheard, "do you know any Welshmen?" 
 
Her friend gave her a startled glance, then laughed. "Oh, Liz, you are 
a piece of work! Quarrelled with your man this morning and looking for 
a replacement tonight! Try the Queen's Head pub, dearie, I've heard 
there's a Welsh ironworker from the docks with money in his trous, 
likes to have a drink there of an evening." 
 
Long Liz Stride smiled. "Thank you, Catharine. I believe I will." 
 
By week's end, Elizabeth Stride intended to be a rich woman. 
 
* * * 
 
The trail Armstrong had taken out of camp did not lead south, along the 
shorter route to Colorado Springs and the railway station. Armstrong 
and Marcus had fled north, the long way up toward Florissant. By 
nightfall, Skeeter, Kit, and Sid Kaederman, along with their guide, 
were deep in the Colorado Rockies, following the path the other Time 
Tours guides had already taken. They camped overnight in a sheltered 
nook of rock out of the wind, then set out at first light, covering 
ground rapidly along a trail Skeeter, at least, could've followed 
blindfolded. He'd hunted with the Yakka Clan often enough to learn what 
spoor to follow through rough country. "It hasn't rained for a while, 
at least," Skeeter muttered, studying the fading trail which sporadic 
wind gusts had partially obliterated in the more open spots. 
"Fortunately, their trail was protected in low-lying areas like this." 
He pointed to faded hoofprints. "They were in a tearing hurry, too. The 
Time Tours guides who came through after them weren't moving nearly as 
fast as Armstrong and Marcus." 
 
"How do you know that?" Kaederman demanded. 
 
Skeeter shrugged. "I've tracked quarry through broken country before. 
Look," he dismounted and crouched down alongside the trail, pointing to 
a mishmash grouping of hoofprints. "These are the oldest prints. 
They're nearly a blur from the wind filling them in and the mud's 
completely dried out. And look how far apart the stride is." He paced 
off the distance between hoof prints. "They were moving at a fast 
canter or a slow gallop, depending on the height of their ponies. Given 
the weight their pack horses are carrying, that's a gruelling pace to 
keep up. These other prints, the fresher ones from the search party, 
are a lot closer together. They're trotting, at best. They'll never 
catch up if Marcus and Armstrong keep up the pace they've been holding, 
pushing their ponies that fast." 
 
"But they'll wear out their horses in no time!" 
 

"Not if they're smart and careful," Skeeter disagreed. "I've been 
studying these prints all morning. They slow to a walk periodically to 
give the horses a breather, probably more for the pack animals' sake 
than the riding mounts. And I've spotted a couple of places where they 
dismounted and let the animals rest and graze. But when they're in the 
saddle, they're moving fast. Judging from those photos Ellen Danvers 
took, Armstrong can't weigh much more than one-thirty, one-forty, and 
Marcus is slender, too. He and Ianira never had the money to indulge 
overeating. Even with the children, he's probably lighter for a pony to 
carry than I am and I'm not exactly massive, myself. Armstrong is 
obviously no fool. I'd say he knows exactly what he's doing. As long as 
they're careful with the pack animals, or don't care about abandoning 
their baggage, they won't founder those horses. And wherever they're 
going, they'll get there a lot sooner than any of us will." 
 
The big question Skeeter couldn't answer from these tracks, however, 
was whether or not any of the Time Tours guides or drovers searching 
ahead of them might be in the pay of the Ansar Majlis. If he'd been 
part of a terrorist cult dedicated to murdering someone like Marcus and 
Ianira, he would've sent more than one hit man through the Wild West 
Gate. Which left Skeeter wondering just how many killers they might yet 
run into on this trail -- or how much use Sid Kaederman would be, if 
they did. He kept his eyes and ears open and hoped they didn't stumble 
into an ambush somewhere along the way. 
 
By their third day of hard riding, they'd swung around the north flank 
of Pikes Peak and were moving east toward the rail line again. They had 
to call a brief halt when Kaederman's pony pulled up lame. The 
detective dismounted stiffly and watched unhappily as Meinrad showed 
him how to check his pony's hooves for stones, lifting each foot in 
turn to check the soft pad known as the frog. They were prying loose a 
sharp rock from his near forefoot when Skeeter heard it: a faint, sharp 
report that echoed off the mountains. Another distant crack reached 
them, like a frozen tree splitting wide open, then a third, followed by 
a whole volley. The sound fell into an abruptly familiar pattern. 
 
"Gunfire!" 
 
Lots of it. 
 
Kit jerked around in the saddle. "Jeezus Christ! There's a war breaking 
loose out there! Kurt, we don't have time to wait, nursemaid him when 
you've got that pony's hoof cleared! Skeeter, move it!" Kit clattered 
off at a gallop just as Skeeter jerked his shotgun out of its scabbard. 
Skeeter put heels to flanks and sent his mount racing after Kit's. He 
leaned low over his horse's neck, his double-barrel clutched in one 
hand like a war spear, and snarled into the teeth of the wind. Even 
above the thunder of hooves, he could still hear gunfire popping 
ominously ahead. He couldn't imagine locals producing that much 
gunfire. But the Ansar Majlis easily could. Had the Time Tours guides 
found Marcus and the girls after all, bringing them back toward camp, 
only to ride into the fusillade of an ambush? 
 
Kit crouched so close above his horse's neck, he looked like a fluid 
statue cut from the same flesh as the racing animal. The retired scout 
surged ahead, splashing through a shallow, rocky creek and switching 
with consumate skill around outcroppings, tumbled boulders and loose 

piles of scree. Skeeter's horse slipped and slid through the jumbled 
heaps of weather-fractured stones, then drew up nose to tail behind 
Kit's, nostrils distended and running flat out. This was bad country 
for a full-bore charge. If either nag put a foot wrong at this speed . 
. . 
 
A sudden silence ahead robbed him of breath. Then the staccato pop of 
gunfire rattled again in the harsh sunlight, sporadic but closer than 
before. Somebody had to reload. Several somebodies. Both sides, maybe. 
Which meant there was a chance the Ansar Majlis were using period 
firearms, rather than modern stuff smuggled through the gate. Against 
black-powder guns, even replica models, his friends might stand a 
halfway decent chance. Given the sound of that shooting, whoever was 
under attack was firing back, giving at least as good as they were 
getting. 
 
Then Kit was reining in and Skeeter pulled up hard to slither to a halt 
beside him, both horses blowing from the run. Kit held up a warning 
hand, then pointed down into a narrow little arroyo. Two riderless 
horses pawed the dusty ground uncertainly, skittish and laying their 
ears back each time gunfire tore through the hot sunlight. Their riders 
lay pinned between an outcropping of stone and a jumble of boulders, 
firing up toward a knife-edge ridgeline that lay to Skeeter and Kit's 
left. Skeeter dragged his field glasses out of his saddle bag, the 
brass warm with the scent of hot leather, and peered toward the 
ridgeline while Kit studied the riders pinned below. 
 
"That's a Time Tours guide," Kit muttered. "And Paula Booker!" 
 
"Shalig!" Skeeter snarled under his breath. "There's at least six 
gunmen up there." He pointed toward the narrow ridgeline. "Counting 
puffs of smoke, at least six, maybe more." 
 
"Six?" Kit shot back, brows diving toward his nose. "That's too many 
for Armstrong's crew." 
 
"Maybe. How many guys did he plant with those drovers?" 
 
Kit swore. "Shalig is right. Let's get around the back side of that 
ridge, come at them from behind." 
 
They had to abandon the horses halfway up, the slope was so sharp. 
Skeeter panted for breath and scrambled for handholds, climbing 
steadily, shotgun gripped awkwardly in one hand. Kurt Meinrad and Sid 
Kaederman, arriving late, struggled to climb the same slope in their 
wake. Skeeter gained the top and bellied forward, lying flat so he 
wouldn't skyline himself and make a visible target above the ridge. Kit 
slithered out beside him, grunting softly and peering through his own 
field glasses. Kurt Meinrad arrived just as Kit began surveying the 
scene below. Skeeter handed the guide his own field glasses and jerked 
Kaederman down when the idiot just stood there, standing out like a 
neon sign flashing "shoot me." Skeeter waited in a swivet, using the 
naked eye to mark spots where gunmen lay hidden in the rocky 
outcroppings of the ridge. Meinrad gave a sudden grunt. 
 
"Huh. That's no pack of terrorists, Carson." 
 

Kit swung a sharp look on the Time Tours guide. "Oh?" 
 
"That's the Flanagan brothers. With a couple of their low-life pals. 
Irish railroad men who took to holding up trains after they finished 
laying track. Small-time thugs, temporal natives. We've had trouble 
with them before, roughing up a couple of the tours. They like holding 
up stage coaches, too, and robbing campsites." 
 
"They may be small time, but they've got your guide and Paula Booker 
pinned down neat as any trap I've ever seen," Kit shot back. "And if 
they're down-timers, we don't have any guarantee they can be killed, 
even if we shoot amongst 'em." 
 
"Maybe not," Skeeter said, misquoting a favorite mid-twentieth century 
television show he'd watched endlessly in reruns, "but I'll bet you 
credits to navy beans I can put the fear of God into 'em." 
 
Before Kit could reply, Skeeter let out a war whoop and charged down 
the precipitous slope, yelling and cursing in twelfth-century Mongolian 
and loosing off rounds as fast as he could jam shells into his 
scattergun. Six astonished faces swung up toward him. Skeeter let fly 
another round of buckshot and heard Kit scrambling down the slope after 
him, yelling in some unknown, bloodcurdling language that left 
Skeeter's hair standing on end. Kit's Model 73 barked with a roar like 
thunder. Lead whined off rock so close to a Flanagan brother's ear, the 
man jumped six inches straight up and landed running. 
 
When Kurt Meinrad joined the insane plunge, shooting and shouting on 
Kit's heels, it was too much for the Flanagans. They all broke and ran, 
heading for ponies concealed in the brush. A clatter of hooves rattled 
away in a boiling swirl of dust, then Skeeter slithered to a halt, 
panting and sweating and wondering if he'd completely lost his mind, 
pulling a stunt like that. But he hadn't felt this alive since 
returning to civilization at the age of thirteen -- with the possible 
exception of fighting for his life in the Circus Maximus. 
 
Kit Carson, hair dishevelled, jaw unshaven, pale eyes alight with an 
unholy look that might've been fury or glee, stalked toward him. 
"Skeeter, you lunatic! What possessed you to pull a bone-headed piece 
of insanity like that?" 
 
Skeeter grinned. "Got rid of 'em, didn't it?" 
 
Kit's mouth thinned. "Yes. And I could be piling rocks over what was 
left of you, too." 
 
"Well, hell's bells, Kit, I never yet met a bully who wouldn't back 
down when confronted." 
 
One corner of Kit's lips twitched. "Next time, wait for instructions." 
 
Skeeter sketched a sloppy salute. "Yessir!" 
 
"Huh. Thank God you were never in the army, Skeeter, you'd have ended 
in Leavenworth inside a week. All right, let's go find out what that 
Time Tours guide is doing out here by himself with Paula Booker. 
Besides playing bait for every outlaw in the territory." 

 
Wordlessly, they headed down into the rocky defile. 
 
 
 
Chapter Six 
 
Time Scout in-training Margo Smith was so keyed up she was very nearly 
shaking as she and her fiancé -- freelance time guide Malcolm Moore -- 
eased open the gate beside the International Workingmen's Association. 
A lively concert was underway, spilling Russian music out into the 
streets. Malcolm held the gate as Margo slipped into the long alleyway 
leading back to Dutfield's Yard. The Ripper Watch Team followed 
silently, carrying miniaturized equipment they would use to film Long 
Liz Stride's brutal murder. Their satchels were heavy, carrying three 
times the equipment needed for the previous two murders. This was only 
the first stop of three the team would make tonight, placing low-light 
cameras and microphone systems in Dutfield's Yard, on a certain 
stairway landing in Goulston Street, and in Mitre Square. 
 
While Margo and Malcolm stood guard, the team members placed their tiny 
cameras, hiding them where they would not be discovered by the police, 
some at the entrance to the alley and others back in the yard. Margo 
glanced every few moments at the windows of the crowded hall, convinced 
someone would spot them and demand to know what they were doing down 
here, but no one noticed. It gave Margo an insight into how the Ripper 
had been able to strike so frequently in the heart of a crowded slum. 
The people of Whitechapel, like those in many another overpopulated 
city, turned their attention inward to their own business and feared to 
pry too directly into the business of neighbors, particularly with a 
deranged killer walking the streets. 
 
Margo drew a deep breath of relief when the Ripper Watch Team finally 
finished and she was able to lead them all back to the street once 
more. 
 
"Very good," Malcolm said quietly, easing the wicker pedestrian gate 
closed, "that's the first one. Now, Mitre Square is this way." 
 
Malcolm led the way toward the soon-to-be infamous site that Margo and 
Shahdi Feroz had first visited only two weeks previously. They had 
noticed, during their study of the killing zone, that the Ripper had 
left his fourth victim within sight of both a policeman's house and a 
Jewish synagogue. Tonight, Catharine Eddowes would walk straight into 
that killing zone, where her life would end violently. Margo shivered 
in the darkness and thrust away memories of her own mother's brutal 
murder, concentrating instead on their surroundings and her primary 
task of guarding the Ripper Scholars from footpads and gangs. 
 
The overwhelming sense of Whitechapel by night was a region of utter 
darkness punctuated randomly by brightly lit pubs which drew residents 
like moths. Their attraction was due as much, Margo suspected, to the 
cheerfulness of the light and the sense of safety it gave, as to the 
gin and ale. They walked down entire city blocks without passing a 
single working gas lamp, skirted past alleyways and side streets which 
loomed like black caverns in the night, inhabited by God alone knew 
what. Sounds came drifting to them, scuffles and muffled arguments. 

Children lurked underfoot by the hundreds, crowding into doorways and 
open landings of stairwells, their eyes following the Ripper Watch team 
with hungry intent. 
 
Pubs were packed with rough workmen and drab women carrying hungry-eyed 
children, all swilling alcohol and talking uproariously, faces puffed 
and reddened from drink. Outside the pubs, women walked endlessly up 
and down, pausing only briefly in the doorways, drifting from one pub 
to another soliciting customers at the Britannia, the Princess Alice, 
The City Darts and the Alma, at King Stores and the infamous Ten Bells, 
Mary Kelly's favorite haunt for plying her trade. 
 
Stepping out onto Commercial Road was a shock, by comparison. From 
where they stood on the corner, all the way down to Mile End highway, 
stretched a raucous hive of bright-lit pubs, shops with dim gaslights 
still flickering, street preachers surrounded by heckling crowds, a 
waxworks displaying reproductions of the latest Whitechapel murder 
victims -- children with pennies clutched in grubby fingers struggling 
to gain admittance -- a suit salesman pitching the quality of his wares 
to a crowd of avid listeners, and drifts of sailors up from the docks, 
swilling gin and ogling the women. Despite the lateness of the hour, 
the Saturday night street stunned Margo with its noise and throngs of 
merrymakers, intent on forgetting the horror stalking the lightless 
roads nearby. 
 
One of the Watch Team's experts, Dr. Shahdi Feroz, studied the street 
carefully as they pushed their way west, toward the border with The 
City of London and Mitre Square. Margo edged closer to her. "Is it 
usual for people to pretend like nothing's happening?" 
 
Shahdi flicked her gaze up to meet Margo's. A slight vertical line 
appeared between her brows. "It is not surprising. It has been two 
weeks since the last killing, after all. People with no choice but to 
stay in this place persuade themselves the terror is over, or at least 
they drink and pretend it is. You have noticed the darker streets are 
nearly empty?" 
 
"Yes, I was just thinking about that. Frightened people are drawn to 
the light and bustle." She nodded down the roaring thoroughfare. "I 
guess they're hoping to find safety in numbers. Not that it will do any 
good." 
 
"For most, it will. Very few of these people will be up and about 
between one and two A.M., when the murders will occur. And even the 
prostitutes are trying to be cautious," she motioned with one slim, 
Persian hand, "staying near the lighted pubs or Saint Botolph's 
Church." 
 
Margo shivered. "Not even buying a knife will help poor Liz." 
 
"No." 
 
They pushed past the end of Commercial Road, gaining Adgate, and turned 
off for Mitre Square. Once again Margo and Malcolm stood watch at each 
of the two ways into the secluded little square, while the Ripper Watch 
Team rigged their miniaturized equipment behind a temporary 
construction fence which closed off one interior corner of the square. 

Catharine Eddowes would die just outside that fence. Margo watched 
closely through the dark alleyway known as Church Passage, which ran 
beneath an overhanging building, turning the little lane into a tunnel 
between Mitre Square and the street beyond. Rough workingmen could be 
heard laughing and singing at pubs. Women's voices drifted past, some 
openly brazen, accosting potential customers. Others were hushed with 
fear as they whispered about the killer, wondering what to do to 
protect themselves and their families. 
 
Most of the women in the East End weren't prostitutes, any more than 
most of the men were pickpockets and thieves; but these women had no 
way of knowing the killer loose amongst them wouldn't be attacking 
"honest women." They were all frightened, as unaware as the police of 
the psychology that drove psychotic serial killers like James Maybrick 
and his unknown accomplice. Who that man was, the team hoped to learn 
tonight. They also hoped to discover which of the killers was the rabid 
anti-Semite. 
 
As soon as the equipment was in place, Malcolm led the way once more, 
moving north and east again, across Houndsditch and past Middlesex 
Street, over to Goulston Street and the landing of the Wentworth Model 
Buildings. The tenement was noisily occupied, which made the 
installation hazardous. Malcolm slipped up the dark staircase past the 
landing and stood guard above while Inspector Conroy Melvyn worked 
alone to fix the tiny, button-sized camera and transmitter in the upper 
corner of the landing. A raucous burst of voices from above sent both 
the up-time police inspector and Malcolm plunging back down to street 
level, sweating profusely. 
 
"Got it," Melvyn gasped out, voice shaking slightly. 
 
"I would suggest we leave the area at once," Malcolm said urgently, 
glancing back as several men and women burst from the staircase, locked 
in a bitter argument that threatened to turn violent momentarily. 
 
"Agreed," Melvyn nodded, heading back for Middlesex Street at a brisk 
walk. 
 
A clock from one of the many breweries in the district, Margo wasn't 
sure which one, tolled the hour. Midnight. An hour before the first 
murder, plus another forty minutes until the second one. Moving in 
utter silence, the Ripper Watch Team headed for Leadenhall Street and 
the Bank of England, where their carriage would be waiting to take them 
back to Spaldergate. Margo glanced once over her shoulder into the dark 
maze of alleys that formed the Ripper's killing ground and held back a 
shudder. 
 
Jack the Ripper had already posted his first letter to the editor. 
 
Tomorrow morning, the Daily News would publish it. 
 
* * * 
 
Skeeter reached the bottom of the bone-dry gully slightly behind Kit. 
Before either of them could call a greeting, Paula gave a glad cry. She 
came hurtling out from behind a sheltering boulder and threw herself 
straight into Kit's arms. "Oh, God, Kit Carson! I've never been so 

happy to see anybody in my whole life! And Skeeter Jackson!" 
 
"What's happened?" Kit asked tersely, fishing for a clean bandanna. 
Paula dried her eyes with it, gulping to control tears of sheer relief 
at her rescue. 
 
The Time Tours guide with the surgeon answered through clenched teeth. 
"Bastards jumped us from cover, when Paula's horse threw a shoe. I was 
trying to reshoe the nag when they started shooting." 
 
"Then you haven't caught up with Joey Tyrolin, yet?" Kit asked sharply. 
 
Paula shook her head. "No. And we won't, either. Mr. Samuelson and I 
were bringing back the bad news." 
 
"Too right," Samuelson growled. "Little bastard and his porter 
emigrated on us! They jumped a train before we could catch up and 
headed east. The drovers and other guides are trying to trace them, but 
they bought a ticket for Chicago, so they could jump off anywhere 
between here and Illinois. Or keep going, switch trains in Chicago and 
head for the East Coast." 
 
Skeeter kicked disgustedly at a clod of dirt. "Great. Now what, Kit?" 
 
The grizzled scout shoved his hat back and wiped sweat from his brow. 
"We hold a council of war." 
 
Skeeter certainly didn't have any better ideas. 
 
* * * 
 
Dominica Nosette was so excited she could scarcely stand still. At 
last! John Lachley and James Maybrick together on the same street! The 
night was windy, full of rainshowers and sudden gusts that whipped 
Dominica's skirts against her ankles and rattled her bonnet around her 
ears, but Dominica scarcely noticed. Her tiny video camera rode next to 
her ear, mounted underneath the concealing brim of her bonnet. The lens 
recorded everything in front of her, whichever way Dominica turned her 
head, and the camera was specially fitted with low-light and infrared 
technology to record video signal in even the darkest alleyways. An 
infrared light source in the fake fruit fastened to her bonnet 
illuminated a wide fan in front of her, switched on whenever she 
pressed the plunger inside her pocket. She'd been holding it down 
steadily for the past five minutes, eyes riveted to the two men who 
conferred briefly under a grimy street lamp, one of the few scattered 
through the East End. The directional microphone in her bonnet picked 
up their low-voiced conversation and broadcast it to her earplug. 
 
"The woman lives in this house," Lachley's voice said. "Eddowes is her 
name, Kate Eddowes, a dirty whore." 
 
Maybrick's voice, breathless with sick excitement, answered. "I want 
her, John, I want to rip her . . ." 
 
"Not until I have my letters." 
 
"Of course . . ." 

 
Dominica finally knew what was contained in the letters John Lachley 
sought. She and her partner had managed to make a photocopy of Long Liz 
Stride's priceless missive, telling her precisely why John Lachley was 
stalking these women to death. The queen's grandson, the firstborn son 
of the Prince of Wales, in the direct line of succession, had been 
indiscreet. Highly indiscreet. With a male prostitute, no less. If 
proof of that indiscretion fell into the wrong hands, Eddy would be 
ruined, possibly even jailed. And John Lachley's career as Eddy's 
spiritual advisor would come to a disastrous end. Classic motive and 
response. Except, of course, that Lachley was a psychopath and was 
using another psychopath as a weapon to rid himself of all witnesses. 
 
Poor Kate Eddowes. She and her lover had returned to London on Friday 
from Kent and the hop harvest, a return Dominica and Guy had 
videotaped. 
 
"I'll get a room over at the casual ward, Shoe Lane, luv," Eddowes had 
told Kelly. "We won't be apart long. You rest, now, and see to that 
cough." 
 
Dominica had followed her down to Shoe Lane, capturing for posterity 
her fateful conversation with the casual ward's superintendent. "Oh, 
I'll get money, right enough. I know the Whitechapel murderer, I do. 
I'll collect that reward being offered by the newspapers!" 
 
But if Kate Eddowes knew, she'd done nothing about it, contacting 
neither the police nor the newspapermen who were offering rewards of up 
to a hundred pounds -- a literal fortune to someone like Catharine 
Eddowes -- for information on the Ripper. She avoided constables, 
shunned reporters, and walked the streets as always, drinking what she 
earned and staring into shadows, clearly trying to drink her way 
through her terror or perhaps trying to drink her way to enough courage 
to finally act. Dominica thought pityingly that she was doubtless too 
frightened to come straight out and say, "Look, here, I've got a letter 
from the queen's grandson in my pocket and I think he's your killer . . 
." 
 
Prince Albert Victor was, of course, safely away in Scotland with his 
grandmother, just now, providing him with an ironclad alibi for the 
murders of Stride and Eddowes. Dominica doubted the prince even knew 
what Lachley was doing, although he might guess. Perhaps that was why 
he'd fled to Scotland, leaving his spiritual advisor behind in London. 
 
When the night of September 30th arrived, Dominica and Guy followed 
Lachley from his home in Cleveland Street, then lost him for more than 
an hour in the teeming streets of Wapping. "Where the deuce did he get 
to?" Guy Pendergast muttered as darkness descended over London's 
rooftops. 
 
"Where the devil does he always get to? Wherever it is, I intend to 
find out!" 
 
"To do that, pet, we'll have to find him again. Of course, we can 
always pick him up at Dutfield's Yard." 
 
"I plan to videotape much more of his activities this evening than 

that! We'll go to Catharine's doss house," Dominica decided. "Surely 
he'll show up there?" And that was exactly where they caught up to him, 
in the company of James Maybrick, at long, bloody last. 
 
"We'll find Eddowes, first, if we can," Lachley muttered, his voice 
whispering electronically in Dominica's ear. "She's too bloody 
dangerous to leave wandering the streets any longer." 
 
Lachley and Maybrick set out, stopping at public house after public 
house, searching for the doomed Kate Eddowes. Dominica, of course, knew 
exactly where Eddowes was -- at least, where she'd be at eight o'clock, 
or thereabouts. Lachley wandered, by chance, directly into her path 
just in time to see events unfold in Aldgate High Street. He watched in 
open-mouthed disbelief and rising fury as two police constables 
incarcerated the woman he had waited two entire weeks to kill. 
 
Catharine Eddowes was drunk. So drunk she could hardly stand up. 
Wailing like a fire engine and giggling, one would've thought her a 
girl of twelve. The sight of a forty-six-year-old prostitute whooping 
her way into Bishopsgate Police Station, carrying a letter in her 
pocket that could destroy everything Lachley had worked for, had 
murdered for, very nearly put the man over the edge. He stood across 
the street from the police station, hidden in shadows, soaking wet from 
the gusting rain, and closed his gloved hands into fists so tight, his 
hands trembled. The look of murderous rage in his face left Dominica 
momentarily shaken. When he stepped close to Maybrick, the words he 
hissed at his accomplice sent a shiver up her back. 
 
"They can't keep her there forever, God curse her! And if she shows 
them that letter, I'll set fire to the whole bloody police station, 
blow up the bleeding gas main under it!" He jerked his black cloth cap 
down further over his brow, all but concealing his face, even from 
Dominica's low-light camera. "We'll find Stride, follow her as we did 
the others, wait until she's drunk, then I'll approach her and secure 
my letters. You can have her, afterwards." 
 
"Yes . . ." 
 
"You remember the code, James, that we agreed upon, should anyone come 
upon us while we're about our business?" 
 
"Yes, yes," Maybrick said, his voice a trifle impatient now, "if you 
see someone, you'll cry Lipski! and I'll do the same if I spot anyone." 
 
Lipski . . . The name of a poisoner who'd triggered a wave of anti-
Semitic hatred in these streets the previous year. That hatred was 
sickeningly alive and well in the wake of the Ripper's murders. John 
Lachley and James Maybrick were deliberately fanning the flames of 
anti-Semitism, throwing the police even further off their trail, by 
using a word like Lipski as a coded warning. Anyone hearing that 
particular name would automatically assume it was aimed at a foreign 
Jewish murderer, rather than a warning between conspirators. 
 
No wonder the constabulary had never caught the Ripper. Diabolically 
clever, these two. But hardly a match for Dominica Nosette. She smiled 
to herself as they returned to Flower and Dean Street, heading to the 
doss house at number 32 in search of Elizabeth Stride. And this time, 

they hit paydirt straightaway. The kitchen entrance opened, spilling 
light and warmth into the blustery night. Elizabeth Stride paused in 
the doorway, speaking to someone in the kitchen. 
 
"Look, Thomas, luv, I've got sixpence! The deputy gave it to me. I'm 
off for a drink, but I'll be back!" Long Liz sailed cheerfully out into 
the evening, chuckling to herself as she passed Maybrick and Lachley, 
hidden in the darkness. "I'll be back, all right, but not 'til I've 
found me a jolly Welshman!" She laughed aloud at that, then headed 
briskly in the direction of Commercial Road where the kind of trade she 
sought would be plentiful on a night like this. 
 
From her shadowy place of concealment, Dominica Nosette watched James 
Maybrick and then John Lachley set out in pursuit, moving at a 
leisurely pace, entirely silent on what must have been rubberized 
shoes, to have made so little noise against the wet pavements. She 
hadn't thought of that and kicked herself for not considering it. 
Normally she wore rubber-soled trainers for undercover work like this, 
but they would've garnered instant attention in the down-time world of 
Victorian London. Too late now to remedy the lack. 
 
Pulse pounding, Dominica waited until both men were well ahead; then 
she gathered up her skirts and stepped softly out onto the rain-puddled 
street and glanced across the road. Guy Pendergast emerged from another 
cramped and dark little nook. They exchanged a brief glance, then 
Dominica smiled and set off. She was about to land the story of a 
lifetime. 
 
* * * 
 
Their council of war didn't last long. Despite Skeeter's urgent desire 
to follow Marcus' trail as long and as far as possible, they had other 
considerations to think of, not the least of which was Jenna Caddrick's 
conspicuous absence from Armstrong's party. 
 
"Their luggage couldn't have had anyone stuffed inside it," Willie 
Samuelson said glumly. "We bribed the station manager to tell us 
everything he could remember. He said their luggage must've been almost 
empty, it weighed so little." 
 
"Which means Jenna Caddrick was never with them in the first place," 
Kit sighed. He dragged his hat off and ran a hand through sweat-soaked 
hair. "Much as I hate to say it, it looks like we've been hoodwinked by 
Armstrong's sleight of hand. I suggest we abandon the hunt for Noah 
Armstrong and his porter. Either Jenna's already dead or she never was 
with Armstrong." 
 
"In other words," Skeeter muttered, "the little bastard deliberately 
sent us on a wild goose chase." 
 
"If you were a terrorist leader running for your life," Kit said in a 
disgusted tone, "with up-time authorities bound to be on your trail, 
wouldn't you try to set up a false trail to follow? Remember, Julius 
was dressed as a girl, so he must have been acting as decoy for whoever 
was bound to follow Armstrong. The names Cassie Coventina and Joey 
Tyrolin have been bothering me for quite a while. We were meant to 
follow Armstrong, presumably so whoever took Jenna Caddrick and Ianira 

Cassondra could slip away quietly someplace else." 
 
Kaederman muttered under his breath. "But where, dammit?" 
 
No one had an answer to that question. Skeeter rubbed the back of his 
neck and said under his breath, "I do not look forward to telling the 
senator how Armstrong tricked us. Christ, this is all we need. Riots 
all over the station, that jackass Benny Catlin missing in London -- " 
 
"Benny Catlin?" Paula echoed, staring. "You mean that nice young kid is 
missing?" 
 
Kit jerked his gaze up. "You know Benny Catlin?" 
 
Paula blinked, started by the sudden intensity of the stares levelled 
at her. "Well, yes. I mean, it isn't every day I give a whisker-job to 
a girl." 
 
Kit's lower jaw came adrift. 
 
Sid Kaederman actually grasped her arm. "What?" 
 
"Take your hand off me!" Paula snapped, yanking herself loose. 
 
Kaederman flushed and apologized. She shrugged her shoulder, rubbing 
her bicep, then asked Kit, "I take it you didn't you know Benny Catlin 
was a girl? She told me she wanted to disguise her gender, which was a 
big disadvantage in London. It's not that unusual, actually, I've just 
never done a whisker job on a girl that pretty." 
 
"My God!" Skeeter matched the face in the senator's photo to one in his 
memory and came up with an unpleasant, inescapable conclusion. "Benny 
Catlin is Jenna!" 
 
Sid Kaederman swore in tones that caused several horses to lay back 
their ears. "God damn it! Armstrong duped us again! That stinking 
little bastard ordered his men to take her to London . . ." 
 
"Yeah," Skeeter agreed, "but how did they get tickets? The Britannia's 
been sold out for nearly a year!" 
 
"Jenna and her roommate must've bought Britannia tickets from that up-
time scalper," Kit said slowly. "A year ago, when they first planned to 
go down time. There would've been plenty of Ripper Tour tickets 
floating around the black market, a year ago." 
 
Skeeter groaned, "The senator said she wanted to film history. She 
must've planned to videotape the Ripper terror." 
 
"Yes. And landed right in the middle of the Ansar Majlis terror, 
instead." Kit scrubbed at his lower face with one sweat-begrimed hand. 
"We have to get back to TT-86. We'll sleep here tonight, set out first 
thing in the morning. I'm afraid we'll be riding hard, to make it back 
to Denver in time to catch the gate. Can you keep up?" He glanced from 
Paula to Kaederman. 
 
Paula Booker thinned her lips. "I'll cope. The last thing I want to do 

is stay here. I've had about as much vacation as I can stand, this 
year." 
 
Kit turned his attention to Kaederman. "I'd suggest you try pain pills 
for those muscle cramps, or we'll leave you behind." 
 
"I'll take the pills," Kaederman growled. "And when this is over, I am 
never setting foot down another gate in my life! I hate it!" 
 
"Suits me," Skeeter muttered. 
 
Kit's hard-eyed gaze met Skeeter's. "Well, Jackson, looks like you'll 
be going to London, after all." 
 
"Great," Skeeter groused. "Jack the Ripper and the Ansar Majlis. Just 
my cup of tea. Anybody want to place a bet on what the senator has to 
say about all this?" 
 
He didn't have a single taker. 
 
 
 
Chapter Seven 
 
The stalk was in James Maybrick's blood, hot fire that only the red 
stuff of a life pouring out across his hands could quench. The wild 
night, with its gusting rainshowers and biting cold winds, spoke to the 
demons raging in his soul. It called them forth, hungering and 
slavering, until they ran barefooted through the flames of his own 
private hell. She shall pay! By God, the bitch shall pay, her and her 
whoremaster both! All London knows my work, now, and she trembles with 
fear when people speak of Sir Jim's deeds. Soon, I will pay her the 
same as I gave the others, whores all . . . and my knife will drink the 
bitch's blood, as well . . . Maybe I'll take her before I rip her open 
. . . take her while her whoremaster watches, then rip them both, God 
damn them! 
 
James Maybrick held in his mind the face of his beautiful, stupid wife, 
who had whored herself again and again with that fool Brierly. He 
summoned up the memory of the terror he'd inflicted on that prostitute 
in Manchester, the even more delicious terror of Polly Nichols and 
Annie Chapman here in London, painted that same wild-eyed fear across 
his wife's vapid face . . . and smiled as he watched his mentor close 
in on the common streetwalker chosen as Maybrick's next victim. 
Maybrick's blood pounded in anticipation. 
 
The potent medicine Lachley gave him each time he visited London left 
James absolutely invincible, stronger and more sure of himself than 
he'd felt in his entire fifty years of life. He laughed behind his 
moustaches, laughed at the notion of Abberline and those bumbling 
idiots in the Metropolitan Police Department actually catching anyone, 
let alone Sir Jim and his personal god. So many constables and fine 
inspectors, wasting their time searching for a foreign Jew to hang! 
 
The game delighted him. That leather apron left in the basin beside 
Annie Chapman had been a most diverting clue. It had sent the idiots of 
Whitechapel's H Division chasing after the wrong sort of man. They'd 

actually arrested a fellow over that lovely apron, so they had! A dirty 
Jewish boot finisher they'd desperately wanted to be guilty. 
 
Too bad he'd had an alibi, an unshakeable one, at that. Not that they'd 
have believed him guilty for long, when other filthy whores had to be 
punished, had to be ripped with his shining knife. No, they wouldn't 
have held Mr. Pizer forever, certainly not past tonight. Tomorrow, all 
London would quake in its shoes at the work he would perform, he and 
John Lachley. A clever cotton merchant from Liverpool and a doctor of 
occult medicine from London's own SoHo, playing them all for the fools 
they were . . . 
 
Rain spattered down from dirty skies, black and cold as last winter's 
ashes. The whore they'd been following for almost two hours, now, was a 
filthy foreigner. Lachley had told Maybrick about her. She frequently 
went begging at the Swedish parish church, spinning lies about a 
nonexistent husband and children. She'd supposedly lost them ten years 
previously, when the saloon steamer Princess Alice had collided with 
the steamship Bywell Castle in the Thames, killing nearly seven hundred 
people. Lachley's inquiries, quiet but thorough, had revealed that the 
bitch's real English husband had died of heart failure only four years 
previously, in 1884, not in the famous steamship collision. Children, 
she had apparently never had. 
 
The one thing about Liz Stride that fretted Maybrick was her nephew, or 
rather, the late John Stride's nephew, who was a member of the bloody 
Metropolitan Police Force, of all things. But that didn't worry James 
too much. Clearly, the nephew couldn't care overly much for his aunt, 
not if Liz Stride were living in Whitechapel, charring for Jews and 
mending their garments for them, selling her body to whatever man would 
have her. He must remember to leave some nasty little clue on the 
streets, tonight, pointing the finger of suspicion at the foreign Jews 
again, he really must. He'd remembered to bring his chalk, this time, 
too. 
 
But he couldn't write out any messages until his knife had drunk its 
fill. 
 
After witnessing Catharine Eddowes' arrest for public drunkenness, they 
spent hours searching pubs for Stride and finally caught up to her 
shortly before eleven P.M. on Settles Street, at the Bricklayer's Arms 
Public House. Alarmingly, they found her in the company of a short, 
well-dressed man she laughingly called Llewellyn. A Welshman! Maybrick 
darted a glance at Lachley, who watched the couple narrowly from the 
shadows. 
 
The whore and her Welshman stood in the doorway of the pub, waiting for 
the driving rain to slacken. Her customer was eager enough for it, 
kissing her and carrying on like some low sailor, rather than the 
respectable tradesman he clearly was, probably some arse of a merchant 
up from Cardiff on business, slumming in the East End where a man could 
have whatever he wanted for the price of a glass of cheap gin. 
 
Two workmen, also taking refuge from the rain, ordered ale and watched 
the antics in the doorway, clearly bemused. One nudged the other. "Hey, 
Liz, why don't you bring your fella in and 'ave a drink, eh?" The tall 
woman glanced around, laughter shaking her strong-boned face, then 

whispered something to her customer. The man shook his head, intent on 
pawing at her bosom under her drab coat. The man who'd invited them in 
snorted knowingly. His friend called over the noise of laughing, 
swearing, singing voices, "Better watch out, Liz, that's Leather Apron 
trying to get round you!" 
 
Laughter greeted this assessment, since the man clearly was not an 
Eastern European Jew. He was obviously too new to town even to 
understand the reference. James Maybrick smiled into his own ale glass, 
delighted. Leather Apron, now there's a lovely joke, indeed! Little do 
they know Leather Apron's sitting right here, watching, waiting for 
that bastard to finish, so Sir Jim can have his own chance at her. Not 
that Sir Jim would actually taste her dirty wares. That wasn't what he 
was here for. Sir Jim could take a whore anytime he wanted, just by 
bedding his wife. 
 
Shortly after eleven, Liz Stride and her importunate Welshman left the 
Bricklayer's Arms, heading out into the rainy night for a tryst in a 
dark stairwell on Goulston Street. From his place of concealment at the 
foot of that stairwell, Maybrick could hear her asking the man to read 
a letter for her, one she had in her pocket. 
 
"Read a letter for you?" he gasped out, clearly giving her the business 
while she asked her question. "Are you daft?" 
 
"It's in Welsh." 
 
The man grunted. "I didn't come to London to read somebody else's 
letters. And only the lower classes bother learning to read Welsh. Good 
God, woman, if a Welshman wants to rise above the handicap of being 
born Welsh, he'd better scrap everything Welsh he can. Coarse brown 
bread, coarse Welsh language, all of it. Great Christ, woman, hold 
still, I haven't finished yet!" 
 
James Maybrick, hat pulled low against the cold wind and rainsqualls, 
smiled behind his moustaches. Long Liz's customer didn't know it, but 
his lack of ability to read his own native language had just saved his 
life. Clearly, Elizabeth Stride was none too pleased that her 
Welshman's sense of inferiority had turned him into a greater English 
snob than most Englishmen. 
 
When she emerged at last from the stairwell, her color was high and so 
was her temper. "Ta very much, luv," she snapped, pocketing a few 
coins. 
 
The Welshman, looking bewildered, watched her storm away down the 
street, muttering, "What the devil is it these creatures really want? 
Now, where's my hotel, I wonder . . ." He peered about him, squinting 
into the rain, then set off briskly, heading west. 
 
What Elizabeth Stride wanted, at any rate, was clear. Over the next 
thirty minutes, James Maybrick and his mentor shadowed her across most 
of the East End, from Whitechapel down through Wapping, east into 
Poplar, a wretched stretch of dockside gambling dens and gin palaces 
where -- so rumor had it -- Long Liz and her late husband had once run 
a profitable little coffee shop, but never once catching her alone. She 
was being careful, obviously, to stay in the well-crowded streets. It 

was in Poplar that Stride picked up the sailor. He reeled out of a pub 
in the company of several of his mates, singing off-key about his long-
lost and sorely missed Cardiff. By eleven forty-five, she and her 
sailor, a young man in a cutaway black coat and ubiquitious sailor's 
hat, were strolling down Berner Street, back in Whitechapel, where they 
paused in the doorway to number 64, waiting out another brief rain 
shower. A passerby glanced up and noticed them kissing, but failed to 
notice either Maybrick or Lachley where they stood across the road in 
the shadows, watching and listening. 
 
"You would say anything but your prayers," the sailor laughed, voice 
carrying across Berner Street. And a moment after that, when the 
passerby had turned onto Fairclough Street and was out of earshot, "How 
about it, then? Will you?" 
 
" 'Course I will, there's a nice quiet spot just down the street, 
Dutfield's Yard, where they used to make carts. Nobody uses the yard at 
midnight, luv. Mr. Dutfield moved his cart-making business over to 
Pinchin Street and the sack maker's shop next to it's closed this time 
of night. And there's a dry stable in there, empty now the carts have 
gone." 
 
"Ah . . . Sounds perfect, then. Lead on, angel." 
 
When they emerged from the doorway to number 64, the young sailor's 
black trousers bulged noticeably in front. Maybrick, hand thrust deep 
into his pocket, gripped his knife and breathed harder. Dutfield's Yard 
. . . He knew the place. It was perfect. Completely closed in, only one 
way in or out, and that through a narrow alley eighteen feet long. The 
yard could only be reached through a pair of wooden gates set into the 
street between a row of terraced cottages, occupied by cigarette makers 
and tailors, and the Jewish International Working Men's Club on the 
opposite side of the alleyway. 
 
A meeting of some kind was in progress at the Club. Maybrick could hear 
voices speaking half a dozen different languages, English, Russian, 
Hebrew, French, Italian, something Slavic that might have been Polish 
or Czech . . . They came from halfway across Europe to this miserable 
little meeting hall where upwards of two hundred working-class louts 
and their women crammed themselves in to give plays and musical 
concerts, all of them hideously amateur, not to mention the radical 
meetings that attracted troublemakers from all over the East End. 
Maybrick detested them, agitators with wild notions about the 
manumission of the labouring classes. Why, they and their kind would 
bring down the Empire, so they would, them and their dirty whores, the 
ruination of decent British morals . . . 
 
Elizabeth Stride, as foreign a bitch as the workers in the lively hall 
opposite, was taking her time, back there in Dutfield's Yard. Was the 
sailor reading out the letter for her? Maybrick caressed his knife. He 
didn't give a damn about the sailor, although he would have to die, 
too, if he'd translated Dr. Lachley's letter for the dirty screw. 
Christ, they were taking their time about it! He eased his pocket watch 
out, peering at the crystal face in the dim light filtering out through 
the Workers' Club windows opposite. Bloody near twelve-thirty A.M.! He 
was cold and tired and wet, had spent five miserable hours on a train 
today, just getting here from Liverpool, and they'd had to walk across 

the whole bloody East End since his arrival. 
 
Get on with it! He snapped shut his watch with a savage motion, thrust 
it back into his waistcoat pocket. Impatience was making him edgy. Once 
already tonight, he'd primed himself to strike, only to have the chance 
snatched away, thanks to Catharine Eddowes' drunkenness. By the time 
Stride finally emerged, James Maybrick was ready to do a violence worse 
than anything he'd unleashed to date. By God, the moment Lachley had 
his letter, he would knock the bitch into that alleyway, throttle her, 
then slash and slash until the fury was finally spent . . . 
 
"Sorry about the note in your pocket, darlin'," the sailor was saying 
as they stepped out of the black little alleyway. "I can read me own 
name, just about, but not anything else. Never went to any school." 
 
"Oh, it isn't your fault," she said, voice peevish. Clearly, she was no 
happier about this customer's lack than the previous one's. "I'm 
beginning to think there's not a Welshman in all of Britain can read 
his own language!" 
 
The sailor laughed. "Give me a kiss, then. I'd better be off and find 
me mates, they'll wonder where I've got to." 
 
If Maybrick hadn't been so feverishly furious to strike, he'd have 
laughed aloud. Poor, dirty whore, had a letter in her pocket worth a 
king's ransom -- literally -- and she couldn't find a soul to read it 
to her. The sailor gave her a lusty kiss, then strode off toward Poplar 
and the docks. Maybrick stepped forward, seething with impatience, only 
to curse under his breath when a young man in a dark coat and 
deerstalker hat left the Workman's Club, carrying a newspaper-wrapped 
parcel some six inches high and eighteen inches long. He was moving 
fast, eyes clearly not yet adjusted to the darkness beyond the club, 
because he very nearly ran her down. 
 
"Oh, I am sorry!" he exclaimed, steadying her on her feet. His accent 
marked him as a foreigner. 
 
"Give me a fright, you did," she gasped, managing a smile for him. 
 
"You are not hurt, then?" 
 
"No, I'm fine, honest. I don't suppose you'd know anybody hereabout who 
reads Welsh?" 
 
The young man looked startled, but shook his head. "No, I'm afraid I do 
not. I am Hungarian, have not been long in England." 
 
"Oh. Well, maybe you might walk me back to my rooms, eh? It's not far 
and I'm that nervous, with this madman walking about the streets . . ." 
 
"Of course, madam." 
 
He escorted her across the street, straight toward Maybrick's hiding 
place. Maybrick all but crushed the handle of his knife under his fist 
and shrank back into the darkness of the doorway he stood in. God 
above, would this lousy whore never spend two minutes alone? If she 
made it all the way back to her doss house with the blasted Hungarian, 

they'd never have a chance at her! Then another set of footsteps coming 
along the pavement sent Maybrick even deeper into the shadows. Holy 
Christ, it's a bloody police constable! Pulse thundering, he stood 
paralyzed, watching the constable approach Stride and her Hungarian. 
The constable frowned at her, moustaches twitching. " 'Ere, now, move 
along, Liz, none of your dirty business along 'ere." 
 
Liz Stride drew herself up, drunk and beginning to show the effects of 
her own night's frustration. "I never asked this gentleman a thing like 
that! He nearly knocked me down, coming out that door." The Hungarian 
doffed his hat nervously and muttered something about getting home, 
then fled down Berner Street in the opposite direction from the 
constable. The policeman shrugged and moved on, leaving Stride to 
mutter a curse after him. 
 
"Well, at least I got enough for the doss house. Bloke might not've 
been able to read, but he had money in his trous, sure enough." She 
sighed, then headed back across Berner Street, clearly intent on giving 
up her quest for the night. 
 
And finally, God, finally, she was alone. 
 
Across the street, John Lachley moved in fast, stepping out of his 
concealment and hurrying toward her. "Madam? I say, madam, I couldn't 
help overhearing you just now." He was speaking in a very low voice, 
but Maybrick, senses twitching, heard every breath drawn, every 
syllable uttered. "You said you were looking for someone who reads 
Welsh?" 
 
Liz Stride paused, taken by surprise. "Welsh? Why, yes, I am." 
 
He doffed his rough black cap, gave her a mock bow. "I'm Welsh, as it 
happens. What were you looking to have read?" 
 
Eagerness flooded across her face and she reached toward her pocket, 
then she paused, sudden wariness stealing across her features. "You 
couldn't help overhearing?" she repeated nervously. "How long have you 
been watching me?" 
 
"Why, madam, not long at all. Here, do you want me to read this letter 
out for you or don't you?" 
 
She backed away from him, toward the alleyway to Dutfield's Yard. "I 
never said it was a letter." 
 
Anger flushed Lachley's face. He was as impatient as Maybrick, maybe 
more so, having waited two full weeks for this moment, while Maybrick 
had been busy with his work in Liverpool and the children and a 
household to run. "Of course it's a letter! What else would it be? Oh, 
for God's sake, just hand the bloody thing over!" 
 
"I've got to go, have a friend waiting for me at the pub down the 
street, there . . ." 
 
She started to step away and Lachley's temper snapped. He grabbed her 
by the arm, flung her back toward the alley. "Give me the letter, you 
stinking whore!" When she tried to break free, Lachley slammed her to 

the muddy ground. A tiny scream broke loose from her throat, then two 
more. She was trying to scramble to her feet, digging for something in 
her pocket. Maybrick, pulse racing, reached for his knife, started out 
into the open, then heard footsteps coming and swore under his breath. 
He fumbled out his pipe instead, lit it with shaking hands just as 
Lachley glanced up. 
 
"Lipski!" The warning burst from Lachley, galvanizing the short, dark 
little man approaching. Already in the act of crossing the street to 
avoid the altercation at the gate, the heavily bearded man, obviously 
Jewish from the prayer shawl visible under his coat, started walking 
much faster. Maybrick went after him, so furious at yet another 
interruption he was ready to slash anything and anyone who got in his 
way. The Jew broke into a run and Maybrick pelted after him, chasing 
the interloper all the way down to the railway arch. He finally 
realized that Lachley would be back at Dutfield's Yard, securing his 
letter. Chasing a damned interfering Jew wasn't why he was out here 
tonight, wasn't why he'd spent the whole stinking night in the cold 
rain. 
 
Maybrick turned and hurried back to the alleyway, where Lachley had 
finally snatched his letter from the whore's pocket. He'd forced her 
back against the gate, one hand across her mouth, his arm pressed 
against her throat, cutting off her air and trapping her against the 
gate. Murderous rage had twisted Lachley's face -- and mortal terror 
had twisted hers. Her eyes rolled as Maybrick approached, hope flaring 
wildly. 
 
"Not in the street!" Maybrick hissed as he came closer. "That bloody 
constable might come back any moment! Get her into Dutfield's Yard . . 
." 
 
Keeping her safely throttled, they dragged Elizabeth Stride back into 
the blackness, down the eighteen feet of blind alleyway and along the 
wall in the yard beyond. She fought them with every scrap of strength 
in her brawny frame, giving them a dreadful time, subduing her. 
Lachley, wheezing and panting, finally threw her against the brick wall 
and pinned her with one arm across her chest, bruising her while his 
hands closed around her throat; Maybrick held a gloved hand clamped 
across her mouth while Lachley strangled her, to keep her screams from 
alerting the crowd in the hall just above their heads. 
 
"I want her!" Maybrick hissed. 
 
"When I've bloody well finished!" Fury cracked through Lachley's voice. 
She was struggling, but more feebly now, losing consciousness. Maybrick 
had his knife out, shaking with need. At length the struggles ceased, 
her life fading away with a harsh rattle in her throat; then Lachley 
was shoving her down into the mud. "Got to make it look like she was 
back here for the sex," he was muttering, voice a bare whisper. 
Maybrick could hear the doctor searching her pockets. "Ahh . . . that's 
grand, a packet of Cachous . . ." 
 
Ahh, indeed . . . Maybrick smiled. Pills used by smokers to sweeten the 
breath. When the constables found her, they would think she'd taken 
them out to chew before servicing her customer, never dreaming she'd 
been strangled to death and cut open for the letter Lachley was 

stuffing into his coat pocket. On the heels of that thought, Lachley 
swore. "Christ! The bitch had a knife in her pocket!" He came up 
holding a short, wicked little blade Maybrick could just make out in 
the near blackness. "Bloody bitch! All right," the doctor hissed at 
last, "she's yours! Make it fast!" 
 
"Give me her knife!" Maybrick gasped, wanting to do her with her own 
blade. Lachley handed it over and Maybrick crouched down, delighting in 
the shock against his hand as he slashed through the throat. He reached 
for her skirts, wanting to rip at her gut --  
 
And the gate at the end of the alleyway rattled open. 
 
A horse's hooves struck the bricks sharply, heading straight toward 
them. Maybrick stood up so fast, he went dizzy. Lachley grabbed his 
arm, dragged him deeper into the yard, back toward the stable. 
Maybrick's heart thudded, heavy and hard and terrified. Hot blood 
trickled down his hands, which shook wildly out of control as the pony 
cart clattered right into the yard with them. 
 
Dear God, we're going to hang for this goddamned slut! 
 
The pony nearly trod on the bitch's body. The animal snorted and shied 
at the last moment, obviously having caught the scent of blood, and 
tried to avoid the bundle on the ground. 
 
"What's got into you?" a man's voice muttered, heavily accented. "What 
did I do with that whip? Eh, is there something on the ground?" They 
could hear the man scraping and probing downward into the blackness. 
"Who's this? Are you drunk? Get up, you're blocking the way." Then, 
voice suddenly uncertain. "Maybe she's ill." He jumped down from his 
cart, hurried back down the alleyway. "I must fetch help, get a 
lantern, it is black as pitch in here . . ." 
 
Oh, my God, he's leaving! 
 
"Quick!" Lachley's voice hissed into his ear. 
 
Maybrick needed no second prompting. His legs shook violently as they 
made their escape, silent on their rubberized servants' shoes. Thank 
God Lachley had thought of using them when this business began, they'd 
have been overheard leaving the yard for certain, without them. He 
still couldn't quite believe they were going to make their escape. He 
shoved both knives into his coat pockets as they hurried down Berner 
Street, while the cart driver entered the noisy Working Men's Club 
behind them. 
 
"What is it, Diemschutz?" a man's voice floated to them. 
 
"A woman, collapsed in the Yard. Get a lantern . . ." 
 
The man's name burned in Maybrick's mind. Diemschutz! Another stinking 
Jew! He would hunt the bastard down, so he would! Slit his goddamned 
throat, how dare he interrupt like that? He'd had no time to do more 
than cut her throat, curse it! 
 
"Keep your hands in your pockets," Lachley hissed. "They're covered 

with blood. We'll have to get underground as fast as possible." 
 
"But I didn't get to rip her!" 
 
Fury blazed in his mentor's eyes. "I don't give a bloody damn what you 
didn't get to do! You sodding maniac, we were damn near caught! And the 
whole East End is going to be crawling with constables inside a quarter 
of an hour!" Lachley's cheeks had gone ashen. 
 
"I know we were almost caught, blast it!" Maybrick hissed, gut churning 
with frustrated rage. "But we weren't, were we? And the bloody buggers 
won't be looking for us, they'll be looking for a lone man. A stinking 
foreign Jew, walking by himself!" 
 
Lachley's breaths slowed perceptibly. His jaw, knotted with anger, 
gradually relaxed. "Right. All right, then, we walk along together. 
Just a couple of jolly mates, 'aving a bit of a bobble on a Saturday 
night, out for a quick one down to boozer." 
 
Maybrick blinked in surprise. "Good God. You really have lived in these 
streets before, haven't you? I didn't quite believe . . ." 
 
"Of course I have, idiot!" Lachley hissed, moving down the pavement at 
a more leisurely pace. "How the bloody hell do you think I know the 
sewers so well?" 
 
"Oh, I hadn't thought of that, really . . ." 
 
"Just shut up, James, for God's sake, just shut the bloody hell up!" 
 
He considered arguing, but one look into Lachley's eyes told Maybrick 
that his mentor was in no mood for trouble, not even from him. He 
walked along in broody silence, the blood on his hands drying into a 
sticky mess. When they passed a gutter with a broad puddle, he paused 
and glanced both directions down the street, then crouched and rinsed 
off his hands and his whore's knife. Her blade was sticky with its 
owner's lifeblood. His hands were still unsteady as he shook the muddy 
water off and thrust the prostitute's knife back into his other coat 
pocket, opposite his own, longer-bladed weapon. He shoved his hands 
into his pockets to hide the bloodstains on his white cuffs. 
 
"I want to get right out of Whitechapel," Lachley muttered, moving 
steadily west. "Forget about your rooms in Middlesex Street. If there's 
an inquiry, if that bloody Jew on Berner Street identifies us to the 
constables, I want to be out of Metropolitan Police jurisdiction, 
fast." 
 
They were already in Commercial Road, walking steadily west toward the 
point where Commercial Road took a sharp bend toward the north to 
become Commercial Street. Once past Middlesex Street and the Minories, 
along Aldgate, they would be in the jurisdiction of The City of London, 
with its own Lord Mayor, its own city officials and -- ah, yes, 
Maybrick smiled, clever Lachley! -- its own constabulary. As they 
passed a nasty little alley, they nearly stumbled over a drunk, who lay 
snoring in the gutter. Lachley paused, cast a swift glance around, then 
stooped and pulled the drunken sailor deeper into the alley. 
 

"Well, don't just stand there! That miserable Jew can describe these 
clothes!" 
 
Lachley was stripping off his dark coat, peeling off the sailor's 
jacket and grimy shirt. "Here, put this shirt on, your cuffs are 
bloody." 
 
The idea of putting on a filthy sailor's unwashed shirt did not appeal 
to James Maybrick. But neither did the gallows. He stripped off his 
shirt in haste, switching his blood-stained one for the sailor's. 
Lachley had appropriated the man's jacket for himself, dropping his own 
coat over Maybrick's arm. Maybrick slithered into it, then dumped his 
coat, the sleeves spattered with Stride's blood, across the drunk's 
naked torso. When they stepped back into the light, Lachley wore a grey 
cap instead of the black one he'd left behind, a salt-and-pepper grey 
jacket, too loose for him, and a red kerchief knotted around his neck, 
nautical fashion. 
 
"You don't look the same man at all," Maybrick said softly, studying 
Lachley with a critical mein. Then, wistful and frustrated, "You don't 
suppose those sodding constables at Bishopsgate have let that drunken 
bitch Eddowes out yet?" 
 
Lachley stared at him, then gave out a short, hard bark of laughter. 
"Great God, you do enjoy dangerous living, don't you? One wife in 
London, another wife and a bloody mistress in Liverpool, every week you 
swallow enough arsenic to poison all Bethnal Green, and now you want to 
stop at the police station and ask if the nice whore they arrested for 
impersonating a fire engine has sobered up enough to go home!" 
 
"What I want," Maybrick growled, "is what I didn't get with the whore 
in Dutfield's Yard." 
 
Lachley, equilibrium restored by their semi-miraculous getaway and a 
change of disguise, laughed again, harsh and wild as the rain-lashed 
night. "All right, damn your eyes, we'll just go along and see! The 
fastest route from here," he peered at their surroundings, "would be 
down Houndsditch from Aldgate." 
 
As they were currently in Aldgate High Street, it was a matter of 
perhaps two minutes' walk to reach Aldgate proper, then they swung 
sharply northward up the long reach of Houndsditch, moving away from 
the Minories to the south. The clock on a distant brewery up in Brick 
Lane chimed the half hour. One thirty A.M. and his blood was high, the 
terror of having nearly been caught now transformed into a feral sort 
of euphoria. Pure excitement flowed through his veins, hot and 
electrically charged, as though he'd just taken a dose of his arsenic. 
Sir Jim was invincible, by God! All he asked was to get his hands on 
that other bitch he'd been promised. He'd cut her with all the wildly 
charged strength in him, rip her to pieces and leave some jolly little 
rhyme for the City Division's bumbling fools to puzzle over. His 
brother Michael, who could rhyme like anything, sat in his lovely rooms 
over in St. James's writing songs the whole sodding country was 
singing. If Michael could do it, so could he. He'd think up a right 
saucy little rhyme to tantalize the police, maybe stir up more trouble 
with the Jews. Yes, a truly fine way to cap off the evening . . . 
 

As they approached Duke Street, a short, auburn haired woman emerged 
from that narrow thoroughfare, moving with angry strides and muttering 
to herself. A dark green chintz skirt with three flounces picked up the 
light from a distant gas lamp, revealing yellow flowers of some kind in 
the cloth. Her black coat had once been very fine, with imitation fur 
at the collars, cuffs, and pockets. A black straw bonnet trimmed with 
green and black velvet and black beads was tilted rakishly on her hair. 
The woman was strikingly familiar, Maybrick couldn't immediately think 
why. 
 
" . . . lousy bastard," she was growling to herself, not having seen 
them yet, "give you two whole florins, I will, he says, if you can get 
me to spend! How was I to know he was so sodding impotent, he hadn't 
managed it in a whole year . . . Half a damned hour wasted on him and 
not tuppence to show for it! I've got to find somebody who can read 
that blasted letter of Annie's, that's what, get some real money out of 
it. The newspapers will give me a reward, that's what I told the 
superintendent of the casual ward, and I meant it, by God! If I could 
just get a reward, now, maybe I could take John to a regular hospital, 
not a workhouse infirmary . . ." 
 
Lachley closed his hand around Maybrick's wrist, halting him. 
Recognition struck like a rolling clap of thunder. Catharine Eddowes! 
Wild exultation blasted straight through him. Lachley hissed, "I'll 
lure her down to Mitre Square, in City jurisdiction . . ." 
 
Yes, yes, get on with it! His hand already ached where he gripped his 
own long-bladed knife. Maybrick faded back into the shadows, leaving 
Lachley to approach the angry prostitute, whom they'd last seen so 
drunk she could scarcely stand up. Clearly, the evening's stay in jail 
had sobered her up nicely. Good! Her terror would be worse, cold sober. 
 
" 'Ello, luv," Lachley said with the voice of a rough sailor, a voice 
that matched his stolen jacket and cap and neckerchief. "You're a right 
comfy sight, so y'are, for a bloke wot's far from 'ome." 
 
Catharine Eddowes paused, having to look up a long way into Lachley's 
face. She was barely five feet tall, nearly seven inches shorter than 
the man smiling down at her. "Why, hello. You're out late, ducks, the 
pubs have all closed. I know," she said with a wry smile, "because I 
wanted a drink tonight and couldn't get one." 
 
"Well, now, I can't say as I could 'elp you to get boozey, but a body 
don't need gin to 'ave a good time, now does a body?" Lachley dug into 
his pocket, came out with a shining coin. "Just you 'ave a butcher's at 
this, eh? Sixpence, shiny an' new." 
 
Catherine's eyes focused sharply on the coin Lachley held up between 
gloved thumb and forefinger. Then she smiled and moved closer to him, 
rested a hand on his chest. "Well, now, that's a pretty sixpence. What 
might a lady have to do, to share it?" 
 
Further along Duke Street, where lights blazed in a local meeting hall 
known as the Imperial Club, three men emerged into the wet night, 
glancing toward Lachley and Eddowes. They moved off in the opposite 
direction, giving the woman and her obvious customer their privacy. 
James Maybrick watched them go and smiled in the darkness from his 

hiding place on Houndsditch. 
 
"Let's take a bit of a stroll, shall we?" Lachley suggested, following 
the men who'd just left the Imperial Club, but moving at a far more 
leisurely pace to give the talkative trio plenty of time to lose 
themselves in the streets ahead. "Find us someplace nice an' comfy to 
share?" 
 
Her low laughter delighted Maybrick. The song she started singing left 
him laughing softly to himself. The silly screw had perhaps ten minutes 
left to live, at best, and here she was, walking arm in arm with the 
man who was going to kill her, singing as though she hadn't a care in 
the world. Maybrick laughed again. 
 
Soon enough, she wouldn't have. 
 
* * * 
 
After two solid weeks in a saddle, short of sleep and in dire need of a 
shower, Kit Carson was in no shape for a face-to-face with Senator John 
Caddrick and half the newsies in the northern hemisphere. But he didn't 
have much choice. They were waiting as soon as he stepped into the 
station through the Wild West Gate. Guides bringing back Julius and the 
murdered tourist followed on his heels. Screams and a roar of voices 
broke out, a solid wall of noise. 
 
"Jenna!" Senator Caddrick's voice cut through the chaos. The senator 
was bolting past the ropes . . . "Jenna!" A Time Tours employee caught 
the senator and held him back. His expression twisted through a whole 
range of emotions. 
 
"Senator Caddrick," Kit told the ashen politician, "it isn't your 
daughter. Neither of them is." 
 
Visibly shaken, Caddrick, gasped out, "Not my daughter? Then where is 
she? Why isn't she with you?" Sudden fury crackled in the senator's 
eyes. He shook off the hands holding him back and advanced menacingly. 
"What are you doing back if you haven't found her? Explain this 
immediately!" 
 
"She isn't with us because we didn't find her." 
 
Newsies were crowding against the lounge's velvet-rope barriers, 
shouting questions. Barricades fell with a crash, spilling newsies into 
the chaos as the returning tour reeled back into the station. Skeeter 
Jackson, gaunt from hard riding, came through the open gate just ahead 
of Sid Kaederman and Paula Booker. A steady stream of returning 
tourists and guides began to pour through the gate as Senator Caddrick 
dragged his gaze from the body bags to his exhausted detective and back 
to Kit's face. "Didn't find her? Why not?" 
 
"Because we have excellent reason to believe your daughter never left 
TT-86 through the Denver Gate at all. I'd rather not say more until 
we've spoken in private." Kit glanced toward shocked Time Tours 
employees. "Could someone notify Ronisha Azzan we need a meeting with 
her? Thanks. No, I'm sorry, there will be no further comments at this 
time." 

 
He waded against the tide of shouting newsies and shaken tourists, 
heading for the aerie, then decided he didn't want to risk the kind of 
fireworks that would explode if he took the entire search team with 
him. So he shoved his way through the chaos in Frontier Town and 
muttered, "Paula, get out of here. Kaederman, go with Skeeter to Connie 
Logan's. Start outfitting for the Britannia." 
 
"Right, boss!" 
 
"You got it, Kit." 
 
Skeeter peeled off so fast, news crews were left stammering in the 
vacuum. Paula took advantage of their surprise to haul Sid Kaederman 
away in his wake. 
 
"What's going on?" Caddrick demanded. 
 
"I'll brief you at the station manager's office," Kit growled. 
 
"But -- " 
 
Kit left him standing in the midst of an unholy, shrieking mob of 
newsies. The senator, trailing reporters like a school of noisy fish, 
caught up and stalked along in thin-lipped silence. At the aerie's 
elevator access, Kit threw a body check to hold out the crowd on their 
heels and mashed the button for the top floor. The elevator rose 
swiftly toward uncertain sanctuary. When the doors slid open, Kit 
discovered just how uncertain that sanctuary was. Along one glass wall, 
lined up like so many gargoyles, sat three stone-faced men and women 
from the Inter-Temporal Court of the Hague, their uniforms glittering 
with brass officialdom. Like it or not, I.T.CH.'s grand inquisitors had 
arrived. 
 
Kit held back a sigh and entered the glass-walled office anyway. The 
I.T.C.H. agents were stiff in their spotless uniforms, while Ronisha 
Azzan stood in cool elegance behind Bull Morgan's immense desk, which 
left Kit feeling even dirtier, grittier, and wearier than before. He 
rearranged grime on the back of his neck, then stalked over to the 
nearest chair and promptly folded up into it. Tired as he was -- and 
stolid as the Grand Inquisitors were -- Kit didn't miss the slight 
shuffle in chairs as his pungent perfume, the accumulation of fourteen 
days on a horse, wafted across the office. 
 
"Welcome home, Kit," Ronisha Azzan greeted him quietly. "If I could 
have your report, please?" 
 
Kit told the Deputy Station Manager what they'd found in the mining 
camp, bringing everyone up to date in a few brief sentences. When he 
finished, utter silence held the glass-walled aerie. Senator John 
Caddrick's expression was a study in lightning-fast realizations: 
shock, dismay, anxiety, and oddly, triumph. Then Caddrick's face went 
slowly purple as anger -- or something approximating it -- won out over 
the other emotions. "Benny Catlin? Do you mean to tell me you've wasted 
two entire weeks chasing the wrong tourist? When my daughter has been 
lost down your godforsaken Britannia Gate this whole time?" 
 

"It wasn't wasted!" Kit snapped. "We know a great deal more than we did 
two weeks ago. One of our residents was murdered, down the Denver gate! 
That boy hadn't even turned seventeen, Caddrick, and he took a bullet 
meant for your daughter!" 
 
Caddrick had enough sense, at least, to shut up. He sat breathing hard 
for long moments. Ronisha Azzan sat back in her chair, looking abruptly 
tired and grey around the lips and nostrils. Kit sympathized. He felt 
grey all over. Ronisha shoved herself to her feet and poured out three 
stiff scotch-and-sodas. Caddrick's hand was shaking as he lifted his 
drink, nearly sloshing it down his expensive suit jacket. Kit drained 
his own glass at one gulp. "Thanks, Ronnie. God, I needed that. So . . 
. What we're trying to determine now is our best chance of tracing 
Benny Catlin in London. Dr. Paula Booker is probably the best bet we've 
got for identifying Jenna, since she's the surgeon who gave Jenna a new 
face." 
 
"I want to see this doctor," Caddrick growled. "I want to know how my 
little girl was when she came through this station, who was holding her 
prisoner, why the surgeon didn't report any of this -- " 
 
"Dr. Booker didn't report it for the simple reason there was nothing to 
report. Your daughter came in voluntarily, alone, claiming to be a grad 
student. Paula gave her a set of false whiskers, surgically implanted. 
The very next day, Paula left for her own vacation down time. You're 
damned lucky, Senator, to have any witness at all. When we caught up to 
Dr. Booker, trying to trace Armstrong and his prisoners, she and her 
guide had been bushwhacked by a gang of local bandits. If we hadn't 
come along, Paula might well have been murdered in cold blood." 
 
Caddrick glared at him, his mouth tightened into a thin white line. 
"Live witnesses won't do any good if Jenna's already dead in London! 
For your information, Carson, my daughter was nearly killed her first 
night there. Twice! Then she disappeared, leaving two dead men behind 
her. And now you tell me you've got two more men murdered in cold blood 
down the Denver Gate? Not to mention a known international terrorist 
who escapes with three hostages -- and you don't even bother to follow? 
My God, mister, of all the careless, irresponsible -- " 
 
"That is enough!" Kit Carson had the lungs to be heard when necessary. 
 
Caddrick slammed the scotch glass down, knuckles white. "Don't you dare 
use that tone with me -- " 
 
"Gentlemen!" Ronisha bellowed, towering over both of them. "Senator! 
You will remain civil or you will leave this meeting! Is that 
understood? Kit Carson has just risked his life, not to mention two 
weeks of unpaid time away from his business, looking for your little 
girl. In my book, you owe Mr. Carson a very serious apology! As well as 
whatever humble thanks you can muster up as a parent. You ought to be 
dancing for joy he's discovered as much as he has, considering what he 
was up against, out there!" 
 
Caddrick clearly didn't intend to dance for anybody, much less for joy. 
He sat glaring at Ronisha for a long, dangerous instant, then glowered 
at Kit, obviously waiting for further explanations. Kit considered 
walking out, then considered unemployment and life as suffered up time. 

Speaking coldly, he said, "Suppose you tell me just what I was supposed 
to do, Senator? Spend the next five years combing the North American 
continent for Armstrong? When we had a positive lead on your daughter's 
whereabouts? The Time Tours guides we left in Colorado are still 
searching for Armstrong and his hostages, will be for months to come, 
down the Wild West Gate. But this search and rescue mission was charged 
with finding your little girl. And that's exactly what it's going to 
do. Find your daughter. In London. Ronnie, what's the news from 
Spaldergate House?" 
 
Ronisha sighed. "We know Benny Catlin was involved in two fatal 
shootings, leaving two baggage handlers dead and a carriage driver 
wounded. Malcolm's been searching, of course, but no one in London has 
any inkling that Benny Catlin is Jenna Caddrick." 
 
Kit grunted. "Sounds to me like Jenna's managed to escape, which means 
our searchers will have to split up to locate Jenna and whoever took 
her through the gate. I pity the searchers. They'll have a helluva 
time, covering London for two separate targets with a three-week lead 
on them." 
 
"They?" Caddrick echoed. "What do you mean, they? You're the team 
leader, Carson! I insist you continue to lead this mission!" 
 
"I can't," Kit said bluntly, rubbing sweat and grit from his brow. "And 
it's got nothing to do with your lack of gratitude or my pressing 
business interests, so forget the protests. I already exist in 
September of 1888. I'd shadow myself and die instantly if I attempted 
to enter London during the next four months. Someone else has to head 
up search and rescue operations there. I'd suggest Skeeter Jackson, 
working closely with Malcolm Moore. Skeeter's already -- " 
 
"Now, wait just a minute! I've done some checking on this Jackson. Not 
only is he the same little creep who assaulted me at Primary, I've 
heard more than enough to know I don't want a con-man and thief heading 
up the search for my little girl!" 
 
Kit silently counted ten. "Skeeter Jackson is not conning anybody, 
Senator. I hired him as my own hotel house detective and believe me, it 
takes a helluva lot of trust to hire somebody for that job. As for the 
so-called assault . . ." Kit swallowed the words poised on the tip of 
his tongue. "Just be forewarned. If you press assault charges against 
him, I'll be damned sure he countercharges you with criminal battery." 
 
John Caddrick's entire face went white. 
 
Even the I.T.C.H. inquisitors shifted in their chairs. 
 
When Caddrick started to sputter, Kit overrode him. "Forget it, unless 
you really want the fight of the century on your hands. We've got 
photographic evidence of the whole incident, Senator. I, for one, will 
not allow a personal vendetta against Mr. Jackson to cripple this 
search mission. There's too much riding on the outcome. Skeeter's more 
than proven himself. Virtually every breakthrough in this case has been 
made by Skeeter Jackson, whereas your detective is virtually useless. I 
told you Sid Kaederman wasn't qualified for a down-time mission, 
whereas Skeeter's already experienced down the Britannia Gate. And 

he'll be working with Malcolm Moore, who specializes in London tours. 
Jackson and Moore head up the London mission, whether you like it or 
not, Senator. Unless, of course, you want your little girl killed?" 
 
Senator John Caddrick's normally florrid jowls faded to the color of 
old wax. He opened his lips several times, but no sound came out at 
all. He glanced once at the I.T.C.H. inquisitors, then swallowed and 
sat motionless in his chair for long moments. The only sound in the 
room was the whir of the air-conditioning fans. Caddrick finally 
managed a faint, "All right. I don't see that I have much choice." His 
voice strengthened into a low growl. "But I will not be browbeaten and 
threatened, is that clear?" 
 
If he stayed, Kit knew he would say something the entire station 
regretted. So he stood up, heading for the elevator. "Quite. Now, if 
you'll excuse me, we have a lot of work to do before the Britannia 
opens again. And frankly, I need a shower and a shave before I do any 
of it. And a cold beer." 
 
Kit stalked into the elevator before Caddrick could protest. 
 
On his way down toward the howling mob of newsies, he thought bleakly 
of Margo, already in London, and of poor Julius, no older than his 
granddaughter, who lay dead with a bullet in his gut. Kit wondered with 
a chill just how many of the searchers on this hunt were likely to come 
out alive? 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Eight 
 
Dominica Nosette was cold and wet where she stood shivering in the 
darkness. Rain was falling again, as dirty as the grimy brick walls 
along Whitechapel's narrow streets. Sudden gusts sent torrents skating 
across the cobblestones like rats scurrying for shelter. Soot ran black 
in the gutters where the occasional gaslight illuminated swirls and 
foul-smelling rivers of refuse on their way to the sewers. It was a 
hideous night to be alive, a worse one to die in. 
 
Dominica had seen far too much death this night to have stomach for any 
more. She prided herself on a tough professionalism, a hard core of 
indifference under layers of thick callus that had made her one of the 
most ruthless and successful photojournalists in the business. Watching 
the death of Polly Nichols on video from the vault beneath Spaldergate 
House in Battersea had been very much like watching an ordinary movie. 
It was easy to disconnect the reality of it and watch dispassionately, 
even though it had been frustrating for her professional sensibilities. 
She would've obtained far better video footage by filming the whole 
thing on site, using more creative camera angles, better audio 
equipment. 
 
Elizabeth Stride's murder in Dutfield's Yard had been harder to 
witness, with the immediacy of sight and smell and sound and the 
knowledge that only the complete blackness of the closed-in yard and 
the concealing half-walls of a disused stable stood between her camera 

lens and the man crouched over Stride with a gutting knife, nearly 
severing her head with a few powerful slashes. But even there, it had 
been only a murder, after all. At least Stride had been dead when the 
knife struck, strangled by that other lunatic, Lachley. 
 
But Catharine Eddowes . . . 
 
Tough as she was, Dominica did not relish the death waiting in this 
square for poor Kate Eddowes. Mitre Square resembled a miniature 
amphitheatre in brick. Along one edge ran a solid, three-story brick 
structure comprised of vacant cottages, jutting out like a peninsula 
perpendicular to Mitre Street just beyond. Along the short, squat end 
of this peninsular "cottage" ran a tiny, short jog of road and pavement 
giving access to the square. The pavement zagged back in a loose Z-
shape from the Mitre Street access, with the Sir John Cass School 
running slap up against the vacant cottages. The resulting interior 
corner, like the crook of an elbow, was isolated, with a broad pavement 
that stood nearly three times wider than a normal walkway. 
 
Beside the school rose a tall warehouse belonging to Kearly and Tongue. 
Opposite, facing the warehouse and school, stood another Kearly and 
Tongue warehouse, the Orange Market along King Street, and a house 
belonging to Police Constable Pearse. Along Duke Street, the fourth 
border of the square, stood the Great Synagogue. Narrow, lightless 
Church Passage -- a covered alleyway -- led into the square from Duke 
Street, past the southern edge of the synagogue. 
 
The tiny "square" thus formed, a secluded island cut off from the 
busier streets surrounding it, was where Lachley and Maybrick would 
lead their second victim of the night. There was a sickening symmetry, 
Dominica realized, to their revolting anti-Semitism. They were 
murdering Eddowes within view of a synagogue. And given their narrow 
escape from Dutfield's Yard, these men possessed a terrifying 
confidence, to kill her within plain view of a policeman's home not 
half an hour after nearly being caught dead to rights. That alone shook 
Dominica as she and Guy Pendergast fled Dutfield's Yard before Mr. 
Diemschutz could bring help. She and her partner sped along side 
streets, running to get ahead of the murderous Ripper duo, literally 
racing the whole distance to Mitre Square to get into position for the 
best vantage point to film Eddowes' death. 
 
In front of the school, a waist-high iron railing partitioned off half 
the available pavement. Because of minor work being done, a much higher 
temporary fence had been erected along the line of that railing, 
effectively cutting the broad pavement in half and sealing off the 
entire corner of the elbow. It was behind this temporary fencing 
Dominca and Guy chose to conceal themselves, less than six feet from 
the spot where Catharine Eddowes was slated to die. 
 
Five minutes after they went into hiding, Constable Watkins appeared in 
Church Passage, doing his rounds and peering dutifully into the square. 
And not two minutes after Watkins retreated down Church Passage again, 
John Lachley appeared, escorting the unsuspecting Catharine Eddowes. 
Dominica held her breath, trembling slightly in the cold, wet air. 
Lachley and Eddowes paused within whispering distance of Dominica's 
hiding place, while James Maybrick slipped up silently behind them, 
knife already out of his pocket. 

 
Dominica knew what was coming. But the shock left her trembling when 
John Lachley smashed Catharine Eddowes to the pavement, strangling her 
right in front of them. The woman struggled, flailing her arms and 
kicking helplessly, while Lachley snarled into her face and crushed her 
throat under his hands. Kate Eddowes finally went limp, arms falling 
lifelessly to the pavement at her sides. Lachley rifled her pockets for 
his letter even as the slavering Maybrick struck with his knife, too 
impatient to wait any longer. 
 
And it was that, watching the infuriated and massively frustrated 
Maybrick, which finally broke through Dominica's tough professionalism 
and left her trembling and sick behind the high, temporary schoolyard 
fence. This was no make-believe movie, no documentary on ordinary 
little murders. Not even the impersonal blowing apart of a solider by 
an artillery round. This was a frenzy of psychopathic hatred, a man who 
was no longer fully human, slashing at an innocent woman's face, 
cutting an inverted "M" straight through the flesh of her eyelids, 
hacking off ears, nearly severing the head from its neck. And when he 
jerked up her skirts . . . 
 
Dominica couldn't watch, squeezed shut her eyes and swallowed hot bile, 
tried hopelessly to force away the image of him snatching out 
Catharine's intestines, tossing them across her shoulder, cutting part 
of them loose and arranging them beside her. Don't gag, don't heave, 
they'll hear you, oh, dear, God, the smell . . . Guy Pendergast's hand 
was bruising her shoulder, the fingers digging in and flexing as he, 
too, fought to remain silent during the ghastly ritual Maybrick and 
Lachley were enacting beyond the fence. She could hear low voices, 
almost whispers, and didn't want to distinguish individual words. 
 
When at last their footfalls moved away, she opened her eyes. She tried 
not to look at the mangled shape lying huddled in front of the empty 
cottages. Dominica was violently atremble, dizzy and light-headed. She 
wasn't sure she'd be able to take a single step without collapsing. 
"They're gone," Guy whispered directly against her ear, to prevent the 
sound from carrying. She nodded. Time to leave. Get the hell out of 
here, Dominica, because Police Constable Watkins is going to walk into 
the Square down Church Passage in about two minutes, discover the body 
and raise all bloody hell . . . come on, legs, move it! 
 
She'd taken one step, no more, when racing footfalls thudded back into 
the Square. Her vision greyed out for just an instant and only Guy 
Pendergast's grip kept her on her feet. Maybrick had jogged back to the 
body, was hacking at it again, tearing away part of her apron and 
wrapping up something . . . oh, Christ, something he'd cut out of her, 
he was carrying part of her insides away with him . . . 
 
"James!" An all-but-silent hiss of fury broke through the shock. It was 
Lachley, white-faced. "Get the hell away from her! Come on, man, before 
a copper strolls in here. They do a patrol past the Square every few 
minutes and they're bloody well due!" 
 
"Forgot my dinner," Maybrick said calmly. 
 
If Guy hadn't been behind her, propping her up, Dominica might well 
have fallen against the fence, giving them both away. The pistols she 

and her partner had concealed in their pockets were utterly useless 
against these two. The men out there arguing over the remains of 
Catharine Eddowes literally could not be killed, not by anyone from up 
time. Maybrick wouldn't die until 1889, of arsenic poisoning, and until 
Mary Kelly was murdered more than a month from now, neither of these 
men could be so much as harmed. 
 
But Dominica certainly could be. 
 
"If you want to make off with her kidney and uterus, fine!" Lachley 
snapped. "But I'll be damned if I go walking along with you while you 
carry them! I'll meet you back at Lower Tibor, as usual." 
 
The two halves of the team that comprised Jack the Ripper split up, 
Lachley pale with anger, Maybrick flushed and euphoric. Lachley uttered 
one short curse, then strode off through the broad opening to Mitre 
Street, vanishing to the southwest, walking fast. Maybrick thrust his 
bloody prize under his coat, shoving the knife into a deep pocket. 
Something dark fell out as he pulled his gloved hand free again. It 
landed with a dull sound against Eddowes' mangled body. Something 
small, made of leather . . . Dominica had to stifle the wild, 
hysterical impulse to laugh as Maybrick strode jauntily down Mitre 
Street, following Lachley's route at a more leisurely pace. Maybrick 
had dropped a red leather cigarette case, the one experts had puzzled 
over for a century and a half. It was far too expensive for a destitute 
woman like Catharine Eddowes to have been carrying. She'd have pawned 
it for cash in a heartbeat. It lay, now, amidst the contents of her 
rifled pockets, which Maybrick had set out neatly beside her body. 
 
Then Maybrick's footfalls died away and they had scant seconds in which 
to make their own escape, before the momentary arrival of PC Watkins 
stirred this whole neighborhood to a frenzy. There were only two ways 
out of Mitre Square and the constable would be arriving through Church 
Passage. They had no choice but to follow on the heels of the killers. 
 
"Well, come on, then," Guy hissed, dragging her toward the exit to 
their hiding place. "You're the one who wanted to follow those damned 
lunatics!" His anger stung her pride fully awake. She jerked away from 
his supporting grasp and stalked out from behind the temporary fencing. 
After what she'd been through tonight, Maybrick had better not give her 
the slip! Concentrating fiercely on Carson Historical Video Prizes and 
million-dollar movie advances, Dominica Nosette eased past the pitiful 
remains of Catharine Eddowes and set out down Mitre Street. I can still 
find out how they pull that disappearing act, in the middle of a 
crowded city . . . 
 
As they slipped down Mitre Street, a police whistle rose shrilly behind 
them. 
 
Maybrick's bloody legacy had just been discovered. 
 
* * * 
 
Skeeter supposed he should've seen it coming, at least where Goldie 
Morran was concerned. But he was so tired and still so shaken by 
Julius' murder, he didn't, not until it hit. The Duchess of Dross 
spotted him through her shop windows and shot out the door like a 

javelin going for the gold. "Skeeter! Just the person I've been looking 
for!" 
 
He stopped dead, about as eager to talk to Goldie as he was to spend 
the night in Senator Caddrick's hotel room. "What do you want, Goldie?" 
 
"A bit of . . . mmm . . . professional advice." 
 
Skeeter's glance came up sharply. "You want advice from me?" 
 
Purple-tinted hair glinted evilly; so did her faintly sharp teeth. 
"Why, yes, Skeeter. You do have a certain amount of useful knowledge 
tucked away in that bony head of yours." 
 
"Really? And what makes you think I'd go out of my way to accept a cup 
of coffee from you, never mind give you advice?" 
 
She glanced around nervously, wet her lips. "Well . . . Since you ask, 
it concerns a mutual acquaintance." 
 
Skeeter narrowed his eyes. "I've been helping Kit Carson arrest most of 
our mutual acquaintances, Goldie. Going to bribe me to look the other 
way when one of your cronies comes through? Forget it. Besides, you 
must've heard? I'm leaving through the Britannia in a couple of days. 
I'm busy." 
 
For just an instant, real anger flickered through her eyes. "I'm 
talking about Jenna Caddrick!" she hissed, voice carefully modulated 
not to carry. 
 
"What about her?" 
 
"Not here. Too many ears." 
 
"Huh." With I.T.C.H. crawling all over the station, never mind Caddrick 
and his staff goons and all those disgruntled federal marshals, that 
was no lie. "All right. Where?" 
 
"My shop. In back. It's sound-proofed." 
 
Figures. "As long as you make it quick. I've got about a thousand hours 
of library work ahead of me before I go to bed tonight." 
 
She sniffed autocratically and led the way into a shop completely 
devoid of customers. Tourists, wary of the violence that kept breaking 
out, were staying in their hotel rooms unless a gate was actually 
cycling, abandoning Commons to the loons and the protestors, all of 
which had hit station entrepreneurs hard in the cashbox. Goldie hung up 
the "Out to Tea" sign -- a ruse to gain privacy, since mere tea never 
passed Goldie Morran's lips -- then turned the lock. She led the way 
into the back, past a solid steel door that clearly served to secure 
her vault. It thumped as she closed it. 
 
The large room beyond was divided, one part lined with small, metallic 
drawers floor to ceiling, labelled neatly as to semi-precious contents. 
The balance formed a cozy corner where she'd rigged a sitting room of 
sorts with a comfy sofa, a table stacked with trade magazines, a small 

wet bar, and a beautiful porcelain birdcage. Skeeter did a classic 
double-take. Inside sat two birds which very few people now alive had 
ever seen outside a museum's stuffed collection. Lovely grey with 
bright splashes of yellow and white and orange, the breeding pair of 
Carolina parakeets chirped cheerfully above the sound of quiet music. 
 
He wondered how many viable eggs she'd sold to smugglers already. 
 
"Now," she said briskly, "let's get down to business. Would you care 
for anything?" She was opening a scotch bottle. 
 
Skeeter was parched, but shook his head. He had his standards. "What 
have you got to say, Goldie? That you didn't tell Security when they 
came calling?" 
 
She smiled slightly. "My, my, testy, aren't we?" She poured a drink, 
neat, and sipped delicately, then came around the end of the bar to 
settle into her sofa, waving Skeeter to a seat. "I need your help with 
possible . . . legal entanglements that don't necessarily need to come 
to light." 
 
Skeeter remained standing and just looked at her. 
 
Something in his expression caused her to sit up straighter. "You do 
recall, Skeeter, I did save your life once. Lupus Mortiferus would've 
chopped you into mince if I hadn't interfered. You owe me." 
 
Dammit, she was right. For once. He did owe her, despite the savagery 
they'd done one another during that idiotic, near-fatal wager. "All 
right, Goldie. I'm listening." 
 
"I didn't tell Security about this, for reasons you'll understand in a 
moment. That tourist who went missing in London, Benny Catlin? He came 
in here to exchange some currency just a few minutes before the 
Britannia cycled. He was a very nice young man. Quiet, a little 
scatter-brained, it seemed. It was idiotically easy, really. And if 
Benny Catlin had been an ordinary graduate student instead of Jenna 
Caddrick . . ." 
 
"Christ, Goldie, what did you do?" He was afraid he already knew. 
 
Goldie didn't disappoint him. "I, er, passed some counterfeit bank 
notes. Someone stiffed me with them, returning from a Britannia tour. 
Which should tell you how good they are. I didn't give her all 
counterfeit notes," she added hastily, "but enough that if Jenna 
Caddrick has been spending them, well . . . She's been down the 
Britannia long enough, now, it could get her into serious trouble if 
they're detected. They're good fakes, quite good, but I didn't intend 
for anyone to spend months down the Britannia with them. I mean, nobody 
expected Benny Catlin to go missing -- " 
 
"Or turn up as Senator Caddrick's kidnapped daughter!" 
 
Goldie flushed. 
 
"God, the messes you scheme yourself into . . ." He was tempted to tell 
her she could just scheme herself right back out again; but he wanted 

to know the rest. "So just what do you want me to do about it?" 
 
Again, she wet her lips. "Well, you see, it occurred to me that Jenna 
Caddrick might be missing because she's been, well, jailed. For 
counterfeiting. I mean, if she got away from her abductors the way 
everybody's saying, that would certainly explain why nobody's been able 
to trace her. Searchers wouldn't think of looking in a Victorian 
prison, after all, for a terrorist's hostage. Probably not even the 
terrorists would think of that." 
 
Reluctantly, Skeeter had to admit she had a point. "So you want me to 
check all the London jails, looking for a woman disguised as a man, 
arrange a prison break, then sneak her out through Spaldergate while 
whoever's trying to murder her isn't looking, then convince her not to 
press charges against you for passing her counterfeit banknotes in the 
first place? Jeez, Goldie, you don't ask much." 
 
"It isn't just getting her out of jail," Goldie said quickly. "I mean, 
there would be a considerable, ah, sum of money involved to compensate 
her. For legal expenses in London. Inconvenience experienced. That sort 
of thing." 
 
"You want me to bribe her? My God, Goldie! We're not talking about some 
addled half-wit tourist, here! Do you honestly think you can bribe your 
way out of this with Senator Caddrick's kid?" 
 
"Well, it's worth a try! I'll pay you, too," Goldie added venomously. 
"Don't worry about that. Cash advance for half my offer, with the 
balance on delivery of one live and kicking, close-mouthed kid!" 
 
"I don't want your money, Goldie. If I do find Jenna Caddrick, maybe 
I'll pass along your message. Then again, maybe I won't. If you did get 
her tossed into some Victorian hellhole of a jail, just pray real hard 
she doesn't have the same capacity for holding a grudge her father 
does." 
 
He left her sitting, mouth ajar, and heard a forlorn chirp from the 
caged parakeets as he swung the vault door open and stalked out. He was 
tempted to head for the nearest bathroom just to wash his hands. 
Instead, he headed for Kit Carson's office. Kit needed to know about 
this. As he headed down through Urbs Romae and Victoria Station toward 
Edo Castletown, having to push his way through a crowd of chanting 
protestors, it occurred to Skeeter that Jenna Caddrick might not even 
be in London any longer. Particularly not if she'd discovered her money 
was no good. Hiding in London would be expensive, which meant she was 
likely running short of funds already. 
 
Caddrick's story was even more full of holes now than it had been 
before. If Jenna Caddrick had been a hostage, she wouldn't have simply 
waltzed into Paula Booker's surgery or Goldie Morran's shop 
unaccompanied, looking to alter her face and change currency. But Benny 
Catlin had done just that, then had climbed the five flights of stairs 
to the Britannia platform and chewed Skeeter's backside over a steamer 
trunk that had very nearly skidded over the edge. There hadn't been 
anyone up there with Benny Catlin. Nobody holding a metaphoric gun to 
Jenna Caddrick's head. She was on her own, in London. The guys she'd 
shot and killed must have been London counterparts of the bastard who'd 

murdered Julius. Who'd been doubling for her, as a decoy. And since it 
was clear that Armstrong was helping Marcus and the girls, Jenna 
Caddrick must be helping Ianira Cassondra . . . 
 
Skeeter actually went so dizzy, he staggered, rocking to a halt so 
fast, the protestor behind him ran slap into his back. Skeeter caught 
his balance, ignoring a flurry of angry mutters from the sign-carrying 
loon, and stood there with his eyes narrowed to slits, thoughts racing, 
then groped for the nearest wrought iron bench and collapsed onto it, 
shaking. 
 
"My God," Skeeter whispered aloud. "Ianira was in the trunk!" No wonder 
Jenna Caddrick had been so badly shaken! He shut his eyes for long 
moments, trying to blot out the image of that trunk sliding off, 
falling the long, fatal way to the Commons floor . . . Then shoved 
himself to his feet and stalked through the jostling horde of lunatics 
rampaging through Victoria Station, carrying signs and howling out 
protests he barely heard, furious with himself for not tumbling to it 
sooner. "Kit'll have my badge, overlooking a clue that big," he 
muttered under his breath. 
 
When Skeeter reached the Neo Edo Hotel, he found Kit in his palatial 
office, bent over his computer. Skeeter paused just long enough to kick 
off his shoes before stepping onto the pristine tatami rice mats. 
"Where's Kaederman?" Skeeter asked tersely, searching the corners of 
Kit's office with an uneasy gaze. "I thought he was coming up here." 
 
Kit glanced up. "Kaederman," he said flatly, "went to bed. That man is 
the laziest detective I've ever met." 
 
"How'd we luck out? At least he's nowhere around to hear the news." 
 
"What news?" Kit leaned forward, eyes abruptly glittering. 
 
"Ianira's in London. She went through in a steamer trunk. One of Benny 
Catlin's. I'm sure of it. You remember that pile-up of luggage at the 
platform, when one of the trunks nearly slid off." 
 
"Yes, you mentioned it belonged to Benny Cat -- ." Kit could out-swear 
Yesukai the Valiant. Then he grimaced. "Skeeter, you had no way of 
knowing, not at the time." 
 
"Maybe not," he muttered, pacing from the enormous desk to the withered 
landscape garden of raked sand and carefully placed stones to the wall 
of television monitors which kept Kit abreast of events all over 
Shangri-La Station. "But if I hadn't been so damn muddled, I'd have 
figured it out a lot sooner. And the trail wouldn't be so cold!" 
 
"Well, beating yourself up over this won't do Ianira any good," Kit 
pointed out gently. "At least we have a pretty good indication Ianira 
was alive, inside that trunk, given Jenna's reaction. I begin to wonder 
if anyone from the Ansar Majlis was with that girl when she went 
through the Britannia," Kit mused. "Other than a couple of hit men who 
died messily? And since she went through on her own, that really makes 
me wonder where Marcus and Armstrong went after hopping their train in 
Colorado. Once Armstrong eliminated the man who shot Julius, they 
certainly lost no time hightailing it out of there." Kit frowned slowly 

as he sat back in his chair. "Unless," he mused, "they weren't running 
away at all." 
 
Skeeter halted his pacing. "Huh?" 
 
"Maybe . . ." Kit tapped steepled fingertips against his lips. "Just 
maybe, they were running to something." 
 
Skeeter stared, trying to figure out what he was driving at. "Running 
to something? What? Where? There's nothing in 1885 they'd want to go 
to!" 
 
"No. Not in 1885. But in 1888 . . ." 
 
Skeeter felt his eyes widen. "London?" 
 
"Makes sense. A lot of sense. Hide out for three years, make damned 
sure nobody's on their trail, cross the Atlantic to meet Jenna and 
Ianira when they come through the Britannia. Armstrong could easily 
have set up a base of operations in London, complete with false 
identity, a good occupation lined up, so money's coming in steadily. 
They could hide out for months, years, if necessary. With damned little 
chance of the Ansar Majlis ever finding them." 
 
"Or anybody else, for that matter," Skeeter added bitterly. 
 
"A definite plus, when one's marked for murder. And they'll have the 
children to think of," Kit added gently. "Surely you can see that?" 
 
He could. All too clearly. "So you think we shouldn't look for them, 
after all?" 
 
"No, I didn't say that. Shangri-La Station's still in mortal danger. 
And something tells me none of our fugitives will be safe until we get 
to the bottom of this. Too many pieces of this puzzle are still 
missing. Like that guy who killed Julius, for one. He was certainly no 
down-time Arabian jihad fighter. So who hired him? The Ansar Majlis? 
Hiring a paid killer isn't their style. Crazies like the Ansar Majlis 
do their own killing. So, if not them, who?" 
 
Skeeter didn't like the road Kit was walking down. 
 
"Yes, you do see it, don't you? I'm getting very itchy about the safety 
of this search team. If someone besides the Ansar Majlis is trying to 
kill Jenna, then merely looking for her could be as dangerous as 
finding her. The question is," Kit mused softly, "how, exactly, to 
begin the search once you get to London? I'd rather not risk Paula's 
life any more than necessary, but she ought to go along, to make a 
positive identification." 
 
Skeeter snorted. "That part's easy." 
 
Kit blinked. "Oh?" 
 
He told Kit about Goldie's counterfeit banknotes. Kit whistled softly. 
 
"So, you'll start by looking for angry merchants who've been ripped 

off? Hmm . . . It might work. There was a fairly large trade in 
counterfeit banknotes and coins, especially near the waterfront, where 
the fakes could be passed to unwary newcomers, people unfamiliar with 
English currency, but it's certainly the best lead we've got so far." 
Kit's grin was sudden, blinding, and terrifying. "Grand idea, Skeeter. 
Let's have you pose as a Pinkerton agent. Say you're after a Yank from 
New York, who's been counterfeiting money in the States, tell our angry 
London merchants you think he's moved his operation to London. We'll 
get Connie to whip up Pinkerton identification papers for you." 
 
"Good grief. First a house detective for the Neo Edo, now a Pinkerton 
agent? Who'd a-thunk it? Me, a private eye!" 
 
"And a pretty good one, so far," Kit grinned. "Get over to Connie's. 
I'll call her, give her a head's up. You'd better collect a few of 
those counterfeits from Goldie, too, so you'll have samples with you in 
London, as part of your cover story. And Skeeter . . ." 
 
"Yeah?" 
 
Kit's smile was positively evil. "Let's not tell Sid about this?" 
 
Skeeter started to laugh; then felt a chill, instead, straight down his 
spine. 
 
* * * 
 
Margo was not keen to watch the murders of Stride and Eddowes. Rather 
than join the Ripper Watch Team in the Vault, she changed clothing, 
requested a cup of hot tea from one of the Spaldergate House maids, and 
curled up beside the fire in the parlour. There she stayed, sitting on 
the floor in front of the hearth, chin on knees, watching the flames 
dance across the coals. Malcolm came in shortly after two A.M., looking 
for her. He paused in the doorway. 
 
"There you are. Well, it's over, down there. Maybrick turns out to be 
the one who chalked the graffiti in Goulston Street. And you'll never 
guess who we caught on tape? Those idiot reporters, Dominica Nosette 
and Guy Pendergast. They're following Maybrick and Lachley. Shadowed 
Maybrick to Goulston Street and photographed the graffiti after he 
left, then started trailing him once more." 
 
"Great. We should've staked out the murder sites, ourselves, and waited 
to nab those idiots." 
 
"Perhaps, but the chance is gone now. We've sent out Stoddard and 
Tanglewood to try to locate them, but they'll be long gone before 
either man can get close, I'm afraid." Malcolm crossed the parlour 
toward her, navigating his way around heavy furniture and tables full 
of bric-a-brac. "Whatever have you been doing, sitting here alone in 
the dark?" 
 
"Trying not to think about what's going on in Whitechapel." 
 
He settled on the carpeted floor beside her and wrapped an arm around 
her shoulders. "You're trembling." 
 

"I'm cold," she muttered. Then, betraying the lie, "You don't think I'm 
too weak for this job, do you? Because I can't watch?" 
 
Malcolm sighed. "There's a fairly large difference between running slap 
into something you're not expecting and going out of your way to watch 
something grisly, particularly when others are on the job to do it, 
instead. No, I don't think you're too weak, Margo. You extricated 
several people from that street brawl at the examination of Polly 
Nichols' remains, didn't you? Doug Tanglewood said he'd never been more 
thoroughly frightened in his life, yet you pulled them safely away, 
even Pavel Kostenka, when that lout was intent on beating him 
senseless." 
 
"That wasn't so hard," Margo shivered. "I just charged in and did the 
first thing that came to mind. He wasn't expecting Aikido, anyway." 
 
"Then you did precisely what a budding time scout should do," Malcolm 
murmured, stroking her hair gently. "Between the Ripper Watch and 
searching for our missing tourist, I haven't had the time to say how 
proud of you I've been. You've nothing to be ashamed of, nothing at 
all." 
 
She bit her lip, wondering if now was a good time to talk about the 
past, which had been troubling her ever since she'd come to London. Her 
mother's descent into prostitution had been Margo's shameful secret for 
a long time, one she'd feared at first would drive Malcolm away; but 
she'd had time to think about it and wondered now if she'd misjudged 
him, unfairly assigning to him the same prejudices she'd encountered in 
Minnesota. He knew about her being raped by a gang of fifteenth-century 
Portuguese, after all, and still wanted to marry her. Surely he 
wouldn't mind what her mother had done to make ends meet, if he didn't 
mind the other? 
 
Malcolm lifted her face, his expression deeply concerned. "What is it, 
Margo?" 
 
She leaned against his shoulder and told him. All of it. Her father's 
drinking. Her mother's desperation to pay the bills, when her father 
spent his paycheck and her mother's both, buying the booze. What her 
mother had done . . . and what her father had done, when he'd found 
out. "I never meant to say anything, because it would kill Kit, to 
learn how his little girl died. But I thought you ought to know. Before 
you married me." 
 
"Oh, Margo . . ." His voice shook. "I wish to God I could go back and 
undo it all. No wonder you fight the world so hard. You've had to, just 
to survive . . ." He brushed his thumb across her cheek, across her 
unsteady lips. "You're so beautiful, so full of courage, it makes my 
heart stop. If your father hadn't died in prison, they'd have to hang 
me for him." 
 
Margo's mouth twisted. "They don't hang people anymore, Malcolm." 
 
Then he was holding her close and nothing else in the universe 
mattered. 
 
* * * 

 
Dominica watched in astonishment as James Maybrick unlocked the door of 
a filthy hovel in Wapping and disappeared inside. Gas light appeared 
briefly through the windows and a ferocious barking erupted, then 
subsided just as abruptly. A moment later, the gas went out, leaving 
the house dark again. 
 
"What on earth?" she wondered aloud, startled. "What d'you suppose 
should we do now?" she whispered. 
 
"I'm going 'round the back, see if I can get a look inside." 
 
"Be careful!" 
 
Dominica waited impatiently while her partner vanished into the inky 
blackness. Rain spat at her, cold and miserable. She huddled deeper 
into her coat and shifted from one foot to the other, trying to keep 
warm. She'd been waiting for perhaps five minutes when snarls and 
savage barking erupted again from the house. A single gunshot split the 
wet night. 
 
"Guy!" Dominica ran across the street, just in time for the front door 
to be thrown wide. Guy snatched her wrist and pulled her inside. "Come 
on! There isn't a moment to lose!" 
 
"What -- " 
 
"Shh!" 
 
He dragged her through the dark house into a central, windowless room 
where a gaslight burned low. A massive black dog sprawled across the 
bare wooden floorboards, dead in a puddle of spreading blood; Guy had 
shot it through the skull. In the center of the floor rested a heavy 
trap door, which Guy pulled up cautiously. Beneath, they found steps 
leading down into a cellar. "He's nowhere in the house," Guy whispered 
urgently. "He had to go through here. There's nowhere else he could 
have gone." 
 
Dominica dragged out her own pistol, aware that she was trembling 
violently. 
 
"There's no lantern," she muttered, eying the black hole uneasily. 
 
"He had one. Must have. It's pitch black, down there, but we'll hear 
him at the very least, follow the sound." 
 
Yes, she thought, and he'll hear us, as well. But they'd come this far 
and she wasn't giving up on the story of the century so easily. She 
gripped her pistol with damp fingers and followed Guy into the cellar, 
which proved to be no cellar at all, but rather a tunnel through the 
sewers beneath Wapping. So this is how he did it! Simply popped home to 
Wapping and vanished beneath the streets! Then, faint with distance, 
they heard it: the splash of footfalls through the filth in the 
tunnels. She and Guy, pausing at the base of the stairs, exchanged 
glances. Then Dominica hiked up her skirts and waded cautiously 
forward. 
 

She was going to get that Carson prize. And all that lovely money, 
which her video would fetch in the up-time world. Dominica Nosette 
intended to be the world's most famous photojournalist ever. And 
nothing was going to stop her. 
 
 
 
Chapter Nine 
 
John Lachley had just finished burning Elizabeth Stride's letter in the 
flames of his altar beneath the streets when a woman's high, ragged 
scream echoed out in the sewer. A man's angry snarl and a volley of 
gunshots roared through the tunnels, followed by a thud of colliding 
bodies, a grunt and sudden masculine cry of pain. Then James Maybrick's 
voice, maniacal: "Lipski!" 
 
Over and over again, "Lipski! Lipski! . . . Lipski LipskiLipski . . ." 
 
The ragged chant jerked Lachley across the room and out through the 
open iron doorway. The Liverpudlian was on his knees in the muddy 
water, his lantern thrown aside, hacking and stabbing at a motionless 
form. The thing lying on the sewer floor had, before Maybrick's violent 
assault, been a man. Blood had spurted and sprayed across Maybrick's 
face and chest. It dripped and spattered down his chin and hair from 
the arterial bleeding Lachley had warned him against when stalking the 
prostitutes. But a more terrible sound, by far, than the slam of 
Maybrick's knife into dead flesh came to Lachely's ears: running 
footsteps, receding into the blackness, unsteady and desperate. 
 
The woman who had screamed. 
 
Lachley left Maybrick to his grisly pleasure and raced after her. He 
had to stop her. Had to silence her. Whoever she was. It didn't matter 
a damn who, he had to catch her. She was slipping on the wet bricks 
ahead. Scrabbling up to run again. Blind and deaf and crashing into 
walls in the darkness. He could hear the scream of her breath. Shallow. 
Ragged. Wild. Could hear the scratch of her shoes. The splash of 
puddles under her staggering feet. Could smell the terror. Thick. 
Sexual. Delicious. 
 
When he caught her, she screamed. Fought him. Writhed and clawed at his 
hands, his face. He backhanded her into the bricks. Caught a fist in 
her hair. Forced her head back. Found the death grip at her throat . . 
. And ghostly red light flickered in his eyes, eerie and startling. 
Lachley reeled back a step, bringing up one arm defensively. Her head 
moved and the light vanished. Then a gunshot split the darkness. The 
bullet whined off bricks behind him. Lachley backhanded her again, fist 
clenched. The gun discharged, blinding him. They struggled for the 
weapon and she fired until the gun clicked, empty. He struck her a 
third time, knocking her to the floor, this time. She splashed into the 
muck at his feet and lay still. A faint moan escaped her. Lachley 
caught her under the arms, grasped her jaw, tilted her head --  
 
And the flicker of dull red light came again. 
 
Badly startled, he searched along her neck, up toward her ear, and 
touched slick, alien cords of some kind, something glassy, an odd tube 

of some kind, what felt like tiny wires . . . What the bloody devil? 
 
He gave a practiced heave and tossed her across one shoulder. Her head 
trailed down his back, arms loose, unjointed. Lachley strode back 
through the darkness, guided by the light pouring from Lower Tibor's 
open door. Maybrick was still hacking at the dead man. 
 
"James!" 
 
When the sharp sound of his voice failed to break the maniac's 
slavering frenzy, Lachley shoved him off balance with a booted foot. 
Maybrick sprawled sideways, splashing into the water, then snarled like 
an animal, knife flashing at the ready. 
 
"James! Put the sodding knife down! He's dead!" 
 
The cotton merchant blinked slowly and, as the wildness faded gradually 
from his eyes, he focused on Lachley's face. "Sorry," he whispered, 
voice shaking, "I'm sorry, doctor, didn't realize . . ." 
 
"You did well, James, killing that bastard. Drag him inside, now, and 
we'll see who our visitors might be." 
 
"Yes, of course." He hauled the dead man up by the arms, dragging the 
body out of the filthy water, and pulled him into Lower Tibor. 
 
"Leave him by the door, James, and find his sodding gun." Lachley 
dumped the unconscious woman across his work table and bound her wrists 
efficiently with a twist of rope. He found a cup and calmly poured out 
a dose of the drug he always gave Maybrick when they returned after a 
successful hunt through Whitechapel. "Ah, you found the pistol. Very 
good. Put it there. Now, James, you're shaking, badly in need of your 
medication. Here, swallow this down. Then take off your coat and the 
rest of those clothes. Burn them, you're covered in blood." 
 
Maybrick drank the powerful drug without question, then stripped off 
the blood-caked garments and dropped them on the altar for burning. 
Lachley heard water splashing as he cleaned himself up at the tiny 
basin. Satisfied that his mad cotton merchant was under proper control 
once more, Lachley turned his attention to the mutilated body lying 
beside the door. He opened the coat, torn and hacked through in two 
dozen places, searched the pockets, emptied the contents of his 
waistcoat and trouser pockets, as well. Then frowned slowly at what he 
found. Crouched beside a perfectly ordinary corpse, John Lachley found 
himself confronted with objects he could not comprehend. 
 
The man's pockets contained a handful of shillings, florins, a few half 
crowns, plus a wad of bank notes, a surprisingly large number of them. 
Nearly two hundred pounds, in fact. But the other items . . . He found 
a stiff, rectangular card of some sort, made of a substance Lachley had 
never encountered. Neither paper nor wood nor metal, it was 
nevertheless shiny and brightly colored, with a series of dark stripes 
down the back, formed of some other unknown substance which could not 
be scratched off easily with a fingernail. It reminded him of gutta-
percha, obtained from the milky sap of a tree native to Malaysia, which 
like latex hardened on exposure to the air, forming a stiff substance 
somewhat like this, useful in cements, insulations, and so on. This 

card was not gutta-percha, however; attempting to dissolve it with oil 
of turpentine and naptha had no effect whatever, which proved it to be 
some other substance. Nor was it caoutchouc, which was not even as 
strong as gutta-percha and certainly nothing like as strong as this 
substance. Frowning, he put the little card aside and studied the other 
mysterious object he'd found, a tiny cylinder covered with a soft, 
spongy substance, with trailing wires coming out of it, coated with 
something slick and flexible. The wires plugged into a compact, heavy 
box. This was made of some other unknown substance, its feel similar to 
the stiff card, yet completely different, bent into a virtually 
seamless shape with tiny buttons and a hinged lid. This boasted a 
transparent cover of something that was not glass. In fiddling with the 
buttons, he pressed one that caused a faint, whirring sound to emerge 
from the box. Startled, he mashed other buttons, trying to get the 
sound to stop . . . 
 
And James Maybrick's voice spoke from inside! 
 
He dropped the thing with a shocked yell, toppled straight over onto 
his backside and stared at the box which lay there talking to him, like 
some parlour medium's trick with ventriloquism or the tiniest Victrola 
phonograph imaginable; but there was no one here except Maybrick and 
himself, and Maybrick stood on the other side of the room, gaping, 
mouth dropped wide to hear his own voice coming from a box the size of 
Lachley's hand. Lachley could not imagine anyone making a phonograph 
this small. 
 
"What is it?" Maybrick's voice shook violently. 
 
"I don't know!" Lachley picked up the box and shook it gently. 
Maybrick's voice kept talking. Then he heard another voice and 
recognized with a jolt of shock what he was hearing. "James! Get the 
hell away from her! Come on, man, before a copper strolls in here. They 
do a patrol past the Square every few minutes and they're bloody well 
due!" This was followed by Maybrick's calm, prosaic, "Forgot my dinner 
. . ." and his own furious, "If you want to make off with her kidney 
and uterus, fine! But I'll be damned if I go walking along with you 
while you carry it! I'll meet you back at Lower Tibor, as usual." 
 
He stared, open-mouthed now, himself. This little box had somehow 
captured their conversation of one hour previously, when they'd stood 
over the gutted remains of Catharine Eddowes. "It is like a phonograph 
or a miniaturized telephone," he whispered, awestruck, "one that 
records voices, rather than transmitting them across a wire! My God, 
how is this accomplished? Where is the mouthpiece? Both a telephone and 
a phonograph's recorder have a mouthpiece to capture the voice and 
transmit it, but there's nothing except these little wires and this 
tiny thing at the end. And what powers it?" 
 
"They must be police!" Maybrick gasped out, shaking with furious 
terror. "Filthy coppers, following us, they're onto us -- " 
 
"London coppers do not have devices like this!" 
 
"Then who are they?" 
 
Lachley stared from Maybrick to the dead man and back, considered the 

box in his hand and the unconscious woman, stared at Maybrick again. 
Under other circumstances, the tableau they presented might have struck 
him as enormously funny: a naked man with blood in his hair, dripping 
water down his face and chest, a corpse in possession of a talking box, 
and a woman with bound hands lying sprawled across his work table. 
"I've no idea who they are," Lachley said at last, pushing himself to 
his feet and fiddling with the box until the voices stopped. "But I 
intend to find out. Get dressed James, you're bollock naked. And rinse 
the blood out of your hair before it dries to a clotted mess." 
 
The madman ran a hand through sticky, thinning hair and grimaced, then 
bent over the basin again and washed his balding head clean. He 
recovered the clothes he'd worn on the train down from Liverpool and 
dressed himself silently. The drug was beginning to take hold, thank 
God, leaving him calmer and quieter. Lachley searched the unconscious 
woman, finding even stranger things secreted about her person than he 
had on the man. He had no idea what to make of the tiny, lenslike 
device hidden in her bonnet, nor could he comprehend the other device, 
which emitted the dull red light he'd seen in the dark sewer. Footsteps 
roused him from his frowning reverie. Maybrick had come to stand behind 
him. 
 
"What's that?" he asked quietly, pointing to the little tube the light 
came from. 
 
"I've no idea. It emits a pale, red-colored light." 
 
"I don't see anything." 
 
Lachley shone it at his eyes. "There, see it?" 
 
"No." 
 
Even when the cotton merchant stared directly into the device, he could 
not see the dim reddish light that was plainly visible to Lachley. 
Curiouser and curiouser . . . The lens-like affair and light emitter 
were connected via slick-coated wires to a heavy, very dense gadget 
hidden under the woman's coat. It resembled the voice recorder only in 
the sense that both were housed in compact boxes of some unknown 
material. Her device had metal parts, however, buttons and levers, and 
a strangely textured surface along one side that resembled a dark 
window, but there was nothing to see through it. In fact, it wasn't 
even transparent, the way the hinged lid of the voice recorder was. 
 
Lachley found another of the stiff, strange cards in her pockets, along 
with a surprising amount of cash, a tiny mirror and other personal 
grooming implements, and a variety of oddments to which he could 
ascribe no purpose whatever. Her clothing was perfectly ordinary stuff: 
a cheap if substantial coat, heavy woolen skirt and bodice, worn over 
petticoats and combinations. Knitted stockings, stout and well-made 
shoes for walking. A heavy chemise under the bodice . . . 
 
And under that, a garment the likes of which he'd never seen. Straps 
and smooth cups of some stretchy black substance, fastened snugly 
around her breasts, clearly meant to support her anatomy in a fashion 
superior to any female garments he'd ever seen, and he'd had enough 
sisters, growing up, plus several hundred female patients who visited 

his surgery, to know whereof he spoke. "What the devil is it made of? 
It isn't latex rubber, yet it's very like rubber, and exceptionally 
well crafted." 
 
"C'n I rip her?" Maybrick's voice came from nearby, dulled by the drug, 
sleepy. 
 
"No, James. She's mine." He glanced around to find the drugged merchant 
swaying on his feet. "Come here, James, you'd best lie down and rest." 
He dragged the unconscious, half-naked woman to one side, making room 
on the long work bench for Maybrick to stretch out. Ignoring the woman 
for several minutes, Lachley concentrated on taking Maybrick into a 
deep trance to erase any possibility of Maybrick's mentioning him or 
the bizarre devices they'd found tonight, when he returned home and 
scribbled out his diary entries. 
 
"When will you be able to return to London, James?" he murmured. 
 
"Not sure . . . long time . . . business . . ." 
 
"Dammit, we have to find the Welsh woman in Miller's Court and 
eliminate her," Lachley muttered, "the sooner the better. Very well, 
James, the next time you return to London, you will locate a woman in 
Miller's Court for me, one who speaks Welsh. She is the woman you will 
kill next." 
 
Maybrick's drugged face changed, coming alive with a hunger Lachley 
recognized very well, now. "I want to rip her . . . I'll slash her 
face, the faithless whore, cut off her breasts, kiss them when I've cut 
them off . . ." 
 
"Later, James! You may do all of that, the next time you return to 
London." Maybrick's eyes were closing again, his breaths deepening. 
"Later . . ." 
 
"Sleep, James," Lachley muttered. "When you wake, you will return to 
Liverpool. You will have no memory of me at all, not until I send you a 
telegram. Only then will you recall my name, this place. Sleep, James, 
and dream of ripping the whore in Miller's Court . . ." 
 
The drugged merchant slept. 
 
That nasty little chore out of the way, Lachley returned his attention 
to the woman at the other end of his work bench. It was time his 
mysterious prisoner woke up. He needed to question her, but she would 
not be likely to cooperate with the men who'd killed her companion. The 
dead man probably wasn't her husband, given the absence of any wedding 
ring on her hands, but they were clearly connected somehow, so he would 
have to take steps to ensure her compliance. He prepared another 
draught of the drug he'd given Maybrick, then roused her with water 
splashed into her face and gentle slaps across the cheeks. 
 
"Wake up, now . . ." 
 
She stirred, moaned softly. Gaslight glinted along her dark blond hair 
and fair complexion. She was a pretty little thing, with wide and 
frightened blue eyes that gradually opened. For a long moment, 

confusion held those eyes perfectly senseless. Then memory stirred 
sharply and an indrawn shriek broke loose. She focused on him, cowered 
away, tried to get her hands under her, and belatedly discovered the 
ropes on her wrists. 
 
"Hold still," Lachley told her, "before you fall off the edge of the 
bench." 
 
A tiny whimper broke free. He lifted her head and felt tremors ripping 
through her as he pressed the rim of the cup to her lips. "Drink this." 
 
"No . . . please . . ." 
 
"Drink it!" She struggled feebly, no match for his strength. With the 
simple expediency of pinching shut her nostrils, he forced the drug 
down her throat. She coughed, gagged, then swallowed it. Lachley 
stroked her hair gently. "There, that wasn't so bad. Don't bother to 
fight me, pet, you're not going anywhere. I haven't poisoned you," he 
added with a wry smile. 
 
She trembled, biting a lip, and tried to hide her face. "Please, don't 
kill me . . ." 
 
"Kill you? Oh, no, my dear, I've far more interesting things in mind 
for you." The shuddering gulp of air she dragged down left him 
chuckling. "Now, then, my dear, the drug I've just given you will make 
you very sleepy. By the way, would you mind terribly telling me your 
name?" She lay trapped against him, shaking, and didn't answer. He drew 
a fingertip down her wet cheek. "All right, then, we'll wait a bit, 
until the drug's taken hold. Terribly sorry about your friend, you 
know. James was quite beyond himself this evening." The woman's tears 
came faster and her breaths went ragged. Curiosity prompted his next 
question. "Was he your lover?" 
 
She shook her head. "No." 
 
"Your brother, perhaps?" 
 
"No . . ." 
 
"What, then?" 
 
"B-business partner." Her eyelids had begun to droop. 
 
"What sort of business, my dear?" 
 
"Journalists . . ." A faint sigh of sound. 
 
Lachley frowned. Journalists? Penny-dreadful journalists? What was the 
world coming to, when women presumed to enter a sordid profession like 
newspaper muckraking? The entire world was unravelling these days, with 
women demanding suffrage and entering medical training at university, 
becoming doctors, for God's sake, setting themselves up with 
typewriting machines as secretaries, a fine and estimable man's 
profession. Women would turn the job of personal secretary into a 
mockery, offering their sexual services, no doubt, breaking up the 
homes and marriages of perfectly respectable businessmen. Society was 

disintegrating and women were largely at fault. "What newspaper do you 
work for? Or do you write for some absurd women's magazine?" 
 
"Newspaper . . ." Her eyes had closed completely. "London New Times." 
 
New Times? He'd never heard of it. Hardly surprising, though, new penny 
dreadfuls hit the market every month, competing for readership and 
advertisements. "What were you doing in the sewer?" 
 
"Following you . . ." 
 
A chill chased down his back. Well, of course she'd been following him, 
how else would she and her partner have found their way down here? 
 
"What did you come here for?" 
 
A tiny, fleeting smile. "Going to win the Carson Prizec . . . in 
historical photojournalism . . . nobody else had the guts to try it, 
following the Ripper . . ." 
 
For a long moment, Lachley stood dumbstruck. The Ripper? She knew of 
the letter he'd sent out? The one the Central News Agency had not yet 
made public? He'd expected the newspaper to print the Dear Boss letter 
immediately, but the dratted editor had clearly held it back and might 
well have sent it to the police. Perhaps she'd seen the letter at the 
Central News Agency office, spying for her own publication? Then the 
rest of what she'd said sank in. Historical photojournalism? He'd never 
heard of such a profession, any more than he'd ever heard of a Carson 
Prize, whatever that was. Clearly, winning it was important enough to 
risk her life for it. "Historical photojournalism?" he echoed blankly. 
"Are you a photographer, then?" 
 
Perhaps that device she'd been carrying was some sort of camera? 
 
"Oh, yes, a very good photographer. Dominica Nosette, most famous 
photographer in the world . . ." 
 
Lachley indulged a wry smile, at that. He'd never heard of the bloody 
bitch. 
 
"Videotape's going to make me rich," she sighed. "Fools on the Ripper 
Watch Team, all those famous criminologists and historians, they don't 
know anything . . . too cowardly to try what I did." 
 
Ripper Watch Team? This sounded deuced ominous. "What did you try?" he 
asked softly. 
 
Another fleeting smile. "Hid in Dutfield's Yard, of course, waited for 
you to bring Liz Stride there. And we hid again in Mitre Square, behind 
that high fence. They put their hidden cameras up and filmed it from 
the vault, but you can't get a decent story hiding in a cellar halfway 
across London. You have to get right out where he's going to strike 
next . . ." 
 
The room spun as the implications of her babbling story sank in. She'd 
known exactly where to hide! Had known where to watch them kill Stride 
and Eddowes! Had known in advance! It wasn't possible, how could anyone 

know where he and Maybrick were going to be, when they hadn't known, 
themselves, where they would encounter the prostitutes? They hadn't 
even realized Catharine Eddowes had been released from Bishopsgate 
Police Station, not until they'd run across her on Duke Street. Yet 
others knew, she'd said, had put up cameras in advance, to photograph 
him and Maybrick . . . others who sat in a vault of some sort halfway 
across London . . . 
 
John Lachley seized her chin, shaking her hard. "Explain! How did you 
know where I would be?" 
 
She blinked slowly. "Everybody knows. Ripper's a famous case. Most 
famous murder mystery in the last two centuries . . . and I'm going to 
solve it, have solved it! When I go back to the station, to my own 
time, I'll be famous, and rich, I've got videotapes of Jack the Ripper 
. . . both of them . . . who'd have guessed it was two men?" 
 
Lachley stood shaking. She was babbling, out of her head. Had to be . . 
. 
 
"All those idiots," she was murmuring, "thinking it was Prince Eddy or 
his tutor, or that barrister who drowned himself or Sir William Gull. 
They've been arguing over who it was for the last hundred-fifty years . 
. . even thought it might've been some time traveller using the 
Britannia Gate . . ." 
 
John Lachley stared at the raving woman, seriously considering whether 
she had taken leave of her senses or if he had taken leave of his. Time 
traveller? A century and a half, arguing over his identity? She wasn't 
a journalist, she was an escapee from a lunatic asylum somewhere on the 
fringes of London . . . 
 
Then something she'd said hit home. 
 
The gate! Ianira, the woman who had known so much about him, had 
babbled endlessly about a mysterious gate. Was she, too, some sort of 
traveller in time, who had come to hunt him? He reeled at the 
implications. His gaze rested on the heavy box he'd taken from her 
coat, with its trailing wires and tubes and cylinders hidden in her 
bonnet, and frowned. He picked it up, then shook the woman. "Look at 
this." Her eyelids fluttered for a moment before opening. "Tell me what 
this is." 
 
"My camera. Digital videocamera, best in the business . . ." 
 
Videocamera? Latin for I see? 
 
"Show me how it operates!" He loosened the ropes on her wrists, braced 
her in a sitting position and leaned her against him. She fumbled the 
camera into her lap and fiddled with controls. "See? This is what I 
recorded tonight." She tried to hold the camera up, but couldn't lift 
her arms. He took it from her -- and let out a yell. The strangely 
textured surface along one side was moving. Pictures flickered across 
it, in color, showing Maybrick bent over Catharine Eddowes, hacking her 
to pieces . . . 
 
Dear God! How the devil could such a tiny little box have captured them 

in pictures like this, color pictures, moving pictures? He pressed the 
controls she had manipulated and the box whirred softly, the pictures 
flashing with such speed he couldn't follow the motion. People racing 
backwards, colors flashing and rippling across the surface, a blur of 
sight and confusion. When he fumbled at the controls again, hands 
shaking, the motion slowed abruptly. He found himself staring at a 
place straight out of nightmare. Vast open rooms, with whole buildings 
inside, hundreds of tiny people moving about the floor and climbing 
staircases made of metal, insanely colored lights glowing in strange 
shapes. "What is this place?" he demanded, voice shaking. 
 
She blinked slowly and focused on the camera he held. "Shangri-La 
Station," she murmured. "The time terminal . . ." 
 
Lachley drew a whole series of deep breaths, gulping down the damp air, 
gradually steadied his shaking nerves. "You," he said slowly, 
enunciating each word with care, "are from my future?" 
 
"Had to come down time, through the gate, to catch the Ripper, to 
photograph him . . ." 
 
He didn't really believe it, didn't want to believe it, such things 
were fantasy, the maunderings of popular authors like that Frenchman 
Jules Verne. Yet he was holding a camera that no craftsman in the 
British Empire could possibly have constructed, made of things Lachley 
had never seen or heard of, and the bitch was drugged, couldn't be 
lying, not with what he'd given her. Excitement stirred to life, with 
tantalizing glimpses of a world which could offer him more power than 
anything he'd dreamed possible. "Eddy," he whispered, "tell me about 
Eddy. Prince Albert Victor. When does he become king?" 
 
"Poor Prince Eddy," she sighed, eyes closing again. "Only four more 
years . . . so young . . . 1892 . . ." 
 
Lachley began to tremble in a wild excitement. Four years? Eddy would 
be crowned king in only four more years? Dear God, what was going to 
happen, that would kill both Queen Victoria and the Prince of Wales? 
Bertie was healthy as an ox and Victoria, herself, likely to live for 
another decade. "What happens?" he demanded, breathless now, "What 
happens in 1892?" 
 
"Influenza. Epidemic of '91-'92. Poor Eddy, he'd just been engaged to 
be married, named Duke of Clarence, whole life ahead of him, and he's 
killed by influenza. Victoria was heartbroken, his parents inconsolable 
. . ." 
 
The room lurched under his feet, swaying and whirling in mad circles. 
Dead of influenza? Never crowned? It couldn't be, he'd worked too hard, 
invested everything, spent five weeks in hell, tracking down Eddy's 
God-cursed letters to protect him, to ensure the ascension to the 
throne. Had done murder after stinking murder to keep Eddy safe, so he 
could become king, to ensure himself the power Lachley craved, the 
safety of wealth and control over the political future of an empire . . 
. 
 
And Eddy was to be killed by a stupid influenza epidemic? 
 

Lachley began to laugh, the sound wild and high, echoing off the bricks 
of the vaulted ceiling. He gripped the impossible camera in both hands 
and laughed until the sound choked him, until he could gasp out, "How 
do you get back? To your own time?" 
 
"Through the gate," his drugged victim answered in a sleepy, reasonable 
tone. 
 
"Gate? What gate? Where?" He was still laughing, the sound of it edged 
with mania, a mind giving way under the stresses. 
 
"The Britannia Gate. In Battersea, Spaldergate House. But it doesn't 
open for days, not until the second of October, only opens every eight 
days . . ." Her head was lolling. "Won't go through it, though, not 
'til Mary Kelly's murdered on November ninth. . . I'll take my 
videotapes back, then, I'm sure to win the Kit Carson Prize . . ." 
 
Another spate of laughter broke loose. Mary Kelly? She must be the 
bitch in Miller's Court. What the bloody hell did he care about a 
scheming little whore with a letter written by a dullard who wouldn't 
even survive to wear the crown? Oh, God, it was too funny, here he 
stood in a satanic sanctuary devoted to the accrual of political and 
psychic power, with a dead time traveller on the floor, a drugged 
maniac on his work bench, and a babbling journalist planning to 
photograph a murder he no longer had any earthly reason to commit, with 
a total of four whores dead and cut to pieces for no reason whatever, 
and the decaying head of an adolescent Nancy-boy glaring at him from 
across the room and laughing at his shattered dreams . . . 
 
Only this woman had brought him a glimpse of something new, something 
which fired his imagination even more passionately than Eddy's 
prospects had done. A whole, immense new world to explore, in which to 
control little minds and live as a king, himself. He laughed again and 
stroked the woman's hair. Thoughts of Eddy fell away like flakes of 
rust from fine Damascus steel. Dominica, the self-important 
photojournalist, had done him a greater favor than she dreamed, 
tracking him through London's sewers. 
 
He left her tied to the great iron hook on his sacred oak tree, drugged 
into a stupor, and deposited the equally stupified James Maybrick on 
the floor of the sewer outside, then locked the door to Lower Tibor and 
began walking through the dark tunnels beneath London, laughing softly 
and wondering what he ought to wear when he carried Dominica through 
the Britannia Gate two days from now, dying of the wounds he would 
inflict shortly before arriving in Battersea? 
 
* * * 
 
Sometime early in the morning hours, Ianira Cassondra woke to gibbering 
terror. Dr. John Lachley had crashed into her bedroom, rousing her from 
drugged sleep with slaps, bruising her arms and shaking her. "Tell me 
about the gate!" he demanded, cracking his hand across her face. "Wake 
up, girl, and tell me about the gate! And the station! Where are you 
from?" 
 
Ianira shrank away from him, weeping and trembling. "I came through the 
Britannia Gate! From the station! Please . . ." 

 
"What station? What's it called?" 
 
"Shangri-La," she whispered, her bruised face aching where he'd struck 
her. Her wrists, crushed in his hard hands, were slowly purpling under 
his grip. "Time Terminal Eighty-Six -- " 
 
"Eighty-Six? My God, are there so many of them? Tell me about your 
world, woman!" 
 
She shook her head, desperate and confused. "I live on the station. I 
am not permitted to leave, for I am a down-timer -- " 
 
"A what?" His face, looming so close above her own, had twisted into an 
unholy mask of madness. She shrank back into the pillows, but he jerked 
her up again, roughly. "Explain!" 
 
"I was born in Ephesus!" she cried. "Came to the station through the 
Philospher's Gate! From Athens . . ." 
 
He went very still, staring down at her. Voice quiet, now, he said, 
"Tell me again where you were born. And when." 
 
"In Ephesus," she whispered. "We did not reckon the years in the same 
way, but the Philosopher's Gate opens into what the up-time world calls 
448 B.C., in the time of Pericles . . ." She trailed off at the look of 
naked shock in his eyes. 
 
"My God," he whispered. "It's true, then. Of course you kept saying you 
were born in Ephesus, when the city doesn't exist any longer." 
 
Ianira blinked up at him, terrified and confused. Clearly, he believed 
her. Why, she couldn't imagine. Something had obviously happened 
tonight . . . Ianira's eyes widened. The Ripper Watch! He must have 
encountered someone from the Ripper Watch tonight, must've seen 
something that had left him convinced of the reality of time travel. 
John Lachley's wild eyes focused slowly on her bruised face. He smiled, 
stroking her hair possessively. "My dear, tell me about the people 
trying to kill you." 
 
She tried to explain about the up-time world's Lady of Heaven Temples, 
the Ansar Majlis terrorists who had sworn to destroy the Templars and 
her family, about Jenna's murderous father and the men he'd sent to 
butcher his own daughter. 
 
"Then you are quite important," Lachley mused. "Far more important than 
that brainless bitch I left in Lower Tibor. A woman journalist, whoever 
heard of such a thing?" Ianira closed her eyes to shut out horror. He'd 
not only encountered members of the Ripper Watch Team, he'd kidnapped 
them. "Yes," he was murmuring, "I do believe you're far more important 
than Miss Nosette. Very well, my course is clear. I'd better do that 
bloody lecture tomorrow night, curse it, to lull suspicion. I shan't 
risk drawing attention to myself over those wretched murders on the eve 
of stepping into the future!" He shook her again. "Tell me about the 
gate. What time it opens. That Nosette woman said something about 
Spaldergate House, in Battersea." 
 

"I don't know what it looks like," Ianira quavered, straining away from 
him. "They smuggled me out of the station in a steamer trunk. I know 
the gate opens in the garden behind the house, but I don't know what 
time. It is in the evening, always, every eight days." 
 
"Ah. Miss Nosette can tell me precisely when, before I dispose of her. 
Very well, my dear," he pressed a kiss to her brow. "I do believe," he 
said quietly, "you had best be moved for safekeeping. I don't wish to 
risk having you escape, my pet. Eddy has proven himself worthless as 
dross, but you, my dear, will take me into a place of power beyond 
anything I imagined." 
 
She gasped, staring up into his mad grey eyes. "You can't go to the 
station!" 
 
He laughed softly. "Nonsense. I'm John Lachley, I can do anything. The 
police haven't a clue that I've helped butcher four destitute whores in 
the East End, controlling Maybrick's pathetic little mind. Miss Nosette 
tells me your world has puzzled over my identity for a century and a 
half. If I can accomplish that in London, with no more than I've had to 
work with, I will become a god on your station!" He smiled at her 
through dark, insane eyes. "And you, my pet, will be my goddess . . ." 
 
She fought him when he drugged her again. 
 
And wept hopelessly when he carried her down the stairs, wrapped in a 
cloak, carrying her toward the nightmarish room she had seen in 
visions, the brick room beneath the streets where he had carried out at 
least one murder and had planned so many others. Somehow, she must find 
a way to stop this madman before he reached the station. Down-time men 
whose minds were sound and whole sometimes went mad when they first 
entered a time terminal and confronted the shocking realities of the 
up-time world. What John Lachley would do, once he reached TT-86 . . . 
 
She faded into unconsciousness, still trying to discover some way to 
stop him. 
 
* * * 
 
Jenna tried to ignore the ugly roar of voices in the street just 
outside their little house, but there was no escaping the angry sound 
of brawling out there. The bells of Christ Church, Spitalfields, 
sounded bleak and hopeless this morning, calling worshippers to a rainy 
Sunday service, while the grim news flashed like wildfire from house to 
house: two women butchered within half an hour of one another, 
confounding the police of two separate jurisdictions and shocking the 
entire city of London, this time, not just the East End. And that at a 
time when most residents here had believed themselves beyond further 
shock. 
 
Noah had gone out to buy fresh-caught herrings for their breakfast, 
refusing to let Jenna set foot into the angry mob outside. Jenna was 
determined to cook breakfast today, however, so she bent over the 
monstrous, coal-fired stove in the kitchen, trying to take in Marcus' 
instructions on how to operate it, when Noah Armstrong rocketed into 
the house. 
 

"I've got a lead," the detective said without preamble, dumping a 
wrapped packet of fish onto the kitchen table with a thump. 
 
Jenna and Marcus jerked around. "What lead?" Jenna demanded 
breathlessly. 
 
"There's to be a lecture tomorrow night at the Egyptian Hall, on 
Theosophy and the occult sciences. The speaker's a doctor, claims to be 
a mesmeric physician. I ran across a man talking about him when I was 
coming back from the costermonger's. It seems the doctor who's giving 
the lecture came up from Whitechapel, was born in Middlesex Street, 
turned to mediumism and the occult. I don't know if this is our man, 
but the doctor who attacked you, Jenna, reacted violently to whatever 
Ianira said in trance. So maybe he had occult connections. We're 
certainly running out of leads, trying to trace ordinary doctors. And 
with the Ripper terror coming to a boil out there, I'm not sure it's 
entirely safe just now, asking about physicians and surgeons. The 
police are looking for a doctor connected to the Ripper, after all, and 
poor Dr. Mindel has barricaded himself into the house, terrified of the 
mobs. Frankly, I think it's worth a shot, going to see this Lachley 
fellow." 
 
Jenna's mouth had dried out like thistle-down, all the liquid in her 
body rushing to her palms, which she wiped unsteadily on her trousers. 
"Yes. I agree. I'm coming with you, Noah." The detective started to 
protest. "No, hear me out! I can identify him faster than you can. If 
he's giving a lecture, there'll be a crowd, which means I can watch 
without him noticing me. If he's the right man, we can trace him to 
where he lives, maybe even find Ianira there." 
 
Noah's lips thinned. Clearly the detective wanted to argue. Then a sigh 
broke loose. "You're right, dammit. But I don't like putting you in 
harm's way for any reason." 
 
"I'll go armed," Jenna muttered. "For bear." 
 
"I, too, will go," Marcus interjected. "Mrs. Mindel has offered to 
watch the girls if I ever need to leave them alone. Ianira is my wife. 
I will go to search for her." 
 
Again, the detective clearly considered arguing, then gave in. "All 
right," Noah groused. "If things do get sticky, another gun hand will 
be welcome. God knows, you learned quickly enough when I gave you those 
shooting lessons after that mess in Colorado." 
 
"You taught me well," Marcus said quietly. "I have not forgotten how to 
use the revolver I bought in Chicago." 
 
Noah nodded. "We'll all go armed. And we'll need better clothes than 
these. The Egyptian Hall is a respectable place. If we show up in East 
End castoffs, they might not even let us through the door." 
 
Jenna frowned. "The only good suit I've got is what I was wearing the 
night the gate opened. It's got bloodstains all over it. The last thing 
I want to do is show my face in public with blood on my clothes. 
Somebody'll take me for Jack the Ripper. I had decent stuff in my 
luggage, but I had to abandon all my baggage at the Picadilly Hotel." 

 
"The lecture's not until tomorrow night, so there's plenty of time to 
pick up new clothes. For all of us, if it comes to that. Fortunately, 
it's market day in Petticoat Lane, so there'll be plenty of new suits 
to pick and choose from." 
 
Jenna nodded. "Good. I'll get my money belt out. I changed a lot of 
currency at the station. We can use that to pay for everything." 
 
"Very well. Let's get over to Petticoat Lane, before the best bargains 
are gone." 
 
Wordlessly, they set out to buy yet another set of disguises. 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Ten 
 
Margo had never placed a wire tap before. 
 
Watching Inspector Conroy Melvyn work that morning in near darkness, 
her admiration for the up-time Scotland Yard detective's skill soared. 
He placed the tap into the telephone lines leading into the Home Office 
in a very short time, then rejoined her on the pavement. "Got it," he 
grinned. "Now when the queen telephones the Home Office this afternoon 
from Scotland, expressing shock over the double murders, we'll get a 
recording of it." 
 
"That's great!" Margo grinned, wondering how much money the residuals 
for up-time broadcast of the historic phone call might land in her bank 
account. "What's next?" Whatever it was, it wouldn't be nearly as hair-
raising as recovering their hidden equipment from the murder sites had 
been. Thank God the Victorian police hadn't yet carried the forensic 
science of crime-scene evidence very far. Not only had they failed to 
put a quarantine on the murder scenes, they'd allowed surgeons and 
coroners to disturb the bodies, wash away the blood, and Sir Charles 
Warren had even erased the chalked graffiti over on Goulston Street 
after Maybrick had slashed it across a stairwell landing. Margo could 
almost understand the reasoning behind the erasure, given the anti-
Semitic slur Maybrick had written and the already explosive mood of the 
East End. To their credit, the City police had argued about it, hotly, 
finally forced to give in to the Metropolitan police decision to erase 
it before it could be seen or even photographed, since Goulston Street 
lay in Metropolitan Police jurisdiction. 
 
"What next, indeed?" Inspector Melvyn mused scratching his chin 
thoughtfully. "I think, my dear, I'd like to be on hand at the Central 
News Agency when the Saucy Jack postcard arrives." 
 
"Do you want to try videotaping Michael Kidney when he shows up at the 
Leman Police Station, accusing the PC on duty for his lover's murder?" 
Margo sympathized with the man. Poor Michael Kidney. He really had 
loved Elizabeth Stride, despite their stormy relationship. 
 
"Might be a bit of a risk," the inspector frowned. 

 
"More risky than recovering that equipment from Mitre Square?" Margo 
laughed nervously. "Or tapping the Home Office telephone lines?" 
 
The inspector grinned. "Well, now you mention it . . ." 
 
"All right, we'll try to get a video of Mr. Kidney. I'll change into 
East End togs before we go." 
 
"Right." 
 
They set out at a brisk walk for Spaldergate House. Malcolm was already 
in the East End, with Pavel Kostenka and Shahdi Feroz and Doug 
Tanglewood, studying the crowd dynamics on the streets. Margo shivered, 
remembering the explosive riot the day Polly Nichols' mutilations had 
been discovered, and was selfishly glad Malcolm had assigned her to 
Conroy Melvyn, rather than the Whitechapel group. 
 
The sun rose while they walked westward down Whitehall where, tomorrow 
morning, a decapitated, legless, armless woman's torso would be 
discovered in a vaulted cellar beneath the New Scotland Yard building, 
still under construction. Tonight, Malcolm and Conroy Melvyn would try 
to place miniaturized camera equipment in the cellar to see if they 
could catch the perpetrator of the so-called Whitehall torso mystery 
and settle once and for all whether that anonymous victim had also 
fallen prey to the Ripper's knife. 
 
As they walked westward, early morning paper criers were already on the 
streets, hawking the morning's shocking news. Church bells tolled from 
St. Paul's Cathedral, from Westminster Abbey and churches Margo didn't 
even know the names of, the sounds of the bells deep and sonorous and 
inexpressibly lonely in the early light. They paused and bought copies 
of the papers, listening to the gentlemen who gathered on street 
corners, men who spoke in hushed, angry tones about the horror in Mitre 
Square, taping the conversations with hidden microphones and the 
miniaturized cameras in their scouting logs. 
 
"The Financial News is offering a three-hundred-pound reward for this 
fiend's capture," one gentleman muttered as they passed. 
 
"The Lord Mayor's offering five hundred pounds," another said, his 
heavily-jowled face flushed with anger. "The government jolly well 
should've done so ages ago, before six women were cut to pieces, four 
of them in as many weeks! That Lusk fellow, with the Whitechapel 
Vigilance Committee, asked just yesterday for a reward to be offered, 
officially, by the government. And they turned him down! Now we've two 
more women dead . . ." 
 
"Sir Alfred Kirby telephoned me to say he planned to offer one hundred 
pounds sterling and fifty militia men to help apprehend the beast, 
asked if I would volunteer. My wife had a fainting spell at the notion 
of me hunting such a madman, wouldn't hear of it . . ." 
 
" -- said he'd heard a chap named Thomas Coram found a bloodstained 
knife in Whitechapel Road. Ruddy thing was nine inches long! You could 
put a knife like that straight through a woman, God help the poor 
creatures. Sir Charles Warren's at his wit's end, trying to 

investigate, what with the City Police demanding cooperation and 
frothing at evidence destroyed . . ." 
 
Conroy Melvyn murmured, "Poor Sir Charles. I feel for the chap, I do. 
Trying to tackle a thing like the Ripper killings, without the faintest 
notion of psychopathic serial-killer profiling or decent forensic 
science. This case breaks his career. I shouldn't want to try 
investigating such a thing in my jurisdiction, I can tell you that." 
 
"I wonder what the coroner will do at the inquest for Elizabeth 
Stride?" 
 
He shook his head grimly. "Not enough, clearly. Still, I intend to be 
in Cable Street when the inquest opens. Vestry Hall will be jam-packed, 
right enough." 
 
Margo sighed. Another inquest. With descriptions of wounds and witness 
testimony . . . She'd almost rather be with Malcolm in the explosive 
East End, than trapped in a room full of shouting reporters after the 
gruesome details of murder and mutilation. "You know, one thing has me 
puzzled," she said at length. "Someone wrote an entry in the Swedish 
Church Parish Register that Elizabeth Stride had been murdered by Jack 
the Ripper. They dated the entry September thirtieth, the morning she 
was killed. Yet the name Jack the Ripper wasn't released publicly until 
today, October the first." 
 
"I know," Melvyn sighed. "Pity we can't be everywhere, isn't it? But 
even with a team of us working and you lot of guides helping, we can't 
solve every mystery connected with the Ripper." 
 
"Maybe someone who worked at the Central News Agency, who'd seen the 
Dear Boss letter, wrote it?" 
 
"Or someone backdated the entry by a day," the police inspector mused. 
"But we'll never know, eh? What drives me batty is not identifying this 
bloke working with Maybrick. We've come up empty handed at every turn, 
trying to trace the blighter." 
 
"Well, somebody's got to know him. Dominica Nosette and Guy Pendergast 
figured out who he is, I'm willing to bet on it. Whatever William 
Butler Yeats and his friend said, that night at the Carlton Club, 
Pendergast figured out who the mystery doctor was." 
 
"Or maybe he just saw the bloody chap and followed him," Melvyn 
muttered, flushing with embarrassment over the affair. The police 
inspector had not taken it well, that a reporter had given him the slip 
while he'd been focused on a famous poet. 
 
"Maybe. That might mean he could have an occult connection, if he was 
there on the night of the Theosophical meeting. Or even if he wasn't 
there, because Malcolm said you were discussing Celtic religions and 
other stuff that would interest someone like Yeats." 
 
"Bloody hell . . ." The inspector's footsteps faltered as a look of 
surprise crossed his face. 
 
"What?" Margo asked. "What did I say?" 

 
"Perhaps nothing. Perhaps everything." The policeman was staring at the 
newspaper they'd just bought. "It's this." He tapped the newspaper, 
then opened it hastily, skimming one finger down the newsprint columns. 
"There was a lecture notice on the front page . . ." he muttered. 
"Jumped out at me just as you spoke about Celtic religions. There! Got 
it." 
 
He held the newspaper open so she could see the article. 
 
"Dr. John Lachley," Margo read out loud. "SoHo scholar of the occult, 
mesmeric physician . . ." Her eyes widened. She clutched at the 
policeman's sleeve. "He keeps a surgery in Cleveland Street, in a house 
he calls Tibor." 
 
Conroy Melvyn stared at her, mouth coming adrift. "My God! The same 
place our chap told Maybrick to meet him!" Then he frowned. "Cleveland 
Street, though? That's a bit of a distance to walk, with bloodstains on 
one's sleeves. Still, it's a ruddy good clue. Good job, eh what? Jolly 
well done, Miss Smith!" 
 
She grinned. "You saw the article, not me." 
 
"Which I would have failed to notice if you hadn't been reminding me of 
what I'd heard that night in the Carlton Club. I say, let's get back to 
Spaldergate post haste. I can hardly wait to spring the news on the 
rest of the team!" 
 
Margo laughed. "Me, either. And wait until Malcolm hears!" 
 
"Mr. Moore," Conroy Melvyn said, stepping to the kerb and hailing a 
hansom, "will quite likely insist on attending tonight's lecture." 
 
"Hah! You couldn't keep him away with wild horses. Me, either!" 
 
"Well said. Now, then . . . Battersea, cabbie," he said, handing Margo 
up into the cab which had drawn to a halt beside them, "Octavia Street. 
And no tricks, my good man, I've consulted Mogg's for the fare!" 
 
" 'ere, now, guv'nor," the cabbie protested, "I'm an honest man, so I 
am!" 
 
Margo settled in with a grin. She'd learned the hard way to consult 
Mogg's map of cab fares, to avoid being cheated blind by the cabbies. 
Then they were rolling down Victoria Embankment at a rush, headed West 
for Battersea Park and an unexpected break in the Ripper case. She 
couldn't take full credit for the discovery, but glowed nonetheless. 
Just wait until Malcolm heard! And Kit! 
 
Maybe she was cut out for this job, after all! 
 
* * * 
 
By the following evening, Jenna had been transformed, as had Noah and 
Marcus, by the acquisition of decent quality gentlemen's clothing, the 
sort a middle-class businessman might wear. They left the girls in the 
care of Mrs. Mindel, making certain that Dr. Mindel was armed and knew 

how to use a revolver, in case of trouble from the mobs, then walked to 
Threadneedle Street, the financial district in the heart of The City, 
to find a cab. It was impossible to hire a hansom cab anywhere in 
Spitalfields -- not only were the residents too poor to afford the 
fares, cabbies were leery of robbery from East End gangs. They finally 
found a cab rank near the Bank of England and hired the conveyance at 
the front of the line. Jenna crowded in with Marcus and Noah for a 
jolting ride up to Picadilly and shivered at the memory of her last 
visit to those environs. She'd very nearly died, that night in 
Picadilly. No sense dwelling on it, she told herself firmly. Even if I 
am looking for the man who shot me in cold blood. She couldn't quite 
suppress a shiver, however, and earned a long, worried look from Noah, 
which she returned with a forced smile. When the cab finally halted, 
Jenna climbed down on shaking legs, hoping no one recognized her as the 
individual who'd jumped from a window in the Picadilly Hotel after a 
bloody shootout. It was one thing, hiding in anonymous Spitalfields. It 
was far more frightening, coming into a part of London where she'd 
nearly been murdered -- twice. 
 
"There's the Egyptian Hall," Noah said quietly. 
 
The building was tall, its face decorated by elaborate stonework, 
including a winged scarab above a tall, rectangular window which was 
crowned by an ornate pediment. A sign above the door proclaimed the 
premises to be the Egyptian Hall, museum and meeting room. Down the 
street, on Picadilly's south side, she could see the immense facade of 
Fortnum and Mason's famous store, and down the other way, the imposing 
edifice which housed the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours. 
Along the north side stood the Burlington Arcade, bustling with 
fashionable shoppers going home for the evening. Shopkeepers were busy 
closing up for the night; the building loomed above them, dark and 
forbidding in its shadows next to Burlington House Mansion. Jenna 
swallowed nervously as fine carriages rattled past, drawn by well-
groomed, shining horses flinging their hooves out smartly. Wealthy 
gentlemen strolled the pavements. Silver-headed canes gleamed in the 
twilight, silk top hats nodded like mobile chimney stacks, and heavy 
gold watches and fobs glinted as their owners checked the time. The 
ladies on their arms wore thick silks and fur-trimmed coats over 
swaying bustles; ostrich and egret feathers drooped from exquisite hats 
and fur muffs in fox, mink, and black sable protected their hands from 
the cold air. In this exquisitely upscale area, Jenna felt very 
downscale, drab and vulnerable in her middle-class wool and fake mutton 
chops. 
 
Then Noah was leading them into the Egyptian Hall, buying tickets to 
the lecture and the exhibits. Signs explained the origins of the 
collections, which had belonged to naturalist and antiquarian William 
Bullock, who had built the hall in 1812. Faded photographs of General 
Tom Thumb, the American dwarf who had come here for a wildly popular 
exhibit, hung on the wall near the entrance. Other gentlemen were 
arriving for the talk, accompanied by a few intrepid and curious 
ladies. A sign with the subject of the evening's lecture directed them 
to the meeting room, where they found a fair crowd gathered. Voices 
washed through Jenna's awareness as she peered anxiously at faces, but 
she saw no one resembling the man who'd tried to murder her outside the 
Royal Opera. She consulted the thick, silver-plated pocket watch she'd 
purchased earlier in the afternoon, and frowned. The lecture was due to 

begin at any moment . . . 
 
"Where the deuce is Lachley?" a man just behind her complained. " 
'Tisn't like him to be late!" 
 
"Perhaps," another man's voice drawled, "he's preoccupied with that 
ravishing creature he took in, the other week? If I'd rescued a girl 
that lovely and had taken her into my home, I might be a bit 
distracted, as well!" 
 
"Is it immoral liaisons you're insinuating, Crowley? Of Dr. Lachley?" 
The speaker's voice held a thick Irish lilt, tinged with anger. 
 
Jenna turned to find several gentlemen watching the two speakers. The 
first speaker, Crowley, shrugged. "Men will be men, after all. I don't 
doubt the good doctor's intentions in trying to help the poor creature. 
But what a comely little thing she was, even if she was half crazed. It 
would be a simple enough, after all, to take advantage of a lady in 
such distress." 
 
The other man, in his twenties, perhaps, with a fire-eaten look to his 
eyes, glared at Crowley. "You, sir, are contemptible! In Dublin, you 
would be publicly shamed for such slanderous sentiments!" 
 
"Easy, Yeats," another young man muttered. "Crowley's infamous for 
baiting people with his depraved ideas. Ignore him. We do." 
 
Crowley's eyes glinted with amusement. "Only a fool ignores the devil, 
sir." 
 
The young man shrugged. "You may bill yourself as the prophet of the 
anti-Christ, Mr. Crowley, but you're no devil. Unless, of course, it's 
you ripping up these poor souls in the East End? Hardly your style, I 
should think. Reading a black mass over them is more in your line." 
 
Several listening gentlemen gasped aloud, faces paling in shock, but 
Crowley merely smiled. "Perhaps you might join me, next time? No? Pity. 
Ah . . . Here's Lachley, at last." 
 
Jenna turned quickly toward the front of the meeting room . . . and 
lurched. For a long, terrifying moment, the entire room circled like a 
washing machine on spin cycle. She knew the man who'd appeared, who 
stepped up to the tall lectern. The last time she'd seen him, he'd 
levelled a pistol at her head and pulled the trigger. Her mind reeled, 
partly with the implications of the conversation they'd just overheard. 
If that's Lachley and Lachley's holding a young lady in his house, she 
can't be anyone but Ianira Cassondra! 
 
Dr. John Lachely was in a high state of agitation, Jenna realized as 
the spinning room steadied down. His color ran high and his dark eyes 
glinted with a touch of madness that left the fine hairs along Jenna's 
neck and arms standing erect. She clutched at Noah's arm. "It's him!" 
 
The detective gave her a sharp stare, then gripped Marcus by the arm 
and forcibly held him back. Ianira's husband had started forward, fists 
clenched. "Not here!" Noah cautioned sharply. "We'll sit through the 
lecture. Then we'll follow him home." 

 
Marcus, his own eyes a trifle wild, glared at Noah; then he glanced at 
the room full of eyewitnesses and subsided. "Very well," Marcus growled 
under his breath. "But if he has hurt her, I will kill him!" 
 
"I'll help you," Jenna muttered. "I owe that bastard a bullet through 
the skull!" 
 
"Keep your voice down!" Noah hissed. "And take a seat, for God's sake, 
the lecture's starting." 
 
Jenna found herself in a chair next to the young Irishman with the 
fire-eaten eyes, Mr. Yeats. The name was familiar, somehow, from long 
ago, she couldn't quite place where or why. Yeats sat glaring across 
the aisle at Crowley, who listened calmly to the opening of the lecture 
and ignored the Irishman's furious stare. Jenna sat wrapped in her own 
feverish thoughts, hardly paying attention to what Lachley said, and 
only stirred when Yeats' friend, the other dark-haired Irishman, 
muttered, "What on earth can be wrong with him? I've never heard such 
ramblings. He doesn't make proper sense, half the time." 
 
Yeats murmured, "I'm sure I don't know. I've never seen Dr. Lachley in 
such a state." 
 
Jenna frowned and concentrated more fully on what Lachley was saying. 
 
" . . . the Classical writers were notorious for confusing all things 
Celto-Gaelic with all things Germanic. I have been to Germany, to 
Hungary and places north. The taking of trophy skulls . . . drinking 
from them . . . rites of blood on oak trees . . ." Lachley's eyes were 
wild, his hands shaking visibly on the edges of the podium. He drew 
back from some hideous thought with evident difficulty and cleared his 
throat. "These sacrifices, yes, ancient Roman writers consistently 
erred. Attributed human sacrifice to ancient Celts, when such rites 
should more appropriately be laid at the feet of their savage and 
bloodthirsty northern neighbors. These Germanic tribes gave Caesar 
enormous difficulty, it is to be remembered. And Germanic rites and 
customs of the Viking period, it should be noted, included such 
barbaric practices as the blood eagle. A man would cut out a living 
victim's lungs and drape them across his back like an eagle's wings . . 
." 
 
Several women in the audience emitted cries of horror. Up at the 
lectern, Lachley's eyes, shining and wild with a sort of unholy 
pleasure, widened slightly at the shocked sounds coming from his 
audience. He calmed himself a little, settling into a more lucid frame 
of mind. "I beg pardon, ladies, but the subject is a most indelicate 
one. So, I cannot help but conclude that classical sources for Celtic 
barbarism and human sacrifice must be suspect. Their traditional 
enemies, the Romans, wished most profoundly to rule the Celts and thus 
cannot be trusted to have painted them with anything approaching 
honesty. 
 
"The Celtic peoples therefore have been seriously maligned for the past 
two thousand years. They have been held up to the world by their Roman 
enemies as barbarians who would slaughter an innocent victim, simply to 
read the oracles in his death throes. Maligned and slandered, the Celts 

have ever since been painted villainously, when their history and many 
accomplishments in law and the arts prove that their rightful place in 
history is among the most civilized and learned peoples of the world. 
Their ancient magical wisdom was very nearly destroyed by systematic 
genocide waged against the Celts' intellectual class by their 
conquerors. 
 
"This wisdom has now been recovered through the wood-carved ogham 
script, from hundreds of 'library sticks' bundled to form whole books, 
hidden away in Irish attics and cellars, and is revealed in its 
astonishing depth and power. This magical legacy of the Celtic peoples 
will certainly prove to the world at large that we, as Theosophists and 
students of the psychic sciences, owe a profound debt to the original 
inhabitants of the British Isles. We who look to the occult for 
spiritual guidance walk in the footsteps of true greatness and surely 
shall rule the world for centuries to come!" 
 
Lachley was trembling at the podium, eyes glowing with a hideous 
passion that left Jenna queasy and cold. He surveyed his audience, then 
gave a mocking little bow. "Thank you, this concludes my lecture for 
the evening." 
 
The applause was thunderous, the entire hall surging to its feet in a 
spontaneous ovation. Dr. John Lachley bathed in the glory of the 
moment, bowing and stepping back from the lectern, raising his hands in 
a show of humility which he was clearly far from feeling. His smile was 
almost manic as he stepped down and shook hands with luminaries from 
society and the arts, bowed over the hands of great society matrons and 
ladies of more dubious reputation, mystics and mediums who had come to 
hear him speak on the popular subject of Celtic occultism, allowed 
himself to be congratulated by journalists who wished to interview him 
. . . 
 
Jenna felt sick, trapped in the same room with him. "Noah, we have to 
find out where he lives." 
 
At her side, the young Irishman named Yeats gave a start and turned 
toward her. "Are you ill, sir?" he asked at once. "Dr. Lachley keeps a 
surgery in Cleveland Street, of course, but I daresay I wouldn't go 
near it. The man's raving, tonight. I've never seen him in such a 
state." 
 
Jenna took a risk. "Do you know anything about the girl that man 
Crowley was talking about?" 
 
Yeats frowned, his intense eyes turning frosty. "No. And I don't care 
to discuss filth with you, sir." 
 
Noah spoke up. "You misunderstand. Our friend, here," he nodded toward 
Marcus, "is searching for his wife. She was the victim of foul play. 
This gentleman," the detective nodded toward Jenna, "was escorting her 
from the docks the night of her arrival in London and was set upon, 
shot nearly to death. We are merely hoping that Dr. Lachley may help 
us. We've reason to believe he witnessed the lady's abduction. 
Cleveland Street, you said? Thank you, sir. We'll meet the good doctor 
there, no need to bother him now, while he's busy with the lecture 
audience." 

 
Noah hustled them out of the hall, rushing Jenna and Marcus through the 
darkened museum, its collection of oddities and antiquities looming 
like something out of a horror flick. They finally reached the street. 
Picadilly was brightly lit, jammed with carriages as the fashionable 
and wealthy of London took to the streets in search of diverting 
entertainment. "We'll have to reach his house before he returns," Noah 
said grimly. "She must be there. We'll break in and carry her out by 
force if the servants object. Hurry, there's a cab rank further along." 
 
Please, let this work, Jenna prayed. And let Ianira be all right . . . 
 
After three weeks in Dr. Lachley's mad care, Jenna didn't see how she 
could be. 
 
* * * 
 
Malcolm Moore enjoyed dressing to the nines, particularly when Margo 
was able to dress the part as his lady companion. She looked stunning 
in watered silk the color of pale lilacs, with several yards of skirt 
trailing down over a swaying bustle and her fiery hair augmented by a 
hairpiece from Connie Logan, which allowed her to imitate the upswept 
coiffeurs popular with stylish ladies. 
 
"My dear," he murmured as he handed her down from the gatehouse 
carriage to the pavement of Picadilly, "I shall be the envy of every 
gentleman who sees you." 
 
She blushed. "Nonsense, sir," she said, glancing toward Shahdi Feroz. 
 
Behind them, Inspector Conroy Melvyn was handing down the Ripper 
scholar, whose exotic beauty was so striking, she captured the 
attention of several passing gentlemen; but Dr. Feroz held far less 
appeal for Malcolm than Margo's fresh enthusiasm and sparkling, lively 
green eyes. "Nevertheless," he offered his arm, escorting her toward 
the Egyptian Hall, which stood opposite Bond Street's terminus, where 
their carriage had dropped them, "you are quite a fetching sight. 
Inspector," he turned to the policeman, "Madame Feroz, the lecture 
awaits." 
 
"Well," Margo smiled, glancing at Shahdi Feroz as they crossed 
Picadilly through heavy carriage traffic, "it is a relief from East End 
rags, isn't it?" 
 
Dr. Feroz chuckled. "Indeed, Miss Smith. A welcome relief." 
 
The police inspector grinned as Malcolm purchased tickets for the 
lecture. He and Melvyn escorted the ladies inside, where a sizeable 
crowd had already gathered. Frock-coated gentlemen and elegant ladies 
murmured pleasantries while they waited for the speaker to put in 
appearance. Malcolm steered the way toward a far corner, where he and 
Margo could watch newcomers while remaining unobserved, themselves. 
Conroy Melvyn and Shahdi Feroz strolled through the room, circulating 
through the crowd, speaking to such luminaries as Madame Blavatsky and 
filming the event through concealed cameras. They had been waiting for 
perhaps six or seven minutes when Margo clutched at Malcolm's arm, 
denting his fine woolen sleeve with her nails. "Look!" She was staring 

toward the entrance, where three gentlemen had just appeared. "My God, 
it's Marcus!" 
 
He frowned. "Surely you're mistaken?" One of the trio did, indeed, look 
very much like Ianira Cassondra's missing husband. Yet there was too 
much grey in his hair and he'd aged in other ways, with a deep-set look 
of fear and frustration etched into his features. Then Malcolm noticed 
the mutton-chopped gentleman at his side and stiffened. "Great Scott! 
That may or may not be Marcus, but the chap with him is most certainly 
Benny Catlin!" 
 
"It is, too, Marcus," she insisted stubbornly. "If somebody were trying 
to kill me and my whole family, I might've gone grey overnight, too! 
But what's he doing in London with Benny Catlin? And who's that guy 
with them?" 
 
"You do have your camera running, don't you?" Malcolm whispered, 
referring to the tiny digital videocamera hidden beneath Margo's 
elegant bustle, its wire snaking up her back to a miniature lens 
concealed in her brooch. 
 
"I turned it on while we were still in the carriage." When Malcolm 
started to move closer, she grasped his arm. "No!" 
 
He glanced down, surprised. 
 
"If Marcus spots you, wanna bet he'll bolt? He could've called on 
friends for help while he was still on the station, but he didn't. 
After everything that's happened, he'll be too terrified, Malcolm, to 
trust anyone." 
 
"Anyone except Benny Catlin," Malcolm growled. "I'd like to know the 
reason for that." 
 
"So would I. If they're in London, want to bet Ianira and the girls 
are, too?" 
 
"No bets," Malcolm shook his head. "But how the deuce did they slip 
through the Britannia without tickets?" 
 
"That Time Tours driver who was shot, up at the Picadilly Hotel, said 
Benny Catlin smuggled a woman through in his luggage. We've been 
assuming she was another student who couldn't get a ticket, or maybe 
that she and Benny were actually reporters. But what if that woman was 
Ianira Cassondra? And maybe Marcus and the girls were in some of the 
other trunks and got out before the police opened the luggage?" 
 
"However they got here," Malcolm said quietly, "the main question is 
why they would come with two gentlemen they hardly know. It doesn't 
look to me like Marcus is here against his will." 
 
"No, it doesn't look that way to me, either." 
 
"Oh, bother!" Malcolm said abruptly, noticing another newcomer. "That's 
all we need, tonight!" 
 
"What?" 

 
"Those gentlemen who just came in? Mr. William Butler Yeats and Mr. 
Bevin O'Downett. Poets over from Dublin. I know them both, slightly. 
Met them at the Carlton Club the night Guy Pendergast and Dominica 
Nosette vanished. Mr. O'Downett and I have scraped acquaintance before. 
I certainly don't want them to recognize me and draw attention while 
Marcus and Catlin are standing right there!" 
 
"Then sit down," Margo said reasonably. "You're less conspicuous in a 
chair than you are head-and-shoulders above me." 
 
Malcolm seated himself with alacrity, turning slightly in the chair so 
that he sat with his back to the group near the door. It was 
frustrating, having to sit there, unable to see what was happening, but 
Margo's eyes were sharp and she was recording the entire evening. She 
murmured, "Looks like Mr. Yeats is getting into an argument with 
somebody." 
 
Malcolm risked a quick glance. "Aleister Crowley. Good God, and there's 
Robert Donston Stevenson. Is the entire occult community of London here 
tonight?" 
 
"Wouldn't surprise me," Margo muttered. "Not to mention a real 
convention of Ripper suspects." Then she dug fingers into his shoulder. 
"Look!" She was staring raptly toward the front of the room. The 
speaker had just arrived to take the lectern. 
 
Malcolm gasped, staring at Jack the Ripper. "My God!" he whispered, 
voice hushed. "It is him!" 
 
"Don't look now," Margo hissed, "but Benny Catlin looks like he just 
saw a ghost!" 
 
Malcolm glanced around cautiously, just in time to see the unknown 
gentleman with Catlin grasp Marcus by the arm, holding him back 
forcibly. The ex-slave's fists were clenched. A look of murderous rage 
had swept his face. 
 
"What the devil is going on?" Malcolm wondered. "Why would Marcus be so 
angry with . . . Oh, dear God." He saw the possibility in a sudden 
tightening of his gut. 
 
"Oh, no," Margo protested, voice cracking slightly. "Not Ianira?" 
 
At the front of the room, Dr. John Lachley began his lecture. Margo sat 
down hastily as the rest of the assembly settled into chairs. Malcolm 
scarcely took in what Lachley was saying, as his mind was racing down 
unpleasant corridors of conjecture. How had Marcus and Ianira run afoul 
of Jack the Ripper? They must be living somewhere in the East End. Yet 
Ianira was not among the Ripper victims, all of whom were frightfully 
well known. 
 
Perhaps he'd killed her and they'd discovered the body, maybe buried 
her themselves, rather than risk the public scrutiny of a police 
investigation? Or perhaps -- and he swallowed hard, at the thought -- 
perhaps the Whitehall torso, due to be discovered on October 3rd, was 
Ianira? He tried to shut out such a vision, even in imagination, but he 

couldn't think what other reason Marcus might have for wanting to 
murder Jack the Ripper. 
 
A swift glance toward Margo prompted him to settle his arm about her 
shoulders. She was crying, silently, wiping away the tears with 
trembling hands. Clearly, her thoughts had wandered down the same 
hideous corridors his had just done. She looked up and tried to smile, 
then her face crumpled and she covered it with both hands, trying to 
compose herself. Malcolm clenched his jaw and stared coldly at Dr. John 
Lachley, loathing him with a far more personal hatred than he could 
ever have mustered for a mere psychotic serial killer. If this man had 
truly destroyed Ianira Cassondra . . . 
 
With a bleakness like death, Malcolm realized there wasn't a great deal 
anyone could do about it. Jack the Ripper could not be killed. Not 
until Mary Kelly had died, if then. It gradually occurred to Malcolm to 
wonder why Dominica Nosette and Guy Pendergast weren't here. Surely the 
reporters would've tried to film such a historic lecture, given by the 
Ripper? Blast those two! They'd trailed Maybrick last night, wandering 
into camera range at all three key sites: Dutfield's Yard, Mitre 
Square, and Goulston Street. Had they met with misfortune in the 
process of tailing Maybrick and Lachley? 
 
He narrowed his gaze, wondering abruptly why Dr. Lachley seemed so 
manic, up at the podium. Perhaps he was always a disjointed, rambling 
speaker? A glance at the crowd suggested otherwise. Several listeners 
looked puzzled, even concerned as they watched Lachley, who was 
literally trembling behind the lectern. A few were whispering among 
themselves, clearly wondering about it. 
 
Mysteries on top of mysteries . . . 
 
Lachley ended the lecture abruptly, a wild look in his eyes as the 
audience applauded, giving him a standing ovation that was, perhaps, 
out of line with the quality of his oration, but which was a strong 
testament to the popularity and power of the Celtic revival sweeping 
through nineteenth-century British society. Malcolm surged to his feet, 
as well, trying to keep Lachley in sight as the man stepped down into 
the crowd, shaking hands. Malcolm caught sight of Shahdi Feroz speaking 
briefly with Lachley and knew a moment's worry for her safety, despite 
Conroy Melvyn's presence at her side, then glanced back to where Marcus 
and the others sat . . . and swore aloud. 
 
"Bloody hell! They've gone!" 
 
"What?" 
 
"Marcus and Catlin! They've gone!" 
 
Malcolm shoved his way impatiently through the audience, trying to 
reach the door. Margo struggled gamely behind him. Malcolm reached the 
street well before she did, but Catlin and his group were nowhere in 
sight. Margo, out of breath from running in her form-fitting watered 
silk, skidded to a halt beside him. "I'm sorry!" she wailed. "I was too 
short to see over everybody's heads and didn't notice them leave!" 
 
He stood breathing hard for a moment, wrestling his anger under 

control, then said, "Let's get back inside, blast it! The least we can 
do is trace Lachley!" 
 
"Malcolm, it isn't your fault." 
 
"No, but it is, too. We were charged with locating Catlin as well as 
tasked with identifying the Ripper. And the future of the station is 
far more seriously affected by Catlin's disappearance than any of our 
work verifying the Ripper's identity." 
 
"I know," she said in a small voice. "At least we know Catlin's alive, 
now," she said with grim determination, "which is better news than we 
thought we might end up with, after following that horrible blood trail 
across London. You know," she said suddenly, frowning in concentration, 
"if Benny Catlin and Marcus have it in for John Lachley, they might try 
to ambush him at his house." 
 
Malcolm shot her a startled glance. "Good God, Margo. You're onto 
something, there." 
 
"So what do we do about it?" 
 
He frowned. "We collect Madame Feroz and Chief Inspector Melvyn, before 
we do anything. Then perhaps we'd best follow Lachley home? If Catlin 
and Marcus are there, they'll be in far greater danger than Lachley 
will, because he jolly well can't be killed." 
 
Margo's face, already pinched with worry, drained white in a single 
heartbeat. "Malcolm, we have to find them!" 
 
"Get back inside, warn Madame Feroz and Inspector Melvyn that we may 
need to leave in a hurry. The Spaldergate carriage isn't due to collect 
us for another thirty minutes. I'll find some sort of transport to 
hire, so we can follow Lachley." 
 
"Right." She hurried into the Egyptian Hall, lifting her skirts to make 
running easier. Malcolm swore under his breath, then headed down 
Picadilly in search of a cab that would hold all four of them. He 
worked very hard to dispel the vision of what would happen if Marcus 
tangled with Jack the Ripper. He had a sinking feeling that neither 
Dominica Nosette nor Guy Pendergast would ever be seen again. He didn't 
want that happening to anyone he called friend. If he'd thought he 
could persuade Margo to return to Spaldergate, he'd have packed her off 
immediately. But he knew only too well the futility of trying, so he 
set his jaw and vowed to do what he could to ensure that no more of his 
charges ended up missing or dead. 
 
So far, in this lethal little game they played, Jack the Ripper had won 
every round. 
 
 
 
Jenna stood in the shadows beside the garden wall behind Dr. John 
Lachley's house in Cleveland Street, clutching the Beale's revolver 
she'd brought with her from New York, and waited in a swivet for Noah 
to reappear. The detective had forced a window casement at the rear of 
the house and was searching quietly for any trace of Ianira Cassondra. 

Across the street, Marcus waited to give the alarm, should Lachley 
arrive before Noah finished the search. 
 
Come on, she breathed silently, what's taking so long? She expected Dr. 
Lachley to return at any moment, expected to hear a scuffle break out 
inside, terrified that Lachley's manservant, whom they'd spotted in the 
front parlour, would hear Noah's footsteps and go to investigate. If 
he's got a telephone in there, he might even summon the police! That's 
all they'd need, to be arrested by London's constabulary for thievery 
of a respected physician's home. 
 
When Marcus' whistle of warning came, Jenna's heart thundered into her 
throat. She melted back into the high, walled garden as a carriage 
rattled and clattered into the drive, coach lanterns gleaming in the 
darkness. Jenna trembled as she flattened against the inside of the 
wall, pistol clutched in one fist. He's back! Oh, God, he's back and 
Noah's still inside! She heard Lachley's voice, giving instructions to 
his coachman to stable the horse, then the carriage-entrance door 
opened and closed with a rattle and thump and Lachley was inside. She 
waited, not even breathing, for the shouts to erupt as Noah was 
discovered . . . 
 
"Hsst! Come on, kid! Let's move!" 
 
She swallowed a scream and nearly went to the ground as Noah 
materialized from the darkness of the garden. "Noah!" 
 
The detective grasped her arm and led her rapidly through the gate, 
which they eased closed, then jogged down the carriage drive, slipping 
past the open stable door. They reached Cleveland Street without being 
spotted and headed for Marcus. Jenna glanced over her shoulder toward 
Lachley's home, where lights were coming up in various windows, as Noah 
began to speak, voice lowered to a whisper. "It's quite clear Ianira 
was held in an upstairs room for some time. Not only are there 
toiletries for a lady and clothing of Ianira's size, there are long, 
dark hairs matching Ianira's, caught in the hairbrush. She is not, 
however, in the house now. He's moved her. Where, we must discover." 
 
Jenna's heart sank. Marcus' face ran pale in the light from a distant 
gas lamp. Then Jenna started. "Look! He's coming out again." 
 
They glanced around quickly, even as Noah herded them all into the 
darkness of a neighboring yard. Lachley had, indeed, emerged through 
the carriage drive entrance. Dressed in rough clothes, with an old felt 
hat pulled low over his brow, hiding his face in shadow, he set out on 
foot, walking swiftly down Cleveland Street, then turned and headed 
toward the distant river. 
 
The moment he vanished from view, Noah darted across the road. Jenna 
and Marcus exchanged glances, then ran after the detective at top 
speed. They passed a carriage where two gentlemen were involved in a 
domestic dispute with their wives over a stray muff, then moved 
steadily eastward, leaving behind the fashionable districts. They came 
out on a street Jenna recognized as Drury Lane, the same street Noah 
had carried her down the night Lachley had shot her. 
 
They followed Drury Lane for its entire length and burst out eventually 

onto the Strand, where they plunged into a maelstrom of shoving, 
shouting men and boys on Fleet Street. Gradually, they angled toward 
Bishopsgate and the East End. Jenna wasn't used to so much walking and 
struggled gamely to keep up, crossing busy Commercial Street into the 
heart of Whitechapel, then moving south down Brick Lane, past breweries 
that left the air smelling of spilt beer, past brick-making factories 
where giant kilns glowed hellishly in the darkness, fire-curing bricks 
by the millions. They headed down toward Flower and Dean Street, where 
women strolled the streets mostly alone, a few walking in pairs or 
small clusters, their eyes bright with fear and misery, soliciting 
rough-dressed men who emerged from pubs and gin palaces and gambling 
hells. 
 
Past Flower and Dean, Lachley took them into a narrow alleyway between 
ramshackle doss houses. A stink of urine rose like a miasma. Jenna 
closed her hand around the butt of her pistol, which she'd thrust deep 
into her coat pocket. They moved steadily down the narrow way, boots 
squelching in mud and God alone knew what else. Jenna certainly didn't 
want to know. Halfway along, Lachley interrupted a streetwalker and her 
customer in the midst of the transaction for which she was being paid. 
Mercifully, Jenna caught only a glimpse of white thighs under the 
woman's hiked up skirts as Lachley shoved past, with curses flung after 
him. 
 
"Sod off, y'bloody feather plucker, or I'll shove me beetle crusher up 
yer Kyber Parse!" 
 
To which Lachley flung back, "Don't threaten me, y'stroppy brass nail!" 
 
Fortunately, the angry prostitute was far too occupied -- and so was 
her client -- to offer any real trouble, not even when Noah plunged 
past, leading the pursuit. Lachley stalked steadily southward, toward 
the distant river, down past garment factories where gaslights burned 
to illuminate rows of sewing machines. Tailors and sweat-shop 
seamstresses worked in such factories for twelve and sixteen-hour 
shifts, six days a week, churning out ready-made clothing for an 
empire. Jenna thanked God they hadn't been forced to take up such work 
to keep from starving. 
 
What's a respectable doctor like John Lachley doing skulking around the 
East End? Unless . . . Jenna blinked in sudden, startled conjecture. 
Unless he's Jack the Ripper! Oh, my God, the facts fit! Poor Ianira! Is 
she even still alive? 
 
They barrelled through a crowd of men gathered on a street corner, 
talking loudly about what ought to be done about the maniac stalking 
women on these streets. "Sorry," Noah doffed his hat as angry protests 
rose on all sides, "don't want any bother, we're on the trail of a 
missing lady . . ." 
 
"Ah, gwan, y'sozzled face-ache," one of the angry men flung after them, 
"better keep goin' clappers or I'm like to put me bunch o' fives in yer 
mince!" 
 
As Jenna shoved her way through in Noah's wake, one of the other men 
muttered, "Button it, Albert, an' lay off the gin, you're drunk as a 
boiled owl. It's clear they got trouble, all right, Gawd 'elp if it's 

this bleedin' Ripper again . . ." A block further on, a Salvation Army 
quartet blared away into the damp night while a frowsy woman with three 
children half-hidden in her skirts listened intently to the singers. 
The music sounded like a spiritualized rewrite of an old drinking song, 
"What Can You Do with a Drunken Sailor?" but included the unlikely 
refrain, "Anybody here like a sneaking Judas?" 
 
Further along, a shouting match broke out between two very drunken 
sailors and the badly dressed women who accompanied them. One of the 
girls, who couldn't have been above thirteen years of age, was pulling 
a long swig from a gin bottle. Jenna wanted to avert her gaze as they 
rushed past, but she'd seen worse since arriving in the East End -- and 
was afraid she'd see far worse, yet, before this night ended. 
 
As Noah took them around a corner, an angry roar of voices erupted 
behind them. Jenna glanced back to see an immense crowd of men burst 
from a side street and utterly engulf the sailors, their hired girls, 
and the Salvation Army quartet. They were shouting about the Ripper, 
making demands and ugly threats that left Jenna intensely grateful 
they'd missed being swept up with the rioters. She turned and hurried 
after Noah. Lachley, still oblivious to their pursuit, led them down 
into Wapping where they encountered two neatly dressed, earnest young 
men with American accents. The Americans were speaking with a group of 
women and ragged children. 
 
"No, ladies, the golden tablets of Moroni don't set aside the Bible, 
not at all. They are only Christ's revelation of His word in the New 
World, translated by His prophet Joseph Smith. Here, let me read from 
this pamphlet, it will help explain the new gospel . . ." 
 
They passed the Mormons, still moving south, and walked all the way to 
Pennington Street, where enormous brick warehouses lined the road. 
Jenna could smell the stink of the river. Just beyond the warehouses 
lay the great London Docks, with the enormous Western Basin closest to 
them now. The smaller and older St. Katharine's Docks lay to their 
immediate west, cut into the reeking earth of Wapping, so that streets 
ended abruptly at the waterside, with immense ships pulled up like cars 
parked along the kerb. Lachley ignored the docks and led them east, 
deeper into Wapping. Did he take her on board a ship? Jenna wondered. 
What would be the point? Unless he's leaving England? Fear skittered 
through her nerves. 
 
They left Pennington Street three blocks further along, winding back 
into filthy, crowded alleyways north of the warehouses. Sailors 
thronged the streets, shoving their way roughly into stinking pubs and 
gambling dens, brawling in the middle of the road, singing boistrously 
in as many as five languages within two blocks' distance. Hollow-
cheeked, dull-eyed children sat along the kerb, begging for a few 
pence. And still Lachley led them back into the maze, past groups of 
furtive men who eyed them, considered it, then thought better after 
weighing the odds. 
 
And finally, at one of the sagging, broken-windowed houses along a 
street where gaslights were as rare as police constables and chickens' 
teeth, Lachley finally stopped. He unlocked a door and vanished into a 
tumble-down brick house with filthy, broken glass windows. These were 
dark. The house was silent, seemingly deserted. Jenna glanced at Noah, 

then Marcus. "What now?" 
 
Noah was frowning thoughtfully at the door. "If we annouce ourselves, 
it might provoke him into panic-stricken, drastic action. I don't want 
to give him time for that." 
 
The detective tested the door gently, then backed up and smashed his 
booted foot against the heavy panel. The lock splintered on the second 
try. Jenna dragged her pistol out of her pocket and rushed in on Noah's 
heels. Marcus brought up the rear. They found a cheerless room empty of 
anything save bits of refuse and appalling drifts of filth along the 
floor. A swift search, downstairs and up, revealed only one inhabitant: 
an enormous black hound chained in a room near the back of the house. 
The dog had been dead for a couple of days, judging from the stench. 
Beside the hideous, putrifying corpse lay a rug someone had turned 
back. And under the rug could be seen the outlines of a trap door. 
 
"Right," Noah said briskly, pulling up the trap. 
 
Marcus helped lift the planks while Jenna gulped back nausea. Stone 
steps, damp brick walls, the smell and splash of water . . . They could 
hear Lachley's footsteps receding quickly and Jenna caught a faint 
flicker of light at the bottom of the hole, which vanished a moment 
later. Noah glanced up into Jenna's eyes. The gun in Noah's hand looked 
like part of the detective's arm, an organic piece that had grown 
there, like the fine hairs on the back of Noah's wrist and the chipped 
nails that tipped short, strong fingers. "I'd feel better if you stayed 
here." 
 
"I ain't no weed," she muttered, quoting the girl who delivered their 
milk every morning. "And if you tell me to stay here, well, then, same 
t'you, wiv brass knobs on . . ." 
 
Noah frowned. "You're picking up the slang pretty well, aren't you? But 
that doesn't make you a match for a thing like Lachley. He's a bloody 
dangerous bastard. Stay behind me." 
 
"No argument, there," she muttered. 
 
Marcus found a stub of candle in a battered tin holder beside the bed 
and a wooden box with matches, printed with the trade name Lucifers. 
Marcus lit the candle and handed it to Noah, who led the way down the 
narrow stone steps. Marcus pocketed the matches and Jenna edged down 
the steps next, leaving Marcus to bring up rear guard. The stink of 
decay and filthy water clouted her nostrils well before her feet 
touched the wet floor below. There was no cellar, as Jenna had been 
expecting. They were standing in a brick tunnel, its arched roof 
clotted with cobwebs and stained with poisonous patches of mold and 
lichen. Water trickled and dripped in the distance. 
 
"What kind of place is this?" Jenna breathed. 
 
"Sewer tunnel, I'd guess," Noah answered, the whisper harsh and 
strained. "Lachley knows his way around, that's clear." They couldn't 
see Lachley's lantern, but his footsteps came with a faint echo from 
further along the sewer tunnel. Jenna stared into the pitchy darkness, 
then swallowed as Noah set out with soft-footed stealth. She cast a 

doubtful glance at Marcus, whose eyes were tortured. But they hadn't 
much choice. Jenna clutched her revolver, the grip solid and reassuring 
against her palm, and eased forward, trying to walk without her 
footsteps splashing. Jenna strained to catch the faintest echo of sound 
in the clammy darkness, but heard only the distant rush of water and 
Lachley's sharp, clattering footsteps far ahead. The sound ran away 
down the tunnels, leaving Jenna biting her lip. 
 
"Hsst!" 
 
At that sharp sound from Noah, Jenna froze. Her lungs rasped in the 
silence and her heart slammed against her ribs. Sweat, cold and dank as 
the putrid air, clung to hair and skin and eyelashes. She listened . . 
. 
 
"Bloody bitch!" A man's voice echoed through the sewers, fierce with 
some nameless rage that left the tiny hairs along Jenna's nape and arms 
starkly erect. Her fingers tightened of their own volition around the 
butt of her gun. A bloodcurdling scream, high and ragged, pierced the 
blackness. A woman's scream . . . 
 
The woman was sobbing out, "Don't kill me, please, I won't tell anyone 
you're the Ripper, please, just let me go home!" The woman's voice, 
clearly British, shook on a wild note of despair. 
 
"That is not Ianira," Marcus breathed. 
 
"What time does the gate go?" Lachley's voice . . . 
 
"I don't know!" 
 
"What time was it when you came through, then?" 
 
A choked-off cry of pain floated through the sewer tunnels. "About -- 
about eight o'clock, I think . . . it was just dusk . . . oh, God, 
please . . . no!" 
 
She screamed again, high, ragged. The sound cut off hideously. Jenna 
stood trembling, torn between the need to stay hidden and the need to 
rush forward, to stop whatever ghastly torture was underway. A moment 
later another sound drifted through the sewers, a sound Jenna couldn't 
identify at first. Heavy, rhythmic thumps, a grating, scraping sound, 
like someone hacking apart a cow's carcass. Jenna covered her mouth 
with the back of one shaking hand. Then they heard footfalls and a 
heavy thump that echoed like a door closing. 
 
Someone was moving through the sewers toward them, splashing quickly 
through the water. For a long, horrible moment, Jenna thought he was 
coming back toward them. Noah blew out the candle, plunging them into a 
terrifying darkness. Lachley's footsteps approached to within a 
frightful distance, accompanied by a lantern's dim glow, then faded 
once more, moving away down another route and disappearing back into 
the maze of sewer tunnels. 
 
Jenna discovered that she was shaking violently. Minutes crawled past 
in the utter blackness of the stinking sewer while doubt and fear 
banged around the inside of her skull like screaming, imprisoned 

monkeys. The echoes of Lachley's footsteps had long since faded, but 
still they didn't move, scarcely daring to breathe. At last, Noah 
shifted. The detective whispered, "Marcus, let's have a lucifer, 
please." A match flared and Marcus relit the candle. 
 
Light sprang up, yellow and warm and glorious, revealing ashen faces. 
Jenna swallowed hard, hands trembling visibly. "Wherever he was 
torturing that poor woman, it's not far." 
 
"He closed a door of some kind," Noah mused. "Perhaps another trap 
door. We'll try to find it and see if he's hidden Ianira down here with 
his other captive." 
 
A cross-tunnel intersected their own. Noah turned left, opposite the 
direction Lachley had taken. Jenna cast worried glances back over her 
shoulder every few seconds, terrified the monstrous killer behind them 
would turn and come back, having heard their footsteps. Her hand sweat 
on the grip of her pistol despite the chill in the foetid air. Jenna 
knew her gun was useless against Jack the Ripper. He couldn't be killed 
tonight, not before Mary Kelly died, more than a month in the future. 
But it was all she had and just holding it made her feel slightly less 
panic-stricken. 
 
"Well, blow me for a game of soldiers . . ." Noah muttered. 
 
The low-voiced exclamation brought Jenna around. "What is it?" 
 
"An iron door! Locked tight as a drum." 
 
The low door had been set back into an alcove. Clearly, John Lachley 
had come from behind that door. Jenna tested it, searched for a lock, 
realized that without a key, they would never get in. The hinge-pins 
were on the inside, so they couldn't even lift the door off. "What we 
need is a key." 
 
"We'll have to make do with a lockpick," Noah muttered. "I've 
cultivated the habit of carrying a set, during the past three years. 
With your father's killers on our trail, we've occasionally needed a 
fast entrance into a hiding place. Fortunately," the detective fished 
into a coat pocket, coming out with a set of burglar's tools and 
crouching before the door, slipping them expertly into the keyhole, 
"Victorian locks are generally large, clumsy, and easy to open." Marcus 
held the candle close to the lock, giving Noah the best light 
available. The lockpicks scraped and scratched inside the iron door, 
then something grated and clicked. 
 
"Got it!" 
 
The sudden silence was thick with tension. 
 
The heavy door swung noiselessly open, which spoke of constant oiling 
and maintenance in this damp environment. Surprisingly, the room beyond 
was not dark. Gas jets in the floor lit a scene from someone's private 
version of hell. Jenna's skin crawled as she stepped across the 
threshold, following Noah. She choked the instant she was inside. The 
sickly odor of rotting meat struck her like a physical blow. The stench 
permeated the air, foul and thick. When she saw what lay on the floor, 

Jenna realized with a shock of horror what the stink actually was. 
 
"Oh, my God!" 
 
Somebody had spilled a great deal of blood in this room. And pieces of 
at least two fresh corpses had been stacked up beside the door like 
cordwood. Arms, legs, gobbets she couldn't readily identify. And two 
severed heads, a dark-haired man's and a blonde-haired woman's. They 
rested on a work bench which stretched beneath cupboards along one long 
wall, sightless eyes staring at the door, faces set in ghastly 
expressions of terror and agony. White robes hung from a hook set into 
the bricks. Dark brown stains were visible across the sleeves and 
front. A stone pedestal that looked very much like an altar stood in 
the middle of the room. On top was another severed head, its flesh and 
hair still rotting off the bones. From what little remained, it looked 
like it had once belonged to a young boy, a teenager. An enormous tree 
trunk, with many of its major branches intact, took up at least half 
the space. Iron brackets and bands held the tree together where it had 
been sawn apart to get it into the room. Ianira, hands bound above her 
head, hung naked from an iron hook set into one enormous branch, limp 
and unconscious, her ribcage barely lifting with her shallow breaths. 
Gas jets at the base of the tree shone across her skin. 
 
"Oh, sweet Mother Mary . . ." Noah whispered, voice harsh. 
 
Marcus had already whipped off his coat, was lifting Ianira down and 
wrapping her nude body gently in its folds. Jenna, keeping her jaw 
tightly clenched, found a knife on the work table and used it to slice 
through the ropes on Ianira's wrists. Marcus was smoothing hair back 
from his wife's brow, trying to rouse her. 
 
"She's been drugged," Noah said tersely. "I can smell the chloroform." 
 
"Bastard!" Marcus snarled. "I will put a bullet through him!" 
 
Noah said tersely, "Just now, our business is getting the hell out of 
here before the maniac who owns this place comes back." 
 
The detective stepped to the door and peered into the darkness while 
Jenna pressed one hand against her mouth, struggling desperately not to 
throw up. The blonde woman must have been the one who'd screamed. And 
they'd just stood there, listening, while he hacked her apart . . . She 
bolted past Noah into the darkness of the sewer tunnel and threw up in 
the murky water against the far wall. The slight current washed the 
mess away, even as she shuddered and choked again. Noah bent over her 
shoulder. "You all right?" the detective asked worriedly. 
 
She nodded, and finally managed to straighten up. "Sorry," she 
whispered, wiping her mouth. "Couldn't help it." 
 
"God, no," the detective managed through clenched teeth. Noah looked 
very near to being ill, as well. Marcus carried his wife out of the 
stinking chamber. Noah closed the door and fiddled with the lock again. 
"Think I'll leave it the way we found it. Let him sweat, wondering how 
a drugged victim got out of a locked room. Ought to bother the hell out 
of him." 
 

"If it's all the same to you," Jenna said through chattering teeth, 
"I'd just as soon not go back through his house in Wapping. I don't 
want to meet him coming back, not for anything in this world." 
 
Noah's glance was keen. "I couldn't agree more." The detective peered 
both ways down the tunnel through narrowed eyes. "We must be near the 
river. We weren't all that far from London Docks when we climbed down 
those steps. With the distance and direction we came, the Thames must 
be close by, off that way." Noah pointed at the wall behind them. 
"Western Basin's probably off that direction, so I'd say we need to go 
that way." Noah nodded down the tunnel opposite the direction they'd 
come. 
 
"Let's go, then," Marcus said quietly. "We need to get Ianira to safety 
and have Doctor Mindel look at her." 
 
It was a silent and tense group that set out through the maze of sewer 
tunnels beneath the East End's filthy streets, searching for a way out. 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Eleven 
 
John Lachley carried Dominica Nosette's hacked up torso a long way 
through the sewer tunnels. The bundle he'd slung over one shoulder was 
heavy and he paused frequently to shift it, but Lachley never 
considered simply dumping it and turning back. He wanted to leave her 
somewhere appropriate and had tumbled to just the perfect spot. When he 
finally reached the place, he paused, listening to the rumble of 
carriage traffic through a grating overhead, then smiled and turned off 
into a freshly-broken opening in the sewer. The vaulted space in which 
he found himself was destined to become part of the cellar of New 
Scotland Yard. The police headquarters, still under construction, was 
directly overhead. 
 
Lachley smiled to himself and dumped the butchered remains of his 
pathetic little journalist where workmen would find her, then tipped 
his cloth hat. "Ta, luv." He grinned, using the voice of his childhood. 
"I'm obliged, Miss Nosette, that I am." 
 
Then he set out the way he'd come, whistling jauntily to himself. The 
tunnels he followed to reach Tibor snaked and twisted in multiple 
directions, following gas mains and sewage flows and underground 
streams bricked over, odd corners and chambers formed out of the 
remnant cellars of sixteenth and seventeenth, even eighteenth century 
warehouses and wharfside pubs, all connected like gladiator tunnels 
beneath an ancient fighting arena. As he walked, he planned exactly 
what he would do when he carried Ianira to Spaldergate House. 
 
He'd kept the identification papers and cards he'd found in Miss 
Nosette's possession, as well as those from the recently deceased Mr. 
Pendergast's pockets. Lachley was quite confident that no one would 
notice the switch in a dark garden. He would rush in, carrying Ianira, 
claim to be Pendergast and babble out some story about being attacked 
by the Ripper, then simply carry her through into the station. He could 

hardly wait to see what the station was really like. With Ianira in his 
power, there was no limit to what he could do in such a place. 
 
When he reached Lower Tibor, John Lachley was in exceedingly high 
spirits. 
 
He set his lantern down with a faint splash. The iron key from his 
pocket grated in the lock, which clicked open. He slid the key back 
into his coat, then stooped to retrieve his lantern. The door opened 
silently at his touch, swinging back on its well-oiled hinges. Light 
from the perpetual flames burning in the gas jets at the altar welcomed 
him home again . . . 
 
And John Lachley froze halfway through the door. 
 
She was gone. 
 
He literally could not take it in, could not comprehend the emptiness 
his senses told him existed in the room. He had left her hanging from 
the iron hook in the great branch above the altar, the hook he'd 
dangled Morgan from, the night that miserable little sod had died, had 
left her hanging as naked as he'd left the boy, bound and drugged 
senseless. There was no humanly possible way she could have freed 
herself from the ropes and the iron hook, much less escape from a brick 
vault with only one door in or out. And that iron door had been firmly 
locked, the lock not forced in any way he could see. Yet she was 
undeniably gone. 
 
Nothing in this chamber could have provided hiding space for a child, 
let alone a full-grown woman. He stood there with his hand uplifted 
against the cold iron of the open door, gaze jerking from shelf to 
cabinet to altar and up to the massive tree trunk and back to the 
shelves again. How had she gotten out? The key in his pocket was not a 
standard iron skeleton key. It would've taken a master locksmith to 
slip this lock. Or a duplicate key. Or an extremely talented thief. Had 
someone broken in here, then, and carried her off? Who? 
 
He could not conceive of a master locksmith having sufficient motive to 
pick his way through a maze of sewer tunnels until stumbling across 
this one particular alcove, to open a locked iron door. It simply 
wasn't reasonable. Common locksmiths didn't have the imagination to 
attempt such a thing! And why would a thief have ventured here? There'd 
been nothing in that entire house in Wapping worth stealing, if a thief 
had come down that way. A duplicate key, then? That was even more 
absurd than the other possible explanations. Take a wax impression, 
create a mould, cast a key, all in a single hour's time, with the owner 
of this door likely to return at any moment, irate and possibly 
murderous? 
 
The longer he pursued a sane explanation, the faster sanity ran through 
his fingers like the dirty water under his feet. Lachley's drugged 
captive simply could not have gotten out. But she had. And Lachley's 
greatest refuge, the result of years of labour and intensive study -- 
his very life if this place were connected with the deaths of the 
whores -- everything he had built was now threatened, because the bitch 
had gotten out! 
 

The explosion jolted the very bedrock of his sanity. 
 
Fury was an expanding fireball inside him, an anarchist's bomb, a 
Fenian detonation that sent him plunging across the room, hands so 
violently unsteady he dropped the lantern with a crash of broken glass 
and spreading lamp oil. He searched places too small for a mouse to 
hide, but found no trace of her. A knife had been moved from his 
workbench and used by someone to cut through the ropes on her wrists, 
ropes he found abandoned on the floor. Someone must have followed him 
down, picked the lock while he was out. 
 
Lachley swore savagely. He had been so careful, confound it, so bloody 
careful . . . Had someone recognized him, after all? Recognized the 
heavily moustachioed man in seedy clothes as the thin and seething boy 
he'd once been in these streets? Lachley had barely gone twenty when 
he'd last walked Wapping and Whitechapel, passing himself off as 
parlour mediumist Johnny Anubis. But who else could it have been, if 
not some god-cursed tea leaf who'd grass on his own loving wife, if a 
reward might be involved? 
 
He halfway expected to find all of Scotland Yard crouched in the tunnel 
beyond the open door to Tibor, billycocks at the ready. What he found 
was a black expanse of dripping brick tunnel, silent and cold as a 
tomb, just as he'd left it. Lachley stood motionless, gazing at the 
ruin of his sanctuary, breathing hard and trying to think what he 
should do. Going home might be fatal. Whether an East Ender had 
recognized him as Jack the Ripper or the girl's husband had trailed him 
down here, whoever had taken Ianira had discovered enough to hang 
Lachley from the nearest gallows. He had to get out of London. Before 
the police did trace him. Well, the gate into the future would open 
near dusk tomorrow evening, which meant he had to elude capture for 
only twenty-four hours. 
 
Dominica Nosette's severed head stared blindly at him from his work 
bench, unable to tell him its secrets. He'd have to take the head with 
him, he realized slowly. Tell them he'd been trying to locate his 
partner and had found her hacked to pieces in the sewers, that he'd 
been able to recover only her decapitated skull. Yes, that's what he 
would do to gain admittance to the gate, he'd shock them all with her 
bloody head, then step through while they bleated about what ought to 
be done. 
 
Moving with calm deliberation, Lachley found a wooden box beneath the 
work bench and dumped out the implements inside, then replaced them 
with Miss Nosette's head. He packed away a few other items he'd want 
along, shoving them into a leather satchel, mind racing. Can't bloody 
well go home, I might find the coppers waiting for me. I'll have to 
stop at the bank tomorrow, secure funds to buy some decent clothing. 
Best not withdraw too much, don't want to tip my hand that I'm leaving. 
Better sleep the night in a hotel room or better yet, a doss house. 
Fewer questions to answer, that way, arriving without luggage . . . 
 
Decision made, Lachley stripped off his bloodstained clothing and 
shoes, changed into spare garments he kept on hand for just such 
emergencies, then carried his satchel and wooden case outside, locking 
the door to Tibor one last time. He'd never dreamed the day would come 
he'd leave the sanctuary for all time. But his fate was sealed and his 

plans were made. He would get onto that station, come hell or high 
water or the damned souls of all eternity, trying to bar the way. 
 
He literally had nowhere else to go. 
 
* * * 
 
Malcolm had been to Cleveland Street before, with wealthy tourists who 
wanted to visit the famous art studios, hoping to buy canvases or 
commission fine souvenir portraits. He'd never guided tourists to the 
street's other, more infamous destinations, of course, although a 
number of zipper jockey tours did, in fact, include stops at Cleveland 
Street's homosexual brothels. Malcolm found it somewhat ironic that 
Jack the Ripper had chosen to live sandwiched between London's higher 
and lower arts and wondered if John Lachley's unstable personality had 
been affected by the proximity of the brothels. 
 
They had trailed Lachley's carriage halfway across London, following at 
a discreet distance. When Lachley pulled into a drive and halted, 
Malcolm asked the cabbie to pull up to the kerb a full block short of 
Lachley's home. "I think it would be wiser to leave the ladies here and 
scout this out on foot, Mr. Melvyn." 
 
"But -- " Margo protested. 
 
"No. I will not unnecessarily risk either you or Dr. Feroz." He spoke 
in a whisper to prevent the driver from overhearing, and would brook no 
argument. "We came here to discover why Marcus is trailing him, not to 
put either of you ladies in the path of Jack the Ripper. And there's 
Marcus now, across the street there." He pointed to the dark hedge 
sheltering the ex-slave from view of Lachley's house. Marcus watched 
Lachley enter his home by the side entrance and gave out a warning 
call, a clear and piercing bird's trill in the gathering dusk and 
gloom. "Want to bet his friends are inside, searching the house?" Margo 
pouted and favored him with one of her famous stationary flounces, 
refusing to honor his friendly wager with an answer, but gave him no 
further trouble. "Driver," Malcolm said a little more loudly, "please 
be kind enough to wait here with the ladies while we determine whether 
or not our acquaintance is at home." 
 
"Right, guv'nor." 
 
Conroy Melvyn joined Malcolm on the pavement. "D'you want to go right 
up and talk to your friend?" the inspector asked quietly, nodding 
slightly toward Marcus. 
 
"It is tempting, as Marcus appears to be alone." 
 
"What's your plan, then?" 
 
Malcolm was about to reply when someone left Dr. Lachley's house at a 
brisk walk. Poorly dressed, he would have looked more at home in 
Whitechapel than Cleveland Street. Whoever the man was, he was headed 
straight toward them. Malcolm's eyes widened when he realized who it 
was. "Bloody hell," Malcolm hissed, "it's Lachley." He turned at once 
to the carriage, leaning inside to murmur with the ladies as Lachley 
approached. Conroy Melvyn also turned to the carriage and said for 

Lachley's benefit, "Confound it, ladies, we shall be quite late! We 
haven't time to return and fetch your muff! If you'd wanted it, you 
should have secured it before calling for the carriage!" 
 
Lachley strode past without a second glance. 
 
Malcolm peered over his shoulder and caught a glimpse of Marcus, who 
had been joined by Benny Catlin and the other man from the Egyptian 
Hall. They trailed Lachley straight past the carriage, Marcus and the 
others passing literally within touching distance. Margo was wailing, 
"But I must have my muff, Geoffrey, I simply must! Oh, you beastly man, 
I cannot face Lady Hampton without it, after that dreadful creature 
showed me up last Saturday with her ermine . . ." 
 
The moment Marcus and his companions had passed, Malcolm handed both 
ladies down. "We dare not follow in the carriage," he murmured, 
securing coin to pay the driver. "I fear you ladies are not dressed for 
hiking, but there's no help for it." 
 
Margo said cheerfully, "I'll worry about blisters on my heels after 
I've got 'em." 
 
The driver was shaking his head, mystified, as he drove off. Malcolm 
set out briskly, feeling some affinity for the tail end of a freight 
train as they whipped through the streets in pursuit. Lachley, far 
ahead, was moving rapidly. Both Margo and Dr. Feroz had difficulty 
keeping up. Their fashionably tight skirts and heeled shoes forced them 
to trot along with mincing little steps. 
 
"Where the devil is he heading?" Inspector Melvyn wondered aloud as 
they moved steadily eastward, angling down toward the river. "It's the 
wrong night for another Ripper strike." 
 
"Maybe he's hunting for Mary Kelly?" Margo suggested. 
 
"Without Maybrick? Deuced unlikely, I should think. He kills to a 
pattern." 
 
"Perhaps," Shahdi Feroz mused, "he works alone to locate the women, 
then strikes with Maybrick as his weapon?" 
 
Margo put in suddenly, "Maybe the Whitehall torso is one of his 
victims? Somebody he meets tonight? The torso will be discovered just 
two days from now, after all." 
 
"Another of these unfortunates in possession of his letters?" Inspector 
Melvyn frowned. "Blast, I wish we knew what these letters were!" 
 
"You said a mouthful," Margo muttered, struggling to keep up. 
 
As they trailed their double quarry steadily eastward, into 
increasingly poorer districts, Malcolm's misgivings increased just as 
steadily. They were dressed to the nines, all of them, and Lachley was 
leading them straight toward the East End, where gentlemen in fancy 
dress coats and ladies in silk evening gowns would stand out like 
beacon fires, inviting attack by footpads. Lachley took them down Drury 
Lane, echoing another night's anxious search, when they'd trailed Benny 

Catlin with bloodhounds. Tonight, at least, Catlin was in plain sight. 
They emerged, as they had that previous night, onto the Strand. Lachley 
headed down through Fleet Street, moving briskly. 
 
Malcolm plunged into the crowds thronging the jammed pavements, trying 
to keep the others in sight. As the heart and soul of the British 
printing industry, Fleet Street was clogged by literally hundreds of 
newspaper reporters, ink-stained printers' journeymen and apprentices, 
bootblacks, newsboys scurrying along with stacks of the latest editions 
piled high, and women of dubious status all jostling elbows as they 
fought for space in the pubs, comandeered hansom cabs, and paid street 
urchins to run errands for them -- all struggling to outwit one another 
in the business of keeping the Empire apprised of the latest news. From 
here, reports of the shocking, double Ripper murders had raced outward 
by telegraph to claim massive headlines across the length and breadth 
of the British Isles and far beyond. 
 
From out of pubs with names like Ye Olde Cheshire Cheese wafted the 
multitudinous smells of cheap sandwiches, greasy fried potatoes, and 
enough alcohol to inebriate several herds of elephants. Malcolm 
wondered fleetingly just how many journalists affiliated with 
newspapers like the prestigious Times and the Star or penny dreadfuls 
with lofty-sounding titles like the Penny Illustrated Paper and 
Illustrated Times or the Illustrated Police News were combing the East 
End tonight, looking for leads to the Ripper case? Given the number of 
men and boys crowding these pavements, only a fraction of those he'd 
expected to cover the case. Fleet Street seethed. 
 
"The ladies can't keep up!" Conroy Melvyn called above the roar of 
voices and bar songs, the rumble of carriage wheels, and the neighing 
of several hundred, snorting horses in the street. Margo and Shahdi 
Feroz were struggling through the thick crowds, falling farther and 
farther behind. Malcolm craned for a glimpse of Benny Catlin and 
Marcus. "Blast it, we'll lose them! Margo, we can't afford delays. Hire 
a cab and take Dr. Feroz back to Spaldergate. Let them know what's 
happening." 
 
"But -- " 
 
"No argument! We haven't time!" 
 
"Oh, all right!" she snapped, cheeks flushed with temper as well as 
brisk walking. "Come on, Shahdi, let's go home like good little girls!" 
She stormed off in search of a cab for hire, taking the Ripperologist 
with her. 
 
"I shall pay for that, presently," Malcolm sighed, hurrying after their 
escaping quarry. The Scotland Yard inspector gave him a sympathetic 
glance as Lachley led them down past Shoreditch into the heart of 
Whitechapel, moving steadily eastward and skirting his way closer to 
the river. 
 
"He isn't going anywhere near Miller's Court, is he?" Malcolm muttered. 
 
Before the inspector could reply, a roar of angry voices erupted from 
the street just ahead. An immense crowd of angry men spilled out into 
their path, shouting demands for better police patrols, more gas 

lights, for a reward to be offered by Her Majesty's government for the 
Ripper's capture . . . 
 
"Hurry!" Malcolm cried, darting forward. He shoved his way into the 
mass of shouting workmen who were still spilling out onto the street, 
unable to push his way through. "Mr. Lusk!" someone was shouting at his 
elbow. "Mr. Lusk, is it true you asked the authorities to offer a 
reward for information on the Ripper's accomplices?" The man shouting 
the question held a notebook and a stub of pencil, trying to scribble 
down information as he was jostled by the swarm of angry Vigilance 
Committee members and loiterers swept up in the crowd. 
 
"They told me t'bugger off!" Lusk shouted back, whipping up a roar from 
the crowd. "Aren't goin' to pay blood money, they said, t'catch 
nobody!" The head of the Whitechapel Vigilance Committee was furious, 
justifiably so. As a prominent East End businessman, Lusk had to live 
and work here, wondering which of his friends or family members might 
be butchered next, while police officials like Sir Charles Warren sat 
safe and insulated in their headquarters and stately homes to the west. 
 
Malcolm fought his way past angry tradesmen, struggling to reach the 
far street corner where Marcus and the others had vanished. Several men 
flung curses after him when he shouldered past and one beefy lout swung 
at him, but by the time the punch landed, Malcolm had dodged past. 
Shouts erupted in his wake, then he was finally through the mass of 
seething protestors. Conroy Melvyn struggled out on his heels, panting. 
"Where'd they go?" the inspector gasped. 
 
"I don't know! Dammit, I can't see them anywhere!" Malcolm plunged down 
the street at a run, heedless of stares, but within three blocks, they 
had to admit defeat. Marcus and Benny Catlin and the other gentleman 
trailing John Lachley had vanished into the maze of dark alleyways, 
swallowed alive by the black gloom which lurked just beyond 
Whitechapel's major thoroughfares. Malcolm kept hunting, stubbornly, 
for nearly an hour, while Conroy Melvyn questioned passers-by in search 
of clues, running into suspicion and close-mouthed wariness again and 
again. Not even the lure of shining crowns -- coins worth more than a 
month's good wages in these streets -- shook loose any information. 
 
"Well," the inspector muttered, pocketing the last of his crowns, 
"looks like they've given us the slip, all right. What now, Moore?" 
 
Malcolm grimaced, eying a knot of roughly dressed men loitering near 
the entrance to the Kings Stores Pub at the corner of Widegate Street 
and Sandy's Row, a building once famed as Henry the Eighth's arsenal. 
Several of the loafing roustabouts were buying roasted chestnuts from a 
poorly dressed woman who'd stationed herself outside the roisterous 
public house. Several of the men were staring speculatively in their 
direction. "Much as I hate to admit it," Malcolm muttered, "we'd best 
return to Spaldergate House. We're attracting entirely too much 
attention to ourselves. The longer we remain in these streets, the more 
likely we are to be attacked, particularly dressed as we are. It's 
getting late and blokes like those won't hesitate for long, looking for 
easy pickings." 
 
Conroy Melvyn glanced around. "I agree, but where the deuce are we? Ah, 
yes, there's the Kings Stores. Been there myself, a time or two, when I 

was still walking a beat. Good God, that must be Mrs. Paumier!" 
 
"Who?" Malcolm asked, glancing over his shoulder as he turned and 
headed west, moving briskly to put them out of easy striking distance 
of the men on the corner. 
 
Inspector Melvyn caught up hastily. "Lady who claimed she spoke with a 
man in a dark coat, carrying a black bag. Chap asked her if she'd heard 
of a murder in Miller's Court, the morning Miss Kelly was killed. 
Claimed she had, indeed, and the bloke told her that he knew more about 
it than she did. She was standing right outside the Kings Stores, 
selling chestnuts. Pub still trades on the claim that Jack the Ripper 
was last seen outside its doors." 
 
"I didn't realize that. It's been an age since I visited our London." 
He laid a slight emphasis on the possessive. "I wonder if the lady 
spoke with our good friend Dr. Lachley or his accomplice from 
Liverpool?" 
 
"We'll find out, come November the ninth." 
 
"If we survive so long," Malcolm muttered, glancing back. The men from 
the Kings Stores pub had followed them. "Step lively, we've got 
company." 
 
The inspector swore under his breath and speeded up. Malcolm homed in 
on the roar of shouts from the Vigilance Committee's angry street 
meeting, steering the Ripperologist back into the chaos in an effort to 
shake off pursuit. They swept off their high top hats, which stood out 
like signposts, and edged their way through the mob, taking their time 
and avoiding any further altercations with the shouting vigilantees. By 
the time they reached the other side, someone had picked Malcolm's 
pocket, absconding with all his ready cash, but they'd shaken their 
more dangerous pursuers in the crush. 
 
"Afraid they cleaned me right out, as well," the police inspector said 
with a grimace of disgust, searching his own pockets. "Got my pocket 
watch, as well. Looks like we'll have to hoof it, eh?" 
 
"I fear so. I haven't even tuppence left." 
 
Malcolm did not look foward to arriving at Spaldergate with the news 
that he'd discovered the identity of Jack the Ripper and located both 
Marcus and Benny Catlin, only to loose them all in the chaos of a 
street meeting. Margo would spit like an Irish wildcat, after he'd 
dismissed her from the search back on Fleet Street. And the Ripper 
Watch Team's work was not yet done for the night, which loomed 
endlessly ahead of them. They still had to stand watch over the 
Whitehall torso mystery, to determine whether that unfortunate victim 
could also be laid at Jack the Ripper's doorstep. Malcolm resigned 
himself to yet another stressful night of short sleep and kept walking. 
 
* * * 
 
Jenna unlocked the door to the little house in Spitalfields with 
shaking fingers, then stepped back to give Marcus room to pass. He and 
Noah carried Ianira upstairs, fumbling for the treads in the darkness 

while Jenna hunted for the gaslight. Once she'd lit it, they made 
better progress up the stairs. Noah called down, "I'll change clothes 
and pick up the girls from the Mindels." 
 
Jenna nodded wearily. Shortly, Noah left the house in disguise as 
Marcus' sister once again, returning with the children and Dr. Mindel, 
who hurried upstairs to treat Ianira. Jenna followed, dreading Ianira's 
return to consciousness. She found Dr. Mindel bent over the cassondra, 
making worried noises, while Artemisia and Gelasia clung to their 
father in the far corner, eyes wide and frightened as they gazed at 
their mother for the first time in three years. 
 
"Drugged, you say?" Dr. Mindel muttered, peering under her eyelids. 
"Such a hideous thing to do to a helpless lady. Her pulse is strong, 
though, and her breathing is regular. She should sleep quietly until 
the drug wears off." He rummaged in a satchel and came out with a small 
jar of salve, which he smoothed onto her wrists where the ropes had 
roughened her skin. "There is no way to guess how long the dose will 
last. When she wakes, please come for me." 
 
"Thank you, Dr. Mindel," Noah said quietly. "We will." 
 
The doctor left and Jenna met Noah's gaze. "There isn't much else we 
can do, is there?" 
 
"No." 
 
Marcus took the children across the narrow hallway to their little room 
and put them to bed. Noah rested a hand on Jenna's shoulder. "You'd 
better get some rest, Jenna. You're exhausted and you don't want to 
risk the baby." 
 
Jenna nodded. There wasn't really anything else anyone could do, except 
wait for Ianira to regain consciousness and pray she was sane when she 
did. Jenna left the room blinking back tears and went quietly to bed, 
where she couldn't get the image of those dismembered bodies out of her 
mind, or that blonde woman's head sitting on a work table beside a 
dark-haired man's skull, left lying as casually as last week's empty 
milk bottles. 
 
She wished she'd paid more attention to the various theories about the 
Ripper's possible occult connections. Clearly, Dr. John Lachley was a 
practicing occultist, not just a theorist and scholar. There'd been 
symbols painted on those hideous brick walls, symbols of occult magic, 
satanic ritual, God knew what else. Lachley was a renowned physician 
and lecturer, a member of the Theosophical Society and a man of means, 
with royal connections. No wonder the police couldn't find Jack the 
Ripper. They were searching for some depraved East Ender, a foreigner, 
not a well-respected member of society. 
 
She could all too easily imagine Inspector Abberline's reaction or Sir 
Charles Warren's if anyone told the police they were up against a 
madman with ties to the royal family. A man who had perverted all 
notions of ancient Druidic rites, including the taking of trophy heads. 
Jenna shuddered, recalling his hideous lecture and the monstrous 
excitement in his eyes when talking about such things. And she had 
actually planned to film the Ripper murders! She and Carl, both. What 

innocents they'd been. Foolish innocents. 
 
The world was full of madmen like John Lachley, killers looking for 
power, men like John Caddrick, her father. Jack the Ripper had built 
himself a hideous house beneath the streets, filling it with death. 
Jenna curled protectively around her abdomen, where Carl's baby was 
growing, and vowed that her child would never become a victim of the 
slaughterhouse her father had built. Jenna would see his monstrous 
construction torn to the ground and her father dead, first. Even if she 
had to pull the trigger. 
 
Weeping softly in the blackness of a Spitalfields night, Jenna Caddrick 
listened helplessly to the hushed whispering from Ianira's room across 
the hall. 
 
 
 
As John Lachley's cab rattled its way up the approach to Battersea 
Bridge, his thoughts rushed and tripped across one another like 
spawning fish. He was eager to reach the end of the journey and 
discover what really lay beyond the "gate." Despite the images in the 
dead woman's fantastical camera, he could not truly imagine the world 
which had produced such marvels. Anxious and impatient, he tried to 
steady his hands, but they would not remain decently calm. He gripped 
more tightly the case hiding Miss Nosette's severed head and craned 
forward to see how much farther it was to the end of the bridge. Soon . 
. . 
 
God grant him patience, for soon could not come quickly enough. 
 
Full dark settled inexorably across London's rooftops and chimneys as 
the cab jockeyed for position in the long queue of carriages and wagons 
crossing the river. On the far shore, Lachley could just make out 
Battersea Park's miniature lake where, on summer days, children chased 
ducks and swans or floated little armadas of handmade boats. There were 
no children in the park tonight, nor anyone else, for that matter, save 
a few modest carriages and the occasional hansom or barouche for hire. 
Black smoke pouring from Battersea's chimney pots snaked its way upward 
to merge with the ominous darkness of yet another rainstorm threatening 
to the east. Low clouds raced all along the southern bank of the river. 
From their vantage point on Battersea Bridge, lightning flared and 
flashed across the distant rooftops of Surrey and Bermondsey and damp 
wind slashed at Lachley's coat and hair through the open carriage, 
threatening to rip his hat loose. He secured it with an irritable jerk 
and checked his pocketwatch impatiently. It was now nearly eight and 
the journalist had guessed the "gate" would go at about eight-fifteen. 
 
The cab finally tilted down the descent from the bridge and swung past 
the dark dampness of Battersea Park, cutting off in a right-hand turn 
which took them toward the long, lazy river bend which formed 
Battersea's western border. Once they reached Octavia Street, it wasn't 
difficult to suss out which house was Spaldergate. Carriages and hansom 
cabs lined the kerbs, disgorging elegantly dressed ladies and 
immaculate gentlemen and their servants, dozens of people arriving for 
what neighbors must imagine was an elegant dinner party. 
 
He ordered the cabbie to stop well back from the line of arriving 

carriages and paid the man, waiting until the battered cab had rattled 
away down the street before moving toward Spaldergate, himself. Hidden 
in the shadows, he watched the arrivals through narrowed eyes. If 
people were still returning to the house, the gate couldn't be open 
yet. He settled his back against a tree trunk, biding his time, more 
than anxious to step through the gate but forcing himself to wait until 
the last possible moment. He did not want to risk being detained by the 
gate's operators. At length, a final carriage arrived, disgorging its 
passengers, a portly gentleman who was saying to the lady with him, 
"Hurry up, Abby, we'll miss the gate!" 
 
At last! 
 
Lachley stole softly down the pavement in their wake, then slipped into 
Spaldergate's side yard and found a wooden gate set into the high wall. 
Beyond, he discovered a vast and overgrown garden. Lachley eased into a 
clump of shaggy rhododendrons and peered into the garden, expecting he 
knew not quite what, a miniature version of a railway station, perhaps, 
with a gate leading into somewhen else, or perhaps the iron hulk of 
some inexplicable and infernal machine. The high stone wall ran right 
round the sprawling garden, its far reaches just visible in the 
gaslight from lamps spaced evenly along a patterned stone walkway. His 
brows rose at the extravagance, so many gaslights illuminating a mere 
garden, and one that was improperly maintained, at that. The walkway 
ended abruptly at the rear wall, as though some fuedal war lord had 
erected a fortress keep straight across an ancient Roman highway. Had 
that bitch Nosette lied? Was there no "gate" after all? No route into 
the distant future? 
 
Yet something was clearly afoot, for milling about in a state of high 
agitation were more people than Lachley -- in his own state of high-
strung, sweating eagerness -- could readily count. Upwards of seventy-
five, at least, plus piles and haphazard stacks of luggage and porters 
swarming like angry mosquitoes, as though this garden were St. Pancras 
Station, that fantastical castle of brick and iron and glass with its 
bustling thousands. Most of the strange guests in Spaldergate's garden 
carried parcels or ladies' toiletry and jewel cases, bulging valises, 
carpet satchels with ironwood grips, all in a colorful and meaningless 
jumble of haste and nameless excitement. 
 
Lachley felt the sting and ache of jaw muscles rigidly clenched, of 
teeth too tightly ground together. The confusion of voices scraped 
against his very nerves, until he had to close his fists to stop 
himself taking the nearest chattering bitch by the throat and squeezing 
until his knuckles collided in the center. The need to move, to do 
something besides huddle in the shrubbery, clawed at him, shrieked 
until the very substance of his skull vibrated with an agony like 
broken bones grating together. He reached for his throbbing temples, 
wanting to clutch at his head and hold the fury forcibly inside the 
cage of his fingers. 
 
The vibrating pain had become a shriek when he noticed with a distant 
surprise that others in the garden were doing exactly the same thing. 
Some actually clapped hands across their ears, as though to shut out an 
inaudible noise. The unnerving sensation was not his imagination, then, 
nor the manifestation of multiple stresses on his overwrought nerves. 
He frowned, trying to comprehend what it might be --  

 
 -- and a hole of utter, midnight blackness opened in the center of the 
stone wall, right above the flagstone path. Lachley sucked air down, a 
sharp gasp. The hair on his arms came straight up and his back muscles 
tried to shudder and crawl away down his spine, intent on running as 
far and as fast as possible, with or without the rest of him. 
 
The gate . . . 
 
It pulsed open with a silent thunder, gaping wider, swallowing up more 
of the garden wall, which simply ceased to exist where that blackness 
touched it. The edges scintillated in the glow from the gas lamps, shot 
through with irridescent color, like a film of oil spilled from 
steamship bilges across Tobacco Basin's darkened waters. The 
fascination of it drew him, repulsed him, left him trembling violently. 
What power did these people possess, to open such a thing out of sheer 
air and solid stone? 
 
Ancient names and half-recalled incantations stumbled through his 
broken, sliding thoughts, names of power and terror: Anubis, destroyer 
of souls, guardian of the underworld's pitchy gates . . . Heimdall of 
the shattering horn, watching for any who dared to cross the glinting 
rainbow bridge . . . Kur, the coiled serpent of the fathomless abyss, 
destroyer of the world in flood and thunder . . . 
 
The outward shudder of the gate's receding edges finally came to a halt 
and it hung there, silent and terrible, beckoning him forward while his 
senses screamed to run in the opposite direction and never glance back. 
Then, as though such a thing were the most ordinary occurance in the 
world, the men and women in the garden stepped calmly through it, 
vanishing from sight like a cricket ball whacked solidly with the bat, 
rushing away to dwindle down to nothing. They were rushing through, 
hurrying, crowding on one another's heels. How long would the monstrous 
thing remain open? He took one step toward it, then another and a 
third, then rushed forward, impatient with his own gibbering terror, 
determined to step through, to discover for himself what horrors and 
delights might lie beyond. 
 
Working himself into a state of frenzy, electrically aware of the risk, 
Lachley pulled Nosette's dismembered head from its carrying case and 
rushed forward into the puddle of light from the nearest gas lamp. A 
well-dressed lady in watered silk saw him first. She let go a high, 
piercing scream. Lachley was abruptly engulfed by a stinging cloud of 
liveried servants and distraught gentlemen. "I tried to stop her . . ." 
Lachley gasped out, waving Miss Nosette's ghastly head about, her 
streaming blonde tresses clotted with blood. Summoning tears, Lachley 
gripped a white-faced gentleman by the arm. "She wanted to follow that 
madman in the East End, to photograph him! By the time I got to her it 
was too late, he'd cut her to pieces, oh, God, all I could bring away 
was this . . . this little bit of her. Poor, stupid Dominica! I just 
want to go home, please . . ." 
 
People were shouting, calling for someone. Lachley started toward the 
gate, not caring to wait. Just behind him, a woman's voice shrilled 
out, "My God! It's John Lachley!" He jerked around and focused on a 
woman who stood not ten paces away, a dark-haired woman of 
extraordinary beauty, who looked vaguely familiar to him. She was 

staring straight at him, eyes wide in recognition. Scalding hatred rose 
in his gorge, threatened to peel back his skin and burst out through 
his fingertips. She knows me! By God, she'll not stop me! Lachley 
whirled and plunged toward the gaping black hole. Behind him, the woman 
shouted, "Stop him! That's Jack the Ripper!" 
 
Screams erupted on his heels . . . 
 
Then he was inside. Falling, rushing foward with dizzy speed. He 
yelled. Then staggered across a metal grating, into a railing at waist 
height. He looked up --  
 
John Lachley screamed. 
 
It was a world inverted. Stone for sky, pendulous glowing lights 
hanging from iron beams and girders, booming voices that echoed and 
rolled, more terrifying than any thunder, speaking out of the air 
itself, a maze of twisting confusion that fell away at his feet, at 
least five full stories below, as though he stood at the top of Big 
Ben's clock tower or the highest point of St. Paul's arching dome. Wild 
displays of light in alien colors hurt his eyes. 
 
People moved in crowds far below, like flotsam caught in the eddy of 
the docklands' swirling waters. Down a rampway, down endless metal 
steps, down and further down still, the people who had come through the 
gate ahead of him wound their way toward the distant floor, while a few 
yards away, suspended on ramps and metal stairs in a mirror image, 
crowds of nattily dressed men and women pressed their way upwards, 
toward the very platform where Lachley stood. 
 
At the base of the metal stairs, confusion reigned. A screaming mob 
shouted questions, inchoate with distance. Men dressed as guards shoved 
and pressed the crowd back. Lachley realized with a start that a number 
of those guards were women, women wearing trousers as though they had 
renounced their sex and thought themselves the equal of any man. Eddies 
moved sharply through the crowd as a fight broke out, unmistakably 
riot, brutal as any mob of drunken dock hands demanding pay higher than 
the handful of shillings a week they deserved . . . 
 
Someone lunged through the gate behind him, shouting his name. 
 
He whirled. The vaguely familiar woman had rushed through with two men, 
who dove straight at him across the platform. Lachley hurled aside 
Dominica Nosette's head and drove an elbow into an unprotected gut, 
then slammed the heel of his hand against a nose, felt bone crunch. 
Both men went sharply down, barely stirring. The woman's eyes widened 
as she realized her abrupt danger. She opened her mouth to scream and 
tried to lunge away from him. Lachley snatched her back by the hair. 
She fought him with unexpected ferocity. Her nails caught his face and 
her knee slammed into his thigh with a sharp flare of pain, narrowly 
missing his groin. 
 
"Bitch!" He slugged her, putting his entire body into the blow. It 
caught her brutally across the temple. She collapsed, a boneless weight 
in his grasp. Someone was shouting from the stairs, where several 
shrieking women stood in ashen shock and one narrow-eyed, dangerous-
looking man was rushing right toward him. Lachley couldn't fight the 

whole bloody station! 
 
He snatched up the unconscious woman as a hostage, heaving her across 
his shoulder, and plunged down the steps toward the distant floor. He 
skidded down flight after flight, one hand balancing the inert burden 
on his shoulder, the other gripping the railing as he slung himself 
around corners at each landing. A glance below revealed several 
uniformed men charging up from the floor, trying to cut him off. He 
snarled aloud, but Lachley was only a flight-and-a-half up, so he 
vaulted across the rail, dropping a full ten feet into the middle of 
the rioting crowd. He landed on someone's back and felt bone crunch 
under his feet as the man went brutally down. Lachley stumbled to hands 
and knees, dropping his hostage in the melee. Someone kicked him aside, 
sent him spinning and rolling under running feet. Bruised and shaken, 
Lachley finally skidded into a momentary pocket of clear space and 
shoved his way to his feet. He thrust himself past intervening bodies, 
reeled from a punch against his unprotected side, turned with a snarl 
and broke the bastard's neck with a wrenching heave and twist --  
 
Then he was clear of the riot. Lachley found himself staring at 
cobblestoned walkways and park benches and wrought iron lamps, even a 
pub that reminded him incongruously of Chelsea. The riot surged behind 
him, shoving Lachley straight past a line of stunned security guards, 
who were busy to distraction searching the rioting mob for him. He 
bolted, determined to discover some way out of this madhouse. He needed 
to find a quiet place to think, to sort out what to do next. He was 
very nearly clear of the chaos when a group of wild-eyed men 
brandishing placards rushed at him. 
 
"Lord Jack!" 
 
"Lead us, holiest one!" 
 
"Command us! We are your servants!" 
 
Lachley opened his mouth, not entirely sure what might emerge. Behind 
him, someone shouted, "There he is!" He glanced wildly back toward the 
platform, where the two men who'd rushed through the gate on his heels 
were stumbling down the stairs under escort, pointing right at him. 
Lachley whirled on the placard-carrying lunatics, who were plucking at 
his very coat sleeves in fawning, worshipful attitudes. 
 
"You want to help me? I need shelter, curse it!" 
 
"At once, Lord Jack!" the nearest cried eagerly, tugging at his arm. 
"Anything you desire! We have awaited your coming . . ." 
 
They surrounded him, rushed him away from the shouting guards who were 
shoving rioters aside, trying to reach him. Lachley ran with the 
madmen, insane sycophants who gibbered at him from all sides and hid 
his face with their hand-scrawled signs. Am I doomed to rely on madmen 
all my days? He'd traded Maybrick's lunacy for a whole crowd of 
insanity. But sheltering with madmen was preferable to hanging, should 
the wardens of the gate catch up to him. 
 
His unanticipated escorts brought Lachley eventually to a place that -- 
despite its overwhelming strangeness -- appeared to be a hotel of some 

kind. The men who'd appointed themselves his adoring acolytes rushed 
Lachley across a brightly lit lobby, where a desk clerk glanced up only 
briefly, then ushered him straight into what proved to be a lift. They 
rose with startling speed and quite delightfully, the controls were 
automated, eliminating the need for a lift operator who would have to 
be eliminated for witnessing his flight. The lights overhead were 
strange, far too bright, and he couldn't determine what the translucent 
panels covering them were fashioned from. Then the doors slipped 
quietly open with a soft bell chime and he found himself in a 
luxuriously carpeted corridor. One of the madmen produced a small, 
stiff card, which he inserted into a metal box on one of the numbered 
doors. The panel opened to his touch. 
 
Lachley stepped warily inside, finding two neatly made beds, a strange 
box with a flat glass front perched on a low table, several odd lamps, 
ugly artwork framed on white-painted walls, and just to the left of the 
door, a lavatory fitted with a large mirror and the strangest water 
closet he'd ever seen. 
 
"Christ, but I need a drink . . ." he muttered, scrubbing at his face 
with unsteady hands. 
 
"At once, Lord!" The man who had unlocked the room hurried across to a 
small cabinet, procuring a bottle of amber-colored liquor which he 
opened and poured while the other madmen crowded inside. Lachley 
knocked back a surprisingly good whiskey, then considered the men who 
stood in a huddle near the door, gazing at him with the intensity of 
utter reverence. 
 
"Who are you?" Lachley demanded. 
 
"Your Sons, Lord Jack. We have long awaited your coming. Command us. We 
are your chosen." 
 
He narrowed his eyes as he considered the implications of that patently 
absurd answer. Were all the inhabitants of this world completely 
insane? No, not all, he frowned, thinking back to those guards at the 
gate. Lachley wondered what to ask first and finally decided on the 
simplest question in his mind. "What year is it?" 
 
None of the madmen seemed at all surprised by such a question. The one 
who'd given him the whiskey said, "By station time, Lord, it is 1910. 
Beyond Primary . . ." 
 
"Station time?" he echoed, startled. 
 
"Yes, Lord. The station exists well over a century in our past and some 
thirty years in your future." 
 
Lachley's mind reeled. Sanity slipped and lurched beneath his feet. He 
groped for it, finding, instead, the bed, which he sank onto simply to 
prevent a nasty fall. "Do you know the bitch who followed me through 
the gate?" he asked harshly. "The one I lost in the crowd?" 
 
"Yes, Lord. She's a Ripperologist, one of the Ripper Watch Team, Dr. 
Shahdi Feroz. She went to study your great works in London." 
 

Ripperologist? Lachley narrowed his eyes. She'd come to London to study 
him? The journalist had said as much, but he hadn't believed her. The 
unlamented Miss Nosette would have said anything to persuade Lachley to 
release her unharmed. Lachley shut his eyes for long moments, trying to 
place where he'd seen that Feroz woman's face before. The familiar 
features finally clicked in his mind. The lecture. She'd attended the 
lecture at the Egyptian Hall. Had spoken with him briefly, afterwards. 
Lachley frowned. Had she known all along, then? Known that he was 
responsible for the deaths of the whores in the East End? She must 
have. Hadn't she cried out that he was Jack the Ripper, back in the 
garden behind Spaldergate? Lachley narrowed his eyes coldly. That 
woman's testimony could see him hanged. 
 
"I must find her," he growled. "Find and silence her." 
 
"Do you want a knife, Lord Jack?" 
 
The question jolted him. He blinked in surprise. "A knife?" 
 
"Yes, Lord. To kill the whores on the station, once you have killed Dr. 
Feroz?" 
 
The leader of the madmen was opening a leather case. He took from it a 
long, shining blade, nine inches of sharpened steel edge, with a thick 
wooden handle. The lunatic held it out to Lachley, balancing it across 
both palms, presenting it like a royal sceptre. He went to one knee, 
offering the weapon as a token of fealty. "My Lord, we are your humble 
servants. Take our knife, Lord, and command us." 
 
Lachley picked it up slowly, realizing it was a far better tool than 
Maybrick's. Better, even, than his Arabian jambala, with its thick, 
slightly curved steel blade, nearly as wide as his palm. Better even 
than the scramasax -- a weapon much like an American bowie knife with a 
hook at the end -- which he'd used as a sacramental blade in Lower 
Tibor to take Morgan's trophy head. This blade, held out so reverently, 
was a delight to behold. 
 
Command us, his followers offered, madmen from a hellish, sunless world 
he did not yet understand. 'Tis better, the blind poet's words rumbled 
through Lachley's memory, boulders crashing down a mountainside in a 
thundering avalanche, 'tis better to reign in hell . . . John Lachley 
began to laugh, a sound so dark and wild, it brought a sharp gasp from 
those worshippers still huddled near the door. The leader, holding out 
the knife across his palms, met Lachley's gaze and smiled slowly. 
Glorying in his newfound power, Lachley accepted the knife from his 
faithful disciple's hands . . . and gave the orders to kill his first 
victim: the dark-haired, petite, and lovely Dr. Feroz. 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Twelve 
 
Skeeter Jackson had never minded crowds. 
 
But the packed mob in Victoria Station would've been enough to 

discompose the pope and his entire College of Cardinals. Skeeter hadn't 
even reached the rope barricade of the departures lounge when waiting 
newsies swarmed all over him, shouting questions and shoving 
microphones and cameras into his face with scant regard for damage 
inflicted. 
 
"Mr. Jackson! Is it true you're leading the search team over the 
protests of Senator Caddrick -- " 
 
" -- tell us your plan to locate the senator's missing daughter -- " 
 
" -- how much they're paying you to risk your life, bringing terrorists 
to justice -- " 
 
Skeeter, lips thinned down to a tight, white line, had never been 
gladder in his life to reach a departures lounge. He fled past the 
barrier, gate pass in hand, leaving them to howl in his wake. Paula 
Booker had taken refuge in one corner, notably seating herself as far 
as possible from Sid Kaederman. The detective glared sourly at Skeeter 
and snapped irritably at a Time Tours employee who'd just brought 
coffee. Skeeter headed the other way, having no desire to renew his 
acquaintance until absolutely necessary. 
 
"Coffee, Skeeter?" The voice came from the farthest corner of the 
lounge, startling him. He found Kit Carson leaning against one of the 
steel beams supporting the long flights of stairs and departures 
platform. 
 
"Kit! What're you doing here?" 
 
"Seeing you off, of course. Coffee?" 
 
"Oh, man, how I need a cup! Thanks, boss." Skeeter gulped, while 
scratching his itching thigh surreptitiously and mentally castigating 
the British for insisting on woolen suits. He wasn't quite allergic, 
but misery was relative. He should've put on that synthetic bodysuit 
Connie had offered, which helped reduce the itch, rather than stuffing 
it into his luggage. 
 
Kit refilled his coffee cup from a thermos flask and said, "There's 
just time to go over the use of your new scout's log." He handed over a 
satchel tucked under one arm. "I've been working on it for the last 
three hours, getting it set up for you." 
 
"My scout's log?" Skeeter echoed, abruptly excited. He dug open the 
satchel with eager fingers. The computerized device nestled inside was, 
Skeeter knew, a mandatory piece of equipment for any time scout. "How 
come you're giving me a scout's log? I'm not a time scout." 
 
"You've always relied on the time cards before, I know. But it occurred 
to me this morning, this search and rescue mission might just become 
far more temporally complex than anyone planned. You may well need a 
more substantial record of when and where you've been, to prevent 
potential accidents in the future. Don't worry, I'm not taking it out 
of your pay." The grizzled former scout chuckled, eyes glinting with 
wicked amusement. "I chalked it up to Senator Caddrick's account." 
 

Skeeter grinned. "Bet he flips when he gets the bill." Skeeter peered 
curiously at the device. He'd seen time scouts carrying them, of 
course, but had never managed to lay hands on one, not even in the days 
when he could've turned a tidy profit snitching a new one and selling 
it on the black market. He would never have stolen a used one, of 
course, even if 'eighty-sixers hadn't been off-limits as prey. Ripping 
off someone's record of their gate travels would've been tantamount to 
premeditated murder. But he'd wistfully dreamed of the money a new one 
could bring, had spent many a pleasant hour drooling over the stuff he 
could buy with that kind of cash. 
 
"Now," Kit was saying, "you haven't been down as many gates as the 
average tour guide, let alone a time scout, but you've done enough time 
travelling to cause potential trouble. Particularly since the Wild West 
Gate and the Britannia can be lethal, if you don't watch which 
direction you're moving through them. So you'll use this. I've already 
programmed in the two weeks we spent in Colorado. You'll want to add 
the time you've spent down other gates, as well. Your first trip to 
Denver, your previous trip to London, plus the brief minutes you spent 
there as a Time Tours porter. And your stay in Claudian Rome, of 
course, finding Marcus and bringing him back. When you get to London, 
turn the log on immediately and take your first set of readings. Before 
this search is over, God knows how many time zones or gates you'll have 
to jump through, particularly if Armstrong has left London for 
healthier climes." 
 
"Aw, man, don't even suggest it!" 
 
Kit grimaced, rearranging a whole ladderful of weathered lines. "Sorry, 
that's my job. Now, then, open it up. Like that, yes. You're going to 
learn how to use this thing in your sleep. Malcolm and Margo can help, 
they know the drill cold." 
 
"Believe me," Skeeter said fervently, "the last thing I want to risk is 
shadowing myself." Dying instantly by stepping into a time where he 
already existed was not Skeeter's idea of a smart career move. "Okay, 
show me how this thing works." 
 
Kit put him through drills right up to the two-minute warning, when 
Time Tours guides urged the departing tour to start climbing the stairs 
reserved for departures, so they would be ready to step through the 
Britannia the moment the returning tour cleared the gate. Kit gripped 
his shoulder in a friendly fashion. "You're doing very well, Skeeter. 
You catch on fast." The retired scout chuckled. "Margo took much 
longer, her first few tries, but she by God knows it now. You won't 
need an ATLS, but it wouldn't hurt to have her and Malcolm show you 
theirs, run you through the process of taking star fixes and 
geomagnetic readings when you get to London. Keep the log running as 
you step through the gate, so you won't forget to turn it on." 
 
Skeeter fiddled with controls, then closed up the log and slid it into 
the trademark satchel Kit had been the first to design. "I'll check in 
with Malcolm right away. Thanks, boss." 
 
Kit held out a hand and Skeeter shook it solemnly. 
 
"Good luck, Skeeter," Kit said quietly. "Try not to get yourself -- or 

anyone else -- killed on this mission." 
 
Skeeter held his gaze solemnly. "I'll do my best." 
 
"I know you will. Scoot, then. Send word periodically with the 
returning guides, so we'll know what's happening." 
 
"Right." Skeeter gulped the rest of his lukewarm coffee, then hurried 
for the stairs, giving Paula a high-sign. Kaederman was still sipping 
coffee. Caddrick's pet snoop finally began the long climb as Skeeter 
rounded the first landing and started up the second flight. Baggage 
handlers were already fiendishly at work on the high platform. In a 
dizzying moment of déjà vu, Skeeter halfway expected to see Benny 
Catlin barrelling through the piles of steamer trunks and portmanteaus. 
Then the gate rumbled open with a skull-splitting backlash of 
subharmonics and the returning tour staggered through, jabbering 
animatedly. 
 
" -- that poor woman, decapitated, they found nothing but her torso!" 
 
" -- left the body in the cellar tunnels beneath the new Scotland Yard 
building -- " 
 
"The Ripper Watch team said Jack the Ripper left the body there, 
himself! Poor Miss Nosette, if only she'd stayed with the Ripper Watch 
Team instead of striking out on her own, like that -- " 
 
Skeeter edged closer to the front of the platform, aware of his 
conspicuous place at the head of the departing tour. The press corps 
had trained cameras on him from five stories down. The gate was nearly 
clear, tourists down to a trickle and baggage handlers staggering 
through under heavy loads, when a wild-eyed man Skeeter vaguely 
recognized plunged through the gate. Whoever he was, the guy let out a 
bloodcurdling yell and went rigid, staring down into Commons. Then 
Skeeter noticed what was clutched in his hand and stiffened in shock. A 
decapitated head! A woman's head, severed with what must've been an 
axe. The grisly thing swung by the hair from the man's white-knuckled 
grip. Screams erupted from the women near Skeeter just as he recognized 
the dead woman: Dominica Nosette, the Ripper Watch photographer. Then 
two men Skeeter didn't know rushed through the open gate, with Dr. 
Feroz on their heels. The Ripperologist was shouting, "There he is! 
It's Dr. Lachley! Stop him!" 
 
The man at the platform railing spun around -- and attacked with 
single-minded fury, flinging the severed head aside. He hit both men 
like a pile driver; they went down hard and didn't stir. Then Lachley 
grabbed Dr. Feroz. She fought back, even as Skeeter shoved his way 
toward them, past screaming women and shocked Time Tours guides and 
baggage handlers, who stood with mouths gaping. "Don't just stand 
there!" Skeeter shouted. "Stop him!" 
 
Lachley cast one wild-eyed glance in their direction, then slugged Dr. 
Feroz so hard her head snapped around. He threw her across one shoulder 
and bolted down the stairs for the Commons floor. Skeeter lunged after 
him -- and one of the men Lachley had knocked down came to his knees 
right in Skeeter's path. Skeeter sprawled and they both crashed to the 
platform floor. A pile of luggage upended and fell straight off the 

edge. Screams erupted somewhere far below. Then Skeeter grunted and 
heaved himself up to look. The luggage had crashed to the floor, 
knocking half-a-dozen people flat. A panic-stricken riot was spreading 
through the crowd. Dr. Lachley was almost to the floor, running hard, 
with Shahdi Feroz dangling over one shoulder like a broken doll. 
 
"Skeeter!" Paula Booker was shouting his name. He glanced back and saw 
the departing tour rushing through the gate. The Britannia had already 
begun to shrink back in on itself. A Time Tours guide had bent to help 
the injured. Paula was waiting at the very edge of the gate. "Hurry, 
Skeeter! The gate's going! Kaederman's already through!" 
 
Whoever Dr. Lachley might prove to be -- and Skeeter had a sinking 
sensation he might just be Jack the Ripper -- Skeeter wasn't about to 
miss this gate and give Sid Kaederman eight solid days to search for 
Jenna Caddrick by himself. Skeeter plunged into the shrinking gate, 
grabbing Paula by the wrist on his way through. They skidded into the 
dark garden behind Spaldergate House and landed smack in the center of 
utter chaos. Time Tours guides were racing toward the gate and 
hysterical women were sobbing. Porters stumbled through into the 
garden, literally shoved through the rapidly closing gate by station-
side Time Tours employees. One of the women was screaming, "My luggage! 
He knocked off my luggage! I must have my medicine!" Another, less 
sympathetically, was howling about her jewelry, presumably strewn all 
over the Commons floor. 
 
"What's going on?" Skeeter demanded of a passing Time Tours guide, who 
completely ignored him. A tourist nearby gasped, "They said it was Jack 
the Ripper! He's crashed the Britannia!" 
 
Paula gasped. "What?" 
 
"That man who came through! That was Jack the Ripper! Burst into the 
garden, shouting something about one of the Ripper Watch reporters, 
said the Ripper had cut her to pieces . . ." 
 
A final porter struggled through the rapidly closing gate, dragging 
five steamer trunks hastily roped together, then the Britannia shrank 
to a point of darkness and vanished, leaving only a tangle of vines and 
shrubbery along the high garden wall. For better or worse, TT-86 was 
sealed up tight as a drum. With Jack the Ripper inside. 
 
"Skeeter?" a familiar voice jerked his attention back around. "Skeeter 
Jackson? What on God's green earth are you doing in London?" 
 
Skeeter blinked up at Malcolm Moore, who had burst into the Spaldergate 
garden at a dead run. Margo, hot on his heels, slithered to a halt as 
lightning flared overhead, deepening smudged purple shadows under her 
eyes. "Skeeter?" she gasped. "And Paula Booker? What's going on? What 
are you doing here?" 
 
"Uh . . ." Skeeter said helpfully. He struggled to pull his scattered 
thoughts together. "Was that really Jack the Ripper?" He gestured 
vaguely toward the now-vanished Britannia Gate. "Crashing the gate?" 
 
Malcolm's lips thinned to near invisibility. "I'm afraid so, yes. Dr. 
Feroz recognized him and gave chase with some of the guides -- " 

 
"I've got bad news, then," Skeeter muttered. "He overpowered 'em. And 
took off with Dr. Feroz. Knocked her cold and hauled her down the 
stairs. The gate was going, or I'd have chased them down." 
 
Malcolm's mouth worked for a long second before any sound emerged. "My 
God!" he finally erupted, voice cracking in unmodulated fury. "What in 
hell could be more important than letting Jack the Ripper escape into 
TT-86?" 
 
Skeeter blinked. Then said unhappily, "Finding a pack of terrorists who 
kidnapped Senator John Caddrick's little girl and hauled her through 
the Britannia. She was in disguise. As Benny Catlin." 
 
Malcolm's anger faded faster than an image from an unplugged 
television. The guide stood blinking for a full sixty seconds, then 
whispered, "Oh, dear God . . ." 
 
"You said it. We gotta talk. Somewhere quiet." Women were still sobbing 
hysterically over the severed head the Ripper had hurled at the 
departing tour, lamenting their lost baggage and the cash they'd left 
in their trunks, cash they needed for the trip. 
 
"Yes, the sooner the better," Malcolm said thinly. "Margo, my dear, 
please ask Mr. Gilbert to meet us in his study. With a very large 
decanter of bourbon." 
 
Margo shot toward the house, threading her way nimbly through wailing 
tourists and staggering porters. Malcolm asked, "How many men have you 
brought to search, Skeeter?" 
 
"All the porters who came through are on search detail if we need 'em. 
Dr. Booker's come through to help make an identification. She gave 
Caddrick's kid a new face. Benny Catlin's. And there's a detective 
you're just gonna love. Caddrick hired him." 
 
Paula Booker peered through the crowd anxiously. "I'd better find Mr. 
Kaederman. We don't want him slipping off on his own." 
 
Malcolm followed her progress with his gaze, then turned to Skeeter, 
waiting expectantly. "Long story," Skeeter sighed. "Very long." 
 
"Then the sooner we're inside, the sooner you can begin telling it." 
Malcolm ushered him through the chaos in the garden, steering him past 
the back door, which one of the servants had chocked open, leading him 
to another door farther on. They entered Spaldergate through a 
scrupulously maintained conservatory replete with hothouse flowers and 
overly green smells. From there, they followed a carpeted corridor 
toward the front of the house, bypassing the bulk of the arriving tour. 
Darkened, silent rooms closed away from public view for the night lay 
just off the hall, while the parlour, at the front of the house on the 
ground floor -- rather than the more traditional first-floor 
arrangement found in London town houses -- blazed with light. The whole 
front of the house was filling up with distraught refugees from the 
shaken tour. 
 
Malcolm turned off the corridor well before they reached the parlour, 

entering a decidedly masculine room dominated by hundreds of leather-
bound books and the unmistakable scent of beeswax and turpentine, used 
to polish the mahogany furniture. Margo had reached the room before 
them and stood in the corner, pouring bourbon from a decanter. A film 
of coal dust dulled every white surface to grey, despite scrupulous 
cleaning by the house staff. The feel of smooth wood under Skeeter's 
hand, the thick, rich carpet, and the mustiness of the air were all 
familiar from his previous visit. Like half-remembered ghosts, they 
filtered through his awareness while Malcolm headed for the bourbon. 
Margo handed over generously filled tumblers and Skeeter gratefully 
upended one. 
 
"Thanks. God, I needed that." He refilled the tumbler and sipped more 
judiciously, this time. Paula Booker found her way into the room, 
lamentably in the company of Sid Kaederman, who thrust out his hand for 
the bourbon as though Margo were a mere servant. Margo handed him a 
tumbler, eying him curiously. Kaederman gulped, ignoring Margo and 
fixing his attention squarely on Malcolm Moore. Skeeter noticed that 
Kaederman's hand was slightly unsteady as he drained his drink. Skeeter 
decided he'd better make the introductions. 
 
"Mr. Sid Kaederman is a detective, hired by Senator Caddrick to search 
for his daughter. Malcolm Moore is a freelance temporal guide in charge 
of the Ripper Watch arrangements. Margo Smith is a trainee time scout 
and is assisting the Ripper Watch Team, as well." 
 
Kaederman shot Margo a surprised glance, then said, "Would someone care 
to explain how the hell you people let a thing like Jack the Ripper get 
into your station? Don't you put any security around your goddamned 
gates?" 
 
Malcolm bristled. "It is not my gate, Mr. Kaederman. Time Tours has 
charge of the Britannia and I do not work for Time Tours. Neither does 
Miss Smith. Now, then, Mr. Jackson, will you kindly explain your 
remarks about Senator Caddrick's missing child?" 
 
Marshall Gilbert appeared in the doorway before anyone else could 
comment. "What in the world can possibly be so urgent -- " He rocked to 
a halt. "Skeeter Jackson? And Paula Booker? What on earth -- ?" 
 
Skeeter smiled wanly. "Evening, Mr. Gilbert. Hope you don't have plans 
for tonight." 
 
The gatekeeper frowned. "I don't believe I care for the sound of this. 
What's happened?" 
 
"Benny Catlin, is what." Skeeter sank into in a leather-covered chair, 
took a long pull at his bourbon, then explained what had happened and 
why they were here. Sid Kaederman and Paula Booker sat opposite 
Skeeter, listening to his terse explanation. "So, after we got back 
from Colorado," Skeeter finished up, "Senator Caddrick threatened again 
to shut the whole station down if we don't find his daughter and this 
terrorist, Noah Armstrong." Skeeter passed around photographs. "And 
after what he did to Bull Morgan, with all that cockamamie crap he used 
to throw Bull in jail, we're taking him damned seriously." 
 
"Good God!" Malcolm gasped, staring at the photos. "That is Benny 

Catlin! We saw him just last night! And this Armstrong chap was with 
him." 
 
"You saw them?" Skeeter sat forward quickly. 
 
"Where?" Kaederman had surged to his feet. 
 
"At the Egyptian Hall. They were attending a lecture by the man we 
identified as Jack the Ripper. In fact, they were following him, for 
reasons we have yet to ascertain, although I suspect it has something 
to do with Ianira Cassondra. We trailed them right across London into 
the East End, but a street meeting jammed our way and we lost them in 
the crush." 
 
While Skeeter's imagination betrayed him with monstrous visions of what 
Jack the Ripper would do to Ianira Cassondra, Sid Kaederman bellowed, 
"You lost them? My God! What a bunch of incompetant jackasses! I don't 
care what that interfering old bastard Carson said, I'm taking over 
this search operation -- " 
 
"Like hell you are!" Skeeter snapped. "Last time I checked, nobody had 
appointed you God." 
 
"You insufferable little -- ! How dare you talk to me that way! I've a 
good mind -- " 
 
"Enough!" 
 
Coal dust settled in the aftermath of Malcolm Moore's bellow. Malcolm 
pinned Kaederman with his gaze. "You will please be good enough to 
refrain from further outbursts, Mr. Kaederman. And we can do without 
the barbed remarks, Mr. Jackson." 
 
"Huh. You weren't stuck for two weeks in Colorado with this pompous -- 
" 
 
"Enough!" 
 
"Oh, all right," Skeeter muttered. "Shutting up." He sprawled deeper 
into his chair, wishing to God he'd never agreed to come in the first 
place. 
 
"That's better. Now, then. We'll take this one at a time, gentlemen." 
Malcolm glanced at Kaederman, who returned his gaze coldly. 
 
"Where are you going to search?" Kaederman demanded. "And just how, 
exactly, did you manage to lose track of Miss Caddrick and her 
abductor?" 
 
"As you have not been to the East End, do not presume to judge 
conditions there. Street meetings are always disruptive and frequently 
violent. The Ripper murders have sparked riots and serious violence, 
particularly against foreigners, for the past three weeks. We were 
caught right in the thick of one. It cut us off from Dr. Lachley and 
the group following him. Including your terrorist and Miss Caddrick. 
Not to mention Marcus, Ianira Cassondra's husband. We suspect Ianira is 
somehow involved, because Marcus had to be restrained from attacking 

Lachley during the lecture." 
 
Skeeter caught a glimpse of Margo opening her mouth to ask something, 
then she thought better of it and scooted back in her chair again, brow 
furrowed slightly. From her corner, she levelled a slow, suspicious 
gaze at Kaederman. Good. With luck, she'd just picked up on the 
inconsistency in Kaederman's story. Namely, that Jenna Caddrick 
wouldn't be running around London voluntarily with Armstrong if she 
were his prisoner. Until Skeeter could get rid of Kaederman, he 
wouldn't be able to tell Margo and Malcolm the real story -- or, at 
least, his suspicions. 
 
Skeeter caught Malcolm's eye. "Yes, Ianira's involved, I'll stake my 
reputation on it. She was inside a steamer trunk I carried through, one 
of Benny Catlin's. Catlin chewed my ass when it nearly fell off the 
departures platform. Cost me a job with Time Tours." 
 
Malcolm's mouth twitched. "Pardon the frankness, but that's no great 
loss." Malcolm was famous for his long-standing feud with Time Tours, 
which he held accountable for the suicide of a long-ago employer. 
"Well, this is quite a sticky wicket you've handed us, Skeeter." 
 
While Skeeter was wondering what, precisely, a sticky wicket was, 
Kaederman said, "Is that all you've got to say? When are you going to 
get off your damn dandified butt and do something about it?" 
 
Malcolm shot an intent stare at Caddrick's detective. "Mr. Kaederman, 
there are ladies present. Kindly refrain from vulgarities." 
 
"You're kidding?" 
 
"No, I am not, sir. You will please refrain from swearing in the 
presence of ladies. Unless you wish to provoke some gentleman on the 
streets into correcting your manners forcibly? You are investigating a 
kidnapping. And the London outside those windows," he nodded toward 
heavy damask curtains falling thick as honey down the long windowpanes 
to close out the rising storm, "is nothing like the London of our own 
time. You cannot safely behave as though you were in New York or even 
up-time London, not if you wish to escape serious injury. Now, you have 
raised the question we all must answer: What to do next. I feel 
constrained to point out that neither you nor Mr. Jackson nor Dr. 
Booker is particularly qualified to search Victorian London. I daresay 
the baggage porters have more experience down the Britannia than any of 
you." 
 
Paula said hastily, "Leave me out, please. I had enough searching in 
Denver to last a lifetime. I agreed to come along because I can provide 
a positive ID on Miss Caddrick. And Kit thought it would be a good idea 
to have two surgeons in residence at Spaldergate, with the team going 
up against armed terrorists." 
 
Malcolm's expression made it clear that he questioned the wisdom of 
sending through such an inept team, but he merely said, "You say 
Armstrong went through the Wild West Gate? I suppose he must have 
arrived in London conventionally enough, by steamship from New York to 
Liverpool or London, bringing Marcus and the children with him. They'll 
have had ample time to set up a hideout anywhere in the city, which 

means they'll be devilishly difficult to trace. On the other hand, we 
know that Miss Caddrick was wounded -- " 
 
"What?" Kaederman lunged out of his chair a second time. 
 
Malcolm blinked. "I thought you'd been thoroughly briefed?" 
 
The detective thinned his lips. "That particular detail was left out." 
 
"I see. Well, the dog we used to trace Benny Catlin followed a blood 
trail away from the Royal Opera House. Not a great deal of blood, but 
clearly Benny Catlin's. Or rather, Miss Caddrick's. We don't know how 
seriously she was injured in the fight at the Opera, but we saw her 
just two days ago, quite recovered, so the wound was clearly not a 
life-threatening one. We'd been searching the hospitals and workhouse 
infirmaries without turning up anything, so I would suggest we now 
broaden the search to private physicians. We'll begin by contacting all 
the private doctors and surgeons in the region of the Strand, then 
spread out in sectors from there, trying to trace where Miss Caddrick 
received treatment for her injury. The baggage handlers can assist with 
that." 
 
"You've got to be joking?" Sid protested. "That could take months!" 
 
Malcolm favored him with a mild look. "Indeed. Your time might be well 
spent compiling lists of names and addresses to contact." 
 
Margo leaned forward. "If they've set up housekeeping somewhere in 
London, they're likely to need a staff, even if it's a small one." 
 
"Not necessarily. Servants gossip. Armstrong won't want to risk that." 
 
Margo looked abashed. "I hadn't thought of that." 
 
Malcolm smiled wanly. "You aren't accustomed to servants, yet, my dear. 
It's entirely possible Armstrong has chosen to hide in the East End, as 
the least likely place anyone would search. Conditions in Bethnal Green 
or Spitalfields, for instance, aren't quite as desperate as they are 
in, say, Stepney, Whitechapel, or Wapping, never mind Poplar and 
Limehouse. And Marcus' accent would blend in rather well with the 
European immigrants in Spitalfields. Whereas it would be quite 
remarkable in more homogenously English districts, even those as 
relatively poverty stricken as SoHo or Cheapside. Consider their 
position for a moment. Armstrong's group includes at least one Yankee 
gentlemen, or rather, a young lady posing as one, which is dangerous, 
in itself, plus a man with a decidedly Latin accent, two small 
children, and attendant guards. That would be extraordinarily memorable 
in the better London neighborhoods. Enough so, were I running from up-
time legal authorities, I wouldn't risk that sort of attention." 
 
"Okay," Skeeter nodded, "that makes sense. So we comb the East End, 
same as half the cops and reporters in London. And check out all the 
doctors." He wished Kaederman would leave, so he could tell Malcolm the 
rest of the story. "When do we start?" 
 
"I suggest you begin by settling into rooms and unpacking your cases. 
Then you and I, Mr. Jackson, will spend a long evening at the Vault's 

computers, planning the search and assigning personnel to various 
sections of the city. Mr. Kaederman, you shall begin by working on your 
list of physicians." 
 
"The sooner I get these goddamned wool pants off, the better." 
 
Margo chuckled. "Better not say that, Mr. Kaederman. Not around here." 
 
"Say what?" Kaederman asked, blinking in confusion. 
 
"In London, the word 'pants' refers to underwear. Call them trousers, 
unless you want the locals to laugh at you." 
 
The look Kaederman shot her told Skeeter he planned to stay as far from 
the locals as humanly possible. Which suited Skeeter just fine. The 
Wardmann-Wolfe agent muttered, "If that's all, I'm tucking it in for 
the night." He stalked out. Paula pleaded weariness and also left. 
 
"You know," Malcolm remarked to no one in particular, "I'd say that 
chap doesn't enjoy time travel." 
 
"You don't know the half of it. That man is a major pain in everybody's 
backside. Now that he's gone, though, there's a few little things you 
need to know . . ." 
 
Malcolm's glance revealed a surprising amount of dread. 
 
Skeeter sighed. "This is the part where this mess gets really 
complicated. Although I think Margo's already tumbled to part of it." 
 
Margo sat forward, eyes blazing with green fire. "You mean, if Jenna 
Caddrick's a prisoner, what was she doing at the lecture with Noah 
Armstrong? Running around London, free as a bird?" 
 
"Exactly." 
 
Malcolm shot his fiancée a startled glance. "I hadn't considered that. 
Yes, that does complicate things a bit." 
 
Skeeter nodded. "You may not know it, but I was right beside Ianira 
when she was kidnapped. Armstrong knocked Ianira flat, swept her and me 
straight to the floor, just as Jenna Caddrick burst out of the crowd 
and shot a terrorist behind us. An armed one, about to murder Ianira. I 
started wondering why Armstrong would've knocked her out of an 
assassin's way, if he was trying to kill her, then I realized the kid 
who'd shot that terrorist couldn't be anybody but Jenna, herself. They 
hustled Ianira out of danger and pulled Marcus and the girls out of 
another terrorist hit at the daycare center. Then Armstrong and Julius 
took Marcus and the girls down the Wild West Gate -- " 
 
"And Jenna came here," Margo finished. "With Ianira." 
 
"Right. And the hit men who went through the Wild West Gate killed 
Julius, thinking he was Jenna Caddrick." 
 
Margo sat up very straight. "Then the men Benny Catlin killed were 
hatchet men? The one she shot at the Picadilly Hotel and the one who 

chased her all the way to the Royal Opera?" 
 
"It certainly seems probable," Malcolm frowned. "But what game is 
Kaederman playing?" 
 
"That," Skeeter answered softly, "is what I intend to find out. 
Somebody's lying. Either Kaederman is or the senator is." 
 
"Or both," Margo muttered. 
 
"Or both. So we've not only got to find Armstrong and Miss Caddrick, 
but we don't dare let Kaederman know, if we do locate them. Not 'til we 
know more about his game and why he's playing it." 
 
"Skeeter," Malcolm sighed, "you have a distressing knack for handing 
out problems it would take Sherlock Holmes, himself, to untangle." 
 
Skeeter grinned and dug out Goldie Morran's counterfeit banknotes and 
his Pinkerton badge. "Maybe so, but this time, I've got an ace or two 
up my sleeve . . ." 
 
* * * 
 
Kit Carson had narrowly avoided death hundreds of times during his 
career as a time scout. But no one had ever tried to crush him by 
shoving luggage off a five-story platform. The man who'd crashed the 
Britannia scored a first in Kit's life. Kit saw the big cases slither 
over the edge of the platform, slither and topple and fall straight 
toward him, where he stood trapped in the middle of a sardine-packed 
crowd. 
 
He did the only thing he could. "Look out!" 
 
Then shoved aside three women, knocked down two reporters, and lunged 
sideways, himself, trying to get as many of them as possible out of the 
way. People screamed and bolted, trampling one another in a rising 
panic. Then he was down, sprawled flat under running feet, as the 
enormous steamer trunks revolved in a slow-motion tumble . . . 
 
Steel struck sparks when the first trunk smashed into the lobby floor. 
Catches burst and contents exploded as the other four trunks and a 
deadly rain of portmanteaus cannoned into the wild crowd. One of the 
smaller cases bounced, cracking down one whole side, then rebounded 
like a grenade into a hapless tourist just above Kit. The blow struck 
the man's arm so hard, all that broke loose was a sick gasp. 
 
A woman in high heels ran straight across Kit's back, digging divots 
through his ribs. Kit dragged himself under the rope barricades into 
the departures lounge, away from the outward rush of fleeing 
spectators. He'd no more than pulled himself under the nearest 
staircase when the man who'd crashed the Britannia leaped over the 
railing, landing atop the hapless tourist with the shattered arm. The 
man went down with a scream. The gate crasher staggered, going down 
under the weight of the woman slung over his shoulder, then someone 
slammed against him and he dropped his hostage. The woman slithered, 
unconscious, to the floor as the gate crasher disappeared under the 
feet of the wild throng. 

 
Kit scrambled out from under the stairs, running toward the abandoned 
hostage, who lay ominously still. He checked gently for broken bones 
and tested the pulse at her throat, unable to reach her wrist under its 
tight Victorian sleeve. She lay crumpled on her stomach, long dark hair 
falling in disarray across her face, obscuring her features. Kit was 
afraid to move her until he was certain there were no broken bones. 
Very gently, he eased her hair back . . . and gasped sharply. Shahdi 
Feroz! What was the Ripperologist doing back in TT-86, weeks too early? 
She'd followed the gate crasher through, leading the efforts to capture 
him. Kit didn't care for the ominous implications. 
 
A nasty bruise was swelling and purpling along her temple. She needed 
medical attention. Kit searched the confusion of screaming, running 
tourists. Half-a-dozen fistfights were in progress and a medi-van was 
just arriving at the edge of the riot zone. 
 
"Medical!" The roar of the seething melee swallowed his shout as though 
he'd barely whispered. The only people who heard were a handful of 
vultures who'd descended on the spilled luggage, carting off cash and 
valuables. The nearest looter glanced up, looked right at him, then ran 
for cover, pockets stuffed with spoils. Kit cursed roundly. He'd have 
to go find someone. 
 
Kit bolted through the chaos, heading toward the arriving medi-vans. He 
reached the nearest and flagged down a team. "Medical! Dr. Shahdi Feroz 
is back there, unconscious. The gate crasher knocked her out." 
 
The emergency technician said, "Sorry, we're under a triage emergency. 
We're transporting critical cases first. There's already been one 
outright murder. Someone snapped a tourist's neck like kindling." The 
technician was stooping to work feverishly over a tourist whose broken 
leg lay at a ghastly angle, with bone protruding from the skin and 
blood spurting from a severed artery. The tech had tightened down a 
tourniquet and was trying to stabilize the break enough to transport 
for surgery. 
 
"Do what you have to," Kit shot back, "but somebody'll want to talk to 
her ASAP, ask her why she came running through the gate after that 
maniac, and why he tried to snatch her." 
 
The tech shot him a startled glance, finished strapping the leg brace 
over the tourniquet, then grabbed his squawky while others lifted the 
tourist into the back of a medi-van. "We need an assist, pronto, with 
Dr. Shahdi Feroz. Station manager's gonna want her story the minute 
she's awake. She's near -- " the tech asked with a glance and Kit 
pointed " -- the gate platform stairs." 
 
The radio crackled. "Roger, we've got somebody on it." 
 
"Thanks," Kit nodded. 
 
He was pushing his way back toward Dr. Feroz when the entire station 
shook to the thunder of emergency sirens. Kit jerked to a stunned halt 
as the pattern of the maddened wail registered. "Code Seven Red! 
Repeat, Code Seven Red! Clear the Commons! All visitors to Shangri-La 
Station, clear the Commons immediately! Visitors are hereby restricted 

to hotel rooms for their own safety. Station residents, please assist 
security in clearing Commons. Repeat, Code Seven Red, Zone Three . . ." 
 
"Code Seven Red?" Kit gasped. 
 
That particular code hadn't been invoked in the entire history of 
Shangri-La Station. And Zone Three was right outside the infirmary, in 
Little Agora. Kit bolted, heading for the trouble zone, intent on 
finding out what had just broken loose inside the station. He met the 
answer at the door to the infirmary. Ann Vinh Mulhaney, bleeding badly, 
was being rushed toward surgery by station security. A gash ran down 
her shoulder, shallow enough, thank God, not to prove instantly fatal, 
but her collar bone had been laid bare by the slashing attack. She held 
one of her Irish Royal Constabulary Webley pistols in a white-knuckled 
death grip. From the look in her eyes, it would take an act of God to 
pry it loose again. 
 
Rachel appeared at a dead run. "Get her onto a gurney!" she ordered, 
ripping open the remains of Ann's blouse to apply direct pressure with 
both hands. "Compresses, stat!" 
 
A nurse ran for the supply cabinet. 
 
Ann Vinh Mulhaney's lips were moving as the gurney rushed past Kit, on 
a direct course for surgery. "Bastard was on me before I knew he was 
there. Almost got my stomach. Dropped to the floor to get out from 
under his knife. Pulled my Webley, shot at him. Missed, God damn the 
son of a bitch . . ." 
 
The Code Seven Red made abrupt, horrifying sense. Kit knew, without 
anyone having to confirm it, who their gate crasher had been and why 
Shahdi Feroz had bolted into the station on his heels. Kit shut his 
eyes for a long, horrified moment. 
 
Jack the Ripper. 
 
Loose on Shangri-La Commons. 
 
And with Mary Kelly still very much alive in London of 1888, it was 
high odds he couldn't even be killed. History could not be changed. 
Jolly Jack had to survive long enough to cut that poor girl into 
mangled pieces. Kit began to curse, starting in English and moving 
through Portuguese, German, Latin, Old Norse, and every other language 
he'd ever learned. If the petite weapons instructor hadn't been so well 
trained, if she hadn't been the kind of woman who went armed everywhere 
but bed . . . 
 
Station sirens slashed through the infirmary once more. 
 
"Code Seven Red, Zone Five! Repeat, Code Seven Red, Zone Five! All 
resident time scouts and guides, report to station security immediately 
for emergency duty. Clear the Commons at once, this station is hereby 
under martial law. Code Seven Red, Zone Five . . ." 
 
Kit bolted toward the door, glancing at the television in the infirmary 
lobby, tuned to Channel Three, which was permanently hooked into the 
Commons' extensive security-camera system. Station security, pest 

control, even BATF agents herded terrified and angry tourists toward 
their hotels, using riot batons to push them along when necessary. 
 
"Caddrick is gonna eat this up like a hog in heaven," Kit groaned, 
abandoning the television and heading out the door at a dead run. He 
had barely cleared the entryway when it came again. "Code Seven Red! 
Zone Six! All Shangri-La shop owners, lock down and secure your areas. 
Any visitors not clear of the Commons in three minutes will be arrested 
on sight. Repeat, Code Seven Red, Zone Six . . ." 
 
Security rushed past carrying a woman with long, dark hair. She'd been 
gashed from navel to groin. A badly shaken security officer was holding 
her abdomen closed, keeping direct pressure on with hands gloved in 
blood, while two others carried her. Kit started rounding up shaken, 
confused tourists. "Clear the Commons!" he roared above the wailing 
sirens. "Get to a hotel!" 
 
"But we're in the Neo Edo!" 
 
"I don't care if you're camping out in the basement! Get to the nearest 
hotel and stay there!" He herded them toward the Time Tripper, which 
was closest. They could sort out who was supposed to be where later, 
after the innocents had been gotten out of harm's way. Within five 
minutes, Commons was nearly clear, echoingly empty. Scores of tourists 
huddled in shop entryways and restaurants, ashen and trapped, unable to 
reach their hotels. Security and Pest Control officers, even BATF, 
rushed through the station, driving remnant crowds toward safety. At 
the edge of Little Agora, Kit could just see two more ashen, grey-
lipped security officers carrying the bloodied remains of yet another 
petite woman with long, dark hair. This one hadn't survived. Her throat 
had been slashed to the bone, her abdomen ripped and gashed. 
 
Kit cursed long and harshly, driving his last charges into the Time 
Tripper's crowded lobby, then headed for the nearest security team to 
offer his services for the manhunt. Wally Klontz' radio crackled just 
as Kit jogged up. 
 
"We need a medical team in Valhalla, stat! Massive coronary at the 
Langskip Cafe." 
 
"On it!" a harried voice responded. 
 
"What can I do?" Kit asked as Wally sent a team of Pest Control 
officers bolting toward the emergency. 
 
"Kit, thank God. Try to find someone from the Council of Seven, get the 
down-timers organized. We need a station-wide manhunt. Jack the 
Goddamned Ripper crashed the Britannia and the Ripper Cults have gone 
mad, attacking every petite, dark-haired woman on station." 
 
Kit's eyes widened. "My God! They're trying to kill Shahdi Feroz." 
 
"What?" 
 
"Shahdi Feroz! She came through the Britannia after the Ripper. He 
tried to kidnap her, but dropped her in the riot. I left her lying 
unconscious at the departures lounge, waiting for medical treatment." 

 
Wally Klontz keyed his radio. "Alert, Signal Eight-Delta, repeat, 
Signal Eight-Delta, missing person, Dr. Shahdi Feroz. Expedite, 
condition red. We need a location on Dr. Feroz, stat. She's the 
Ripper's target." 
 
The radio crackled and sputtered, then someone said, "Roger, Signal 
Eight-Delta, Shahdi Feroz." 
 
Kit said tersely, "I'm heading back to Victoria Station to look for 
her." 
 
Wally nodded as his radio crackled again. Kit broke into a run as Wally 
flagged down a pair of BATF agents. Commons had never been so echoingly 
deserted. A score or more of injuries, an outright murder during the 
Britannia riot, and three women slashed by the Ripper cults, sparking 
three Code Seven Reds in damn near as many minutes . . . How many more 
people would die before they could stop this maniac and his 
worshippers? If they could stop him? John Caddrick would have a field 
day with this, curse him. And God alone knew what those damned I.T.C.H. 
agents would do, faced with fresh disaster. Shangri-La Station needed a 
miracle. 
 
Kit was very much afraid they'd just run out of grace. 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Thirteen 
 
Ianira Cassondra woke slowly from a long, blurred nightmare to the 
sound of rumbling wagons, bright voices speaking incomprehensible 
English, and the laughter of small children at play. She stirred 
beneath warm quilts and turned her head toward the sounds, deeply 
confused. The presence which had waited like a monstrous, ravening 
wolf, swooping down across her each time she had awakened from drugged 
stupor, was gone without a trace. For long moments she could not bring 
herself to believe that, even when her eyelids fluttered open to reveal 
a shabby, well-scrubbed room she had never seen before. 
 
Someone moved close beside her and she focused her gaze slowly on a 
familiar face. She knew him at once, but the change in those familiar, 
beloved features shocked her speechless. Marcus' face was lined, his 
hair greying at the temples, and a terror of long standing burned hot 
in his eyes. His smile was radiant as the sunlight, however, as he took 
her hand. "You are home, Ianira. Safe." 
 
She lifted a trembling hand, touching his face, finding wetness under 
her fingertips. "How -- ?" 
 
"We followed him. He gave a lecture and we followed him when he went 
beneath the streets. We found you after he had gone, took you out of 
his horrible little room and brought you home. We're in London, 
beloved, in Spitalfields, hiding with Noah and Jenna. The girls are 
safe with us." 
 

She began to cry, from sheer relief and the release of pent-up terror. 
Marcus held her close and she clutched him tightly, revelling in the 
touch of his hands and lips. "I tried to escape," she whispered, "but 
he caught me. Kept me drugged. Marcus, he wanted to use me, to gain 
power . . ." 
 
"He is mad," Marcus said roughly. 
 
"Yes. He is the Ripper." 
 
Marcus' arms tightened protectively. "You will never see him again. 
This, I swear." 
 
When the first storm of emotion had finally passed, Ianira tipped her 
head back and gazed into her husband's wet eyes. "I want to see our 
children, husband." 
 
Marcus hesitated 
 
Ianira touched the grey in his hair. "Tell me." 
 
"We had no choice," he began, voice agonized. "They came after us, in 
Colorado. Julius . . ." He faltered. "Julius died, beloved. Their 
gunman murdered him. Noah and I took the girls away, ran for the train 
and fled east." 
 
The grey in his hair, the lines that had aged his face, his reluctance 
to call the girls made abrupt sense. "You did not return to the 
station," she whispered, shaken. "It has been three years for you, 
hasn't it?" 
 
He nodded. "Please forgive me . . ." 
 
She could not stop the tears, but lifted a trembling hand and placed it 
across his lips. "No, there is nothing to forgive. I have seen what war 
does to people. Ephesus was fighting for her independence. Was not my 
marriage to an Athenian part of that war, with me as a sacrifice? You 
and I have been caught in another war, Marcus. We are under attack from 
these men who seek Jenna's life. They use madmen like the Ansar Majlis 
to destroy and terrorize. In such a war, losing three years of your 
company, three years from my children's lives is nothing. Nothing at 
all, compared to losing you." 
 
The terror faded from his eyes, replaced by a flood of tears. He kissed 
her gently, as though she were made of fragile alabaster, and smoothed 
back her hair where long strands clung to damp cheeks. Then he went to 
the door and called in their children. Artemisia had grown into a tall, 
beautiful girl of seven, with wide, dark eyes and a curiously adult air 
of watchfulness and restraint. Gelasia clung to her sister's hand, eyes 
bright and inquisitive as she studied Ianira. 
 
Little Gelasia spoke first. "Are you really my mamma?" 
 
Ianira's throat closed and Artemisia said in a voice tinged with 
distinct British tones, "Of course she is, don't you remember?" Then 
Misia rushed across the room, flinging herself into Ianira's arms. "I 
missed you, Mamma!" 

 
"Oh, my darling . . ." 
 
Little Gelasia was more than willing to accept the return of a mother 
into her life, snuggling up to Ianira and telling her solemnly about 
her new doll and the lessons Noah had been giving them. "I can read!" 
she said proudly. "Papa and Noah taught me!" 
 
"You have always been a clever girl," Ianira smiled. "You and Misia, 
both." She ruffled her older daughter's hair affectionately. "What do 
you study, Misia?" 
 
"English and Greek and Latin," she answered promptly, "with Papa, and 
history and mathematics and geography with Noah and Jenna." A shy smile 
came and went. "And we study the future, too. Noah has a little 
computer, like a time scout's log, so we will understand science and 
technology when we go home to the station." 
 
Home to the station . . . 
 
"You miss the station?" Ianira asked softly. 
 
Artemisia nodded. "Sometimes. I miss the school and the television and 
the music. And I miss Uncle Skeeter. Do you remember when we fed the 
big pterodactyl and the bucket of fish spilled down his shirt? I can 
just remember that. We laughed and laughed." 
 
"We all miss Uncle Skeeter," Ianira agreed. "When it is safe again, we 
will go home." 
 
Artemisia's eyes told Ianira that her daughter remembered the violence 
of their last day on the station only too clearly. "Yes, Mamma. When it 
is safe again. If the bad men come here, I will help Noah and Jenna and 
Papa kill them." 
 
Ianira shivered. Another casualty of war: innocence. 
 
"Then we must hope," Ianira said gently, "that the bad men never come, 
because I will never let anyone harm my beautiful little girls." 
 
As she hugged her daughters close, Ianira could sense danger beyond the 
walls of their house in Spitalfields. It was not the same danger she 
had felt in John Lachley's presence. This was a cold, implacable danger 
which threatened from the future, from the world beyond the station's 
Primary Gate. Somewhere nearby, the killers who had sought Jenna's life 
in New York and their own lives on the station were searching for them 
in the dismal, rain-drenched streets of London. 
 
* * * 
 
Skeeter was up at the crack of dawn and on the street very shortly 
afterward, with Margo as a guide. They left Spaldergate House in 
company with a mass of Time Tours baggage handlers, groomsmen from the 
stables, even a couple of the housemaids, all detailed to the search 
team. 
 
"We'll spread out through SoHo first," Margo briefed them in the dimly 

lit stable. "We'll search street by street, combing the clothiers 
shops. We're looking for a merchant or merchants who've been robbed 
with counterfeit banknotes. Strike up casual conversations, see what 
you can turn up. If you stumble onto a hot lead, get word to Skeeter 
and me. I'll be wearing an earpiece under my hat, so you can signal me 
by radio." She handed around miniaturized transmitters, which vanished 
into coat pockets. "I'd advise taking umbrellas, since it looks like 
more rain. And here are the photos Mr. Gilbert reproduced last night." 
She handed out thick, card-backed "tin-type" prints of Noah Armstrong, 
Marcus, and "Benny Catlin" as they'd appeared at the lecture, taken 
from Margo's scout log. "Any questions? All right, then, let's move." 
 
A Time Tours carriage drove Skeeter and Margo to Regent Street, an 
ultrafashionable thoroughfare lined with ritzy tailors' establishments, 
fine bootmakers' shops, ladies' milliners, every sort of fashionable 
emporium a Londoner might want to visit. At this hour, Regent Street 
was very nearly silent, the shops deserted and the streets clear of 
traffic. "We won't actually be searching Regent Street," Margo told 
Skeeter, carefully holding her skirts and long umbrella aside as 
Skeeter handed her down to the pavement. "But Regent Street forms the 
western border of SoHo, which is jam-packed with the kind of shops 
middle-class businessmen frequent. These," she waved the tip of her 
umbrella toward the expensive establishments along Regent Street, 
"won't even open for a couple of hours, but SoHo gets up with the 
birds, same as its clientele." 
 
She was right about that. As Skeeter escorted her eastward, activity 
and noise picked up sharply. Delivery wagons groaned through the 
streets, their heavy drays straining against harness and collar, heads 
thrust forward and hooves ringing against the cobbles with the sharp 
sound of iron on stone. Shop keepers rattled open doors, jangling tiny 
brass bells against the glass, while clerks arranged window displays to 
their liking and called greetings to the draymen or dickered over 
prices and freight charges with delivery men. Shop girls, neat as pins 
in their starched dresses and aprons, bustled to greet early customers. 
A tantalizing drift from a bakery's open door set Skeeter's mouth to 
watering. 
 
"Let's start there," Margo decided, nodding toward a respectable 
looking shop advertising gentlemen's suiting off the rack. 
 
Skeeter held the door, escorting Margo inside. A middle-aged clerk in a 
well-made if inexpensive suit greeted them. "Good morning. How may I 
assist you?" 
 
Margo gave the clerk a surprisingly cool smile, causing Skeeter to 
glance more sharply at her. "Good morning," she inclined her head 
politely. "My name is Smythe, sir, and this is Mr. Jackson, of America. 
We're hoping you might be of some assistance in a rather difficult 
situation. Mr. Jackson is a Pinkerton man, a sort of private police 
agency. He's come to London on the trail of a counterfeiter, a man 
who's deprived me of a considerable sum of money I could ill afford to 
lose." 
 
"Counterfeiter?" Genuine alarm showed in the clerk's guileless eyes. 
"D'you mean to say we've a counterfeiter working in SoHo?" 
 

Skeeter produced a sample of Goldie's fake banknotes. "These are some 
of the forgeries recovered from Miss Smythe, here. I have reason to 
believe the men producing these banknotes are passing them somewhere in 
SoHo. This young lady is not the only vicitm they have damaged. I've 
traced this gang from Colorado to New York to London and I mean to 
locate them, sir." 
 
The clerk's eyes had widened in sympathetic surprise. "I should hope 
so! I'll check the cash drawer at once!" The clerk searched carefully, 
but located none of Goldie's fake banknotes, nor could he recall having 
seen any of the gentlemen in the photographs Skeeter produced. The 
clerk frowned over them, shaking his head. "No, sir, I'm afraid I don't 
recognize any of them. But I'll certainly be on my guard and I shall 
inform my employer immediately to be wary of any fivers and ten-pound 
notes we receive." 
 
"My card," Skeeter handed over the first of several dozen Spaldergate's 
staff had run off for him the previous night, "if anything should turn 
up." 
 
"Deeply obliged, sir," the clerk said earnesly, "for the warning. I'll 
keep your card right here in the cash drawer." 
 
Skeeter tipped his hat as Margo thanked the clerk, then they headed for 
the next shop. And the one after that, moving from street to street, 
until Skeeter's feet ached and his throat burned and the skies poured 
miserable, sooty rain down their collars. He and Margo hastily opened 
thick umbrellas against the downpour and checked the time on Skeeter's 
pocket watch. 
 
"One o'clock. No wonder my feet are killing me." 
 
"And my stomach's about to have a close encounter with my spine," Margo 
said ruefully. "Let's find something to eat, then keep searching." 
 
The afternoon was no more profitable than the morning had been, just 
wetter. By the time Margo admitted they'd struck out, the sun was 
already below the rooftops and the chilly evening wind was biting 
through Skeeter's overcoat. 
 
"I'm afraid there's not much more we can do today," Margo sighed. 
 
"Maybe someone else found something?" 
 
"They would've contacted us," she said with a slight shake of her head. 
"Let's get back to Spaldergate. We'll cross check with everyone else 
and come up with a new plan of attack for tomorrow." 
 
"My feet aren't even going to speak to me by tomorrow," Skeeter 
groaned, flagging down a ratty-looking hansom cab. 
 
The two-wheeled, open carriage slithered to a halt at the kerbside. 
"Battersea," Margo called up as Skeeter handed her into the cab, "and 
I've consulted Mogg's!" 
 
"Why, I'd never cheat a lady, miss!" 
 

The cabbie flicked his reins and they set out at a jolting trot. 
 
"What's Mogg's?" Skeeter asked, hanging onto his seat and struggling 
with his stubborn umbrella. 
 
"Mogg's maps." She pulled a little booklet from her handbag and passed 
it over. "Study it carefully. It lists the fares for every conceivable 
route through the city. Otherwise, cabbies will cheat you blind." 
 
"I'll remember that," Skeeter said as the horse jolted around a corner 
and swung smartly into heavy traffic, nearly colliding with two 
carriages and a drayman's wagon and eliciting rude commentaries from 
cabbies they narrowly avoided while rounding a traffic circus Skeeter 
didn't recognize. "If we survive so long. Man, not even New York 
traffic is this nuts!" 
 
Margo just grimaced and held on. 
 
True to Margo's prediction, nobody else had found a trace of 
counterfeit banknotes, nor had anyone located a witness who could 
identify Armstrong, Catlin, or Marcus. Skeeter was feeling massively 
discouraged when he eased his aching, blistered feet into a basin of 
hot water in his bedroom. Maybe they hadn't bought their clothes in 
SoHo? Or maybe they'd lucked out and used genuine banknotes when making 
the purchase? What else would they have to buy, which could be paid for 
with Goldie's counterfeit banknotes? Food, of course, and coal for the 
cookstove and fireplace. But they weren't likely to pay for any of that 
with five- and ten-pound banknotes. 
 
"Well," he mused aloud, "they have to live somewhere, don't they?" Had 
they brought enough cash between them to buy a house or were they 
reduced to renting? Probably the latter, unless Armstrong had found 
lucrative employment somewhere. According to Goldie's records, she 
hadn't changed enough currency for "Benny Catlin" to buy a London 
house, not even a really ratty one. But if they were renting, they 
might well use larger denominations to make the payments. "I wonder how 
somebody goes about renting a house in London?" 
 
He asked that question at dinner, since Kaederman had announced his 
intention of taking all his meals in his room. Malcolm toyed 
thoughtfully with a spoonful of turtle soup -- the mock variety, since 
no one in Spaldergate House would buy sea turtle, even if the creatures 
wouldn't be endangered for another century. As he pushed around bits of 
mock turtle meat, Malcolm's brow furrowed slightly. 
 
"We hadn't pursued that avenue of inquiry, Skeeter, because finding one 
man in all of London by knocking up every leasing agency in the city is 
an even longer shot than checking infirmaries and hospital wards. But 
we're not looking for Benny Catlin on his own, any longer, we're 
looking for a rather conspicuous group, aren't we? Yes, we might do 
well, at that, searching for some trace of such a group. One leases a 
house through a variety of means, generally via agencies which maintain 
lists of properties to let. Quite a few such agencies also have 
telephones, these days. We could put someone on it from Spaldergate 
while the rest of us continue to search along other lines. And there 
will certainly be agencies we shall have to check in person." 
 

Miss Tansy, Spaldergate's capable administrative assistant, offered to 
compile a list. "I'll begin telephoning when the agencies open 
tomorrow." 
 
"Thanks," Skeeter said, flashing her a grateful smile. 
 
When he finally crawled into bed, he dreamed of endless shopfronts, 
their windows streaming with sooty grey rain, and of endless, babbling 
voices and blurred faces reflecting only puzzled bafflement as he posed 
question after question. When Skeeter finally woke, aching and tired 
with the unfair exhaustion that comes of too many stressful dreams, he 
roused into consciousness with an immediate awareness of a renewed 
throbbing from his feet, a gradual awareness of watery light and the 
spatter of rain falling against his window, and the unhappy knowledge 
that he would have to coax his swollen and protesting feet through 
several more miles of London's maze-like collection of storefronts. He 
sighed, eased gingerly out of bed, and got ready for another day of 
searching. 
 
Surely there had to be an easier way to go legit? 
 
 
 
Shahdi Feroz knew she was lucky when she woke up on the Commons floor. 
She was alive. Frankly, she hadn't expected to wake up again. She tried 
to move and bit her lips over a gasp of pain, then opted for lying very 
still, instead. A station riot had erupted as far as her swollen right 
eye could see. Given the shocking bruises she could feel the length of 
her body, Shahdi suspected panic stricken tourists had stepped on her, 
multiple times. John Lachley's single, if somewhat devastating, right 
cross to her temple couldn't begin to account for her stiff, 
unresponsive limbs and aching back muscles. 
 
At the moment, she could only give profound and shaken thanks that John 
Lachley had dropped her at all. What he would've done to her . . . She 
shuddered, recalling the sight of Dominica Nosette's severed head 
clutched in his hand. Poor, stupid reporter. The rest of her lay in the 
basement of New Scotland Yard on Whitehall; they'd watched Lachley drop 
off the mutilated torso and bid her a flippant farewell, via the camera 
hidden at the construction site. Shahdi was gingerly flexing her 
fingers, trying to decide whether or not her body would accept being 
pushed to hands and knees, when someone literally dragged her to her 
feet. Blinding light caught her square in the eyes and the world 
erupted into a chaos of shouting voices. 
 
"Dr. Feroz -- " 
 
" -- comment -- " 
 
" -- really Jack the Ripper -- " 
 
" -- how could you allow that monster -- " 
 
She stumbled and swayed sharply, and would've fallen again if she 
hadn't collided with someone far taller and heavier than herself. The 
man grasped her by the shoulders, keeping her on her feet, then a new 
voice thundered into her awareness. 

 
"By God, you're going to answer for this!" 
 
Before she could even blink her vision clear, Shahdi was dragged 
forward, tottering off balance, literally hauled through the chaos by a 
man whose grip added another layer of bruises. Still half-stunned from 
Lachley's blow, she couldn't even offer a struggle for the first 
hundred paces. By the time her head was clear enough to realize she'd 
just been assaulted -- again -- and had been kidnapped by some new 
maniac, there wasn't a security officer in sight. 
 
Shahdi dug in her heels. "Let go of me!" 
 
She wasn't sure whose face she expected to swing furiously into focus. 
 
Senator John Caddrick hadn't even made her list of possibilities. She 
gasped, then wrenched her arm free. "Who do you think you are? Take 
your hands off me at once!" 
 
"Oh, no you don't!" Caddrick snarled, dragging her forward again. "You 
and I have an appointment with federal authorities. I want some 
answers!" 
 
She twisted free once more, ready for combat. "Touch me again and I 
will have you jailed for assault and battery!" 
 
Before Caddrick could reply -- or grab her wrist again -- a howling mob 
of reporters descended, screaming questions and thrusting cameras and 
microphones into their faces. From somewhere out of the confusion, a 
uniformed BATF agent appeared. 
 
"Thank God! You found her!" the agent cried, speaking briefly into her 
radio. "Secure from Signal Eight-Delta, I have Dr. Feroz, unharmed." 
 
"Roger, bring her in." 
 
"Dr. Feroz, please come with me immediately. Your life is in danger." 
 
Another security patrol rushed toward them, flanking Shahdi and pushing 
back reporters with a certain callousness that shocked her. 
 
"What's going on?" Caddrick demanded. 
 
"Dr. Feroz is being taken into protective custody. The Ripper cults 
have targeted her for murder." 
 
While she tried to take in the implications of that shocking statement, 
the security agents hustled Shahdi through the station, leaving 
Caddrick and the reporters to trail after them, shouting questions 
nobody answered. They literally dragged Shahdi through the doorway into 
security headquarters, with the senator and fifty screaming newsies on 
their heels. The lobby was in chaos. Agents scrambled past them, 
swearing and shoving reporters aside with scant regard for broken 
equipment. Telephones shrilled for attention between deafening hoots 
from the station's emergency sirens. Dispatchers shouted instructions 
into radios, scribbled information from the reports crackling over the 
speakers. 

 
John Caddrick stood staring at the confusion, then strode toward the 
main desk, mouth thinned to near invisibility. Shahdi was escorted past 
the uncertain haven of the dispatcher's desk where a harried woman was 
shouting into a radio. A moment later, Shahdi found herself in a nearly 
empty corridor lined with closed doors. "This way, Dr. Feroz," her 
escort said, steering her around a corner. They cannoned straight into 
someone at least two feet taller than Shahdi was. She staggered and 
fell against the wall, then found herself staring up at Ronisha Azzan, 
Shangri-La's Deputy Station Manager. 
 
"Dr. Feroz?" Ronisha Azzan blinked. "Thank God, I was told you'd been 
located. Come with me, please. I was just coming down to meet you." 
 
Behind the tall deputy station manager, a squat, fire-plug shape was 
storming down the corridor like a torpedo fired at a battleship. Shahdi 
blinked in surprise. Bull Morgan was out of jail. Caddrick rounded the 
corner at just that moment, then stood sputtering. "What's he doing out 
of jail?" 
 
The squat station manager growled, "What the hell is he doing here?" 
reminding Shahdi of an angry pit bull. 
 
Caddrick flushed, nostrils flaring with barely controlled anger as he 
stared up at the tall deputy station manager beside Bull Morgan. 
"Azzan, I will have your head for this! Letting a known criminal out of 
jail before -- " 
 
Bull Morgan shouldered him aside. "Get out of my security headquarters. 
You're obstructing an emergency operation during a declared state of 
martial law. Leave right now or pick out your cell in the detention 
block. The one I've been using is free." 
 
"How dare you -- " 
 
The security agents who'd escorted Shahdi to safety produced handcuffs 
and startlingly effective grins. The nearest said with a chuckle, "Mr. 
Morgan never bluffs, Senator. And neither does the BATF." 
 
Caddrick sputtered for an instant longer, then turned on his heel and 
strode away. Bull bit the end of a cigar he'd magicked out of a pocket. 
"Better give that schmuck an escort back to his hotel. God knows, we 
don't want anything happening to him out there." 
 
Security pelted after him as Bull appropriated his deputy manager's 
radio. "Benson! Report, goddammit!" He strode off before Shahdi could 
hear the reply. Ronisha Azzan stalked after him, drawing Shahdi along. 
 
"Ms. Azzan," she said, wincing as the rapid pace jolted her bruises, "I 
don't know what a Code Seven Red is, but I do know Jack the Ripper is 
loose on this station and right now, I know more about Dr. John Lachley 
than anyone else on TT-86. I'd like to help." 
 
The tall deputy manager nodded her thanks. "Doctor, you just got 
yourself a job." 
 
Moments later, she was at ground zero of the biggest crisis in the 

history of time tourism, wondering what on earth she was going to tell 
the harried, white-faced security officers looking to her for answers. 
 
* * * 
 
By the end of his first week in London, Skeeter Jackson had begun to 
think Jenna Caddrick and Noah Armstrong had made their own clothes. Or 
that Noah had bought their entire wardrobe in the States and brought it 
over by ship. Hundreds of tailors' shops and ready-made clothing 
stores, scattered throughout SoHo, had yielded not so much as a trace 
of the missing senator's daughter and her companions. Even the inquiry 
into leasing agents had drawn a blank. None of the agents they 
consulted had found any counterfeit banknotes, nor could they identify 
the photos Skeeter and the other searchers circulated. 
 
At Malcolm's suggestion, they turned their attention to the East End, a 
far more dangerous territory to search. Teams consisted of three 
searchers minimum, for safety's sake. Also at Malcolm's suggestion, Sid 
Kaederman remained at Spaldergate, supervising the teams fielded to 
question private physicians and surgeons; the actual questioning was 
done by Spaldergate staff and Time Tours porters. 
 
Skeeter's first run into the East End was supervised by two seasoned 
pros: Malcolm and Margo, who wanted to be sure he knew the ropes before 
turning him loose with a couple of groomsmen. Whitechapel, with its 
dismal, dirty streets and its stench of rotting refuse in the gutters, 
was open for business well before Skeeter arrived, less than an hour 
past dawn. 
 
Immense wagonloads of freight groaned their cumbersome way down 
Houndsditch, Aldgate High Street, and Commercial Street. Heavy drays 
with chipped, ponderous hooves and shabby coats of hair growing in 
thick for winter, strained against worn leather harness and collars. 
The big draft horses carted vast tonnages of export goods to the docks 
for shipment across the face of the world, and brought out staggering 
amounts of raw lumber and bales of cotton arriving from foreign shores, 
huge bundles of animal hides and fur for the leather and garment 
industries, ingots of pig iron and copper and tin for the smelting 
plants and iron works which belched their stinking smoke into 
Whitechapel's skies. The high whine and rasp of industrial saws poured 
from open factory windows, like clouds of enraged wasps spilling 
furiously from a nest shaken by a foolish little boy. 
 
And everywhere, the people: dirty to the pores with coal smoke and 
industrial grime no amount of scrubbing with harsh lye soap could 
remove. Women in frowsy dresses ran bakeshops, trundled basketloads of 
fish and flowers, plied meat cleavers against stained butchers' blocks 
in grimy little storefronts whose back rooms often hid the misery and 
desperation of illegal abortions. Men hauled butchered carcasses over 
their shoulders or gutted fish in stinking open-air markets where feral 
cats and fat, sleek rats fought for discarded offal and fish heads. 
 
Other men hauled handcarts piled high with bricks and building stone or 
carried grinding wheels on frayed leather harnesses, calling out in 
roughened voices, "Knives to grind!" as they wandered from shop to 
doorstep. Boys ran urgent errands, clutching baskets of vegetables and 
heavy stacks of newspapers, or trundled rickety wheelbarrows spilling 

over with piles of red, coarse brick dust which they sold in little 
sackfuls. One boy jogged along with a ferret in his arms, leading a 
bright-eyed spaniel on a worn leather leash. 
 
"Good grief, is that a pet ferret?" Skeeter turned to stare. 
 
Malcolm followed his glance. "Not a pet. That boy's a rat-catcher. 'You 
maun have a ferret, to catch a rat,' " he added in what sounded 
suspiciously like a quotation. "He'll spend the day over in the better 
parts of town, de-ratting some rich woman's house. The ferret chases 
them out and the spaniel kills the sneaky little beasts." 
 
"And the boy gets paid a small fortune by some hysterical housewife," 
Skeeter guessed. 
 
Margo shook her head. "More likely by some frantic housekeeper who 
doesn't want to lose her place because rats have broken into the cellar 
or littered in the best linens." 
 
"There is that," Skeeter admitted as the boy dodged past, heading west. 
Then he spotted a long, shallow wooden trough where girls appeared to 
be dunking handfuls of dried leaves into stinking dye. "What in the 
world are they doing?" 
 
"Dying tea leaves," Malcolm said drolly. 
 
"Dying them? What for?" 
 
Margo chuckled. "There's fortunes to made in the tea recycling 
business. Housekeepers in wealthy households sell used tea leaves for a 
tidy sum, then girls in the tea trade dye the leaves so they look new 
and sell them in the poorer parts of town." 
 
"Remind me not to buy tea anywhere around here. What's in that stuff 
they're using? It smells horrible." 
 
"Don't ask," Malcolm said repressively. 
 
"You don't want to know what's in the food around here, either," Margo 
added. "They keep passing laws against putting in the worst stuff. Like 
brick dust in sausages, as filler." 
 
"Remind me to skip lunch. And I'm not a squeamish eater." A guy 
couldn't spend five years in Yesukai the Valiant's tent and stay 
finicky, not if he wanted to survive. But he'd never eaten brick dust -
- of that, at least, he was morally certain. They passed the Ten Bells, 
a public house strategically poised on the corner of roaring Commercial 
Street and Fournier, within sight of the gleaming white spire of 
Christchurch, Spitalfields. Rough-dressed men loitered near the 
entrance, eyeing tired women who walked slowly past, returning the 
interested stares with calculating glances. A shabby woman selling 
roasted chestnuts beside the door paid the prostitutes no attention, 
reserving her efforts for paying customers. One woman who'd stopped to 
rest against the pub's wall was driven away by a nearby constable. 
 
"Move on, there, or I'll take you in, so I will!" 
 

The woman's reply was not precisely in English, baffling Skeeter with a 
sharp spate of incomprehensible syllables, but she moved farther down 
the street. Skeeter scratched his neck. "What was that all about?" 
 
Malcolm said quietly, "They aren't allowed to pick a spot and solicit. 
They have to keep moving. Women walk from pub to pub, or simply circle 
a building like Saint Botolph's Church, known locally as the 
'prostitutes' church,' for the women walking in dreary circles around 
it, hours at a time. They often stake out little territories without 
ever stopping long enough to get themselves arrested. Mary Kelly 
patrols the area around the Ten Bells pub, there. Rumor is, she's very 
jealous of her beat. Of course, that may just be sour grapes from the 
other women. She's very pretty and vivacious. She likes to sing and the 
men like her." 
 
Margo put in, "Women like poor Liz Stride would've hated her for it." 
 
Skeeter had seen enough pictures of Long Liz to know she'd been a 
mannish, horse-faced Swede, missing half her teeth, poor creature. Word 
was, her lover had been utterly devastated by her death. "Well," 
Skeeter cleared his throat, "where do we start? I hadn't realized the 
East End was so big." 
 
"Huh, this is nothing," Margo put in. "You ought to see the docklands. 
They stretch out to forever." 
 
Malcolm cast a jaundiced eye at his fiancée. "I fear Mr. Jackson will 
have ample opportunity to tour the docklands before this business is 
done. Now that you've seen something of Whitechapel, Mr. Jackson, and 
have a feel for the territory, I would suggest we repair to Middlesex 
Street. If they're supplying their wardrobe from the East End, it's the 
likest spot to search." 
 
"I'm following you," Skeeter said ruefully. 
 
Malcolm led the way past Christchurch, which rose in startling white 
purity from the grime, and walked briskly down to Fashion Street, then 
cut over to Middlesex, a long block to the west. The Sunday cloth fair 
which had given the street its famous nickname was conspicuously 
absent, but shops selling ready-mades of a cheap cut, mostly stitched 
from mill-ends cloth, were open for business. Malcolm pushed open the 
door of the nearest, leaving Skeeter and Margo to follow. As the door 
swung shut with a solid thump, a well-scrubbed shop girl in a worn 
dress eyed them, taking in their fine clothes with a dubious, narrow-
eyed stare. 
 
"Wot you 'ere for?" she asked suspiciously. "You never come round 'ere 
t'buy togs, not the likes of you, wiv yer fancy city suiting." 
 
Malcolm doffed his hat. "Good morning, miss. No, indeed, you're very 
sharp. We're hoping you might be able to help us. We're looking for 
someone." 
 
"I ain't like to grass on nobody, I ain't," she muttered. 
 
Malcolm produced a shining shilling and said casually, "The gentlemen 
we're looking for are foreigners, miss, foreign swindlers and thieves. 

They have cheated this young lady of a substantial sum of money by 
passing counterfeit banknotes and they have robbed me of quite a sum 
the same way, passing their filthy money at a game of cards last week." 
 
Margo spoke up in a voice Skeeter scarcely recognized. "Give me a 
fiver, 'e did, miss, said 'e 'adn't got nuffink smaller, an' I give 'im 
near four quid change for it, when it weren't worth the paper the 
cheeky blagger printed it on 'is own self." 
 
The girl's eyes widened, her suspicion dwindling under the twin 
onslaughts of Margo's East-End voice and alarmingly serious complaint. 
Skeeter stepped forward with one of Goldie's sample banknotes. "My name 
is Jackson, ma'am, from America. I've trailed these criminals all the 
way from New York, where they were counterfeiting dollars. This is one 
of their forgeries." He handed over the banknote and let her peer 
curiously at it, then produced the photographs. "Have you seen any of 
these men?" 
 
The shopgirl took the heavy cardstock photos and gazed at them 
carefully, shuffling through them. "No," she said slowly, "never 
clapped me minces on any blokes wot stood for these 'ere likenesses. 
But I'll look sharp, so I will. Some tea leaf passed me a bad fiver, 
I'd just about as well shut me doors an' walk the streets or starve." 
She handed the photos and the fake banknote back with a grim, angry 
look in her eyes. "Mark me, I'll keep a sharp butcher's out, so I 
will." 
 
Malcolm handed her a small white card. "If you do see them, here is 
where you can reach me." He handed over the shilling, as well, which 
she pocketed hastily, along with Malcolm's card. He put his hat on 
again, tipping the brim. "Good day, miss." 
 
They tried the next shop on Middlesex Street, then the one after that 
and the next in line, with Malcolm sometimes initiating the questions 
and occasionally Skeeter stepping in to fill that role. They had 
reached the end of the lane, having covered every shop in Middlesex 
Street, when a voice rose behind them. 
 
"Mister Moore, sir! Wait a bit, mister!" 
 
They looked around to see the first girl they'd questioned, running 
breathlessly toward them. They waited, hope suddenly an electrifying 
presence in their midst. The girl reached them and gasped out, "Cor, 
but I'm glad you 'adn't gone yet! Mistress just come into the shop, 
y'see, it's 'er shop, like, and I told 'er what you said. She thinks 
she knows of 'em, mister." 
 
Skeeter exchanged startled glances with Margo as Malcolm said, "By all 
means, let us speak with your employer." 
 
A moment later, they were showing the photographs to a stout, sallow-
cheeked woman with white hair and poor teeth. "That's 'im, I don't 
doubt," the woman said, pointing to Noah Armstrong's photograph. "Of a 
Sunday, when the market's in the street, me sister-in-law sets up a 
stall just outside, there. Sold a fistful of suits, Sunday last, to a 
bloke wot give 'er a fiver. An' it weren't worth no more'n me 
shoelaces, come the time she went off t'spend it. I remember the bloke, 

as I was set up next ter Sally an' she were that excited, she were, 
t'get a fiver when she needed the money so desperate. Like to put 'er 
in the work'ouse, bastard did, 'an 'er a war widow wivout no 'usband 
nor child t'look after 'er in 'er age. It's me own profits, small as 
they are, wot's paid 'er rent an' put food in 'er Limehouse this week 
past." 
 
"Do you remember anything about him that might help us locate him? Did 
he say anything about where he was staying?" 
 
"That 'e didn't, or I'd 'ave sent a copper after 'im." 
 
"My dear lady," Malcolm said, producing two five-pound notes from his 
wallet, "you have been of incalculable service. Please see that your 
sister-in-law's losses are replaced." 
 
The old woman's eyes shot wide at the sight of so much money. She took 
the banknotes with a shaking hand, turned them over and over, staring 
at them. Wetness spilled over and traced down both cheeks as she closed 
wrinkled hands around the money. The crackle of crisp paper was loud in 
Skeeter's ears. Voice trembling, she said to her shopgirl, "Go an' 
fetch Sally, luv, tell 'er God sent a right proper angel t'look out for 
us. God bless you, mister." 
 
The girl's eyes were bright, as well. She dropped a brief curtsey and 
ran out the back way. A door thumped, marking her exit, then Malcolm 
tipped his hat. "Good day, madam. Thank you again. If you hear anything 
else, your girl has my card." 
 
They left her clutching the money to her bosom. 
 
The moment the door swung shut behind Skeeter, Malcolm said, "They are 
here, then, as surmised. It remains to locate their hiding place. It 
occurs to me that they cannot be staying anywhere in the immediate 
area, or the shopkeepers hereabouts would have recognized them as 
neighbors." 
 
"Well, they have to eat, don't they?" Skeeter pointed out. 
 
Malcolm's eyes glinted. "Which means they must procure victuals from a 
chandler." 
 
"Remember what you said, Malcolm?" Margo said thoughtfully. "If you 
were going to hide in the East End and knew you would be marked as a 
foreigner, you'd find a place with a high concentration of immigrants, 
so you wouldn't stand out so much. Like Spitalfields and Bethnal Green. 
Let's try the Chandler's Shops up there." 
 
"Indeed," Malcolm glanced north. "A capital idea. Let us begin at 
Spitalfields Market, shall we?" 
 
They walked rapidly north and jogged west to Bishopsgate, which they 
followed north again through the bustle and crowds of carts and 
groaning freight wagons and strolling vendors calling their wares. The 
market, when they arrived, was a vast confusion of Cockney voices 
singing out in rhyming patter that echoed with a roar of alien sound. 
 

Fresh flowers spilled a heady perfume into the wet morning air, 
thousands of blossoms tied in dripping bunches. Flower girls piled them 
high into heavy baskets and trays for sale in better climes. Fresh 
vegetables heaped in mounds lent a more sober note to the riot of 
hothouse flowers. Fishwives haggled over the price of mussels and eels 
and ragged urchins bartered for coarse-ground flour while their harried 
mothers counted out pennies for bricks of tea. 
 
"If we can't find a trace of them here," Malcolm shouted above the 
roar, "I shall be very much surprised. Mr. Jackson, why don't you take 
the right-hand side of the market. Miss Smith, try the left-hand way 
and I shall tackle the middle." 
 
They split up and Skeeter approached the first stall, where a sweating 
woman in her fifties manhandled huge rounds of cheese, hacking off 
wedges for sale. He gave her the pitch, holding up a shilling to catch 
her attention. 
 
"Ain't seen 'em," she said shortly, pocketing Skeeter's money. 
 
He tried again at the next stall, where re-dyed tea sold briskly. The 
negative response cost him another shilling and several elbows in his 
ribs from customers anxious to buy a brick of tea for tuppence. He 
moved on to a flower vendor who gave him a suspicious glare over the 
nodding heads of pure white daisies, their centers yellower than the 
sun over Spitalfields' grey sky. The woman shook her head impatiently 
and pocketed the coin. Skeeter glanced around, searching for Margo and 
Malcolm, making their grim, determined way through the stalls. He 
turned back with a sigh and tried the next vendor, where slabs of fatty 
bacon hung from meathooks. 
 
"Why d'you ask about 'em?" the man behind the counter demanded sourly, 
eyes narrowed as he peered at the photographs. 
 
"We believe they're counterfeiters. They've cheated a young lady who 
runs a shop up in Bethnal Green, gave her a counterfeit banknote that 
nearly landed her in the workhouse, unable to pay her bills. I've 
followed them all the way from America, where they printed dollars 
instead of pound notes." The man hesitated, giving Skeeter cause to 
hope. He fished out a glittering half crown coin. "I realize you don't 
like to grass on anyone," Skeeter said, holding up the coin, "but these 
men are cheating women who can't afford the loss. An elderly war widow 
in Middlesex Street lost five pounds to them." 
 
The man's jaw muscles bunched. He spat to one side, then tapped the 
photograph of Marcus. "I seen 'im, lots o' times. Lives wiv 'is sister 
and some chap who come over from America. And a pair of sweet little 
girls, God 'elp 'em, wiv a father like that. Comes 'ere regular, like, 
t'buy bacon an' flour, 'e does, along wiv 'is sister." 
 
Skeeter handed over the half crown and produced a full sovereign, 
glittering gold in the light. "Where do they live?" 
 
The man jerked his head to the east. "Be'ind Christchurch, someplace 
along Fournier Street, is all I know." 
 
"Thank you," Skeeter said quietly, handing over the sovereign and 

retrieving his photographs. "More than you can know." 
 
He hurried through the mob, finding Malcolm near the end of his own 
row. The guide wore an expression of frustration. Skeeter waved him 
over. "Malcolm! I've got a solid lead! Behind Christchurch, on 
Fournier!" 
 
Malcolm's eyes came violently alive. "By damn, Jackson, good work! 
Where's Miss Smith?" 
 
They found Margo deep in conversation with a woman selling flour by the 
scoop. Malcolm caught her eye, but she lifted a hand, so they waited. 
When the woman finished talking, Margo handed her a whole sovereign and 
turned toward them, cheeks glowing with excitement. 
 
"You've found them, too?" Malcolm said without preamble. 
 
"Yes! Fournier Street, seventh house on the right. Mr. Anastagio," she 
tapped Marcus' photo, "and his sister and their friend, Mr. Dillon, 
from America." 
 
"All I got was Fournier Street," Skeeter admitted wryly. 
 
"Cockney women," Margo chuckled, "love a good gossip. Especially when 
there's money in it. Let's go beard Mr. Anastagio in his den," she 
added, eyes bright with excitement. 
 
"By all means," Malcolm agreed, heading out of the crowded market. "And 
let us pray that Mr. Dillon and Miss Anastagio do nothing rash before 
we convince them we are Marcus' friends." 
 
Skeeter's heart was triphammering as they turned into Fournier Street 
and passed poor but well-scrubbed houses where stout women called to 
one another in Yiddish. At the seventh house on the right, they found 
shuttered windows and a closed door, but flowers grew in pots along the 
steps and smoke curled upwards from the chimney. Inside, Skeeter could 
hear the squeal and laughter of children's voices. His throat 
tightened. Artemisia's voice . . . teasing her sister . . . Malcolm and 
Margo waited expectantly, gazes locked on him. Skeeter nodded once, 
then climbed the stone steps and knocked on the door. 
 
The voices inside cut off sharply, then footsteps hurried their way. 
Margo joined Skeeter on the top step, just as an unknown voice called 
out, "Who is it?" 
 
Margo glanced at Skeeter, winking, then raised her voice to carry 
through the door. "Eh, luv, you got a dog?" 
 
"What?" 
 
"I ast, 'ave you got a dog? There's a bitch wot's littered pups on yer 
front steps." 
 
The door opened quickly and Skeeter found himself staring at "Benny 
Catlin" -- Jenna Caddrick in the flesh, wearing woolen trousers and a 
heavy flannel shirt. Wide eyes swept down, looking automatically for 
the mythical puppies. Suspicion and wild terror leaped into Jenna's 

eyes and she tried to slam the door in their faces. Margo shoved her 
foot against it and said, "It's no use running, Miss Caddrick. We're 
here to help." 
 
At that instant, a childish voice squealed from the dim interior. 
 
"Uncle Skeeter!" 
 
An instant later, Artemisia had flown into his arms. 
 
Skeeter buried his face in her thick hair to hide the tears. 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Fourteen 
 
Kit Carson arrived at the security office complex with a mob of 
screaming reporters on his heels. As Kit fled through the doors, 
someone in a BATF uniform looked around at the howling noise. "Oh, God, 
who let them in?" 
 
Irritated time scouts joined forces with security personnel to bodily 
shove the horde of newsies back out the door. Several cameras and more 
than one face failed to survive the process. A cordon of armed guards 
was hastily thrown into place in front of the doors, pulled from off-
duty shifts called in for riot control and search teams. 
 
"What can I do to help?" Kit asked the nearest harried desk jockey, who 
was manning five phones at once and handing out search assignments. The 
officer glanced up and three phones shrilled at the same time. She 
lunged for the nearest, listened, jotted notes, grabbed the next one 
without bothering to hang up the first. Then swore and grabbed a 
microphone. 
 
"Code Seven Red! Zone Nine! All visitors on station are hereby ordered 
to seek the nearest available shelter. Repeat, Code Seven Red, Zone 
Nine!" 
 
Somebody else was snarling, "I don't care who the hell you are, get off 
this channel! We're in a state of emergency, here . . ." 
 
Kit ground his teeth and waited for somebody to tell him how he could 
help. He was still waiting when Bull Morgan, slightly thinner than the 
last time Kit had laid eyes on him, arrived. Bull had already managed 
to scrape up a cigar someplace, despite the fact he couldn't have been 
out of his own jail more than five minutes. The station manager was 
busy masticating the end of it into a pulpy, wet mess that indicated 
his current level of stress. Kit wondered who'd had the audacity to 
unlock his cell door. Ronisha Azzan, no doubt. With Jack the Ripper 
loose on station, she very well might have thrown the federal marshals 
into jail, just to keep them out of everyone's hair. 
 
Bull caught Kit's eye and waved him over. "Kit, I need someone to 
hustle downstairs to the weapons ranges and open up the arsenals, Ann's 
and Sven's, both. We don't have enough arms for our security officers. 

And I want a couple dozen Found Ones deputized as security to search 
the subbasements. You know the Found Ones, and they trust you. Give 'em 
weapons from Sven's lockers, they'll know how to use bladed weapons. 
And if we had some clubs . . ." 
 
"What about those 1880's style baseball and cricket bats the outfitters 
stock?" 
 
"Good idea. Get 'em. Every Ripper cult on station has gone nuts, 
killing women. We need all the help we can get, stopping this mess." 
 
"I'll organize the men in the Found Ones, put together sweep teams." 
 
"Make damned sure the women stay out of harm's way. Especially the 
dark-haired, petite ones, who look like Dr. Feroz." 
 
"Has anyone seen her?" 
 
Bull twitched the unlit cigar to the other side of his mouth. "She's 
back with Ronnie, right now, telling us what she knows about this 
maniac. If he wasn't totally insane before he got here, chances are, he 
is now. Even the most balanced down-timers go a little bit nuts when 
they first arrive on station." 
 
The coldness in the pit of Kit's belly deepened. At least the 
Ripperologist was safe. 
 
"Kit, why don't you join the briefing Dr. Feroz is giving our sweep 
teams before you organize the Found Ones. You can pass along what she 
has to say. The briefing is back in Mike's office." 
 
Kit found Shahdi Feroz speaking tersely to a group of security 
officers, Pest Control units, and BATF. Even the I.T.C.H. agents had 
put in appearance, listening intently and recording notes of their own. 
 
The Ripperologist was just answering a question. "Yes, that would fit 
the pattern of a psychotic serial killer. They usually kill to a 
pattern. If you can unravel the pattern, you can go a long way toward 
stopping the killer. Unfortunately, in John Lachley's case, it is not 
so simple. He was killing women in possession of letters which he was 
desperate to recover. What sort of letters, we still do not know. 
Clearly, he didn't come to Shangri-La Station looking for them, which 
suggests he has abandoned whatever plans he'd made, which these letters 
threatened. I believe he has come forward in time looking for bigger 
game. Power is what lures him. He rose from obscure beginnings in the 
East End and pursued a medical degree as a means to greater power. 
Occult scholarship was another tool he used. Aleister Crowley studied 
under him and Lachley succeeded in positioning himself as personal 
advisor to the queen's grandson, Prince Eddy." 
 
A nearby scout muttered, "Now there's a scary thought. The man who 
bills himself as the prophet of the anti-Christ, studying Satanic 
ritual under Jack the Ripper." 
 
"What about the Ripper cults?" a BATF agent asked worriedly. 
 
Dr. Feroz thinned her mouth. "That is part of the bad news. Lachley has 

already begun to wield immense power through the Ripper cults. We must 
deprive him of his new worshippers, quickly. Isolate him in a time he 
does not yet understand, while he is still vulnerable to technology 
which baffles him." 
 
One of the I.T.C.H. agents spoke up. "You can isolate him all you 
like," the woman said coldly, "but it won't do any good if he can't be 
killed." 
 
The Ripperologist surprised Kit -- and everyone else -- with her 
answer. "We have no guarantee he cannot be killed. After all, Jack the 
Ripper was two men. It is entirely possible James Maybrick will act 
alone in the murder of Mary Kelly. The girl looks enough like his 
adulterous wife to send the man into a frenzy. In crime scene 
photographs taken the day of her murder, there are initials visible in 
blood on the walls, an F and an M, suggesting the name Florie Maybrick. 
 
And Catharine Eddowes, poor woman, had an M carved through her eyelids, 
another clue to Maybrick's identity, had the police realized it. With 
Lachley out of the picture, Maybrick is on his own, without a mentor to 
guide or goad him into repeated murders. If one studies Maybrick's 
diary, one finds a startling change of tone and attitude after Mary 
Kelly's murder. It is almost as though Maybrick had roused from a 
murderous stupor of some sort, returning to sanity and remorse. 
 
"Importantly, Lachley is a mesmerist of some note. I would not be at 
all surprised to learn that Lachley had used that skill to gain control 
of Maybrick, using hypnotic suggestion to bring his hatred of 
prostitutes boiling over to critical levels, then pointing him at the 
victims Lachley chose. Without Lachley to reinforce the hypnotic 
suggestions, Maybrick might well come to his senses after the butchery 
of Mary Kelly and look back on what he has done with the very shock one 
reads in the diary. Given all this, with Maybrick quite probably acting 
alone in the Kelly murder, we cannot assume that Lachley is impossible 
to kill. Not based on the assumption that he must be present for Mary 
Kelly's death." 
 
Kit was impressed. Maybe there was hope, yet? 
 
Mike Benson spoke up quickly, however. "We're going to play it safe and 
assume the worst, just the same. I don't want anyone tackling this guy 
alone. We've cleared Commons, which has robbed Lachley and his 
worshippers of easily available victims, but his fury will make him 
dangerously unpredictable. He may well go to ground somewhere. Or he 
may start breaking down doors, looking for Dr. Feroz or the next best 
substitute. There may be no way to stop his killing spree, short of 
evacuating the station." 
 
"You can't be serious!" 
 
"My God, Benson -- " 
 
"Quiet!" The bellow came from behind Kit's shoulder. He jerked around 
to find Bull Morgan striding into the briefing room. "I'm not 
evacuating this station, get that clear right now. One, it's impossible 
to do, not in time. There is no physical way to get everyone on this 
station through Primary during its next cycle, not to mention trying to 

herd every man, woman, and child in Shangri-La down to Primary precinct 
in the next three minutes, just to make the gate opening." 
 
Glances at wrist watches caused a miniature sea of bobbing heads, a 
flock of guinea hens popping up and down in tall grass. As though on 
cue, the station announcer came on, the sound muted through the walls: 
"Your attention please. Primary is due to open in three minutes. Be 
advised, all station passes through Primary have been revoked for the 
duration of the station emergency. Remain in your hotel room or your 
current place of shelter with the door locked. Do not make any attempt 
to reach Primary . . ." 
 
Bull Morgan waited for the echo to fade, then said grimly, "I've 
ordered a total lockdown of this station, including cancellation of 
Primary passes, so he can't slip out with panic-stricken tourists the 
way he crashed the Britannia. I want everyone on a search team to stay 
in radio contact. Work in teams of at least three and never lose sight 
of your teammates. If your team doesn't have a radio, see Mike Benson. 
That's it people, move out and comb this station like it's never been 
combed before." 
 
The nearest I.T.C.H. agent collared Bull. "What do you intend to do 
with Lachley when you find him?" 
 
"Since you ask, I hope to God he can be killed, because I have no 
intention of taking Jack the Ripper alive and then ending up stuck with 
him for the rest of his natural life. Up-time law says we can't ship 
him home and we can't send him to an up-time prison, either, because 
that same law prevents us from sending any down-timer through Primary. 
And frankly, there's not a cage I could build on this station that a 
psychopath couldn't eventually break out of. We're not equipped to hold 
a thing like that in a cell for the next forty or fifty years." 
 
"What happened to trial by jury?" the I.T.C.H. agent demanded, her 
glare icy. 
 
Bull Morgan chewed his cigar to shreds. "I'll tell you what, lady. You 
answer me this. What happened to four gutted women? And a man with a 
broken neck, who was unfortunate enough to simply be in Lachley's way? 
We have a station cram full of potential victims, here, and it's my job 
to see they don't become statistics. And just in case you've forgotten, 
down-timers don't have any legal rights, the honest and decent ones any 
more than some psychopathic butcher. And I didn't write those laws, 
either. I'm just stuck enforcing 'em. I'm not real happy about it, but, 
by God, I will protect innocents. This ain't New York, lady, and it 
ain't the Hague, and you're not in charge. You don't like it, get the 
hell off my station." 
 
The I.T.C.H. agent gave Bull a combative glare, but she backed down. 
They might be stuck in the middle of the worst situation any station 
had ever faced, but Bull Morgan wasn't going down without a fight. Kit 
felt like cheering. 
 
"Okay," Bull said briskly, "I want sweep teams out, combing the lower 
levels, and I want every searcher armed with a knife, bare minimum, and 
a pistol for the up-timers. Ronisha, organize the new teams by zone. 
And get the word out to teams we've already fielded, same rules. Let's 

find this bastard before anybody else dies." 
 
* * * 
 
A rush of footsteps brought Skeeter up from his crouch, holding 
Artemisia in one arm. She leaned her head against his shoulder, arms 
wrapped around his neck as the door was thrown wide. Jenna Caddrick 
vanished as someone thrust her aside. An instant later, Skeeter found 
himself staring at the wrong end of an enormous revolver. 
 
"Put her down!" 
 
It was Noah Armstrong, dressed in women's clothing. There was no 
mistaking the cold, murderous rage in Armstrong's grey eyes. Behind 
Noah's shoulder, Marcus appeared, ashen. When he caught sight of 
Skeeter, the former slave's mouth fell open. "Skeeter? And Margo! And 
is that Malcolm? What are you doing in London?" 
 
Skeeter shifted Artemisia to his other arm. "Looking for you, of 
course. You might tell your friend, there, to put the gun down." 
 
"Noah, these are my friends! From the station!" 
 
Armstrong didn't even blink. "I don't care if they're Santa's elves. 
Anyone could've followed them here!" 
 
"Sure, anyone could've," Skeeter agreed, "if they'd known where we were 
heading today. Which they didn't. And I'll put Misia down when you put 
that pistol away. If anybody's got some explaining to do, it's you, 
Armstrong. And you'd better start talking fast." 
 
Armstrong's eyes narrowed over a cold glint, then backed up and 
gestured with the barrel of the gun. "Inside. All of you." 
 
As Skeeter stepped past, Marcus said quietly, "They are my friends, 
Noah. Skeeter risked death in the Circus at Rome to free me from 
slavery. He is one of the Found Ones, a trusted friend. My children 
call him uncle. Malcolm is a freelance guide, friend to Kit Carson, and 
Margo is to marry him. She will be the first woman time scout, when her 
grandfather has trained her fully. We can trust them, Noah." Marcus 
turned to Skeeter, then, his face twisting in an expression that hurt 
to witness. "I am sorry I did not come to you on the station. Please 
try to understand, Skeeter. We could not risk it, then. Men were trying 
to kill us and I could not put my children in jeopardy, not to contact 
anyone." 
 
"I figured that out," Skeeter said softly. "It's all right." 
 
Marcus' eyes gleamed wet for a dangerous moment, then he managed to say 
fairly steadily, "I am glad you have come. Ianira needs to return to 
the station. So do our children. We must end this long terror and go 
home." 
 
"You found her, then?" Margo asked sharply. "Did Lachley have her, 
after all?" 
 
Surprise lit Marcus' dark eyes and Jenna Caddrick blurted, "How did you 

guess?" Even Noah Armstrong was momentarily taken aback. 
 
Margo eyed the revolver still levelled at them, then answered Jenna's 
question with a faint smile. "We went to the lecture at the Egyptian 
Hall, of course. Malcolm and I did, that is. Skeeter wasn't in London 
yet. We're guides for the Ripper Watch Team and we'd finally figured 
out that Dr. Lachley must be Jack the Ripper, so we staked out the 
lecture -- and saw you. We tried to follow when you left, but lost you 
in the crowd. Where was Ianira? Not in Lachley's house, surely? You 
left there without her." 
 
Marcus' eyes darkened with grim memory that set Skeeter's skin to 
crawling. "In the sewers," he said harshly. "He had a place in the 
sewers, a room where he kept Ianira and other things, pieces of people 
he had butchered, a terrible place . . ." 
 
"Good God," Malcolm breathed, eyes going wide as realization dawned, 
"the sewers! Of course no one could catch the Ripper. He was using the 
sewers to escape!" 
 
"To hell with Jack the Ripper!" Armstrong said in a cold, hard voice. 
"How did you find us?" The revolver still tracked Skeeter's chest. 
 
Footsteps on the stairs distracted everyone but Armstrong, who said 
sharply, "Get back upstairs!" 
 
An instant later, Ianira rushed past Armstrong and flung both arms 
around Skeeter's neck, tears streaming, as she hugged him, Misia and 
all. "Skeeter! You are safe . . . We have missed you!" 
 
She kissed Skeeter's cheek, then hugged Margo and Malcolm in turn, eyes 
brilliant with the tears streaming down her face. "It is good to have 
old friends among us again! But how did you find us? Noah and Jenna 
have been very careful and our hiding place was well chosen." 
 
Skeeter handed Artemisia to her father, lips twitching into a faint 
smile. "We tracked you through your money, actually." 
 
"Our what?" Jenna gasped. 
 
Skeeter grinned. "Your money. The banknotes you picked up on station 
when you exchanged your up-time currency." 
 
Her brow wrinkled above the ludicrous mutton chops Paula Booker had 
given her. "Banknotes? How in the world could you trace me through 
banknotes?" 
 
"They're fakes." 
 
Jenna stared, shaken so badly out of her composure her face ran dead 
white. Even Armstrong, who had finally put the revolver away, blanched. 
Clearly, they understood the implications of Victorian prison as well 
as Skeeter did. 
 
"Believe it or not," Skeeter spoke into the shocked silence, "Goldie 
Morran admitted it before I left the station. She was terrified you'd 
been arrested in London for passing counterfeit banknotes, which would 

explain why nobody could find Benny Catlin. The last thing she wants is 
your father breathing down her neck, so she came clean, spilled the 
whole thing to me. They're not all fake, but she slipped you enough 
counterfeits to cause trouble. You bought some suits with a counterfeit 
five-pound note and we traced you through that. Once we knew you were 
in the East End, we started showing people your photographs until we'd 
tracked you down." 
 
Jenna's ashen face ran ice pale this time and she swayed sharply, 
prompting Armstrong to steady her. "Oh, my God. You didn't? We can't 
stay here!" 
 
"Perhaps," Malcolm said quietly, "you would be good enough to explain 
why not? The only information we have, your father supplied, through 
his own sources and from the detective he's hired. And we have reason 
to suspect that gentlemen's credentials, thanks to Skeeter." 
 
Armstrong said brusquely, "Let's go into the parlour. I could use a 
drink and Jenna had better sit down." 
 
Marcus brushed his daughter's hair back from her brow. "Misia, please 
go upstairs and finish your lessons with your sister." 
 
"Okay." She kissed her father's cheek as he set her down, then ran to 
Skeeter and hugged him tightly before clattering up the stairs, 
hitching her dress up to her knees. 
 
Jenna Caddrick brushed past, moving woodenly into the parlour, followed 
by Noah Armstrong. Jenna stood near the window, staring silently into 
the street, while Marcus and Ianira took seats on the worn upholstery 
of a high-backed sofa with carved mahogany legs and arms. Armstrong 
followed them into the parlour, stopping near the hearth, where a coal 
fire blazed cheerfully, then hesitated. "It's clear that Marcus and 
Ianira trust you. Very well, I'll give you the full story." Armstrong 
swept off a woman's hairpiece, revealing short, dishevelled brown hair 
which didn't quite reach the high Victorian collar of Armstrong's 
dress. Without the wig, it was abruptly difficult to tell whether 
Armstrong was a young man in woman's clothing or a young woman with 
short hair. "It's a very long story, but the upshot is, I'm a 
detective. I was hired to protect these people." Armstrong nodded 
toward Jenna, Marcus, and Ianira. 
 
"You're a detective?" Skeeter blurted, then narrowed his eyes. "Who 
hired you?" 
 
"Cassie Tyrol." 
 
Skeeter's mouth dropped. 
 
Margo gasped out, "Cassie Tyrol?" 
 
"My aunt," Jenna said in a choked voice. "She hired Noah before they 
murdered her. They would've killed me, too, if Noah hadn't dragged me 
out of the restaurant. They killed my fiancé, Carl, at my apartment." 
Her voice began to quake as wetness spilled over from her eyes. "I was 
talking to him on the phone when they shot him, so I wasn't at the 
table when they shot Aunt Cassie. I'm . . ." she bit her lip and 

pressed a hand against her abdomen, protectively. "I'm going to have 
Carl's baby. It's all I have left. I can't even call on my family for 
help," she added bitterly, "because it's my father who's trying to kill 
us." 
 
Mouths sagged open, even Malcolm's. The silence was so profound, 
Skeeter could hear a clock somewhere out in Spitalfields strike the 
hour, its ghostly notes singing through the cold October air. Then 
Jenna swayed and Noah Armstrong hurried to help her to the nearest 
chair, guiding her with a tender look and gentle hands. Clearly, Noah 
Armstrong was anything but a murderous terrorist. Skeeter found his 
voice first. 
 
"Miss Caddrick, your father is threatening to shut down the station 
unless you're brought back." 
 
Shocking hatred blazed from her eyes. "If I could, I'd put a bullet 
through his skull!" Even as she spoke, fury transmuted into terrible 
grief. Jenna covered her face with shaking hands and began to cry, 
raggedly and very messily. Ianira produced a handkerchief and sat down 
beside her, sliding an arm around her shoulders. Jenna groped for the 
handkerchief and struggled to regain her composure. "I'm sorry," she 
whispered through hiccoughs. She finally blotted her cheeks, then 
looked up, shoulders slumped, face haggard with too much fear and far 
too little sleep. 
 
Malcolm suggested gently, "Why don't you tell us your story, Miss 
Caddrick? I suspect Mr. Jackson, here, knows more of it than the rest 
of us do, but Miss Smith and I know enough to realize that we're facing 
a very serious threat." 
 
Jenna rubbed reddened eyes with the backs of her hands, clutching 
Ianira's sodden handkerchief, then drew a deep, unsteady breath. "Yes. 
I literally don't know how many people have already died because of 
what we know. Noah and I, that is. And now Marcus and Ianira." She drew 
a second watery breath and met Malcolm's gaze. "Guess I ought to start 
with proper introductions? This is Noah Armstrong, a private detective 
with the Wardmann-Wolfe Agency." 
 
Skeeter swung a sharp stare at Armstrong. "You're a Wardmann-Wolfe 
agent? Why, that lying, scum-sucking, low-life bastard!" 
 
"I take it," Armstrong said grimly, "my reputation has been 
compromised?" 
 
Skeeter snorted. "You might say that. Senator Caddrick's telling the 
whole world you're Ansar Majlis." 
 
The look that passed across Noah Armstrong's face set Skeeter's hair on 
end. 
 
"I see," Armstrong said very softly. "I suppose it's fitting, after 
all, since he put them on our trail in the first place." 
 
"Senator Caddrick?" Malcolm asked sharply. "In league with the Ansar 
Majlis?" 
 

"It's true," Jenna whispered, her watery eyes haunted with terrible 
shadows. "Daddy ordered his hit men to dress like Ansar Majlis." 
 
"I was sitting right beside Cassie Tyrol when they burst in through the 
door, shooting," Noah Armstrong said heavily. "She was dead before I 
even had time to draw my pistol. If I hadn't thrown the table in their 
faces, they'd have shot me down, as well, then they'd have found Jenna 
and killed her. They did kill dozens of people standing near us as we 
escaped the restaurant. Caddrick and the men paying him off have 
stirred up the real Ansar Majlis, as well. Fed them money, munitions, 
transportation, names and locations of targets, helped them to attack 
Ianira on the station." 
 
Margo was frowning. "Wait a minute. Am I the only one confused, here? I 
know I've been in London for quite a while, but what possible 
connection is there between Jocasta Tyrol and Ianira Cassondra? Would 
you mind starting at the beginning? Because this isn't making much 
sense to me." 
 
Noah Armstrong spoke quietly. "Miss Tyrol came to me three years ago; 
at least, it was three years ago for Marcus and the girls and myself, 
just a few weeks ago for Jenna and Ianira." Grey eyes flicked toward 
the senator's daughter. "Miss Tyrol was curious about some very ugly 
things she had uncovered about her brother-in-law, Jenna's father. She 
hired me and also helped a young friend of hers get a job in Senator 
Caddrick's office. An actor doing role research. The boy stumbled 
across some very nasty evidence. He sent it to her, but was murdered 
for it. I'd been doing my own investigations, along the same lines, and 
as soon as Mr. Corliss was killed, I persuaded Miss Tyrol to go into 
hiding until we could take the evidence to the authorities." 
 
Jenna said bitterly, "Aunt Cassie tried to warn me. She slipped away 
from Noah and called, arranged to meet me. I'm the reason she's dead! 
Aunt Cassie and Carl, both . . ." Tears tracked messily down her face, 
dripping into her surgically-implanted sideburns. "Carl McDevlin was 
going to marry me, in spite of my father's nasty habits and the chaos 
of the press following everything we Caddricks do. And my doting father 
gave the order to murder him, just on the chance I might have told him 
something." 
 
Armstrong brushed wet hair back from Jenna's face, the gesture eloquent 
of the trust that had grown between them. "Miss Caddrick and I managed 
to get into TT-86," Armstrong sighed, "with the tickets for London she 
and her fiancé were planning to use, but the assassination squads 
followed. Two of them almost killed Miss Caddrick the night she 
arrived." 
 
Jenna shivered. "I managed to shoot my way out of the Picadilly Hotel 
or I'd be in a morgue someplace. And so would Ianira." 
 
Malcolm said very quietly, "I hope you have proof?" 
 
"Yes." Jenna whispered. "Noah does." 
 
The Wardmann-Wolfe detective nodded wearily. "There've been quiet 
rumors for years about Senator Caddrick's association with organized 
crime. The evidence Alston Corliss gathered is enough to hang Senator 

Caddrick and several of his cronies, particularly a paid enforcer named 
Gideon Guthrie. And Guthrie works for Cyril Barris, who has mob 
connections on three continents, just for starters. Ties to the Yakuza 
and the Russian mafia, you name it, he's diddling in it. Barris has 
been paying off John Caddrick for a couple of decades. Unfortunately, 
Alston Corliss was a total amateur up against seasoned killers. The 
pieces were found in several different locations." 
 
Margo shuddered. 
 
"What Alston Corliss found," Noah added, "were payoff records made 
through companies the senator owns, monies deposited into accounts only 
he had access to, as majority shareholder and CEO. Construction 
companies, mostly, both in the States and abroad, Asia and Japan, in 
particular." 
 
This finally started to make sense to Skeeter. In the aftermath of the 
orbital accident that had formed the time strings, the whole Pacific 
Rim had been hard hit by earthquakes and tidal waves. The rebuilding 
had been going on for most of Skeeter's life. 
 
Malcolm was nodding, as well, face set in weary lines. "And the 
construction industry in Japan is controlled by the Yakuza gangs, has 
been for centuries. The senator allied himself with these gangs?" 
 
"Yes. There and in the States, in South America, anywhere the Yakuza 
gangs were active. In the States, particularly on the west coast, local 
gangs of American thugs started affiliating themselves with the Asian 
gangs coming in, running drugs, prostitution, and gambling. Years back, 
even before he launched his political career, the senator had ties to a 
local mafia boss in Los Angeles, a man who later affiliated his gang 
with a prominent Yakuza family. It turned out to be a very profitable 
affiliation. For all parties concerned. It certainly financed the 
senator's campaigns." 
 
"Yes," Margo frowned, "but how does Ianira tie into all of this?" 
 
Jenna's mouth thinned to a bitter line. "Think about it. You know what 
she was responsible for starting. The Lady of Heaven Temples are the 
fastest growing international religion in the world. What better way to 
smuggle drugs halfway around the planet, launder money, ship American 
girls out to Asian brothels -- " 
 
"Ianira's not involved in that kind of garbage!" Skeeter snapped. 
 
Jenna was crying again. "No. I never said she was. But my father is. 
He's using the Temples as a cover. Several congressmen have been 
calling for an investigation of Templar possessions and financial 
activities, something Daddy couldn't risk. So he decided to turn the 
Templars into martyrs, so public sentiment would crucify anyone who 
dared investigate Temple finances." 
 
Skeeter swore aloud. It made abrupt, sickening sense. 
 
"I see you've tumbled to it," Armstrong nodded, holding Skeeter's gaze. 
"Miss Caddrick's father also knew he was being investigated by one of 
the best detective agencies in the business and he knew Miss Tyrol had 

put us on his trail. But he couldn't order an ordinary gangland hit on 
a woman as widely popular as Cassie Tyrol. There'd be far too much 
press, not to mention police asking questions, if he simply had his 
regular paid thugs kill her. His one piece of luck was that both Jenna 
and Miss Tyrol were prominent Templars, and so was Miss Caddrick's 
fiancé. Miss Tyrol donated her share of the profits from Temple Harlot 
directly to the Temple." 
 
Skeeter's blood ran cold. "So he used the Ansar Majlis. Of course. They 
were a perfect front." 
 
"Yes. They made it look like a terrorist hit. Only the bastards in that 
restaurant were never part of the actual Ansar Majlis. Neither were the 
hired killers who came after us on the station. They activated real 
Ansar Majlis moles already in place on TT-86, of course, so the riots 
on station would look like the genuine thing. The senator targeted 
Ianira as one of his primary public martyrs, since the Ansar Majlis 
exists specifically to destroy everything she's responsible for 
starting. He knew very well what public sentiment would be if the 
deified prophetess of the Temple were murdered, along with her entire 
family." The bitterness in Armstrong's eyes was terrifying. The shame 
in Jenna Caddrick's was infinitely worse. Silence spun out like 
filaments of glass, waiting to be shattered. 
 
"So that's the whole, sordid story," Noah finally shattered it. "We're 
in hiding, with Miss Caddrick posing as a gentleman and me posing as 
Marcus' sister, trying to stay alive long enough to put Senator 
Caddrick in prison where he belongs." 
 
Malcolm rubbed the bridge of his nose for a moment, eyes bleak when he 
met Armstrong's gaze again. "According to Skeeter, there have been 
multiple riots and murders on TT-86, with a number of cults, including 
the Angels of Grace Militia, at odds with supporters of the Ansar 
Majlis. Now we know why. Everything we've built on TT-86 is at enormous 
risk. The senator is making threats, very serious threats, to close 
down the station." 
 
Jenna said in a low, hard voice, "He's been looking for a way to shut 
down time tourism for years." 
 
"He doesn't even need to do it, himself," Skeeter muttered. "The riots 
and murders alone are likely to shut us down. He brought federal 
marshals with him and arrested Bull Morgan, the station manager, on 
trumped-up tax charges. I.T.C.H. has been brought in to investigate and 
God knows where that will end. The Inter-Temporal Court has shut down 
stations before, replaced their whole management operations. And with 
Bull Morgan and Ronisha Azzan out, only God knows what would become of 
the down-timer community on station. I.T.C.H. sure as hell doesn't care 
-- down-timers have no legal rights to protect and not enough financial 
clout to influence a gnat, never mind the Inter-Temporal Court." 
 
Malcolm added heavily, "Down-timers on other time terminals I could 
name live like animals, compared with TT-86. Most 'eighty-sixers have 
no idea how fortunate our down-time population really is." 
 
"We must stop this!" Marcus cried, moving protectively to Ianira's 
side. 

 
"Yes, but how?" Margo wondered, frustration burning in her eyes. 
"You're a detective," she swung abruptly toward Armstrong, "and you say 
you've got proof. What do you suggest we do? You can't hide forever and 
you certainly can't expect us to sit and bury our heads in the sand 
like a bunch of ostriches. Marcus and Ianira are our friends. We won't 
sit around and do nothing!" 
 
Noah's lips thinned. "No, clearly we can't just sit here, not now. The 
senator and his assassins know we're in the city, since they sent you 
through to look for us. Hiding in London was only a stopgap measure, we 
knew that from the start. All we've done by coming here is buy 
ourselves time. We would've been gone before now, if Ianira hadn't been 
kidnapped her first night in London. It took us days, tracing and 
rescuing her. What has to be done is simple. I have to go back with the 
proof. Make sure the senator and his gangland bosses are arrested and 
stand trial for murder." Armstrong frowned. "Getting the evidence to 
the authorities is going to be a major battle, even if someone else 
takes it to them. And you know what mafia trials are like. Clearly, the 
senator has taken pains to ensure I'm shot on sight as a dangerous 
terrorist, so I won't live to testify." With a bitter twist of lips, 
Armstrong added, "I really do appreciate your not shooting me out of 
hand and asking questions later." 
 
"I started wondering about Caddrick's story even before we went chasing 
halfway across Colorado on your trail," Skeeter muttered. "I was 
standing next to Ianira when that first riot broke out. What I saw 
didn't tally with the line Caddrick fed us." 
 
"For that, I am deeply grateful, Mr. Jackson. I also suspect," the 
detective added darkly, "there will be at least one hired killer in 
London trying to trace us." 
 
"Oh, yeah," Skeeter said softly. "There is, all right. And I know his 
name. At least, the name he's been using. Mr. Sid Kaederman. The 
senator's so-called detective. A Wardmann-Wolfe agent, so he says." 
 
Noah Armstrong's brows twitched downward. "Sid Kaederman? There's no 
Wardmann-Wolfe agent by that name." 
 
"You know them all?" Malcolm asked quietly. 
 
"I'd better. The agency's founder, Beore Arunwode, is my grandfather. I 
know that agency and its employees better than most people know their 
own kids. Part of my job was running security clearances on every agent 
we hired." 
 
"Great," Skeeter groused. "I knew there was something wrong with that 
guy, I just couldn't figure out what." 
 
Malcolm favored him with a faint smile. "I've never known your 
instincts to fail, Mr. Jackson. It seems they were right on target, 
once again. The question is, how to deal with Mr. Kaederman? If he's a 
hired gun, the proof you have, Mr. Armstrong, isn't likely to 
incriminate him. At least, not directly. Which means we need to trap 
him into committing a crime we can hang him for. Or I should say, trap 
him into trying to commit that crime." 

 
"Like what?" Jenna asked bitterly. "The only thing he's here for is to 
murder me. And Noah. And Ianira and her family." 
 
The answer skittered across Skeeter's mind in a jagged lightning 
strike, a notion so wild, he actually started to laugh. 
 
"Skeeter Jackson," Margo asked sharply, "what are you thinking?" 
 
"He wants Jenna Caddrick and Noah Armstrong. So, let's give him what he 
wants." 
 
"What?" Jenna came out of her chair so fast, it crashed over. "Are you 
insane?" 
 
"No," Skeeter said mildly, "although I know a few people who might 
argue the point. When your father showed up, he mistook me for Noah. 
And Paula Booker's here in London with us. Kit insisted she come 
along." 
 
Margo gasped. "Skeeter! You're not thinking what I think you're 
thinking?" 
 
Malcolm moved sharply. "You do realize the risk?" 
 
"Oh, yeah," Skeeter said very softly. "But do you have a better way to 
trick him into trying to commit murder, without risking the real Noah 
Armstrong's life? Not to mention Marcus and Ianira and the children, 
and Miss Caddrick, here. Noah's got to testify. He's the only one who 
can put a noose around Caddrick's neck. We can't risk Noah, but we can 
sure as hell hand Sid Kaederman a life-sized decoy. If you have any 
better ideas, I'm all ears." 
 
Malcolm didn't. Neither did anybody else. 
 
"All right," Malcolm said tersely. "I'll have to get him out of the 
road long enough for Paula to work her magic on your features. When 
Kaederman tries to murder you, we'll nab Kaederman, dead to rights, 
with enough evidence to hang him." 
 
"Where do we spring the trap?" Margo asked, brow furrowing slightly as 
she considered the problem. 
 
"Someplace open enough to give him a shot at Mr. Jackson," Malcolm 
mused, "but not so open he could give us the slip too easily. A public 
place, with plenty of witnesses, but not a crowd so large he can lose 
himself in it." 
 
"Train stations are out, then," Margo frowned. "Victoria Embankment or 
maybe Chelsea Embankment?" 
 
Malcolm shook his head. "Access to the water taxis is too great. He 
could jump into a waterman's boat and be gone before we could lay hands 
on him. It'll have to be someplace he wouldn't expect a trap. A place 
we could tell him we've found a clue to Armstrong's whereabouts and 
have him believe it without question." 
 

"What about the Serpentine? Or Boating Lake in Battersea? We could say 
he's been seen there with Ianira and the children." 
 
"I've got a better idea," Skeeter said suddenly. "We tell Kaederman 
you've discovered the counterfeit banknotes, which is something Kit and 
I kept secret. So we tell him you're running short of cash. Kaederman 
already knows you're in disguise as a man, Miss Caddrick, and we also 
know that Noah Armstrong can assume any disguise he feels like, male or 
female. So the two of you have been hitting the gentlemen's clubs, 
gambling, as a way to dump the counterfeits and make up your losses, 
fast." 
 
Jenna frowned. "Gambling? But why would we do that? Gambling is a good 
way to lose money." 
 
"Not -- " Skeeter grinned, abruptly merry as any imp, " -- if you 
cheat." 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Fifteen 
 
The tunnels beneath Frontier Town were a maze of immense glass aquaria, 
ranks upon tiers of them, which had been empty the last time Kit had 
searched Shangri-La Station's basement. Now they held all the live fish 
the station could import through its gates. Between the flock of crow-
sized pterodactyls and toothed, primitive birds and the enormous 
pteranodon sternbergi, whose wingspan rivalled that of a small 
airplane, pest control had been hard pressed to import enough fish. Sue 
Fritchey had turned the corridors and tunnels beneath Little Agora and 
Frontier Town into a miniature biological preserve where pterodactyl 
lunches swam by the thousands. 
 
In this dim-lit world of glass walls and gleaming fish scales and the 
patterned reflections of water on tunnel walls and ceilings, the caged 
sternbergi's weird, primordial cries vibrated eerily against the 
stacked aquaria, each cry drifting through the basement corridors like 
the soundtrack from a bad horror flick. The noise set teeth on edge as 
once-extinct screams echoed and reverberated for hundreds of yards in 
every direction, distorted by distance, inexpressibly strange. 
 
Kit hunted the alien terrain with a team of four, Sven Bailey and Kit 
out front with riot shotguns, Kynan and Eigil behind them with bladed 
weapons and a couple of old-style wooden baseball bats, to reduce the 
chances that an attack would put friends in the line of fire. They had 
searched about a hundred yards of cluttered corridor, finding no trace 
of Jack the Ripper or his manaical worshippers, when they came to an 
intersecting tunnel. Kit held up a hand. "Stay back until I've had a 
look." 
 
He had just eased to the corner when they came boiling out of hiding, 
at least a dozen of them, brandishing knives and hurling murderous 
threats into Kit's teeth. Kit fired into the thick of them. Men 
screamed and went down as Sven, too, loosed off a load of buckshot. A 
baseball bat smashed into an aquarium at Kit's elbow. Water and 

wriggling fish flooded the corridor floor, stained red where several 
attackers had fallen, gutshot and screaming. Kit fired again, trying to 
drive the madmen back. Eigil was shouting in Old Norse; the Viking 
barsark was lopping off limbs and smashing more aquaria to the floor. 
Screams and moans echoed amidst the shattering noise of smashing glass. 
Then the Ripper cult broke and ran, with Sven and Kit hard on their 
heels. Eigil and Kynan, their borrowed weapons dripping blood, were 
right behind. 
 
Pounding footsteps echoed, distorted by the piled aquaria. Kit put on a 
burst of speed, rounded a corner on Sven's heels, and piled into the 
middle of a seething mass of bodies. The Ripper cult had turned at bay, 
blocked by the massive bulk of the pteranodon sternbergi's cage. Kit 
slammed into a would-be killer and they reeled against the cage. The 
gigantic pterosaur screamed, shattering eardrums, and lunged in a state 
of maddened agitation. The immense beak, longer than a man's body, shot 
between the bars as Kit flung himself aside. The Ripper cultist 
screamed, impaled on a razor-sharp beak. The sternbergi reared 
backwards, scraping the body off against the bars. Kit staggered off 
balance, buffeted by the backdraft of immense leathery wings. One of 
the cultists snarled and slashed at his throat. Kit dropped to the 
floor, under the blow, and fired his riotgun upwards into the man's 
gut. Kit's attacker reeled backwards against the bars, then screamed 
and dropped his knife as the pterosaur struck again, its wicked eye 
gleaming like a poisoned ruby. Its beak snapped shut with a clacking 
sound like two-by-fours cracking, taking off the man's arm at the 
elbow. He screamed and went down in a puddle of arterial spurts. 
 
Kit rolled, trying to come to his feet, and heard Sven's shotgun roar. 
More screams rose, then a group of men burst around the corner and 
slammed full-tilt into the battle. Kit caught a glimpse of flying 
burnooses and grim, dark Arabic faces, then Mr. Riyad, foreman of the 
Arabian Nights construction crew, was fighting his way to Kit's side. A 
group of his workmen, proven innocent of terrorist affiliations, mopped 
up the remnants of resistance. Kit staggered to his feet, wiping sweat 
and someone else's blood, and met Mr. Riyad's gaze. 
 
"Am I glad to see you," he gasped out. 
 
"We came as quickly as we could, when we heard the screams and the 
shooting." 
 
"Thank God." 
 
They'd taken five men alive, having left a trail of nine dead and 
wounded behind them. Kit fumbled with his radio. "Code Seven Red, Zone 
Eleven. We've got prisoners and a helluva mess, down by the 
sternbergi's cage." 
 
"Roger, Zone Eleven. Sending reinforcements." 
 
"Better get a medical team down here and tell Sue Fritchey to bring a 
tranquilizer gun. The sternbergi's out of control." The immense 
pterosaur was still screaming and trying to attack anything that moved 
near its cage. 
 
"Copy that, we'll do what we can. We've got casualties all over the 

station." 
 
"Roger, understood. Anybody find Lachley yet?" 
 
"Negative. 
 
"He's not with this group, either. We'll keep searching once we've 
turned these guys over to security. Kit out." 
 
"Roger, security out." 
 
As Kit clipped the radio to his belt, Pest Control arrived with a dart 
gun. They shot three separate tranks into the immense pterosaur, which 
gradually ceased hurling itself against the bars. Its wings and head 
drooped to the cage floor, its baleful ruby eye heavy lidded and 
closing. Security arrived a moment later, taking charge of prisoners 
with rough efficiency. The battered cultists stumbled off in handcuffs 
and shackles, too dazed to protest. Pest Control agents opened up the 
cage and began treating lacerations on the sternbergi's hide and wings. 
A weird grunting moan issued from the pterosaur's immense throat, then 
its wicked little eyes closed completely and it lost consciousness. 
 
"We'd better regroup and keep searching," Kit sighed. 
 
The construction foreman nodded. "Yes. We should perhaps search 
together, this time? These men are completely mad," Riyad gestured at 
the dead Ripper cultists. "They fight like demons." 
 
Sven Bailey, who was wiping blood off Kynan's gladius while Kynan 
wrapped a shallow cut in his ribs with makeshift bandages, muttered, 
"You just said a cotton-pickin' mouthful. Never saw anything like it." 
 
They sorted themselves out, then spread into a loose fan, moving down 
the corridor past the open cage. As they searched, grim and silent, Kit 
couldn't help worrying about Margo's safety in London and cursed 
himself for not asking Dr. Feroz. He'd have to wait, now, because he 
couldn't clutter up security channels with a personal request. Besides, 
he needed to focus his entire attention on this lethal search for the 
Ripper and his maniacal followers. So Kit thrust the worry aside as 
best he could, telling himself that she was in good company with 
Malcolm and Skeeter, and kept hunting. 
 
* * * 
 
"You want me to what?" Paula Booker stared. 
 
Skeeter grinned. "I want you to make me look like Noah Armstrong." 
 
She blinked at him, eyes still blank with astonisment. "Here? In 
Spaldergate House?" 
 
"Yeah. Here. Tonight, after everyone has gone to bed. Mrs. Aldis, the 
housekeeper, will let us into the vault, that's no problem. It's a 
little crowded right now, because the Ripper Watch Team is down there, 
but we won't be in their way. They aren't using the surgery, in any 
case, just the computer facilities. The surgery's modern, has all the 
amenities. And Mrs. Aldis is a surgical nurse, assists Dr. Nerian all 

the time." 
 
"I know that," Paula said impatiently. "I've been down there already. 
But . . . Tonight?" The request had clearly thrown her off stride. 
Clearly, she thought Skeeter had taken leave of his senses. 
 
He let his grin fade away. "Paula, we learned something tonight that . 
. . Well, let's just say I'm not going to sleep very well 'til this is 
over. Sid Kaederman isn't what he's pretending to be. If we don't trick 
him into giving himself away, he will literally get away with murder. 
And if we don't stop him, it'll be Ianira and Marcus on his hit list, 
them and their kids. And that's just for starters. This is one helluva 
mess we're stuck in, Paula. Believe me, I wouldn't ask you to rearrange 
my face with a scalpel if it weren't necessary. I happen to like my 
face, whatever anyone else thinks of it." 
 
Paula Booker's eyes widened. "You found them, didn't you?" 
 
"Shh!" he motioned frantically to keep her voice down. 
 
She darted a worried glance at her closed bedroom door. Like Skeeter, 
she was on the third floor, bunking in the servants' quarters. Sid 
Kaederman, as a VIP, had been given the last available room on the 
"family" floor, one level down and at the opposite end of the house, 
overlooking Octavia Street rather than the rain-choked gardens at the 
back. 
 
Paula whispered more carefully, "You did find them today, didn't you?" 
 
Skeeter nodded. "Yeah. They're mostly all right. Once you're finished 
rearranging my face, though, Malcolm wants to talk to you. He wants you 
to run a checkup on everyone, make sure no lasting damage has been 
done. Particularly Ianira. She's had a rough time in London. Malcolm 
will explain all that later. Right now, I need that new face, so we can 
lay a trap for Kaederman. The sooner he's in cuffs, the sooner we can 
all go home." 
 
Paula sighed, pushing back her hair in a weary gesture. "All right, 
Skeeter. I don't have everything I'd like, not to do a face job of that 
magnitude, but I think we can do a creditable job of making you look 
like Armstrong. Enough to suit, anyway. Fortunately, your bone 
structure and coloring are very similar, as you've pointed out. And we 
do have good photos of Armstrong to work from. That'll help. Let me get 
my medical bag. I brought through a lot of instruments and medicines to 
supplement Spaldergate's supply. You realize, this is going to put you 
out of commission for about a week? It'll take that long for the 
swelling and bruising to fade and the stitches to heal where I nip and 
tuck." 
 
"Yeah, we figured it would take a while. That'll give Malcolm and the 
others a chance to lay the trap for Sid. And it'll give you time to 
work with Ianira, too." 
 
"All right, Skeeter. We'll have to tell Sid something so he won't grow 
suspicious about your absence." 
 
Skeeter nodded. "We'll spread the word I was hit by a carriage or a 

wagon and had to be rushed into surgery." 
 
"That should work. Let's go down to the Vault, then, and get started." 
 
Eight hours later, Skeeter woke up in recovery to a dull throb of pain 
all through his face and the muffling, claustrophobic feel of bandages. 
As he swam toward full consciousness, with the sounds of a heart 
monitor beeping somewhere beside his ear, his gaze focused slowly on 
Margo, who sat beside his bed. 
 
"Hi," she said quietly. "Don't try to say anything, Skeeter." 
 
He wouldn't have moved his face on a dare. 
 
"Sid bought the story about you being hit by a freight wagon. The creep 
actually chuckled and said it was about time you got your comeuppance. 
Malcolm was extremely rude to him." 
 
That surprised Skeeter, even as it warmed his heart. He still couldn't 
get used to the idea that Malcolm Moore and Margo Smith were giving him 
their friendship. Margo smiled. "Paula's gone to Spitalfields to check 
up on Ianira and the others. They're all moving to Malcolm's flat in 
Belgravia, just in case there's trouble about the counterfeit 
banknotes." 
 
Skeeter regretted the necessity of ruining his friends' down-time 
cover. 
 
Margo patted his hand gently, taking care not to disturb the I.V. 
leads. "Rest for now, Skeeter. We've got everything under control. I'll 
visit again tonight, after Paula gets back." She gave him a cheery 
smile, then vanished from his line of sight. Dr. Nerian appeared and 
spent several moments fussing with his I.V. lines, then injected 
something into the heplock. Whatever it was, it eased the deep ache in 
his face and left him drifting. 
 
Skeeter fell asleep wondering what he really would look like, a week 
from now. 
 
* * * 
 
Goldie Morran was having the worst week of her life. I.T.C.H. agents 
had been prowling through her books, finding discrepancies she would 
have to explain, and Interpol agents had been breathing down her neck, 
curious in the wake of the Inter-Temporal Court's investigation. She 
would have been deeply thankful for the reprieve brought about by the 
Ripper, but for one detail. The entire station was locked down, leaving 
her trapped for three solid days in her shop, which she'd had the 
foresight to equip with a well-stocked back room, including a 
convertible sofa bed, a wet bar, and plenty of food. 
 
But all business was suspended for the duration of the search, which 
meant she was losing thousands of dollars, same as every other merchant 
on station. So Goldie sat in her back room in splendid solitude, 
listening to her Carolina parakeets chirp, tried to straighten out her 
books, and brooded over what news might arrive about Jenna Caddrick 
when the Britannia Gate opened again. 

 
Skeeter, thank God, had kept his mouth shut about the counterfeits, but 
Goldie was terrified she would end up facing charges over them. She 
hadn't done anything so very wrong -- she hadn't printed them, after 
all. She'd simply tried to recoup some of her own losses, passing them 
to that idiot, Benny Catlin. Goldie cursed her luck and poured another 
brandy from her rapidly dwindling supply. Who'd have dreamed that 
moronic little graduate student would turn out to be Jenna Nicole 
Caddrick, in disguise? Making an enemy of Senator John Caddrick was a 
dreadful business move. Worse, even, than attracting the attention of 
Interpol agents and the Inter-Temporal Court. 
 
Her nerves were so frayed, when the telephone rang she actually dropped 
her brandy snifter from nerveless fingers. She left it lying on the 
carpet and lunged out into the shop where the telephone sat. "Goldie 
Morran!" Her voice came out breathless and unsteady. 
 
"Goldie? Mike Benson, here. No wonder we didn't get an answer at your 
apartment. How long have you been trapped in your shop?" 
 
"Since that maniac arrived, of course!" 
 
"We're conducting a room-by-room search of the station. You're alone, I 
take it." 
 
"Of course I'm alone! Did you think I'd be giving wild parties, back 
here? I want out of this shop, Mike. Send somebody over here to escort 
me home, for God's sake." 
 
"I'll send someone," Benson retorted, "to search your shop, then your 
apartment." 
 
"Thanks for the royal treatment!" 
 
"Don't mention it, Goldie. Be ready to unlock your door." 
 
"I'll be waiting," she promised grimly. 
 
Five minutes later, a young BATF officer arrived, security radio in 
hand. Goldie unlocked her doors and stood tapping one foot impatiently 
while he searched her shop. She followed him into the vault to be sure 
he didn't appropriate anything. 
 
"Nice birds," he commented with an avaricious twinkle in his eyes. 
"Carolina parakeets, aren't they?" He scribbled something into a 
notebook. "Mr. Wilkes will be very interested. He loves birds, you 
know." The arrogant booby was laughing at her. 
 
Goldie seethed. It was perfectly legal for her to have them on station. 
But Monty, curse him, would be watching her like a hawk from now on, 
curtailing her profitable sideline in viable egg smuggling. 
 
"All right, you can lock up, now," he said, snapping his notebook shut 
and pocketing it. She closed the vault door while he radioed in that 
her shop was clear. "I'll escort Miss Morran to her apartment and clear 
that, as well." 
 

"Roger." 
 
They left through the front door, which she bolted, then she rattled 
down the big steel mesh doors and locked them, as well. "I can't tell 
you how much I'm looking foward to a hot shower and a real bed," she 
muttered. 
 
"You think you've had it rough," the BATF officer complained. "We've 
been running on two hours of sleep a day since that maniac got here. 
And things were no picnic before he crashed the Britannia." 
 
They hurried across Valhalla, the fastest way to reach the section of 
Residential where Goldie lived. The emptiness of Commons was downright 
eerie. Their footsteps echoed. She could hear other security patrols in 
the distance, mostly when their radios sputtered where patrols reported 
in. "How much of the station has been searched?" she asked uneasily as 
they started around the end of the big wooden ship housing the vacant 
Langskip Cafe --  
 
They ran slap into someone coming the other way. Goldie staggered under 
the impact. She had only a split second to register wild, inhuman eyes 
in a narrow, darkly Eastern-European face, then a wicked knife flashed 
and the BATF officer went down, throat cut to bone. Goldie drew breath 
to scream and he slammed her against the wooden hull of the ship. She 
hung there, stunned, while he pressed a gore-covered hand across her 
mouth and nose. She choked on the stink of blood. 
 
"Do you live here?" he hissed. 
 
Goldie nodded, so terrified she could barely keep her feet. He dragged 
her away from the ship, shoved the knife against her ribs, and stooped 
to secure the dead BATF officer's radio and pistol. He then marched her 
rapidly across Commons toward a Residential corridor. "My followers 
have told me much about your Primary Gate. Unfortunately, your guards 
have deprived me of my acolytes, so you will have to assist me through 
that gate. Take me there. And hurry up, bitch! The gate goes in ten 
minutes." 
 
She glanced despairingly at her shop, safe behind its locks and steel-
mesh doors. If she could get to the shop, she could trip the silent 
alarm, summon help. And she kept a pistol in the shop. When she tried 
to change direction, he pressed the knife against her ribs again. "Not 
that way! I saw him take you from your shop. I shan't allow you to 
summon help, woman, a fact you had better learn now. Take me to 
Primary, by a safe route. If you do not oblige me quickly, I will find 
someone else." The blade cut through her blouse. "Do you understand 
me?" 
 
She nodded, still half-choked by the bloodstained hand pressed across 
her mouth. The entire left side of her face ached, where he'd slammed 
her against the side of the Langskip, and her eye was starting to swell 
closed. Senses whirling, Goldie took the nearest route into 
Residential, moving woodenly along with the Ripper's knife under her 
ribcage. Goldie staggered frequently, but her captor made no offer to 
assist her. He simply held the knife against her ribs and hissed, "Cry 
out and I will kill you where you stand." She guided the killer through 
twisting corridors until they reached a passageway that emerged at the 

junction between Edo Castletown and Primary Precinct. 
 
She pointed toward the gate, since he hadn't freed her mouth. 
 
He eased to the corner and peered around, surveying the stretch of open 
Commons beyond. Goldie, too exhausted even to try running, hung in his 
grip and waited to die. Tremors threatened to send her to the floor 
even sooner. As she sagged against the wall, waiting, the public 
address system blared to life. 
 
"Your attention, please. Primary is due to open in three minutes. Be 
advised, all station passes through Primary have been revoked for the 
duration of this emergency. Remain in your hotel room or your current 
place of shelter with the door locked. Do not make any attempt to reach 
Primary . . ." 
 
The Ripper jerked Goldie around to face him. "Explain this!" He laid 
the sharp steel against her throat and drew his hand away from her 
mouth. 
 
She shook her head in a stupor. "They've shut down the station," she 
mumbled, voice shaking. "Locked down all the gates, so no one can 
leave. They'll have security officers swarming all over Primary, to 
keep anyone from coming in or going out." 
 
Goldie could, in fact, see a whole cordon of security officers blocking 
the gate access, armed to the teeth with riot guns. The Ripper swore 
savagely, then gazed down at her through cold, implacable grey eyes. 
"You said you live in this insane place?" 
 
"Yes -- " 
 
"Where?" 
 
"Back -- back that way." 
 
"Take me there!" 
 
Goldie's heart sank. Tears blinded her. "Please don't kill me . . ." 
 
"Stop snivelling, you stupid harridan! If I had intended to kill you, I 
would have cut your throat already. Since my worshippers have been 
killed or taken prisoner by your station guards, I require shelter and 
someone to explain the operation of this infernal place! Now take me to 
your flat or I'll find another hostage!" 
 
Goldie limped toward her distant apartment, hardly able to keep to her 
feet. By the time they reached it she was weaving so badly, all that 
kept her on her feet was his monstrous grip on her arm. She stumbled to 
a trembling halt in front of her door. 
 
"Open it." 
 
She fumbled with the lock, turning the key from her pocket, then he 
kicked the door farther open, dragging Goldie inside and shutting the 
door with a slam that echoed. He hunted through the apartment swiftly, 
then shoved Goldie into the bedroom. He threw her onto the bed and tied 

her to it, leaving her shaking in a film of sweat. 
 
"Have you a name?" 
 
"G-Goldie Morran . . ." 
 
"What trade are you in?" 
 
Humor him . . . that's what they always say, humor a madman . . . 
 
"I change currency," she quavered out. "Up-time money for whatever a 
tourist needs down a gate . . ." 
 
"Tell me how to operate this device." He held up the stolen security 
radio. 
 
"You press the talk button," she gulped. "Then someone from security 
answers." 
 
He pressed the button. The radio sputtered. "Security." 
 
"I've searched Goldie Morran's rooms. There's no one here." 
 
"Roger." 
 
Even if she'd dared scream for help while the radio was live, he gave 
her no chance, switching it off immediately and setting it down on her 
dresser. He considered her coldly where she lay sprawled, bound hand 
and foot to her own bed. "Where might I find a map of this accursed 
place?" 
 
Goldie swallowed down a dry throat. "The computer would be best." 
 
She had to show him how to use it. He tied her to the bed again, 
afterward, then returned to the living room and spent hours sitting in 
front of Goldie's computer. She heard keys clicking, listened numbly 
through a haze of terror to his soft-voiced verbal commands, not really 
taking in anything he said. Then the living room fell silent. Goldie 
strained to hear, trying to catch any hint of movement beyond the open 
bedroom door. Nothing came to her ears except the hum of the air-
conditioning fan. 
 
How long she lay rigid on the rumpled bedspread, Goldie wasn't sure. 
She couldn't see a clock from her angle. Pain and fright began taking 
their toll of her strength. She was nearly unconscious when the sound 
of footsteps jolted her back to full awareness. Oh, God, he's back, 
he's going to hack me to pieces . . . 
 
The Ripper smiled down at her. "You've done very well, my dear. Now, 
then, show me how to operate the devices in your kitchen. I could use a 
cup of tea." 
 
"I'm in pain," Goldie whimpered. "I can't feel my feet and hands and my 
eye is swelling shut." 
 
He frowned slightly, then pulled loose her bonds. He examined her 
ankles and wrists, then traced the extent of the bruising along her 

face with surprising gentleness. "Mmm . . . A bit swollen and there 
will be a bad bruise, I fear, but you're in no danger of losing the 
eye. Beg pardon for handling you so roughly. Have you an icebox?" 
 
Goldie stared, trying to comprehend the shift of attitude. "What?" 
 
"An icebox. You need a cold compress to bring down the swelling. And a 
tincture of laudanum would ease the discomfort. I fear I left my 
medical bag in London." 
 
Goldie managed to whisper, "I don't keep any laudanum. You need a 
prescription for something like that. There's ice in the freezer. In 
the kitchen." 
 
He tied her to the bed again, although less tightly than before and he 
wrapped her wrists and ankles first with scarves from her closet to 
keep the skin from chafing, then headed for the kitchen. She heard 
rummaging sounds as he searched through cabinets and finally tried the 
freezer door. "Ah . . . What an ingenious device! How is it powered, I 
wonder?" She heard the clink and rattle of ice cubes, then the hush of 
running water. A moment later, he was back in the bedroom, carrying a 
wet towel packed with ice cubes. He laid it carefully against her face, 
stroked her hair back from her cheeks and tested her pulse. "You've 
suffered a shock, dear lady. We really must bring the pain level down." 
 
"In the bathroom," Goldie whispered. "Aspirin . . ." Nausea and pain 
were setting the room to lurching like a capsized boat. 
 
More sounds of rummaging drifted to her, then he forced something 
between her lips and held a water glass to her mouth. She choked and 
swallowed a handful of aspirin tablets. He covered her warmly with her 
own blankets and checked the icepack, as though genuinely concerned for 
her welfare. Goldie closed her eyes as he searched her closets and 
bureau drawers, whistling contentedly to himself. "Have you been 
through many gates?" he asked at length, rousing her from near stupor. 
 
"No. I don't go down time." Not since that disastrous trip to New 
Orleans a few years back. The gate had gone unexpectedly unstable, 
forcing her to leave behind a young historian she'd taken with her. 
She'd felt worse pangs of guilt, trapping him there, than she'd ever 
felt in her life, but there really hadn't been anything she could have 
done, or anyone else, for that matter. "I stay on the station and run 
my shop," she added with a shiver. 
 
"Ah. How soon before Primary opens again?" he asked at length. 
 
"Three days." 
 
"In that case, my dear Mrs. Morran, make yourself comfortable while I 
learn the vagaries of your ingenious cookstove." 
 
Goldie lost consciousness to the sound of rattling pots and pans. 
 
* * * 
 
Six days after Skeeter's surgery, on the tenth of October, Malcolm 
baited the trap. Sid Kaederman had made no secret of his disgust with 

the lack of modern amenities and repeatedly criticized the search 
efforts in scathing terms when Malcolm and Margo returned to 
Spaldergate each night to report their "lack" of progess. When 
Skeeter's new face was finally healed and ready, Malcolm returned to 
Spaldergate with news of a major and unexpected "break" in the case: 
Armstrong had been spotted. 
 
"Who saw the bastard?" Kaederman asked eagerly. "Where?" 
 
"An inquiry agent," Malcolm said smoothly. "We ran across the chap this 
afternoon. Runs a small agency out of Middlesex Street. He's done work 
for hire before, on behalf of Spaldergate." 
 
"What did he say? How did he find Armstrong?" 
 
Malcolm poured brandy as he explained. "Essentially, he was hired by an 
irate merchant to discover who'd been passing counterfeit banknotes." 
 
"Counterfeit banknotes?" Kaederman's brows twitched upward in 
startlement. 
 
"Indeed. It seems the money changer he used on station was somewhat 
less than scrupulously honest. She slipped a number of counterfeit 
banknotes in amongst the genuine article. Just before Skeeter Jackson 
left the station, the money changer asked Mr. Jackson to look into it 
for her. She was afraid Jenna Caddrick might have been arrested for 
passing counterfeit money. We'd hired this particular inquiry agent 
before, looking for Benny Catlin, so this afternoon I hunted him up. 
Mr. Shannon had been hired recently by a local merchant, trying to 
trace a foreigner passing fake banknotes. The merchant was irate, 
wanted to find the counterfeiter to recover substantial losses." 
 
Sid Kaederman laughed quietly, utterly delighted, judging from the 
glint in his eyes. "Imagine Armstrong's shock when he discovers he was 
swindled by a money changer!" 
 
Malcolm frowned. "You appear to misapprehend this situation. 
Counterfeiting is a serious charge, Kaederman. If we don't get to 
Armstrong before the police, he will be in more trouble than we'll be 
able to get him out of -- and God knows what that will mean in terms of 
recovering his hostages. We must move quickly. Mr. Shannon has 
identified him and only a substantial bribe kept him from reporting 
what he's learned to his client and the police." 
 
"Where's he hiding?" 
 
"He was staying somewhere in the East End, but moved out of his 
lodgings very suddenly, with his entire family -- or rather, obviously, 
his hostages. According to Shannon, Armstrong has discovered the 
difficulty with his cash supply and may well have passed counterfeits 
to his landlord without realizing it. Clearly, he wanted to disappear 
before his landlord could create trouble. Shannon managed to locate him 
again and saw him purchase a fancy suit and silk top hat. Armstrong 
subsequently wrangled an introduction at one of the Pall Mall 
gentlemen's clubs and has been gambling at the gaming tables. Loses 
here, wins big there." 
 

"Sounds like he's trying to get rid of the counterfeits without having 
to go to a bank." 
 
"Precisely. Which means we should be able to lay hands on him tonight, 
when he returns to the gaming tables. Shannon overheard him make an 
appointment with some of his new acquaintances for the Carlton Club 
tonight. Unfortunately, when Armstrong took the underground railway out 
of Blackfriars Station, Shannon lost him in the crush of the crowds, so 
we still don't know where he's moved the hostages." 
 
Kaderman ignored that last piece of information, eyes glinting with 
feral excitement as he latched onto the useful item in Malcolm's story. 
"Tonight! The Carlton Club, where's that?" 
 
"Pall Mall, just west of Waterloo Place. All the fashionable 
gentlemen's clubs are found in Waterloo Place and Pall Mall. It's an 
ideal setup to pass counterfeit banknotes. So much money changes hands 
at the gaming tables, a man would be hard pressed to determine just who 
had passed the counterfeits. Are you a gambler, Mr. Kaederman?" 
 
A small, secretive smile came and went. "Often." 
 
"Might I suggest, then, that we arrange to play cards this evening?" 
 
Kaederman chuckled. "With pleasure." 
 
"I'll arrange for a hansom cab to take us down at eight o'clock, then." 
 
"I'll be ready." 
 
Malcolm wondered if Kaederman would wait until they approached 
"Armstrong" at the Carlton Club's gaming tables or if he'd try a hit 
from some distance, before his victim could realize Kaederman was 
there. They hadn't been able to search Kaederman's luggage -- he kept 
both his room and his cases locked -- so he could easily have any 
number of modern weapons stashed away. They were putting Skeeter in 
body armor, which Kit had thoughtfully sent along, but Malcolm still 
worried over the problem like a Staffordshire terrier with a soup bone. 
He hoped Skeeter knew what they were all doing. Far too many lives were 
riding on the outcome of this trap, Margo's and Malcolm's own, among 
them. With a final worried glance at Sid Kaederman, Malcolm arranged 
for the hired carriage and settled down to wait for showtime. 
 
* * * 
 
Skeeter fiddled nervously with his watch fob as he climbed out of the 
Spaldergate barouche into the elegant bustle of Pall Mall. He was a man 
transformed. His formal black jacket was the forerunner of the modern 
tuxedo and his diamond horseshoe stick pin, high collar, and heavy gold 
watch and chain marked him as a man of considerable wealth. The 
expensive macassar oil that slicked his hair back glinted in the dying 
light of sunset as his reflection wavered in the Carlton Club's 
windows. He did an involuntary double-take -- his new face startled 
Skeeter every time he glanced into a reflective surface. 
 
At least the swelling had gone down where Paula had tugged and snipped 
his flesh into a different shape, and the bruises had faded. He could 

even talk without pain and had finally graduated to solid foods after 
nearly a week on liquids, unable to chew without the aid of opiates. As 
the Spaldergate House carriage rattled away, returning to the 
gatehouse, Skeeter told the butterflies in his belly to settle down and 
behave. Any other night, he would've been thrilled beyond measure to 
play the role of wealthy gambler in one of London's finest gaming 
establishments. But springing a trap on Sid Kaederman left Skeeter 
scared to the bottom of his wild, adopted-Mongol heart. He'd accepted 
the risks when he'd set this in motion, but that didn't stop every 
monarch and swallowtail butterfly in the northern hemisphere from doing 
a rumba under his ribs. 
 
Douglas Tanglewood, the Time Tours guide assigned to Skeeter for the 
night, flashed him a wan smile. "Feeling a bit keyed up?" 
 
"A little." 
 
"It's to be expected," Tanglewood said with forced cheeriness. The 
guide had been pressed into service with a critical role to play. He 
would provide Skeeter with the necessary introductions at the Carlton 
Club, since Malcolm had another mission tonight. Malcolm was bringing 
in Kaederman. As they crossed the pavement toward the Carlton Club's 
doorman, Tanglewood kept darting glances at Skeeter, clearly disturbed 
at seeing him wearing another man's features. 
 
The entrance to the Carlton Club was crowded with laughing gentlemen, 
opportuned on all sides by unfortunates who made their living -- such 
as it was -- off the spare change flowing like wine through Pall Mall. 
Bootblacks and eel-pie vendors jostled shoulders with flower girls, all 
crying their wares while newsboys hawked the latest shocking reports 
out of Whitechapel. Skeeter spotted Margo in heavy disguise as a 
bootblack boy, diligently polishing some gentleman's shoes in the glow 
from the club's gaslights. Her unsuspecting customer had stepped up 
with one foot on her overturned wooden box, reading his newspaper while 
Margo darted quick looks through the crowd. 
 
Margo caught his gaze and nodded imperceptibly. Skeeter nodded back, 
then followed Tanglewood into the opulent interior of the Carlton Club. 
The Time Tours guide greeted the liveried doorman by name as the man 
opened massive mahogany doors. "Good evening, Fitzwilliam. I've brought 
a guest this evening, Mr. Cartwright, of America." 
 
Fitzwilliam accepted a small tip from Tanglewood's gloved hand. "Good 
evening, sir." The doorman spoke politely, his accent as carefully 
cultured as his gleaming livery. "Welcome to the Carlton Club." 
 
"Thank you." The instant Skeeter stepped across the threshold, he knew 
he had just walked into money. The game rooms were in full swing with 
lively conversation and gambling activities, the air thick with cigar 
smoke and the smell of wealth. Skeeter and his guide checked their 
overcoats and wandered through the busy rooms to acquaint themselves 
with the club's floor plan, then paused at a craps table where Skeeter 
tossed a few rounds, just to "keep the hand in." He paid his losses 
with a polite smile, then, as they walked off, muttered, "Don't play 
that table. I tossed four sets of dice and every one of 'em was 
loaded." 
 

The Time Tours guide shot him a startled stare. "What?" 
 
Skeeter chuckled. "Never try to con a con. He'll spot you every time. 
The first ones I tossed were weighted, probably with a mercury tumbler 
inside. Did you notice how that portly guy with the mutton chops kept 
tapping them? Dead giveaway. It's why I asked for a new set. Second 
pair was shaved on the edges. I could feel where they'd been rounded 
off on all corners but two. That means a better chance they'll roll 
until they hit a true squared edge, skewing the odds." 
 
Tanglewood was gaping at him. 
 
"Then there was a set where they'd shaved a few of the faces just 
slightly convex, causing 'em to tumble more readily along the bulged 
sides. The one concave face creates just the tiniest vacuum against the 
table's surface, causing the die to land on that face. Wouldn't happen 
every time, of course, but over a long enough period of throws, you'd 
get a consistent win. Or loss, if you're trying to prevent sevens or 
elevens from showing." 
 
"And the fourth pair?" Tanglewood asked, visibly astonished. 
 
"Weighted again, very subtle, though. The paint didn't quite match on 
all the dots. Your basic slick operator made those. Used heavy lead 
paint on the dots for the sixes on that pair, so they'd consistently 
end up on the bottom." Skeeter gave the gaming room they'd just left a 
disgusted glance. "I didn't say anything, because we're not here to 
create a scene and I didn't particularly feel like getting involved in 
a duel of honor with some stiff-necked British lord. But I think I'll 
avoid the craps tables from now on, thank you." 
 
"Good God, Jackson. Where do you learn such things? No, don't answer 
that. I'm not sure I want to know. Ever consider a career as a 
detective?" 
 
"As a matter of fact," Skeeter chuckled, "Kit Carson hired me to work 
security for the Neo Edo." 
 
Tanglewood let out a low whistle. "I am impressed." 
 
Ten minutes later, Tanglewood had introduced him as "Mr. Cartwright, of 
New York City, America" at the card tables and Skeeter found himself 
wallowing happily in a rip-snorting game of stud with the scions of 
several noble houses, all of them happy as clams to be playing "cowboy 
poker" with a genuine Yank. In the third hand, one of the players lit a 
thin, black cigar and gave Skeeter a friendly glance. "I was in 
America, once, had business in San Francisco. Met a fellow there who 
played this game very well, indeed. Perhaps you know him, if you've 
played cards widely over there?" 
 
Skeeter glanced up. "What was his name?" 
 
"Kiplinger. Mr. Kiplinger." 
 
Skeeter sat back in his chair. "Kiplinger? Why, yes, I have heard of 
him, although we've never met." The corners of his lips twitched. 
"Quite a gambler, Mr. Kiplinger." Skeeter's eyes twinkled as a 

positively wicked mood stole over him. "Do you suppose you'll ever be 
going back to San Francisco, sir?" 
 
The card player smiled. "No, Mr. Cartwright, I think it exceedingly 
unlikely. An uncle of mine had gone out there during the Gold Rush of 
'49, you see, made a fortune selling whiskey and victuals to the 
miners. Parlayed it into an astonishing sum, buying shares in mining 
operations. When he died last year, I went out to see to the estate, 
since I was named in his will. He'd never married, poor old Uncle 
Charles, left a fortune with no heirs but a nephew. Black sheep of a 
very fine family, let me tell you. But he added ten thousand per annum 
to my baronetcy when he passed on. Quite an astounding country, 
America." 
 
Skeeter grinned. "Well, since you don't plan on going back, mind if I 
let you in on Mr. Kiplinger's secret? Quite a scandal it was, too. 
Happened just before I came over here." The other gentlemen at the 
table leaned foward, abruptly intent. Even Tanglewood, whose job was to 
keep watch for Malcolm and Kaederman, listened with keen interest. "Mr. 
Kiplinger," Skeeter warmed to his subject, "is what's known as a 
machine man." 
 
"A machine man?" the baronet frowned. "What the deuce is a machine 
man?" 
 
"In short, a cheat, a swindler, and a fraud. Maybe you've heard the 
term 'ace up your sleeve'? Well, what Mr. Kiplinger did was invent an 
ingenious little machine that fit around his forearm and wrist. It had 
a little clip in the end of it, to hold a playing card or two, and it 
could be extended down along the inside of his wrist, like so," Skeeter 
pointed to his own forearm, "or pulled back again, to hide whatever 
cards he'd slipped into the clip. He tied a string to the end of the 
sliding arm of his machine, ran it down his coat and inside his 
trousers, to a little mechanism at his knees." 
 
The gentlemen had forgotten their own cards, staring in open-mouthed 
delight. 
 
"The devil you say! How did it operate?" 
 
"The string was attached to a tiny little hook sewed to the inside knee 
of his other trouser leg. If he wanted to slide the arm of his machine 
down to his wrist, so he could palm a hidden card into his hand, he 
squeezed his knees together, which took the tension off the string and 
lowered the sliding arm with the cards clipped to it. When he wanted to 
sneak a card up his sleeve, all he had to do was pull his knees apart 
and presto! Away went the card, slick as a whistle. He practiced with 
that little contraption until he got so good at it, he could slip three 
or four cards into that clip during the course of a round of poker and 
nobody was the wiser." 
 
The gentlemen at their table were gasping, both delighted and 
scandalized. 
 
"Eventually," Skeeter chuckled, "he got greedy. About two months ago, 
it must've been, he decided to enter a really high-stakes poker game in 
San Francisco. And he kept winning. Every single hand. There were a 

number of very fine card players in that game, professional gamblers, 
all of them, and several of these professional gentlemen started to get 
just a little suspicious of Mr. Kiplinger and his phenomenal run of 
luck at the cards. So at a prearranged signal, they jumped him, dragged 
off his coat, and found his little machine with three aces and a queen 
clipped into it." 
 
"Good God! Did they shoot him on the spot?" 
 
"Oh, no." Skeeter grinned. "Not to say that didn't cross their minds, 
of course. Men have been shot for cheating less seriously than that. 
No, what they did was tell Mr. Kiplinger he had a choice. He could 
either die, right then and there, or he could earn his life back." 
 
"How?" That from a heavy-jowled gentleman whose peerage earned him the 
right to wear a jewelled coronet in the presence of the sovereign. He'd 
told them so, within five minutes of their having joined the group. 
 
Skeeter sat back, grinning triumphantly. "All he had to do was build 
one of these machines for each and every one of them. Which he did." 
 
Laughter and exclamations of astonishment greeted the pronouncement. 
 
"But I say, Cartwright, however did you find out about this?" 
 
Skeeter laughed easily. "One of those fellows was my uncle. Black sheep 
of my family. Hell of a card player." He winked. "One hell of a card 
player." 
 
Doug Tanglewood joined in the laughter as Skeeter scooted back his 
chair, gracefully slid off his coat and removed his cuffs, revealing no 
trace of Mr. Kiplinger's infernal contraption, then replaced cuff and 
cufflinks and evening coat and resumed his seat. 
 
"All right, gentlemen, let's play poker, shall we?" 
 
* * * 
 
Kit was jolted from sleep by the insistent shrill of his telephone. He 
groped, bleary-eyed, for the receiver. "Mmph?" 
 
"Kit? Are you awake?" 
 
"No." He started to fumble the receiver back onto its cradle. 
 
"Kit! Dammit, don't hang up, it's Bull Morgan. I need you in the 
aerie." 
 
Kit hadn't slept more than ten hours during the last five days. In 
fact, he had just spent four of those days combing the station for Jack 
the Ripper, placating and browbeating by turns panic-stricken, 
infuriated tourists in the Neo Edo, and working gate control to keep 
any in-bound tourists from coming back into the station. Tours had 
backed up not only in New York, where in-bound tourists were refused 
admittance, but also in every down-time location TT-86 operated, 
leaving literally hundreds of tourists stranded down time, unable to 
return until the station neutralized the Ripper threat. Having just 

fallen into bed after nearly twenty hours of non-stop work, Kit told 
Bull Morgan exactly what he thought of the station manager's latest 
request. In graphic and shocking detail. 
 
Unfortunately, Bull didn't speak medieval High German, which was Kit's 
favorite language for cursing. The moment he wound down, Bull said 
maddeningly, "Good. I'll see you in ten minutes. Caddrick's on his way 
with I.T.C.H. They're shutting us down, effective today, unless we can 
figure a way to stall 'em off." 
 
"Oh, God . . ." Kit propped his eyelids open. "If I'm not there in ten, 
send an ambulance." 
 
"Thanks, Kit. I owe you." 
 
"You sure as hell do. I'll collect on this one, too, just see if I 
don't." 
 
The line went dead and Kit crawled out of bed, feeling a certain 
kinship with a recently squashed garden slug. He dragged on the first 
clothes that came to hand, staggered in search of footgear, and finally 
stumbled out onto Commons, heading at a drunken pace for the aerie. He 
was halfway there, repeating to himself, I will not fall asleep on my 
feet every few seconds, before he woke up enough to realize he wore 
nothing but a loosely belted kimono that covered entirely too little of 
him and house slippers that had been new when Queen Elizabeth the First 
had taken the English throne. He'd stolen them, himself, from an 
Elizabethan house he'd entered under very unhappy circumstances. 
 
"Ah, hell . . ." He pulled the belt tighter, which at least kept the 
more private bits of him from showing, and scowled at his hairy shins. 
No time to go back and change, now . . . He couldn't even stop 
somewhere and beg a pair of jeans. Commons remained eerily quiet, shops 
and restaurants resembling darkened caves behind their steel security-
mesh doors. Scattered patrols of security, BATF, and Pest Control 
officers stood guard over major gates due to open, to be sure no one 
got into or out of the station. After that dead BATF officer had been 
found beside the Langskip Cafe, a few days back, not even Commons 
security forces made the rounds without partners along. A slow, door-
to-door search of every hotel room and Residential apartment on station 
was underway, looking for both Lachley and a handful of Ripper cultists 
still at large, but the search was taking forever, with no guarantee 
that the Ripper wasn't simply changing lodgings to a room already 
cleared. 
 
By the time Kit reached the aerie, he was almost asleep again, leaning 
against the elevator doors for the ride up from Commons. The elevator 
doors slid open, dumping Kit unceremoniously into the room. He 
staggered, recovered, and hitched the kimono around with an irritable 
twitch, then met the astonished gazes of John Caddrick, three armed 
bodyguards, and five I.T.C.H. agents impeccably attired -- respectively 
-- in six-thousand dollar suits and neatly pressed uniforms. Kit 
scratched absently at a thick growth of stubble, yawned, and wove his 
way toward a chair, where he promptly collapsed. 
 
Caddrick glared. "You're drunk!" 
 

"God, I wish," Kit muttered. "I just haven't been to bed in about five 
days. Thanks for waking me up. Now, what's this bullshit about closing 
Shangri-La?" 
 
Caddrick glanced at the highest-ranking I.T.C.H. officer. "Agent 
Kirkegard has agreed to shut down this station. TT-86 is dangerously 
out of control, thanks to gross incompetence among the managerial 
staff." 
 
Kit just looked at him. Then switched his attention to the immaculately 
groomed Kirkegard, her blond hair pulled back into a severe knot at the 
nape of her neck. "You wouldn't mind, would you, if I toss this jackass 
through the window?" 
 
"This is not a time to joke!" she snapped. 
 
"I'm not joking," Kit growled. "The only thing wrong with this station 
is John Caddrick's butt, sitting on it." 
 
Bull Morgan stood up hastily, clearing his throat. "Kit, I know how 
hard you've been working during this crisis. I asked you to join this 
meeting to present your case as a station resident and business owner, 
before I.T.C.H. makes its final determination." 
 
"I see. Tell you what," Kit leaned forward, holding Agent Kirkegard's 
gaze. "You people have been probing around in our books and our private 
vaults and auditing our tax returns until you've dug down to Himalayan 
bedrock. I'd like to issue you a real challenge." 
 
"A challenge?" Kirkegard echoed, her Nordic brow creasing briefly. 
 
"Yep. A real barn-burner. I'd like you to figure out why John Caddrick, 
here, would lie to the press, the FBI, Interpol, and I.T.C.H. about the 
circumstances of his little girl's disappearance." 
 
For a long moment, utter silence reigned in the aerie. Every mouth in 
the room had dropped open, including Bull Morgan's. Kit was beyond 
caring if he'd just signed the station's death warrant -- not to 
mention his own. He was simply too tired to keep pussyfooting around 
what he knew about Jenna Caddrick's vanishing act, and he was fresh out 
of other options. And it looked to Kit like he'd struck paydirt, with 
this one. 
 
Senator Caddrick's face had utterly drained of color, leaving him 
virtually transparent for long instants. Then a scarlet flush darkened 
toward purple. He came out of his chair, snarling. "Why, you miserable, 
drunken, washed-up has-been! How dare you insinuate any such thing!" 
 
"Sit down," Kit growled, "before you step close enough to call it 
assault and I retaliate in ways we'll all regret." 
 
"Don't sit there and threaten me!" 
 
"All right." Kit stood up. "I'll stand here and do it. Maybe you'd care 
to explain a few facts. You say your daughter's so-called kidnappers 
came to this station and tried to murder Ianira Cassondra, but we've 
got eye-witnesses who'll swear in court that your daughter came into 

this station of her own free will. Moreover, she came armed with a 
loaded revolver she used to kill the terrorist about to murder Ianira. 
Or what about Noah Armstrong, who's supposed to be a ringleader of 
these same terrorists? Armstrong shoved Ianira to safety, just as the 
man Jenna killed tried to shoot her. And why did Julius, not to mention 
Marcus and his children, voluntarily run to Denver with Noah Armstrong 
in disguise, smuggling the girls out in their luggage and setting up 
Julius as decoy for your daughter? For that matter, why was Jenna, who 
was supposed to be held hostage, allowed to wander around this station 
at will, changing money all by herself in Goldie Morran's shop just 
minutes before the gate departure? Furthermore, she strolled into Paula 
Booker's cosmetic surgical studio and paid for a new face, again 
totally on her own. She was all by herself when she stepped through the 
Britannia Gate, too -- we've got witnesses who'll swear to that, too, 
in a court of law. Nobody forced that girl through any gates on this 
station. How about it, Caddrick?" 
 
Caddrick's cheeks faded to the color of dirty ice. "This is 
preposterous!" 
 
"Is it? Your story doesn't add up, Caddrick. I wonder what we'd find 
out about Noah Armstrong if we went back up-time and started digging? 
The man can't be an Ansar Majlis terrorist, not when he's kept Ianira's 
whole family from being murdered by Ansar Majlis operatives, and he 
can't be a kidnapper since he let Jenna and Ianira walk through the 
Britannia gate without armed guards. She was seen on the departures 
platform by one of the baggage handlers. There wasn't anybody close to 
her who could've been holding a gun on her. And she walked out of 
Spaldergate House in London with no escort except a Time Tours driver. 
No kidnappers in sight, nothing. She was followed, of course. Two men 
who trailed her out of this station, working as baggage handlers, tried 
to kill her at the Picadilly Hotel. Only Jenna shot both of them, with 
the same revolver she used to kill the Ansar Majlis gunman on station, 
killed both men and got away clean. Personally, Caddrick, I'd like to 
know why your story doesn't wash with the facts." 
 
"I will not stand here and be slandered!" Caddrick shouted, causing 
dust to jump on the surface of Bull's immense desk. 
 
"Good!" Kit shot right back. "I'll personally escort you to Primary and 
kick your butt through, the second it re-opens!" 
 
Ms. Kirkegard stepped between them, holding up an imperious hand in 
either direction, forestalling whatever shattering curse was about to 
erupt from Caddrick's mouth. "Silence! All of you! Mr. Carson, these 
are very serious allegations." 
 
"You bet they are. Believe me, I know exactly how serious they are. I 
wouldn't risk making such accusations lightly, because too many people 
who thwart John Caddrick's plans end up conveniently dead." 
 
"I will sue you for every goddamned cent you own!" Caddrick snarled. 
 
Kit grinned into Caddrick's teeth. "Like to see you try it. We're 
outside American jurisdiction, here. You'll have to convince the Inter-
Temporal Court, if you want to sue my butt." 
 

Agent Kirkegard said forcefully, "I want to see these witnesses, 
immediately." 
 
"Sorry. They're in London. Looking for Jenna Caddrick. And keeping a 
very suspicious eye on the senator's private detective, Mr. Sid 
Kaederman. Caddrick rammed him down our throats with threats to shut us 
down if we didn't send him along. The man had never stepped through a 
single gate, was monstrously unqualified for a down-time search 
mission. I spent a couple of weeks in Sid Kaederman's company, on 
horseback in Colorado. Maybe the senator, here, can explain why Mr. 
Kaederman recognized the man who murdered one of our station residents 
in an abandoned Colorado mining town? Recognized him and didn't expect 
to find him dead? That man had committed cold-blooded murder of a 
sixteen-year-old boy, I might add, who went to Colorado as decoy for 
Jenna Caddrick." 
 
"There are perfectly good reasons why Kaederman might not say 
anything," Caddrick began. 
 
"Really? If Kaederman were legit and had recognized one of the 
terrorists, he'd simply have said so. But he didn't say anything. In 
fact, he took pains to make sure no one realized he'd recognized the 
man. Why? Mr. Sid Kaederman's story doesn't add up, either, does it? We 
sent him to London to avoid having your federal goons shut us down, but 
I sent Skeeter Jackson and Paula Booker through to keep an eye on him. 
Skeeter knows this case better than anyone -- he's been at hand when 
every key piece of this mess has unfolded. And when it comes to Ianira 
Cassondra, Skeeter's the only man on this station I can guarantee no 
amount of money will buy off. A boy doesn't get adopted by twelfth 
century Yakka Mongols without adopting their moral codes. For Skeeter, 
clan is sacred, and someone's already killed one member of his adopted 
station-side clan and tried to murder several others. Believe me, 
Caddrick, that boy will kill to protect Ianira and her family, if he 
has to. And he will find Jenna and Noah Armstrong. The question is, 
what will they tell him when he does?" 
 
"You're mad!" Caddrick shouted. "Completely insane! My God, Carson, is 
this the only way you can find to keep your precious pocket-book from 
being shut down around your ears? By making wild accusations and 
threatening me?" 
 
"Why don't we let Jenna settle it?" Kit smiled coldly into Caddrick's 
eyes. 
 
The senator swung on the I.T.C.H. agents. "Are you going to listen to 
this garbage? I insist you do your job! Shut down this station right 
now, before any more lives are lost! As for Carson," he flung a pitying 
look over his shoulder, "it's clear he's cracked under the strain. Up-
time hospitalization is what he needs." 
 
Agent Kirkegard frowned. "Senator, I cannot believe Kit Carson has gone 
raving mad in the space of one week. Not when he has worked so 
heroically to save lives on this station. No, do not interrupt!" she 
snapped, as Caddrick started to protest. "Grave charges have been made, 
charges which must be investigated. If what Mr. Carson says is true, 
your actions on this station must be considered highly suspicious. 
Until this delegation is satisfied that no evidence exists to prove 

these accusations, my fellow agents and I must take them seriously. You 
will return to your hotel, Senator, and you will not leave it unless 
you are summoned by this delegation. Is that clear? Mr. Morgan," she 
turned her attention to Bull, leaving Caddrick sputtering in naked 
shock, "I believe your security system records events on Commons?" 
 
"It does," Bull nodded. "We recycle the tapes on a weekly basis, but 
we've kept the footage of every riot on station, for legal purposes." 
 
"Very wise. I hereby subpoena all security tapes showing the 
disturbance surrounding Ianira Cassondra's disappearance." 
 
"But she's a down-timer without rights!" Caddrick protested. 
 
Kirkegard turned an icy gaze on him. "Indeed. But if your daughter and 
Noah Armstrong are shown in that tape doing what Mr. Carson claims they 
were doing, your entire story will come under serious suspicion. And 
they are not down-timers, but up-time citizens with full legal 
protection. Therefore, that tape is critical evidence. Mr. Morgan, if I 
may suggest it, the senator should not be privy to any further 
discussions this commission has with station management, until such 
time as these charges are proven or dismissed." 
 
"You can't be serious!" Caddrick blustered. 
 
She levelled a cool stare back into his seething grey eyes. "I would 
suggest you remove yourself to your hotel, Senator. Or I will have you 
removed." 
 
Caddrick stood sputtering for several incoherent moments, then stalked 
to the elevator. His stunned bodyguards hurried in his wake, exchanging 
worried glances. The elevator swallowed them down and took them 
mercifully away. Kit ran a hand through badly disheveled hair. "Thanks. 
And now, if you don't mind, I'm going back to bed. You can subpoena me 
to testify later." 
 
And without waiting for a by-your-leave, he stalked to the elevator and 
followed Caddrick's abrupt exit. Ten minutes later, he was sprawled in 
bed once more, his last conscious thought a worried one, wondering what 
he'd just unleashed on them all. 
 
 
 
Chapter Sixteen 
 
The cold night wind chilled Margo through her thin bootblack's 
disguise. She shivered and wished she could walk through the ornate 
doors to the Carlton Club, just long enough to get warm. Instead, she 
danced in place, hugging herself for warmth, and called out to passing 
gentlemen, "Shine, guv'nor? Farthing for a shine?" 
 
She had just secured a customer and was diligently blacking his boots 
when Skeeter and Douglas Tanglewood arrived in a rented hansom. They 
nodded imperceptibly in her direction and vanished into the warmth of 
the club. Margo worked briskly, as much to keep warm as to maintain her 
disguise. The pistol inside her trousers was held snug against her 
abdomen by a belly-band holster and the dagger in her boot rubbed her 

calf as she moved about. She kept close watch on the arriving 
carriages, impatient for Malcolm to arrive with Sid Kaederman. More 
than a quarter of an hour passed without a trace of them, leaving Margo 
more and more uneasy. She was busily blacking another gentleman's boots 
when a hansom cab rattled to a halt some distance from the kerbside and 
a well-dressed gentleman swung himself down. 
 
"Driver," he called out, "my friend wishes to continue on to London 
Docks, to catch his steamer." 
 
Even as he spoke, he thrust his arm back into the dark cab, which 
jolted slightly on its high wheels. Margo slowed her strokes with the 
buffing brush, puzzled. The cab started down the street and the 
gentleman turned, heading toward the club entrance. Margo gasped. 
Kaederman! He strode past, nodding to the doorman. "I shall be joining 
friends this evening, a Mr. Cartwright and his companions." 
 
"Very good, sir." 
 
Margo dropped the buffing brush, abandoning her astonished client. She 
darted after the hansom cab, terrified of what she might find. It took 
her half a block to catch up and she only did so then because the cab 
was caught in a jam of carriages trying to turn into Waterloo Place. 
Margo flung herself onto the step and lunged up, ignoring the driver's 
startled demand to get out of his cab. 
 
"Malcolm!" 
 
He lay slumped against the side of the carriage, cheeks ashen in the 
gaslights from nearby club windows. "Margo," he whispered in a 
terrible, weak voice. "Sorry, love, took me by surprise . . ." He had 
fumbled one hand beneath his coat, was holding himself awkwardly. Blood 
had spread across his shirt, was dripping down his arm and spreading 
across the back of his hand. "Get back to . . . Carlton Club . . . warn 
the others." He sipped air. "I'm not hit bad. Managed to fling myself 
aside . . . when he told the driver to go to the docks . . . would've 
had me through the heart, otherwise." 
 
Even as Malcolm was explaining, Margo was ripping his coat and shirt 
off, using her dagger to cut the shirt into bandage strips. She wound 
them around Malcolm's chest, folding a couple of thick pieces to act as 
compresses over the wound. Her hands shook violently, but she managed 
to tie them off snugly. 
 
"Go, Margo," Malcolm wheezed. "I'll take the cab to Spaldergate. Go!" 
 
She swore aloud, recognizing the necessity. "Driver! Your passenger's 
been shot! Take him to a surgeon! Battersea Park, Octavia Street! And 
hurry those horses!" 
 
The driver let go a voluable flood of invective and cracked his 
carriage whip, urging his horses up onto the pavement to bypass the 
crush of carriages in the street. Pedestrians scattered, cursing, as 
Margo shoved her knife back into her boot sheath and flung herself down 
to the street, pelting toward the Carlton Club once more. She dodged 
carriage wheels and horses, gained the pavement, and slung herself 
around startled gentlemen strolling from club to club. She finally 

gained the Carlton and hurled herself at the doors -- only to be 
snatched back by Fitzwilliam. 
 
"Here, now, where d'you think you're going? This is a gentleman's club! 
Take yourself away, you filthy bootblack!" He dragged Margo by the back 
of her shirt collar and shoved her roughly to the pavement, where she 
landed in an undignified sprawl. 
 
"Listen to me!" she shot back to her feet. "I have to get a critical 
message to Mr. Tanglewood and Mr. Cartwright! Send a message, yourself, 
if you won't let me in! Tell them Kaederman shot Mr. Moore and he's 
going to kill Mr. Cartwright! They're in terrible danger -- !" 
 
"Take yourself off before I summon a constable, you little lunatic!" 
 
Margo darted past, but Fitzwilliam was quick. He trapped her between 
his body and the wall, pinning her like a bug on display. He boxed her 
ears so soundly, Margo's head rang and her eyes streamed. She swore in 
gutter langage, then bit his hand, flinging herself around him and 
running toward the now-unguarded door. 
 
"Stop that boy! Stop him, I say!" 
 
A group of startled gentlemen just leaving the club made a grab for 
her. She slithered past, cursing them, and dragged out her pistol -- 
then someone seized her shoulder and spun her around and pain exploded 
through her head, sending her sprawling across the pavement like a 
ragdoll. 
 
* * * 
 
Goldie rapidly discovered that John Lachley, while certifiably mad, was 
nevertheless no fool. Killing her was thankfully the furthest thing 
from his mind. She spent most of her captivity tied to the chair in 
front of her computer, teaching him everything he demanded to know 
about the up-time world. He needed her -- for a while, anyway. And that 
gave her the courage to hope she might somehow survive. 
 
"This," Lachley demanded, touching a finger to the glowing computer 
screen, "is the schedule for the various gates, then?" 
 
Goldie nodded. "Yes." Her left wrist was bound to the chair, her right 
tied to the desk with a short length of rope, just enough to operate 
the mouse. 
 
"Three different dates are given for each gate," he frowned. 
 
"There have to be three. One is the time-frame of the up-time world, 
where the tourists come from, one is the time-frame of the station, and 
one is the time-frame of the tour destination beyond the gate." 
 
He studied the readings for a moment. "This one has only two dates." 
 
"That's Primary, of course. Gate One." 
 
"Ah, of course . . . The way into the up-time world which your guards 
have so churlishly denied me. Of course there would be only two dates 

given. Yes. Show me how one obtains a proper gate pass for your 
Primary." 
 
Goldie bit her lip nervously. "I can't. You get one in New York. When 
you come into the station. And a down-timer can't get one. Down-timers 
are never permitted to step through Primary. It's against up-time law." 
 
Lachley scowled. "Deuced awkward. I shall simply have to obtain one 
from a tourist or station resident, then. No matter. A trifling detail. 
Make this machine show me what your up-time worlds looks like." 
 
Goldie explained how to put in a CD encyclopedia which contained 
photographs and movie clips, since she couldn't reach the shelf where 
they were stored, then clicked into various files to show him what he 
demanded. As he frowned at the screen, she suggested nervously, "You'd 
get a better idea, watching videotaped movies on television." 
 
Ten minutes later, Goldie sat bound hand and foot on her couch, while 
John Lachley sprawled at his leisure beside her, watching Goldie's 
movies. He exclaimed often, sitting forward with interest whenever cars 
or jets or cityscapes appeared, took particular note of new machinery 
and gadgets, and demanded explanations of everything he saw until 
Goldie's mind whirled in exhaustion. He watched videotapes until she 
fell asleep in her bonds and when she woke again, stiff and aching, he 
was still watching. He also spent hours at her computer, reading 
station library files, and studied every book on Goldie's shelves. 
Lachley's growing knowledge of the up-time world terrified Goldie. He 
correctly identified every item in the videos, explained each item's 
proper use, and had picked up modern slang and idiom with an ease that 
left her shaking. If he got loose in New York . . . 
 
She couldn't see any way to stop him, short of reaching a telephone to 
cry for help, and since he was already familiar with their use from 
London, he hadn't allowed her near one -- once he'd recognized hers for 
what it was; it bore no resemblance whatsoever to an 1880's telephone. 
When operating the computer, she wasn't even able to send an e-mail to 
station security. He'd grasped the e-mail concept with terrifying 
rapidity and had forced her to delete the programming from her hard 
drive. 
 
Goldie knew the entire station was being turned upside down, searching 
for him, but no one had come to her apartment, thanks to his trick with 
the dead BATF officer's radio, and no one had called her, either, not 
even to commiserate over lost profits. It hurt to realize that in such 
a crisis, not one of the station residents had thought to check on her, 
to see if she was alive or dead. People she'd thought of as friends had 
completely ignored her. Bitterness choked Goldie, but there was nothing 
she could do except wait and hope that her captor grew careless just 
long enough to scream for help. 
 
Every day's passing, however, left Goldie sinking further into despair. 
He never relaxed his vigil for even a moment and Goldie entertained no 
doubts about what he'd do if he caught her trying to telephone. Lachley 
would cut her to ribbons so small, there wouldn't be enough to fill a 
casket. On the other hand, if she didn't anger him, he would probably 
let her live, at least until he made the attempt to crash Primary 
outbound. And he couldn't try that as long as Bull Morgan kept the 

tourists in their hotel rooms and refused to let anyone through. 
Goldie's greatest terror was that Lachley would simply kill her, waylay 
a security agent and steal his uniform, then slip through Primary that 
way. 
 
As days passed, the intolerable situation left John Lachley deeply 
impatient, forced as he was to sit through two cycles of Primary 
without anyone allowed near it. He paced agitatedly, muttering under 
his breath, then finally snatched up another videotape from her rapidly 
dwindling supply. Lachley poured himself a generous brandy from the 
last bottle in the cabinet and slid in Goldie's copy of Temple Harlot, 
which she had just recently acquired through a video pirate. When the 
pre-movie interview of Ianira Cassondra flickered across the screen, 
Lachley jerked so violently, he knocked the glass to the floor. He 
stared at the screen and ripped off a shocked oath. "God's blood! It's 
her!" He turned a wild-eyed stare on Goldie. "Who is that woman?" He 
stabbed an unsteady finger toward the television. 
 
"Ianira Cassondra. One of the station's down-timers. A member of the 
Found Ones, the down-time community of refugees. She sits on the 
council as their speaker." 
 
He ran the tape back to listen to the interview in its entirety, then 
stopped the video and demanded a full explanation. Goldie told him 
everything she knew about Ianira, her flight from a murderous husband 
in Athens, her arrival on station, her marriage to Marcus, the adoring 
acolytes who had named her their prophetess, hailing her as the Goddess 
incarnate. "They flock to the station," she quavered. "When she was 
kidnapped, they went berserk. Staged protests and started brawls with 
the Ansar Majlis and half the station. The Angels of Grace Militia has 
sworn to defend Templars from harm until Ianira is restored." Goldie 
wanted to ask why he was so abruptly interested, but couldn't find the 
courage to open her lips again. 
 
Lachley sat staring into empty space for long moments, mind clearly 
racing. At length, he murmured, "It is possible, then, to wield that 
much power, even in this strange world . . . If a mere chit can be 
taken for a goddess, then I shall certainly rule as a god." He smiled, 
laughed softly to himself, eyes twinkling. Then untied Goldie from the 
couch and hauled her unceremoniously into her bedroom, where he dumped 
her onto the mattress and tied her down again. He stroked Goldie's 
wild, unwashed hair back from her face and smiled down at her. "You 
have done very well, my pet. According to the time tables on your 
computer, Primary opens again tomorrow evening. You and I shall be 
ready, dear lady. Whether they permit it or no, I will step through 
that gate." 
 
Goldie was too exhausted, too numb to ask how. She hadn't forgotten how 
he'd created his last diversion -- or the severed human head he'd flung 
down into the crowd, its plunge caught vividly on SLUR-TV's cameras. It 
had been a woman's head, with once-beautiful blonde hair. Goldie knew 
in her creaking bones he would cut her to pieces, too, if he could find 
no other way through Primary. 
 
Despite Goldie's soul-deep weariness, sleep was a long time coming. 
 
* * * 

 
Skeeter was winning the latest round of poker, hands down, when a 
liveried servant carrying a folded slip of paper on a silver tray 
entered the card parlour. "Message for Mr. Cartwright!" He spoke just 
loudly enough to be heard, without disrupting conversations under way 
over the cards. The servant was peering around the room, trying to 
locate the recipient. At the sound of his assumed name, Skeeter jerked 
his glance up. 
 
"What is it? What message?" 
 
"Ah, Mr. Cartwright? A message, sir." The man handed Skeeter the folded 
slip of paper and waited for the tip Skeeter produced, then departed 
with a slight bow. Skeeter glanced at Doug Tanglewood, who was frowning 
already, then opened the note. Every droplet of blood drained out of 
his face. There's serious trouble at home, come at once, someone's 
taken the children . . . 
 
The table flipped over with a crash. Cards and money went flying. 
Skeeter hit the floor running and took the stairs five at a time, 
leaving Tanglewood to follow in his wake. Skeeter was ruthless with 
elbows and shoulders. "Let me through, damn your eyes!" 
 
Shocked gentlemen scattered out of his path, staring after him. Then he 
was on the ground floor, retrieving his coat, rushing toward the door. 
He was nearly there when a voice at his ear said, "Where's the fire, 
Armstrong?" He jerked his gaze up, startled, to find Sid Kaederman at 
his elbow. An instant later, something hard, cylindrical, and 
terrifying jabbed his ribs, as luck would have it, between the front 
and back panels of his hidden body armor. 
 
"Make any noise at all and I'll blow a hole through your liver," 
Kaederman hissed. "Outside, Armstrong. We're going have a friendly 
little chat someplace quiet. About your friends." 
 
Shaking with fury at his own stupidity, Skeeter walked into the cold 
October night. The jaws of the trap had slammed shut, all right -- only 
Skeeter was the one caught and where the hell was Malcolm? Nothing was 
going down the way it was supposed to! How had Kaederman gotten the 
drop on them all, leaving Skeeter off balance and everyone out of 
position? Kaederman pushed open the door and shoved Skeeter through, 
gun still jammed into his ribs. Skeeter raked the pavement with his 
glance, searching for familiar faces and not spotting any. Kaederman 
was lifting a hand and whistling for a hansom cab when Margo appeared, 
running toward them. 
 
"Kaederman!" 
 
The killer stiffened -- and the damned, interfering doorman grabbed 
Margo by the shoulder, slugging her so hard, she sprawled across the 
walk. Her little .32 top break clattered across the pavement and into 
the street. Men were shouting, calling for a constable, and someone 
cried, "Good God! The boy had a gun!" 
 
Kaederman shoved Skeeter away from the fracas, toward a hansom cab 
waiting for a fare, the horse's head bent low, the cabman bundled 
against the cold wind. Skeeter's fury faltered into the beginnings of 

real fear. 
 
"I say," a familiar voice said from behind them, "did you drop this, 
sir?" 
 
Kaederman started to glance around, an instinctive response to the 
polite inquiry -- and Doug Tanglewood kicked Skeeter's feet out from 
under him. 
 
He went down with a startled yell, no more expecting that sudden move 
than Kaederman. A brief, sharp scuffle exploded above him. The muted 
clack! of a silenced pistol reached him. The scent of burnt powder and 
hot metal filled the air as the gun discharged almost soundlessly. 
Tanglewood gripped Kaederman's gun wrist with both hands while swearing 
savagely, oblivious to the hole through the loose side of a once-fine 
Prince Albert coat. The crowd of gentlemen on the steps stood like 
spectators at a sporting event, thinking this was an ordinary brawl; 
not one of them recognized the anachronistic, suppressed semiautomatic 
pistol as a dangerous weapon. 
 
Skeeter kicked out and managed to clip Kaederman's ankles with one 
thrashing foot. Kaederman tripped, flailing for a moment off balance. 
Tanglewood suddenly had his opponent's full weight slipping through his 
hands and only slowed Kaederman's fall enough for the assassin to 
control it, leaving Tanglewood the one off balance and Kaederman 
rolling back up. Skeeter scrambled to his feet just as Margo rushed in 
low, under Kaederman's gun arm. She prevented his second shot from 
catching Tanglewood between the shoulderblades. The gun fired wild as 
Kaederman tried to avoid her. A giant's fist punched Skeeter in the 
chest and sent him sprawling, saved from the bullet by the Kevlar panel 
under his fancy dress shirt. Margo was still struggling with Kaederman. 
Shrill whistles sounded, police whistles, and someone shouted, 
"Constable! Over here!" 
 
Tanglewood lunged at them just as Kaederman punched Margo in the solar 
plexus. She doubled up with a gagging sound and he dragged her back 
with the gun to her head. "Get back, damn you, or I'll kill her!" 
 
Skeeter tried to crawl to his feet, stunned and gasping against pain to 
his ribs, bruising pain from that shot to his body armor. Kaederman 
kicked him in the gut, dumping him to the ground again, and dragged his 
hostage into the street where he flung her into a cab. Then Kaederman 
lunged up and shouted at the driver, who sped away with a clatter, 
swerving into traffic at a reckless pace. Skeeter and Tanglewood bolted 
in pursuit -- and found their way blocked by two burly constables. 
 
"What's going on, here?" the taller policeman demanded. 
 
"That man's a killer!" Skeeter gasped, pointing at the vanishing hansom 
cab. "He's taken a girl hostage! We have to stop him!" 
 
Tanglewood dashed into the street, scooping up Margo's revolver in one 
fluid movement while flagging down another cab. "Skeeter! Come on!" 
 
The constables grabbed for him and missed. A moment later, the cab 
driver was racing down Pall Mall in pursuit. Skeeter clung to the side 
of the rocketing hansom to avoid being flung out as they whipped 

between carriages at a reckless pace. Douglas Tanglewood was swearing 
nonstop. "Goddammit, what a bloody mess!" 
 
"What'm I gonna tell Kit?" Skeeter groaned, closing his eyes against 
the very thought. "What in the world am I gonna tell Kit? And the 
others . . ." He could hear the voices already, could picture the 
freezing contempt. And where were you, Skeeter, when Margo was abducted 
by that killer? Ah, gambling . . . Well, of course you were, Skeeter, 
who could expect anything better of you . . . 
 
He had to find her. Before Kaederman tortured her to learn where Jenna 
was. Skeeter wouldn't give a plugged nickle for her life, once 
Kaederman knew. Skeeter clenched his jaw. He vowed to hunt Kaederman to 
the ends of the world, if necessary. 
 
And kill him. 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Seventeen 
 
Primary was due to open at eight-fifteen P.M., station time. Goldie 
spent the day in a mute daze, watching John Lachley prepare his escape. 
He had raided Goldie's wardrobe, finding a pair of her jeans and a 
sweatshirt that fit him reasonably well. He carefully studied the 
identification papers and cards in her wallet, requiring Goldie to 
explain the purposes of each. He knew, now, about the BATF kiosks and 
medical stations he would be required to pass, with identification in 
hand. Goldie didn't see how he could possibly fool anyone with her ID, 
but he clearly had a plan and that scared her even more thoroughly. If 
he used her ID, he wouldn't need her. 
 
Lachley also tucked into her wallet all the loose cash Goldie had left 
in the apartment. He'd already appropriated her private stock of 
jewelry, gemstones, and rare coins, some of which she kept separate 
from her shop inventory in case of robbery or other disaster to her 
storefront. She reflected bitterly that the one contingency she hadn't 
planned for was kidnapping and armed robbery by Jack the Ripper. He was 
packing Goldie's suitcase, chatting almost gaily about the up-time 
world and his plans, when the buzzer sounded at her apartment door. 
 
Goldie jerked her head up from the mattress. Lachley whipped around, 
transformed in the blink of an eyelash to a cold-eyed, ruthless killer. 
He snatched up his knife and advanced on her with a terrifying, 
soundless movement, a snake that had abruptly sprouted legs. The door 
buzzer sounded again, followed by an impatient pounding. Lachley 
dragged her from the bed and hauled her, trembling, into the living 
room. He laid the razor sharp blade at her throat and whispered, "Call 
through the door. Say you're ill and can't open it." 
 
"Hello?" Goldie called, voice cracking with terror. 
 
"Security!" a man's voice came back through the door. "Mind if we check 
the place again, Goldie? We sent you an e-mail, but you never answered, 
so we thought we'd check on you." 

 
"Could you come later?" she choked out, shaking so violently the knife 
knicked her throat in a thin red line. "I'm not well. I slipped and 
fell and can't move around much." 
 
"Do you need a doctor?" the security officer called back, sounding 
worried, now. "I'll send for someone . . ." 
 
Lachley pressed the steel tighter against her jugular. "No!" Goldie 
cried. "I'm fine! Just bruised and shaken, is all." 
 
"Open the door, Goldie," the man demanded maddeningly. "We'll let the 
doctor decide. And I have to search the apartment, no exceptions 
allowed." 
 
Lachley cursed under his breath, then shifted the tip of the knife to 
Goldie's spine and slid around behind her. "Open it," he hissed. 
 
Goldie's hands trembled violently as she reached for the locks and the 
doorknob. Lachley stood hidden from sight as the door swung open. She 
shuffled aside for the security team. Wally Klontz and a BATF agent 
stepped inside, the BATF officer entering first. Wally had barely 
crossed the threshold when Lachley shoved Goldie brutally to the floor. 
Lachley sank his knife into the BATF officer's throat in a lightning 
attack, leaving Goldie screaming and covered with spatters of blood. 
Wally flung himself at the killer, but Lachley twisted aside and 
slashed out. The blade tore Wally's shoulder to the bone, sending the 
security officer reeling back in shock and pain. Then Lachley was out 
the door and running. Wally fumbled with his radio while blood poured 
down his arm and spread across the front of his shirt. 
 
"Code Seven Red!" he screamed. "Goldie Morran's apartment! Lachley 
killed Feindienst and laid my shoulder open, then bolted!" 
 
Goldie dragged herself to Wally's side and tried to stanch the bleeding 
with her hands. The radio crackled. "Roger, security teams are 
responding. Medical's on its way. Did he kill Goldie?" 
 
"Negative, but she's pretty shaken up." 
 
Goldie's hands trembled violently against Wally's torn shoulder. 
 
The radio sputtered. "Roger. Sit tight, help's on the way." 
 
Ten minutes later, Goldie lay strapped to a gurney in the back of a 
medi-van, headed for the infirmary. Wally Klontz occupied the gurney 
next to hers, where EMT's worked over his gashed shoulder and threaded 
an I.V. into his elbow. Goldie still didn't quite believe she had 
survived. As terror finally dropped away, Goldie's mind gradually came 
back to life again, presenting her with several startling, lucrative 
possibilities. After all, very few people could claim to have survived 
a week as Jack the Ripper's prisoner. Why, there might be television 
appearances in this, exclusive magazine and newspaper stories, books, 
perhaps even a movie . . . 
 
Feeling more like herself than she had in a full week, Goldie settled 
down to enjoy her notoriety. 

 
* * * 
 
For long moments, shock held Margo motionless on the floor of the cab. 
The driver had whipped his horse to a gallop, urged on by Kaederman's 
shouted promise of reward. By lifting her head, she could just see over 
the footboard. It was dark beyond the open side of the hansom, which 
swayed and jolted badly as they rattled over uneven paving, but as they 
whipped around a corner, she caught a glimpse of the Atheneum 
gentlemen's club. They'd turned onto Waterloo Place, then, which meant 
they now raced northward along Regent Street. 
 
The long, gentle curve of Nash's Quadrant left her slightly queasy as 
the windows and street-level doorways flashed past. A dizzy swing 
through Picadilly Circus sent them plunging past the County Fire Office 
into a broad, sliding turn down Shaftesbury Avenue. They rattled down 
Shaftesbury at a terrific clip, the SoHo district flying past on their 
left hand, then the cabbie swung sharply into a skidding right-hand 
turn that left them racing down High Holborn. 
 
Margo was beginning to recover her breath, at least, despite the 
terrific jouncing against her ribs as she was jolted around on the 
floor. Her wits returned, as well, stirring into anger. She was alive 
and if she wanted to stay that way, she'd better do something fast. 
She'd lost her pistol, thanks to that idiot doorman, but she might 
still have the boot-knife, if all that thrashing around hadn't knocked 
it out of her boot sheath. He hadn't searched her yet, which was a 
small miracle. If she hoped to use that dagger, she'd have to do it 
quick. His silenced pistol frightened her, his prowess with it even 
more so, but they were in a flying cab with her sprawled across the 
floor, supposedly stunned and terrified out of her wits, so he probably 
wouldn't expect her to try anything yet. She groped cautiously toward 
her boot with one hand, trying to brace herself with her other arm to 
reduce the bone-shaking jar of the ride. 
 
Cor, I'll 'ave bruises from me thri'penny bits to me toes . . . she 
thought sourly, lapsing into the Cockney she'd been speaking almost 
more than standard English, this trip. Margo stole her hand into her 
boot and closed her fingers around the grip of the little dagger Sven 
had given her. It wasn't a large one, only four inches or so of blade, 
thrust into a leather sheath sewn to the boot lining, but it was a 
weapon and she certainly knew how to use it, after all those lessons 
with Sven Bailey. Just closing her hand around the stout wooden handle 
lifted her flagging spirits. Kaederman shouted up to the driver, "Turn 
south! And you can slow down, now. We've shaken the bastard following 
us!" 
 
"Can't turn, guv," the driver called down, "we're on the Viaduct, no 
way to turn 'til we come to Snow Hill an' Owd Bailey!" 
 
The Viaduct! Margo's hopes leapt like bright flames. Built to eliminate 
the treacherously steep drop along Holborn Hill, the Viaduct was 
essentially a bridge fourteen-hundred feet long, with shops and even a 
church built down the length of it. Where the Viaduct's single open 
space of visible ironwork crossed Farringdon Street -- itself the 
covered-over course of River Fleet -- there was a sheer drop of some 
fifteen feet. No carriage could get off the Viaduct anywhere between 

Charterhouse Street and Snow Hill, with the Old Bailey Criminal Court 
just beyond. 
 
But a lone person on foot could. 
 
Stone steps descended to Farringdon on either side. 
 
The trick would be to create such confusion, he couldn't shoot her. She 
considered -- and swiftly rejected -- three separate plans of attack 
before settling on the one likeliest to work. It was also the riskiest, 
but she wasn't afraid of risk. If she didn't escape, Kaederman would 
kill her. Probably after torturing her for Jenna's location. So, as the 
cabbie slowed his horse to a swaying trot past St. Andrews' Church, she 
quavered out, "P-please, can I g-get up? I'm hurt, down here . . ." She 
slid the dagger out of her boot and held it tight in the hand farthest 
from him. 
 
Kaederman muttered under his breath, "Try anything and I'll put a 
bullet through you." He grasped her wrist and levered her up. She 
swayed, losing her balance deliberately -- which wasn't hard to do. 
Hansoms were notoriously tippy contrivances and they were still going 
at a fair clip. She slipped sideways with a gasping, frightened cry. 
She flung out one arm to catch her balance, which put the knife exactly 
where she wanted it. 
 
Right over the trotting horse's rear quarters. 
 
She slammed the blade home, hilt deep. 
 
The horse screamed, a tearing, jagged sound of pain. It kicked and 
reared violently, sheering wildly to the right. The cab flung sideways. 
The maddened animal was kicking, lunging, trying to get the steel out 
of its flank. The whole carriage crashed sideways. Margo grabbed for 
the edge of the roof above her head as they went down. She lost her 
grip when they slammed to the street. The force crushed Margo back 
across the seat, with Kaederman under her. She kicked anything that 
moved and dragged herself up over the lip of the toppled hansom. The 
driver was yelling from his seat at the rear of the cab. From the sound 
of it, he was pinned by the weight of the carriage. 
 
Then she was out and running, with no time to be sorry for the driver 
or the horse and no time to recover the dagger. Kaederman was shouting, 
cursing hideously. The iron railings over Farringdon Street flashed 
past, then she was skidding in a desperate lunge for the nearest of the 
step-buildings flanking Farringdon, plunging down the steep steps, 
clutching at the railing for balance. She heard thudding footfalls 
above, pounding in pursuit across the bridge and down the stone 
staircase on her heels. Oh, God, help me, please . . . She expected a 
bullet to slam through her back any moment. Margo reached the street 
and cut back toward Shoe Lane and St. Andrew Street. If she could just 
reach Holborn again, she wasn't far from the Old Bell. The ancient 
coaching inn would be busy, with lots of people coming and going. 
Famous along all the old coaching roads, the Old Bell beckoned as her 
only safe haven. The proprietor and his customers would help her and 
there might even be a constable, in for a bite of supper. She flew up 
St. Andrew, gasping for breath at the steep climb back up Holborn Hill. 
 

Just short of Holborn Circus, a heavy hand closed around her shoulder. 
Kaederman spun her against the side of a closed shop, snarling and 
backhanding her brutally. Margo punched and kicked, screaming bloody 
murder -- and a shrill whistle sounded, practically on top of them. A 
constable pounded down Holborn Hill, straight toward them, shouting at 
Kaederman to halt immediately. Kaederman swore and ran, instead, 
vanishing down a side street. Margo staggered and slid down the side of 
the shop toward the pavement, reeling with the shock of her near 
escape. 
 
"Are you hurt, boy?" the constable cried. 
 
She sat on the cold stone pavement, shaking violently. "N-no . . . He 
was going to kill me . . ." 
 
The constable crouched beside her, than said in a surprised voice, 
"Cor, it's a girl!" 
 
She glanced down and realized Kaederman had torn her shirt open during 
the struggles. She blanched and clutched the edges closed, hands 
shaking violently. 
 
The constable's eyes widened abruptly. "Dear me, miss, was he -- was 
that the Ripper?" 
 
Margo's head whirled for just a moment. She found herself giggling 
shrilly and fought to get herself under control. "I don't . . . I 
dunno," she gulped, deciding she'd better stick with Cockney, given her 
current appearance. "Said 'e would give me somefink to eat, but 'e 
never. Just tried to kill me. Dragged me into 'is cab, only I got away 
an' run down the steps from 'igh 'olborn t'Farringdon. The cab tipped 
over, y'see, an' I think the driver's 'urt, up there on the Viaduct." 
 
"You're all right, then, miss? Truly?" 
 
She nodded. "Just shook, is all. You'd better go an' see about that 
cabbie, mister." 
 
"Stay here, please. I'll see you're taken someplace warm and I'll 
certainly want a description of your attacker." 
 
She nodded again, leaning against the shop wall while the bobby hurried 
up the steps toward the Viaduct. The moment he was out of sight, she 
dragged herself to her feet and headed the opposite way, walking as 
fast as she could push herself. Margo was still badly shaken, but she 
had to get away before that constable returned and started asking 
questions she didn't want to answer. She had to report Kaederman's 
escape, too, and Malcolm was injured, on his way to Spaldergate for 
treatment. She groaned aloud. It was a long way from Holborn to 
Battersea, which left her with far too much time to worry about Malcolm 
on the way. He had to be all right! Just had to be . . . 
 
I blew it, Kit, she wailed silently, I really messed up! Worse than 
South Africa! 
 
Castigating herself every step of the way, Margo walked faster. 
 

 
 
At Skeeter's harsh insistence, they moved Jenna Caddrick and the others 
into the vault beneath Spaldergate House within half an hour of the 
attack at the Carlton Club. Spaldergate's vault was, at the moment, 
quite literally the safest place in all of London. "Kaederman's got 
Margo hostage, which means he'll find out exactly where you're hiding," 
Skeeter had said ruthlessly, overriding Noah Armstrong's objections. 
The detective, shaken at seeing his own face mirrored in Skeeter's 
newly rearranged one, reluctantly agreed, even handing over the damning 
proof that would condemn Senator Caddrick. They packed up and moved yet 
again, returning to the gatehouse only to find another crisis underway. 
Malcolm had arrived twenty minutes earlier by hansom cab, shot through 
the chest and barely conscious. Both Dr. Nerian and Paula Booker were 
in surgery, working to save his life. Skeeter tightened jaw muscles 
over a whole spate of curses and carried his honorary nieces down the 
stairs leading to the vault. 
 
The Spaldergate housekeeper took charge of Ianira, Jenna, and the 
others, settling them down on sturdy cots in one corner, but nothing 
Skeeter said would induce Noah Armstrong to stay in the vault, as well. 
 
"No!" The detective glared at Skeeter, expression haggard. "Dammit, 
what kind of coward do you think I am, to hide down here when he's 
holding Miss Smith hostage! God knows what he'll do to her! I've only 
stayed in hiding this long because of them," he jerked his head toward 
Jenna Caddrick. Ianira and Marcus sat on one of the temporary cots, 
holding their frightened little girls close. 
 
"What you've done for my friends . . ." Skeeter said quietly. "Nothing 
I do will ever repay that. Except, maybe, catching this bastard. But if 
Kaederman kills you while we're chasing him, you won't be able to 
testify and all of this will have been for nothing." 
 
In the brief silence, while Noah Armstrong ground molars together, the 
vault's telephone shrilled. One of the housemaids on duty with the 
Ripper Watch Team answered. Her eyes lit up as she gasped, "Margo's 
back? But we thought she was a hostage!" 
 
Skeeter ran for the stairs, Armstrong pounding right on his heels. They 
found Margo in the parlour, where Hetty Gilbert was fussing over her, 
wrapping a quilt around her shoulders and putting an icepack to her 
bruised face, while Mr. Gilbert brought a generous brandy and forced it 
between her teeth. She was shuddering, from cold or shock or both. 
"Malcolm's really all right?" she was asking anxiously as Skeeter and 
Armstrong burst into the room. 
 
"He's in surgery, dear," Hetty Gilbert soothed, brushing back Margo's 
hair with one hand. "Doing fine, they said. Hold that ice on the 
bruise, child." 
 
Margo noticed Skeeter and bit her lips, startling him when tears welled 
up. "I'm sorry, Skeeter. Kaederman got away." 
 
"Thank God you got away," Skeeter said fervently, collapsing into the 
nearest chair and upending the brandy Gilbert poured for him. "Shalig, 
what a night! How in the world did you escape?" 

 
She told them succinctly, glossing quickly over any details that might 
have betrayed her own terror during the experience. Margo was one tough 
cookie, all right, for all that she was barely seventeen. Malcolm was 
luckier than he knew, to have a girl like Margo. She sighed, at length, 
nursing her own brandy and shifting the icepack on her cheek. "When 
that constable shouted, Kaederman ran off and disappeared down a side 
street. I sent the constable up to check on the poor cabbie, pinned 
under the wreckage, then got out of there as fast as possible and came 
back here." 
 
"Quick thinking," Marshall Gilbert nodded approvingly. "Very quick 
thinking. You not only saved your life, you kept the authorities from 
asking uncomfortable questions that might have led them here. And God 
knows, we've been under enough official scrutiny as it is, thanks to 
Benny Catlin's shooting spree at the Picadilly Hotel." 
 
Margo nodded and leaned her head back against the chair, drained and 
pale, but her hand on the icepack was rock steady. "They'll assume it 
was the Ripper, I suppose. That's what the bobby thought, anyway, and I 
didn't disabuse him of the notion. Look, we've got to find Kaederman. 
And we have to get Ianira and the others to safety -- " 
 
"They're in the vault," Noah said, attracting her attention for the 
first time. 
 
She did a double-take, then laughed weakly. "God, that's startling. You 
really do look like twins, now." 
 
"Do you have a photo of Kaederman?" Noah asked, voice grim. "Something 
we can duplicate and use, the way you traced us?" 
 
Skeeter nodded and rescued his scout's log from his room, replaying 
their arrival through the Britannia Gate. Noah swore. "Good God! That 
bastard really must be desperate!" 
 
"You know him?" 
 
Armstrong tapped the screen on Skeeter's log. "That's Gideon Guthrie. 
Provides security for the L.A. gangland boss who's been doling out 
Senator Caddrick's payola. For Guthrie to be handling this personally, 
they're running scared. He hasn't actually dirtied his own hands in 
years. Maybe," Armstrong mused darkly, "he simply ran out of hit men to 
send after us?" 
 
"And now he knows we're onto him," Skeeter growled. "Want to bet he 
bolts? Jumps on the nearest ship and runs?" 
 
Armstrong shook his head. "He's got a helluva lot to lose, if he just 
ditches." 
 
"Yes," Skeeter countered, "but he's gotta figure Caddrick will do time, 
over this, and maybe his own boss, as well. There's no way he can get 
back onto the station, not without somebody putting him in cuffs. So 
he's down to just a couple of options. He can run for it and start 
over, in this time period. And surely a guy like Kaederman has enough 
experience to set up shop someplace like New York or Chicago, even San 

Francisco, maybe, put together a sweet little gang of thugs with all 
the up-time tricks he's accumulated. Or he can do what Marcus and you 
did, getting here. He can hot-foot it to New York by the first trans-
Atlantic steamer, board a train headed for Denver, and slip through the 
Wild West Gate in disguise, try and get back through Primary to New 
York." 
 
"Will the Denver gate still be operational in 1888?" Armstrong asked 
quietly. 
 
Mr. Gilbert answered. "I don't see why not. The Wild West Gate is very 
stable, has been for years, or we wouldn't be using it as a tour gate. 
I can't imagine it going suddenly unstable and closing." 
 
"Then our boy might try it," Skeeter mused. "All he'd really need to do 
is mug a Denver tourist for his ID to get through the gate." 
 
Armstrong gave him a grudging glance. "Not a bad point. So, we comb the 
steamship ticket offices?" 
 
Margo eased the icepack into a new position as color returned to her 
cheeks. "It's a start," she nodded. "And we'd better put one of the 
groomsmen in each major railway station, in case he tries to catch a 
train for another port city. Liverpool did a lot of trans-Atlantic 
shipping, passenger as well as cargo." She grimaced, wincing slightly 
under the icepack. "James Maybrick certainly shuttled back and forth 
between Liverpool and the States for years. In fact, he met his wife on 
one of the crossings, poor woman. I wonder how many trains leave 
tonight? Or how many ships are scheduled to sail? It's going to be a 
long night." 
 
Fortunately, the Gilberts were able to produce a table of scheduled 
ship departures from the day's newspapers. Hettie Gilbert copied them 
out while her husband retrieved a map of the docklands. He spread it 
out across his desk, then turned up the gaslight for better illumation. 
Skeeter stared in rising dismay at the immense stretch of land to be 
searched. Wapping, the Isle of Dogs, Poplar and Limehouse and 
Shoreditch, not to mention Whitechapel, of course, and Shadwell. St. 
Katharine's Docks, London Docks, Wapping Basin, Shadwell Basin, and the 
Old Basin below Shadwell. And there was the great West India Docks 
complex and the smaller Junction Dock, Blackwell Basin, and Poplar 
Docks. And east of there stood the East India Docks, the Royal Victoria 
and Albert Docks, and south of the Thames, the vast Surrey Commercial 
Docks . . . 
 
Skeeter groaned aloud. Hundreds of acres, tens of thousands of people 
to question if the ticket offices didn't pan out, and very few of those 
teeming thousands likely to part with a word of information without 
palm grease of some sort, even if it were only a pint of ale or a glass 
of gin. "My God," he said quietly, "we'll never cover all of that." 
 
"It isn't quite hopeless," Marshall Gilbert insisted. "Look, we can 
probably discount this whole complex, and this one," he swept a hand 
across the map. "They're cargo facilities only, no passenger services 
offered. And these, too, no point in searching naval shipyards. No 
commercial traffic, just military vessels. I'll get Stoddard in to 
help, he knows the docklands better than anyone else on staff. And 

we'll put Reeves on it, as well as all the groomsmen, footmen, drivers, 
and baggage handlers. I would imagine," he added, glancing from Skeeter 
to Noah Armstrong and blinking mildly at their startlingly matched 
faces, "Miss Smith will be keen to assist, as well." 
 
"You'd better believe it," she muttered. 
 
Twenty minutes later, Hettie Gilbert handed over her finished list. 
"There's only one ship scheduled to sail tonight, leaving in an hour, 
but a dozen are due to sail tomorrow." 
 
Skeeter nodded. "We'll just have time to reach the docklands, if we 
leave right now." 
 
Groomsmen and gardeners and footmen were already clattering out of the 
stable yard on horseback, dispersing for every train station in the 
city. A woman in a housemaid's dress was leading more horses from the 
stable, saddled and ready as riders were assigned. Iron-shod hooves 
rang against the paving stones. Skeeter mounted in silence as Margo, 
who had changed into warmer clothing, hurried out of the house and took 
her own horse, still in masculine disguise but looking now like a young 
man of the middle classes, rather than a ragamuffin bootblack. 
 
"All right," Skeeter said tersely, "we'll follow your lead, Margo." 
 
They set out in silence. 
 
* * * 
 
Kit was in his office at the Neo Edo Hotel, trying to placate outraged 
tourists and worrying about the rapidly dwindling supply of foodstuffs 
in the hotel's larder, when word came: Lachley had been spotted at 
Goldie's apartment. The security radio he carried everywhere crackled 
to life with a generalized call to every member of the volunteer 
security force. 
 
"Code Seven Red, Residential Zone Two. Lachley's on the run, last 
spotted heading into the subbasements. All teams are hereby 
reactivated. Report in for a zone assignment." 
 
Kit clattered the phone down in the middle of a wealthy dowager's 
tirade and snatched up the radio. "Kit Carson reporting." 
 
"Kit, take Zone Seventeen again, same search team and pattern." 
 
"Roger." 
 
He picked up the telephone and started calling members of his team. 
They met on Commons, which stretched away in an echoing, empty vista of 
deserted shops and restaurants, the floors scattered with refuse no one 
had yet cleaned up. Alarm sirens hooted at intervals and lights flashed 
overhead, red and malevolent. Sven Bailey arrived first, followed by 
Kynan and Eigil. To Kit's intense dismay, Molly and Bergitta were with 
them, both women moving with a determined grimness that boded ill for 
reasoning with them. "We aim t'help," Molly said without preamble, "an' 
nuffink you say will stop us." 
 

Bergitta, who had finally recovered from a terrible beating and gang-
rape at the hands of the Ansar Majlis, gave an emphatic nod. "I will 
not stay hidden when this man attacks our home. We will help drive him 
out." 
 
Molly added, "We got Viking ring-mail shirts on, underneath." She 
plucked at her loose-fitting dress. "Connie give us the loan. Didn't 
'ave no other armor would fit under a frock, so she didn't. B'sides, I 
know somefink about this 'ere bloke, might be important." 
 
Kit rocked back on his heels. "You know him? John Lachley?" 
 
Molly shrugged. " 'Corse I knows 'im. Come up out of Whitechapel, 'e 
did. Called 'imself Johnny Anubis. Read fortunes and suchlike. Nasty 
little blagger. Wot's more, 'e ain't a normal man, so 'e ain't. I 
walked them streets, 'eard wot the girls said about 'im. They said 'is 
male parts weren't made right. Were 'alf woman, 'e were, wiv an Hampton 
Wick small as your little finger and wot a lady's got, besides, only 
that ain't made right, neither. A couple of girls wot laughed at 'im 
ended floating in the Thames wiv cut throats. Never could prove 
nuffink, but I say 'e done 'em, 'is own self." 
 
Kit frowned. Had John Lachley been born an intersexual? He had to force 
aside quick pity. It didn't matter -- couldn't be allowed to matter -- 
what Lachley had suffered in London's East End, growing up with a 
blurred gender. Too many people had died already. Kit said quietly. 
"Whatever he once was, John Lachley is now Jack the Ripper and it's our 
job to end his career. All right, ladies. You just might help us flush 
him out, acting as bait. I know Bergitta started training with you, 
Sven, after that Ansar Majlis attack, and I'd trust Molly in any scrap. 
Bergitta, you and Molly take the middle. Sven, you and I will take 
point, Kynan and Eigil, bring up rear guard. We're searching Zone 
Seventeen again." 
 
Sven grunted. "Just remember to stay away from that damned pterosaur's 
beak. I don't want any of us skewered." 
 
"Amen to that," Kit muttered, leading the way. 
 
They moved warily past barricaded shops and restaurants, past 
ornamental fountains and ponds and secluded alcoves formed by shrubbery 
and statuary and mosaic tile floors. They'd just reached Little Agora 
when the overhead sirens screamed. 
 
"Code Seven Red! Zone Thirteen . . ." 
 
"That's just downstairs!" Sven yelled above the ear-splitting howl of 
the siren. 
 
Kit jammed his radio against his ear, trying to hear. "Down-timers have 
spotted him! He's in the tunnels under Frontier Town!" 
 
They rushed down the stairs, sprinting past stacked aquaria where 
idling fish watched curiously as they raced past. Someone was 
screaming, a high and hideous sound that brought Kit's hair on end. 
Garbled shouts echoed and floated down the long, twisting corridors, 
then Kit burst around a curve and skidded to a halt. Two down-timers 

lay twisted on the floor, one man's neck obviously broken, another 
gutted and lying with sightless eyes. A third, the young Greek hoplite, 
Corydon, clutched at a gash across his arm, which had been laid open to 
the bone. 
 
"He ran . . . that way . . ." Corydon gasped, nodding with his head. 
His radio lay on the floor, sputtering with static. "I called . . . 
security . . ." 
 
Bergitta dropped to her knees beside him, ripping her own skirt and 
using a comb from her pocket to form a tourniquet band just above the 
massive wound. "Go!" she snapped. "I will watch Corydon until medical 
comes!" 
 
Kit keyed his radio even as he pelted in the direction Lachley had 
taken. "Medical emergency, Zone Thirteen. Two dead, one serious 
casualty. Tell medical to shag butt, Corydon's nearly lost an arm!" 
 
"Roger that. Medical's on the way." 
 
Kit slowed when the corridor branched off in three directions. "We 
don't dare split up, Lachley'd just gut us one by one," he muttered, 
listening for any sound of footfalls. All he heard was echoing silence 
and an occasional, distant mutter and weird cry from the immense 
pteranodon's cage. "We'll take the left-hand fork," he decided, "and 
come back if we run into a blind alley without finding him." 
 
They did not run into a blind alley. In fact, they ran into a deep maze 
of tunnels twisting through the bowels of the mountain, past doors 
where machinery chugged and hummed and rumbled and a distant rush and 
tumble of water could be heard through pipes and fittings. Kit marked 
the corridors they'd searched by scrawling on the walls with an ink 
pen, trying to sort out the tangle of passageways. Storage rooms were 
locked tight, but the heating and cooling plants, the sewage works, the 
generator pile all had to be searched painstakingly. Which they did, as 
time piled up in their wake. 
 
The gigantic pteranodon was asleep when they eased past its cage, 
wicked red eyes shut inside their whorls of brightly colored, leathery 
skin. Bloodstains still marked the concrete floor from the pitched 
battle fought with the Ripper cultists, but they found no trace of John 
Lachley. 
 
"He can't have vanished into thin air," Kit muttered as they pressed on 
past the pterosaur's cage. He'd begun to feel a superstititous prickle 
of sympathy with those befuddled London constables. 
 
Kit glanced at his wristwatch and scowled. Upstairs in Commons, 
security would be preparing to turn back the incoming tour from Denver 
as the Wild West gate dilated open. If they could just find Lachley 
before the gate opened, they could end this monstrous blockade and get 
the station back to normal. 
 
"Molly," he frowned thoughtfully. "You told me Lachley grew up in the 
East End. Is there something we could use to drive him into the open, 
maybe goad him into attacking?" 
 

Molly's eyes began to glitter. "I can't flush 'im out, nuffink ever 
will." Molly drew a deep breath and let go a flood of Cockney 
gibberish. "C'mon, then, let's 'ave yer 'ideous Cambridge an' Oxford 
out where we can 'ave a butcher's, eh? I grassed on you, so I did, 
Johnny Anubis! You an' your disgustin' Kyber, 'ope you like it in a 
flowery, corse yer lemons 'as done caught up wiv you, so they 'ave!" 
 
Sven cast a dubious glance at Molly. "Do you really think any of that's 
going to flush him out? Somehow I don't think he cares about the crimes 
he's committed." 
 
Molly's eyes flashed with irritation, but she changed her approach. 
"Eh, Johnnie, you got no cobbler's t'show yer ugly boat to a frog-
chalkin' fanny like meself? Shouldn't wonder, you weren't born wiv 
none, was you, Johnny Anubis? An' you ain't pinched none from them 
fancy friends of yours, neither, 'ave you? I shouldn't wonder you don't 
show yer Kingdom Come! Corse you bloody well can't chalk, wiv as bad a 
case of Chalfont St. Giles as ever you saw, wot you got off lettin' a 
toff like yer lovin' Collars an' Cuffs run 'is great Hampton up yer 
bottle." 
 
"This isn't working," Sven muttered. 
 
"You got any better ideas?" Kit shot back. 
 
Molly was still trying to goad Lachley into the open. "I don't give an 
'orse an' trap, so I don't, Johnny Boleslaus, not for you nor your tea-
leafin' ways, takin' a starvin' woman's last 'apenny an' tellin' 'er 
t'bend over again so's you can tell 'er she's fore an' aft, wivout a 
brain in 'er loaf. Gypsy's kiss on you, an' you'd better Adam an' Eve 
that, so you better. An' yer bubble an' squeak friends, 'ere, says the 
same to you!" 
 
"Kit, Molly's just wasting her breath -- " 
 
He came in low and fast, lunging from a dark alcove where the corridor 
snaked around in a tight twist. Molly screamed and went down. Lachley's 
blade flashed in the dim light even as Kit whirled, trying to bring his 
pistol to bear on the struggling figures. Sven's gun shattered the 
silence. The bullet whined off the concrete wall. Molly was in Kit's 
line of fire, kicking and screaming at Lachley. Eigil waded in as 
Lachley rolled to the top, knife slashing again at Molly's unprotected 
throat. The Viking barsark snatched him up by the neck. Lachley rammed 
his knife into Eigil's gut and the Viking went down with a sharp grunt 
of pain. Kit fired, but Lachley was already moving again, slamming the 
point of the knife toward Sven. The blade just grazed the weapons 
instructor as Sven flung himself down and back, away from the knife's 
arcing path. Sven's pistol went clattering and slid into the 
pteranodon's cage. Kynan was dragging Molly away, sliding her across 
the floor on her back. Kit might have gotten another shot off, but 
Eigil was in his line of fire, clutching at his belly while blood 
poured out between his fingers. Kit lunged past, trained his pistol on 
the maniac --  
 
And Lachley was away and running, knife in hand, twisting around a 
corner and vanishing even as Kit fired. The bullet shattered a door at 
an oblique angle, driving splinters outward. Kit swore and shouted into 

his radio, "Code Seven Red! Zone Seventeen! Converge on my signal! And 
get a Medical team down here, we've got casualties, bad ones!" Kynan 
was already stripping off his own shirt and shoving it as a compress 
against Eigil's gut wound. Molly was bending over Sven, saved from 
worse injuries, herself, by the chain mail under her dress. That steel-
ringed undershirt had done exactly what ring-mail armor was designed to 
do: deflect the slashes of a bladed weapon. Connie Logan, I'm gonna buy 
you a whole case of champagne, maybe even a keg of Falernian through 
the Porta Romae . . . The boom and rumble of the station's public 
address system came echoing eerily down the open stairwells to the 
tunnels. 
 
"Code Seven Red, Zone Seventeen, repeat, Code Seven Red, Zone 
Seventeen! Station medical personnel, report to Zone Seventeen, stat, 
for transport and emergency triage. Please be advised, Gate Three 
cycles in seven minutes. All tour passes are hereby revoked until the 
station emergency has ended. Repeat, all visitors are required to stay 
in their hotel rooms until further notice. Shangri-La Station is 
operating under martial law. Code Seven Red, Zone Seventeen . . ." 
 
Sven was muttering under his breath and brushing Molly's hands away. 
"It's just a scratch, dammit! I can't believe I let him get that close 
to me in the first place!" 
 
"You were a little distracted," Kit grunted, wiping his brow with a 
sweating arm. "We've got to trail him. Sven, can you move?" 
 
"Hell, yes," the weapons instructor growled, coming to his feet to 
prove it. Kynan, shirtless and holding compresses against Eigil's gut, 
handed up his borrowed gladius. "Kill that son of a bitch, please." 
 
Sven saluted him with the blade. 
 
Kit muttered, "We'll give it our best shot, Kynan." He didn't add what 
he was thinking: We shot at that maniac from close quarters and missed. 
Maybe he can't be killed, after all. God help us . . . 
 
Then they whipped around the corner, following the Ripper's bloody 
footprints. 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Eighteen 
 
Grey dawnlight spilled like dirty bilge water across thousands of 
chimneys jutting up from factory roofs, refineries and foundries, from 
ironworks and shipyards as Skeeter entered the docklands, accompanied 
by Margo, Noah Armstrong, and Doug Tanglewood. Their search the 
previous night had turned up no trace of Sid Kaederman, either at the 
train stations or the docks near Wapping Old Stairs. Skeeter carried a 
list of ship departures scheduled for today, convinced Kaederman would 
be on one of them. 
 
A forest of masts stabbed skyward, dark silhouettes against clouds 
which promised more rain before the morning grew much older. Furled 

sails and limp rigging hung like dead birds on all sides, marking the 
berths of hundreds of sailing vessels used mostly as cargo transports, 
now, too antiquated and slow for passenger service. The heavier, stubby 
iron snouts of steamship funnels jutted up alongside passenger quays, 
cold and silent until coal-fired boilers were heated up for departure. 
 
Douglas Tanglewood led the way toward the main offices of St. 
Katharine's docks along St. Katharine's Way, Wapping. Carts and 
draymen's wagons bumped and jockeyed for space on the crowded roads. 
Surrounding the dockyards lay a jumbled maze of factories, foundries, 
food processing plants, icehouses, shipbuilding yards, and shops that 
fed, clothed, and supplied thousands of industrial workers. 
 
"St. Katharine Docks," Tanglewood said quietly, "is the oldest and now 
one of the smallest dock complexes. More than twelve hundred homes were 
razed to build it. Left eleven thousand Londoners homeless and 
destroyed some of the oldest medieval buildings in the city." He shook 
his head, clearly regretting the historical loss. The dockyard gate, an 
arched entrance of stone, was surmounted by elephants on pedestals. 
Immense brick warehouses abutted the waterfront across from berthed 
ships. "On these small docks, like this, there's no room for transit 
sheds between water's edge and the warehouse doors. That gives our 
quarry fewer places to hide. It'll be much worse, if we have to search 
the other dockyards." 
 
Skeeter watched a confusion of sweating stevedores off-loading valuable 
cargoes into vast, echoing warehouses, then asked, "Where do you buy 
tickets?" 
 
"The Superintendent's office and transit offices are this way," 
Tanglewood nodded, pointing out the buildings beyond a stone wall that 
separated the dockyards from the street. "Mr. Jackson, please come with 
me. Perhaps Miss -- ah, Mr. Smith and Mr. Armstrong could ask around 
for word of an American trying to buy passage." 
 
Margo and the enigmatic Noah Armstrong, both decked out in middle-class 
businessmen's wool suits, moved off to talk to the dock foremen. 
Skeeter followed Tanglewood into the transit office. 
 
The clerk glanced up from a ledger book and smiled a cheerful greeting, 
his starched collar not yet wilted under the day's intense pressures. 
"Good morning, gentlemen, how might I help you?" 
 
Tanglewood said, "We're hoping you might be able to assist us. We 
understand there is a ship scheduled to leave St. Katharine's this 
morning at six-thirty, a cargo ship. Do you know where we might 
discover if a certain man has tried to book a passenger berth on her? 
Or maybe hired on as shiphand?" 
 
The clerk's smile reversed itself. "You're trying to find this man?" he 
asked cautiously. 
 
"We are. He is a desperate criminal, a fugitive we're trying to trace. 
He kidnapped a young lady last night and shot a gentleman, leaving him 
nearly dead, and we have proof that he is responsible for several other 
deaths in the recent past. The young lady has escaped, thank God, made 
her way to safety last night. We have reason to believe he'll try to 

book passage on any ship that will have him, to escape the hangman. 
This gentleman," Tanglewood nodded to Skeeter, "is a Pinkerton Agent, 
from America, one of the Yanks' best private inquiry agencies." 
 
Skeeter dutifully produced his identification. 
 
The transit clerk's eyes had widened in alarm. "Dear God! Have you 
contacted the Metropolitan Special Constabulary, sir? The river police 
should be notified at once!" 
 
"If this ship proves not to be the one we're looking for, we certainly 
shall. But it's nearly six already and the ship sails in half an hour, 
so there's hardly time to go and fetch them." 
 
"Yes, of course. Let me check the books." He was opening another stiff 
ledger, running a fingertip down the pages. "The Milverton is the ship 
you want, just two years old, so she's new and fast for an iron sailing 
vessel. Western Dock, Berth C, opposite East Smithfield Street, north 
of the offices. Go along the inner perimeter at water's edge, is best. 
You'll have to go right round the basin, there's no way across the 
inlet on foot. Watch your step when you're out by the warehouses, we're 
very busy this season, and the stevedores will cause trouble if you get 
in their way. As to a passenger . . ." He was consulting another 
ledger. "There's no record of anyone booking passage on the Milverton 
this crossing, but a desperate man might well approach the captain 
privately, rather than risk transit office records or the presence of 
river police." The clerk shook his head, frowning. "Plenty of men are 
still shanghied off the streets round here, by commercial captains 
desperate for shiphands. A man asking for a berth or offering to work 
for his passage wouldn't even be questioned." 
 
"Wonderful," Skeeter muttered. If Kaederman offered to work his way or 
paid a tidy sum the captain wouldn't have to report to the ship's 
owner, not a captain in the docklands wouldn't jump at the offer, no 
questions asked. 
 
"You've been very helpful, sir," Tanglewood thanked the clerk, slipping 
him a half crown for his trouble. The young man pocketed the coin with 
a nod of appreciation and returned to his ledgers. Tanglewood opened 
the door and stepped quickly outside. 
 
"We'd best hurry. They won't welcome interruptions at this late hour." 
 
They hailed Armstrong and Margo, who stepped smartly out of the way 
when sweating stevedores cursed at them. The Milverton was a sleek 
ship, her iron prow and bowsprit jutting so far out over the wharf, the 
tip end of the bowsprit nearly scraped the warehouse opposite. Men 
bustled across her, shouting commands and unfurling her great sails in 
preparation for departure. Loading was still underway, stevedores by 
the dozens manhandling huge casks and crates out of the warehouse along 
her port side, hauling them up into her vast iron holds. Skeeter kept a 
sharp watch for Kaederman. The captain, when Skeeter and the others 
climbed the main gangplank, was not amused by the interruption. "Get 
the bloody hell off my deck! I sail in a quarter hour and we're behind 
schedule!" 
 
"This won't take long," Tanglewood assured him, producing a 

conciliatory five-pound note and holding it up. "Have you taken any 
passengers aboard in the past twenty-four hours? Or a new crew hand, a 
Yank?" 
 
"I bloody well have not and if you don't get off my deck, I'll toss you 
into the basin!" He snatched the five-pound note and stalked off, 
shouting at a hapless crewman who'd snarled a coil of rope leading from 
the capstan to the mainsail, which rattled lopsided in the rising 
breeze. 
 
They searched the ship anyway, dodging irate ship's officers, but were 
finally forced to admit that if Kaederman were aboard, he'd stowed away 
as cargo. They jumped back to the quay with minutes to spare before 
becoming stowaways, themselves. Standing on the quay, they watched 
until the Milverton pulled slowly and majestically across the basin 
toward the river, under tow by steam-powered tugs. They held vigil to 
make sure Kaederman didn't show up at the last minute, but he remained 
a no-show. When the ship passed through the locks into the river, 
Skeeter pulled a rumpled list from his coat pocket and scratched off 
the Milverton's name. 
 
"London Docks," he said quietly, "a ship called Endurance. She leaves 
Wapping Basin at seven." 
 
London Docks, down in the heart of Wapping, dwarfed little St. 
Katharine's. The immense, double-armed Western Dock alone was larger 
than all the basins of St. Katharine's, combined. The smell of tobacco 
was strong in the air, coming from the central basin and its 
warehouses. When Skeeter mentioned it, Tanglewood nodded. "That's 
Tobacco Dock, of course. Rented out by Her Majesty's government to the 
big trading companies. You said the Endurance leaves from Wapping 
Basin? This way, then." 
 
The appalling noise overwhelmed the senses. Beneath the level of the 
quays Skeeter could see vaulted cellars where stevedores trundled great 
casks of wine and brandy. Transit sheds stood between waterside and 
warehouses, temporarily sheltering a vast tonnage of goods and 
providing a maze in which one man could hide almost indefinitely. 
 
Lock-keepers worked incessantly, regulating the flow of ships in and 
out of the great basins, while draymen arrived with wagonloads of 
luxury goods for export to Britain's far-flung mercantile markets. The 
stench of raw meat and blood and cooking vegetables mingled with the 
smells of coke-fired furnaces from vast food-packing plants. Whole 
wagonloads of salted sea-turtle carcasses rolled past, off-loaded from 
a ship out of the Caribbean basin, destined for the soup canneries and 
luxury manufacturers who made combs, hair ornaments, boxes, ink-pen 
barrels, and eyeglass rims from the shells. 
 
Past the canneries were great icehouses, bustling with men and boys 
loading ice into insulated wagons. Every time the doors opened, cold 
rolled out in a wave across the road. Skeeter began to realize just how 
overwhelming London's docklands really were as they passed the Ivory 
House, with its immense stockpiles of elephant tusks, and warehouses 
where eastern spices and enormous pallet-loads of exotic silks were 
trundled off the quays. The number of places Kaederman might hide was 
distressing; to search all of it would take a small army. 

 
The Endurance proved to be a squat little tramp steamer, its days as a 
passenger boat eclipsed by vastly larger luxury ships. The hectic pace 
of loading was no less frantic than it had been aboard the Milverton. 
The captain was no less harried, either, but was slightly less brusque. 
"A Yank? No, I haven't laid eyes on a Yank today nor yesterday, 
neither, and not a paying passenger the last three crossings. New crew 
hired? Not a single hand, no, sir, I've a good crew, treat 'em right. 
They've turned down offers of more money working for harsher masters 
and that's a fact . . . No, no! The deliveries for the galley go into 
the center hold, not the bloody prow! You'll break every egg in that 
crate, storing victuals in the bow, that's where she takes the brunt of 
the waves!" 
 
And off he went, correcting the error, leaving them to question crew 
hands. No one had laid eyes on anyone answering Kaederman's 
description. 
 
"Strike two," Skeeter Jackson muttered, crossing the Endurance off his 
list. "Next stop, Regent's Canal Dock, Stepney." 
 
Rain began falling in earnest, plastering Skeeter's hair to his 
forehead and horses' manes to their necks. Draft horses strained 
against their harness collars and slipped on the wet streets. Drivers 
shouted and cursed and wagon wheels churned piles of dung into a foul 
slurry carried into the nearby river and the sewers underfoot. They 
struck out at Regent's Canal Dock, as well: the High Flyer, sailing for 
Hong Kong, produced no trace of Kaederman. 
 
Perhaps it was only the grey and dirty rain soaking through his coat 
and snaking in runnels down his collar, but Skeeter began to think the 
task of finding one murderous lout in this overcrowded, reeking maze of 
humanity and bustling commerce was impossible. He tried to protect the 
ink on his slip of paper from spatters of rain gusting in beneath the 
broken eaves of a pub where they'd taken momentary shelter. "Next ship 
departs out of Quebec Dock." 
 
"Where's that?" Noah Armstrong asked, rubbing hands together absently 
in an attempt to warm them. The October rain was cold. Keening wind cut 
through their trousers and coats. 
 
"Surrey Docks, that's south of the river," Margo said, shivering. 
"We'll have to cross at London Bridge, there isn't any bridge closer. 
Which is why Tower Bridge is being built, to shave miles off the round 
trip from London Docks to Surrey Docks, for the draymen. But it's still 
just an iron shell, doesn't even span the river, yet. We'll have to 
backtrack. When does the ship go?" 
 
Skeeter consulted his pocket watch. "Three-quarters of an hour from 
now." 
 
"We'd best not walk it, then," Tanglewood muttered, "that's a bloody 
long way from Stepney to Rotherhithe and Bermondsey. There's a tram 
line nearby, we'll catch the next tram heading west. When do the other 
ships go, Jackson?" 
 
He used his cap to protect the ink on his list. "Eleven o'clock, 

Blackwell Basin, West India Docks. Two p.m., Import Basin, East India 
Docks. Seven o'clock this evening, Royal Albert Dock." 
 
"He might try for a later ship," Margo mused as they located the tram 
stop. "Just to give himself time to pull together the kit of goods 
he'll need. Money, clothing, sundries, a packing case or duffel bag to 
hold them in." 
 
"We might get lucky at the secondhand shops, if the transit offices 
don't pan out," Noah Armstrong said quietly. Armstrong didn't say much, 
but listened with an almost frightening attentiveness and the 
detective's ideas were always sound. The tram arrived a moment later, 
glistening a wet, cheerful red, its sides covered in advertisements. 
They managed to secure seats on the lower level, where they could sit 
out of the rain. Passengers on the upper deck sat huddled under the 
open sky, with rain pouring down their collars despite umbrellas that 
turned the top of the tram into a lumpy, domed canopy. The horses 
snorted, shaking their great, dappled heads against the downpour, and 
chewed at their bits, jingling their harness bells and tugging at the 
reins, then the tram rumbled into motion along the tracks. 
 
They crossed the Thames, its grey water choppy in the storm. Hundreds 
of river taxis and sailing ships bobbed like forlorn, waterlogged 
birds. Steamers chugged and churned their way through the leaden water, 
spewing coal smoke into the dark sky. Rain spattered against the tram's 
windows, bringing Skeeter's spirits even lower as he caught sight of 
the vast Surrey Commercial Docks on the southern shore of the river. 
Surrey was exclusively commercial, offering no passenger service, which 
meant security would be tighter. 
 
Skeeter spotted only a few gates along the access roads, used by 
draymen and their wagon teams. It occurred to Skeeter that Surrey Docks 
could become a trap to anyone caught inside, if a security force could 
be thrown across those few gates. The four of them, however, did not 
comprise such a force, and they clearly couldn't involve the river 
police. How would they ever find one man, in all that immense sprawl? 
Surrey was bigger, even, than London Docks. 
 
Entering the Surrey complex was like walking straight into a foreign 
land. Spoken English was in the minority, with half-a-dozen 
Scandinavian languages battling for dominance over harsh Russian and 
garrulous French as fur traders and timber importers argued tariffs 
with stolid dock foremen. And permeating it all came the scents of raw 
lumber and cured animal skins and dark, dirty water lapping and 
slapping against the sides of iron hulks tied up at the quays. 
 
They entered through Gate Three, out of Rotherhithe, and found the 
Superintendent's office. "Berth 90, Quebec Dock," the clerk read from 
the ledger. "The clipper ship Cutty Sark. Yes, they've registered a new 
hand, galley cook from America, name of Josephus Anderson. He signed on 
as crew this morning after the regular cook took suddenly ill. Says he 
can't read, but he signed his name on the books." The clerk showed the 
signature, a laborious scrawl that was nearly illegible. 
 
"Could be trying to disguise his handwriting," Skeeter said 
thoughtfully as he and Tanglewood rejoined the others. "Make himself 
look less educated than he is, so he won't attract as much attention. 

He wouldn't need to know a thing about sailing to work as a galley 
cook. And it would be just like him to drug or even poison the real 
cook, so they'd have to hire a new one in a hurry. Josephus Anderson 
sounds like Kaederman, all right." 
 
When Skeeter told Armstrong and Margo which ship they were looking for, 
Noah Armstrong gave a start of surprise. "My God, the Cutty Sark? 
Bastard has a real sense of style, doesn't he? Haven't they retired her 
by now?" 
 
Tanglewood said, "Oh, no, she's a few more years of work left in her 
career. The Cutty Sark's days as a trading clippership are numbered, of 
course. She might've been the fastest to make the tea run in her day, 
but they'll put her in drydock in a few years, never fear." 
 
A passing trader who overheard the remark laughed heartily. "Drydock, 
eh? What on earth would you put a useless ship in dry dock for? Charge 
sixpence a tour?" He continued on his way, laughing and shaking his 
head. 
 
Tanglewood chuckled. "Well, that is what becomes of her, thank God. 
Imagine, ripping up a ship like her for scrap!" 
 
Skeeter led the way past the end of Canada Dock basin, toward berth 90. 
Rain pelted down harder as they headed down Redriff Road, dodging heavy 
wagons and piles of dung and sodden masses of sawdust heaped into ruts 
and holes. Mud spattered their trousers and squelched underfoot. Wet 
lumber towered in stacks higher than their heads; stevedores were 
throwing tarpaulins across piled crates in the shadows of those lumber 
stacks. French Canadian sailors grumbled and groused about the foul 
weather and asked for directions to the nearest pubs and whores. Near 
the immense warehouse beside berth 91, casks marked Black Powder, 
Explosive! formed a squat pyramid under the transit shed. A ship's 
officer was giving instructions to the stevedores. 
 
"We've got an iron hull, boys. I don't want any man jack of you 
striking sparks or you'll blow my ship and half this dock sky high. 
Black powder is shock sensitive and friction sensitive and we're 
packing three tons of it into those holds. Thank God for this rain, 
it'll dampen down static electric charges. Be damned sure your men are 
wearing leather-soled boots, no steel heel plates, no hob-nails, no 
copper-toed work boots, have I made myself clear . . ." Skeeter edged 
past the massive pyramid of powder kegs, where unhappy stevedores were 
already grumbling about having to change footgear in the middle of a 
driving rainstorm thick enough to put out hell's own fires. 
 
Berth 90 stood in Canada Yard South, opposite Bronswick Yard, Greenland 
Dock. The two yards were separated by Redriff Road, which snaked and 
twisted its way between Surrey's various basins. They found the captain 
on the quay, deep in discusssion with dock officials regarding fees the 
captain insisted were sheer piracy. One look at the captain's wrathful 
countenance and Tanglewood suggested, "Let's try one of the crew hands 
first, shall we? I'd say that chap's in no mood for polite inquiries." 
 
A crewman passed them, headed up the gangplank toward the Cutty Sark's 
beautiful decks, and Margo darted forward. "Hey, wait a second, could I 
ask you a quick question?" Money changed hands, then Margo waved them 

over. "This gentleman," she nodded at the puzzled crewman, "will escort 
us down to the galley to meet Mr. Anderson." 
 
Skeeter pressed elbows against ribs, where his pistols lay concealed in 
twin shoulder holsters: the Royal Irish Constabulary Webley he'd 
carried to Denver and a larger Webley Green borrowed from Spaldergate, 
a commercially popular revolver predating military models carried by 
British army officers. And snug against the small of his back, in a 
sheath worn sideways beneath his coattails, rode one of Sven Bailey's 
Bowie knives. Going after Kaederman, he would've felt happier carrying 
a Maxim machine gun, as well. 
 
As they climbed the gangplank and crossed the holystoned decks, 
Skeeter's pulse kicked in at triple time, jumping savagely in 
anticipation of Kaederman's violent reaction. Then they were climbing 
down into the ship's dark interior, following the narrow passageway to 
the cramped galley. Skeeter stole his hand into his coat and gripped 
the butt of his Webley Green, fully expecting trouble to break out the 
instant "Anderson" caught sight of them. 
 
"Hey, Anderson!" the sailor poked his head into the galley. "You got 
company, mate!" He then sauntered away on his own business, jingling 
Margo's coins in his pocket. 
 
"I comin', suh, I comin' . . . can I help you all, somehow? I got work 
to do . . ." 
 
Anderson's voice was soft, respectful, almost obsequious. And the 
moment Skeeter caught a glimpse, his spirits plunged toward despair. 
Their new galley cook was a Yank, all right. A very black one, at least 
sixty years old, with grizzled white hair, missing half a tooth in 
front. He spoke in a broad, drawling dialect that sounded like the deep 
South. Anderson proved to be a former plantation slave who'd signed as 
cook aboard the first ship out of Savannah after his manumission. Said 
he wanted to see something of the world, have a few stories to tell his 
grandchildren. 
 
While Tanglewood thanked the cook and apologized for interrupting his 
work, bitter disappointment sent Skeeter striding back topside, fists 
clenched as he reached the rain-slick deck. A ship's officer sporting a 
vulcanized rubber rain slicker was telling someone, "Your bunk's below, 
stow your gear and report to the quartermaster for a uniform. Then shag 
your arse back topside and find the first mate, he'll tell you what 
your job's to be." 
 
A man with a heavy sea duffel across one shoulder turned to locate his 
new bunk below decks . . . and Skeeter gasped. Then yanked loose his 
big Webley Green revolver, aiming for Sid Kaederman's heart. "Don't 
move! Don't even breathe, God damn you!" 
 
Sid froze in astonishment. The officer in the rain slicker was staring 
at the Webley, slack-jawed. "Here, what's the meaning -- " 
 
"Tanglewood!" Skeeter shouted. "Get up here! He's on deck!" Running 
footsteps sounded below. The deck officer started forward, plainly 
furious. "What is the meaning of this outrage? Put away that pistol, 
sir, or I'll have you put in irons!" 

 
"Stay back!" Skeeter shouted. But it was too late. The officer had 
stepped straight into Skeeter's line of fire. Kaederman dropped the 
heavy duffel with a thud and raced across the rain-slick deck, heading 
for the gangplank. Skeeter lunged around the officer and fired. 
Splinters flew as lead struck the ship's rail. Kaederman plunged down 
the gangplank and hit the quay running. Skeeter cursed and followed as 
Armstrong and Tanglewood ran across the wet decks of the Cutty Sark at 
full tilt, guns drawn. Tanglewood fired, as well, missing the fleeing 
Kaederman clean. Tanglewood skidded wildly across the slick decking and 
Skeeter's feet did a creative skid of their own, slowing him down so 
badly, Armstrong beat them both to the gangplank. The detective plunged 
down toward the quay on Kaederman's heels. Douglas Tanglewood was 
swearing as he scrambled up from the deck. Margo appeared just as 
Skeeter rushed down the gangplank in pursuit, shoving aside shocked 
stevedores and ship's crew to reach the quay. 
 
Skeeter glimpsed Kaederman ducking through the transit sheds alongside 
berth 91. Armstrong plunged in after him, shoving his way past angry 
stevedores trying to shift heavy casks from a dwindling pyramid. A 
scant instant later, the detective came racing back Skeeter's way, 
white-faced and shouting. "Get down! Get down!" 
 
A massive explosion rocked berth 91. Fire belched outward in a solid 
wall of destruction. The concussion hurled Armstrong to the ground. The 
shockwave knocked Skeeter flat, crushing the breath from his lungs. 
Heat seared his sodden coat as he flung both arms over his face. Then 
rain was pouring over him again, slashing down at the mass of flames 
that had, seconds before, been an immense transit shed. Blazing timbers 
and tin shingles crashed to earth in a deadly rain. The rigging and 
sails of the ship at berth 91 were on fire. Stunned sailors were 
already struggling aloft with buckets and heavy knives, chopping at the 
ropes, trying to put out the inferno before it reached the holds. 
 
"Armstrong!" Skeeter yelled, scrambling to his feet. The detective 
stirred sluggishly, but staggered up. Skeeter braced the Wardmann-Wolfe 
agent when Armstrong nearly fell, again, reeling and dizzy on his feet. 
 
"Was Kaederman in that shed?" Skeeter shouted, barely able to hear his 
own voice. 
 
"What?" Armstrong shouted back, voice tinny and distant through the 
ringing in his ears. 
 
"Kaederman! Was he in there?" 
 
"No! Saw him bolt for Redriff Road, right after he broke open one of 
those casks. Struck a match and threw a damned blazing rag right onto 
the loose powder, then ran out the other side!" 
 
"Black powder? Good God!" No wonder the whole transit shed had gone up 
like a bomb. Unlike modern, smokeless powders, black powder was 
genuinely explosive, deadly as hell in that kind of mass. How many 
stevedores were killed in there? Skeeter wondered as he dodged and 
jumped across burning timbers and twisted, smoking tin shingles. 
 
He reached the terminus of Redriff Road and searched wildly for any 

trace of Kaederman. He swore. . . Then heard shouts and curses drifting 
down from the direction of Greenland Dock. Any disturbance was a good 
bet. Skeeter raced that way and pelted slap into an angry group of 
Scandinavian sailors, cursing to make a Viking raider proud. A whole 
stack of crates had been knocked down, breaking open to strew their 
contents of valuable furs into the mud, white ermine and sleek mink and 
glorious black sable. Then Skeeter caught a glimpse of Kaederman far 
ahead, running down Plough Way through Commercial Yard on a direct 
course for Gate Eighteen. 
 
And Kaederman's diversionary tactics abruptly backfired right into his 
face. He hadn't quite reached the gate when a whole squadron of irate 
constables burst through, inbound. London's river police, responding to 
the emergency. Kaederman, clutching an up-time pistol in one hand, 
skidded to a halt. For an instant, Skeeter thought he meant to shoot 
the entire police squadron. Then he doubled back, instead, and raised 
his gun directly at Skeeter. 
 
Shit -- ! 
 
Skeeter ate mud. He skidded face-first on his belly and tried to bring 
up his own pistol. There were too many innocents in his line of fire. 
He spat filthy muck and rolled frantically as Kaederman dodged past, 
firing at him on the way and shoving aside the furious sailors busy 
rescuing their sodden furs. Kaederman fired at Armstrong, Tanglewood, 
and Margo, too, as he ran toward them. The hail of bullets sent all 
three headlong into the mud. Then he raced along the very rim of the 
quay at water's edge and reached Redriff Road again before they could 
turn their weapons on him. 
 
Swearing and spitting, Skeeter propelled himself to his feet, covered 
head to foot in slimy, foul mud that carried a rank stench into his 
sinuses. He didn't want to consider what might be in that mud. 
Armstrong was in the lead as they burst out of Commercial Yard in 
pursuit. Kaederman was a sizeable distance ahead, but even Tanglewood 
and Margo were gaining ground and Skeeter, abruptly in the rear thanks 
to the about-face, was steadily catching up. 
 
Kaederman headed this time for Gate Three, the principle entrance to 
Surrey Commercial Docks. And once again, his delaying tactics with the 
black powder backfired. A horse-drawn fire engine, bells clanging 
madly, charged through, followed closely by four more. The fire engines 
completely blocked the way as they swung into the dockyards. Trapped 
inside the walls, Kaederman turned north toward the warehouses 
alongside Albion Dock. River police had taken up the hue and cry, as 
well, shouting at the fire officials to send word for another squadron. 
 
"We've got us a bloody arsonist!" a policeman behind Skeeter yelled, 
fury lashing his voice. "Damned Fenian bomber, blew a shed of gunpowder 
to hell! Try and head him off at Gate Two . . ." 
 
Rain slashed down across Skeeter's face in blinding gusts and 
unpredictable squalls. The mud under his boots sent him slipping and 
sliding for purchase in the choppy mess. At least it washed the reeking 
stuff off his face. Kaederman didn't try any delaying tactics at Albion 
Dock. He passed the warehouses and a gang of startled stevedores at 
full tilt, racing for Gate Two and escape. They charged past another 

huge basin in a straggling, strung-out line, then Skeeter caught up to 
Doug Tanglewood and Margo. They ran -- as he did -- with guns clutched 
in wet, muddy hands. 
 
"If he gets out of this dockyard, we're sunk!" Skeeter gasped. 
 
"Looks like we're sunk, then!" Margo spat back. 
 
Kaederman had just slipped through Gate Two, with Armstrong hard on his 
heels. Skeeter put on a burst of speed and drew ahead. By the time 
Skeeter shot through Gate Two, a second squad of river police had put 
in appearance, running north from the direction of Gate Three. They 
were still in the distance, however, nowhere close to Kaederman. He was 
just visible on Rotherhithe Street, dodging past startled pedestrians 
on the pavements, cutting around large groups by ducking into the 
street. Horses flung their heads up and reared, shrilling a sharp 
protest at his erratic flight. Skeeter had just caught up to Armstrong 
when Kaederman cut sharp south again, leaving Rotherhithe Street. 
 
"Where the hell is he going?" Skeeter gasped. "The river police are 
down that way!" 
 
For a long moment, Armstrong didn't answer, too busy dodging past a 
protesting carthorse and its cursing driver. Then a startled expression 
crossed the detective's face. "Surely not?" 
 
"What, dammit? Where's he heading?" 
 
"The tunnel?" 
 
It took a few seconds for Skeeter to call up his mental map of the 
area, memorized before leaving the station, then he had it: Isambard 
Kingdom Brunel's Thames Tunnel, connecting Rotherhithe and Wapping. 
Twelve hundred feet long, it had taken eighteen years and countless 
lives to build. It was also the only way to get from Rotherhithe's 
Surrey Docks to Wapping without detouring to London Bridge -- or 
swimming. 
 
"Isn't that a railway tunnel now?" Skeeter asked as they ran, heading 
helter-skelter straight for the tunnel's entrance. 
 
"Yes! Trains from London to Brighton, owned by East London Railway 
Company. But the railway uses only one of the tunnel shafts! The 
other's still a pedestrian tunnel!" 
 
"Aw, shit, you are kidding, right? If he makes it to Wapping . . ." 
 
Unfortunately, Armstrong was not kidding. 
 
He was also correct. Sid Kaederman plunged into the circular structure 
that housed the Rotherhithe entrance to the Thames Tunnel and vanished 
from view. They followed at a run, clattering past startled men and 
women in working-class garb. Skeeter and Armstrong pounded their way 
through the vast entrance, with Margo and Doug Tanglewood on their 
heels. 
 
The entrance was a circular shaft at least fifty feet across. Skeeter 

peered past wrought-iron railings as they plunged down the broad, 
double-spiral stairs. The shaft was a good eighty feet deep and 
Kaederman was already halfway down, plunging three and five steps at a 
time. Skeeter's muddy boots skidded on the stone treads. Down and 
around, in a broad, lazy spiral, a dizzying gyre that would prove fatal 
if he put so much as one foot wrong. Down, down to goblin town . . . 
 
He was beginning to pant for breath when they finally reached the 
landing where the double spiral came together. Half-a-turn more and 
they were on the ground, paving stones clattering underfoot. The Thames 
Tunnel loomed before them, a double-barreled shotgun nearly a quarter 
of a mile long. The air was dank, foetid, cave-like. The tunnel walls 
exuded a chilly sweat, moisture running in tiny rivulets like the 
condensate on a beverage glass. Twin tunnels receded into infinity, 
dimly lit at regular intervals with gas lamps. Railway tracks ran down 
the center of one side. 
 
"Which tunnel?" Skeeter gasped as Tanglewood and Margo bounded down the 
last few steps to join them. "Which one did he go down?" They listened 
intently at each entrance for the echo of footfalls. The chugging of 
water pumps growled and echoed. They couldn't distinguish anything like 
a sound of running footsteps against the background noise. 
 
"That one!" Armstrong finally decided, pointing to the pedestrian 
tunnel. "I doubt he wants to risk meeting a train. He's no coward, but 
he's no fool, either." 
 
Dank, chilly air closed in as they pelted down the echoing brickwork 
and stone tube in pursuit. A few handcarts loaded high with coal and 
wooden crates jockeyed for space in the narrow tunnel. Gas lamps gave 
plentiful if rather dim light the length of the shaft, which had been 
constructed as a series of connective arches beneath the river. Nearly 
forty-five years old, the long pedestrian tube remained the province of 
footpads, thieves, and innumerable prostitutes who led a troglodyte's 
existence beneath the river. They passed sleeping drunks huddled in the 
brick archways, women who'd set up stalls at which tawdry goods and 
cheap jewelry could be purchased. Ragged children begged for money. A 
pair of roughly dressed men eyed them as they shot past, then thought 
better. 
 
A train deafened them as it roared past on the other side of the brick 
supporting wall. If Kaederman had chosen the other route -- or if they 
had -- they'd have been crushed under the wheels. Then they were 
through, emerging on the Wapping side of the river, somewhere to the 
east of the great London Docks. The eighty-foot climb up the dizzying 
double-spiral of the Wapping shaft, a twin of the Rotherhithe entryway, 
winded Skeeter badly halfway up. He staggered on with a stitch in his 
side and cursed Kaederman with every upward step of burning thigh 
muscles. They caught a glimpse of him from time to time on the way up, 
moving doggedly toward the street high above. 
 
The raucous noise of workaday Wapping drifted down in distorted echoes 
and clangs, human voices and riverboat whistles and the slam of cargo 
being offloaded at the docks. The rumble and clatter of freight wagons 
mingled with the roar of the train chugging through the tunnel far 
below. Then they reached the street. Sunlight, dim and watery, replaced 
the gaslights of tunnel and shaft. Rain was still pouring in wind-blown 

gusts. A vast throng of people and horses and overloaded carts 
clattered wetly through the narrow streets, past ships parked at dead-
end roads. 
 
"Where is the son of a bitch?" Armstrong gasped, face contorted with 
frustrated anger. "We'll never find him in that stinking mess!" 
 
Skeeter was too busy dragging down enough air for his starving lungs to 
answer. They started asking passers-by and finally obtained a lead from 
a ragged and muddy girl of twelve, totting bunches of bedraggled 
flowers in a basket over her arm. She pointed down Wapping High Street. 
"Cor, 'e went that way, mister, knocked me down an' never said nuffink, 
spilt me flowers all over the frog, 'e did, ruint' the lot, and never 
'pologized, neither . . ." 
 
Skeeter tossed a couple of shillings into her basket, eliciting a 
soprano squeal of astonishment, then pelted down Wapping High Street 
through the driving downpour. They finally caught a glimpse of 
Kaederman -- just as he made a flying leap at a cart rattling smartly 
northward. He caught the tailboard and dragged himself in. The cart 
shot forward at twice, three times the speed a man could run. Cursing, 
Skeeter and the others lagged farther and farther behind, searching for 
some transport of their own. For an entire block, Skeeter staggered 
along with a butcher's knife of a stitch in his side, beginning to 
despair. Then a shopkeeper who'd clearly arrived a short time earlier 
came out to back his horse and cart up onto the pavement, unloading a 
pile of crates directly into his shop. 
 
Skeeter dove toward the horse with a gasping cry of relief. A quick 
snatch at the Bowie knife concealed under his coattails, a few slashing 
blows at harness straps, and the startled horse was free, front hooves 
coming up off the pavement as it tried to stand on rear legs. "Whoa, 
easy there . . ." Skeeter stepped up onto the cart pole, its front end 
digging into the street, and threw a leg over, clutching the grip of 
the fighting knife in his teeth until he could slide it back into the 
sheath. The shopkeeper shouted just as Skeeter urged the horse forward 
with knees and heels. 
 
"Hey! Wot you doin', that's me 'orse!" 
 
Skeeter kicked the nag into startled motion even as he dug banknotes 
out of a pocket and tossed them onto the street as payment. "Come on, 
let's go . . ." Obedient, if puzzled, the horse slanted an ear back to 
catch the sound of Skeeter's voice and broke into a shambling trot, 
probably its top speed while harnessed. A solid thump of heels sent the 
horse into a surprised canter, stiff-legged and jolting from the 
unaccustomed gait. Skeeter gained ground rapidly on Kaederman's cart, 
while the shopkeeper screamed curses after him. 
 
A swift glance revealed Noah Armstrong halting a hansom cab at 
gunpoint. Margo and Doug Tanglewood piled in. Then Skeeter gave all his 
attention to guiding his aging carthorse through the crowded street, 
cutting and weaving between high-piled wagons, shabby cabs for hire, 
even a few gentlemen's carriages. Businessmen or merchant traders, 
probably, come to check on arriving cargo or oversee outgoing 
shipments. Gaping pedestrians and liveried drivers stared at the sight 
of a carthorse lumbering past at its top, stiff-kneed speed, trailing 

harness straps and the end of long reins which Skeeter was looping and 
pulling in to prevent their being caught in a passing wagon wheel or 
carriage axle. He had no desire to end his ride that abruptly. 
 
Skeeter pushed his shaggy mount to a rumbling gallop. The carthorse 
burst past the boundary between Wapping and Whitechapel, steadily 
gaining ground on Kaederman. The cart made a right-hand turn, swinging 
smartly into Whitechapel High Street, which was jam-packed with hay 
wagons, oxen pulling loads too heavy for horses, and fast-moving 
hansoms. There was a near-collision that sent Sid Kaederman sprawling 
against the side. Skeeter saw his mouth move and the cart's driver 
turned his head sharply. The driver started shouting, then turned to 
crack his cartwhip at the stowaway. Kaederman's answer was to pull 
loose his pistol and fire at the irate driver, point-blank. 
 
Either the jostling spoiled his aim or the driver was one of those 
down-timers who couldn't be killed, because Sid missed him clean from a 
distance of twelve inches. The driver, white-faced and still yelling, 
performed a diving roll that landed him on the cobbled street, spitting 
curses and running for his life. The carthorse picked up speed without 
a guiding hand on the reins. Kaederman's transport careened out of 
control down the congested road. Kaederman, thrown violently from side 
to side as the carthorse dodged and shied away from other wagons and 
horses, crawled awkwardly over the seat, trying to reach the reins. 
Skeeter leaned low over his horse's flying mane and urged the draft 
animal to greater speed. If I can just catch up while he's distracted . 
. . 
 
They raced down Whitechapel High Street in a grim, jolting chase. 
Kaederman's cart plunged into Whitechapel Road, careering past 
screaming women on the pavement and cursing draymen who swung violently 
wide to avoid collision. Children scattered like ants, shouting curses 
after Kaederman's runaway horse. Truant boys and chimney sweeps scooped 
up mud clots and pieces of broken brick, hurling them in Kaederman's 
wake. 
 
The inevitable disaster struck just as Skeeter pulled alongside. A 
heavily laden team of drays, moving ponderously down the middle of 
Whitechapel Road, couldn't swerve fast enough. The driver tried. Tried 
hard, in fact. He succeeded in pulling his team broadside to the 
onrushing cart. 
 
The shock of collision drove Sid's horse slam against the other team's 
harness poles. Wood splintered. Horses screamed. The heavy wagon 
toppled. Its driver and a stack of crates six feet high were hurtled 
under the wheels and hooves of other wagon teams. A human scream tore 
the wet morning air. The horses were still screaming, crashing down as 
wood splintered like shotgun blasts. 
 
Sid's empty cart jacknifed around, airborne. It smashed down across the 
upturned drayman's wagon. Crates broke open under the force of the 
cart's landing. Hundreds of shoes and ladies' skirts, cheap dresses and 
steel bustles, men's trousers, and warm woolen coats spilled out into 
the mud. Sid, thrown violently airborne by the cart's twisting 
gymnastics, landed asprawl in a heap of dark, wet skirts on the other 
side of the broken wagon. The spilled garments cushioned his fall, 
probably saving his life. 

 
Then Skeeter's galloping horse, presented with an impassable barrier, 
jumped the upturned wagon. The horse's rear hocks clipped the top 
boards, then they landed roughly on the cobbles beyond and slipped on 
the wet stones. The horse skidded and went to his knees with a ringing 
scream of pain. Skeeter was thrown forward across the horse's neck. His 
superb riding skills -- mastered on wild, half-broken Mongol war ponies 
-- and a desperate grab at the harness collar kept Skeeter from 
smashing face-first onto the cobbles. His horse neighed sharply again, 
a sound of pain and fright, then heaved and scrambled up, bleeding down 
both torn knees. Skeeter, badly shaken, slid down the horse's 
forequarters and landed on the wet street. 
 
Poverty-stricken children, shrieking women, and idle louts from nearby 
gin palaces descended on the wreckage, a swarm of devouring locusts 
intent on carrying off as much as they could cram into their arms, toss 
over their shoulders, stuff into gunny sacks, or simply pull on over 
their own clothes. Hundreds shouted and cursed and scurried for the 
choicest pickings, using prybars to open unbroken crates or simply 
hauling them off, contents unseen. 
 
Kaederman's horse, badly wounded, was lunging, trying to climb over the 
backs of the toppled drayman's horses. All three animals were down, 
kicking and neighing shrilly, trying to regain their feet. Harness lay 
tangled, fouling their legs, which kept them from scrambling up. A man 
in a blood-stained leather apron hacked at the harness leather with a 
broad meat cleaver, trying to free the trapped animals. Wagons and 
carts, blocked by the wreckage, piled up on either side, their drivers 
shouting curses or jumping down to help shift the broken cart and wagon 
out of the way. Someone mercifully shot Sid's mortally wounded 
carthorse, ending the agonizing, bone-grating screams. Skeeter -- 
limping where metal harness fittings had torn a gash through his 
trousers and thigh -- hunted through the wreckage for Sid. 
 
Kaederman had regained his feet, bleeding from cuts down his face and 
arm. His coat was torn, smeared with mud and dung slurry from the 
street. The hired killer stumbled, visibly dazed, through the crowd of 
riot-happy scavengers, then drifted erratically toward the edge of the 
road. He staggered at every step, clearly having wrenched a knee on 
landing. He was still running, though, moving raggedly and glancing 
over one shoulder to locate Skeeter. At least with a bad leg, he 
couldn't run fast or far. 
 
Skeeter abandoned his own injured horse and fought his way on foot 
through the near-riot. A hansom cab shoved and clawed its way forward 
along the crowded pavement, scattering irate pedestrians into the jam 
of wagons and carts on the street. It halted six feet behind Skeeter's 
limping carthorse, which an opportunistic girl of fifteen was leading 
swiftly away. The cab disgorged Margo, Douglas Tanglewood, and Noah 
Armstrong; the latter tossed a wad of bank notes to the driver before 
jumping down to join the pursuit. 
 
"He's heading that way," Skeeter pointed as they slithered through the 
crowd of spectators and fighting scavengers. "Hurt and limping, but 
still on the move." The up-time killer had reached a three-story, 
eighteenth-century structure that might have once been a grand house, 
built of grey-painted stone and mellow brick. Coal smoke and soot had 

stained wide windows and trim a dingy grey. Kaederman peered through 
the windows, clearly trying to decide whether he should bolt inside or 
continue down the street. A semicircular, cross section of metal from 
what might have been the rim of a wagon wheel or maybe a large bell, 
had been mounted above the door. 
 
Kaederman spotted them and thought better, limping past the entrance 
and rounding the corner to parallel a whole series of longer and lower, 
grey-painted buildings attached to the rear of the main structure. 
Skeeter and the others had already reached the corner when Kaederman 
found a set of double doors into the third building back, a three-story 
factory of some kind, judging from the noise and the smoke bellying up 
from a forest of chimneys. A wagon and team of horses stood in the open 
doorway where men drenched with sweat were loading heavy crates. 
Kaederman sidled past and plunged into the dim interior beyond. 
 
Despite his own limp, Skeeter was at those wide double doors in a 
flash. On his way through, he caught a fleeting glimpse of a sign 
painted in neat white letters: Whitechapel Bell Foundry, est. 1420, 
these premises since 1570, home of Big Ben, Bells of Westminster, the 
American Liberty Bell . . . 
 
The appalling noise and stench of a nineteeth-century smelting plant 
struck Skeeter square in the face. Intense heat rolled outward in a 
visible ripple, distorting the foundry's interior for just a split 
second. Then he was inside, breathing the fumes of molten metal and 
burning charcoal. Rows of windows high up did little to dispel the 
gloom. The vast, clangorous room, fully three stories tall, remained in 
near darkness, aided and abetted by the wet, cloudy day outside. 
 
Men shouted above the crash and slam of immense machines, heavy 
conveyors, and the boom of newly cast bells being tested for trueness 
of sound. Molten bronze -- and possibly iron and silver and brass, 
judging from the color of the ingots on those conveyors -- glowed in 
immense vats, surging like volcanic rock, seething and malevolent in 
the near darkness. Enormous, pulley-driven crucibles of liquified metal 
swayed across the room some eight feet above the foundry floor, moving 
ponderously down from the smelting furnaces to row after row of casting 
molds, some of them six and seven feet high. Filled molds were jammed 
and crammed to either side, forming narrow aisles -- canyons in 
miniature -- stacked high to cool. 
 
Men with long, hooked poles tipped the crucibles to pour their glowing, 
gold-red contents into the open snouts of bell molds, every pour 
sending cascades and showers of sparks and molten droplets in a deadly 
rain that sent foundry workers scattering back for safety. Others used 
heavy iron pincers to lift smaller, filled molds aside for cooling, 
making room for new, empty molds beneath the I-beam pulley system on 
which the crucibles rode. Catwalks hung like iron spiderwebbing above 
the smelting furnaces. Conveyors brought heavy ingots up to be tossed 
by sweating men and half-grown boys into the fiery furnaces. They 
dumped ingots, secured returning crucibles from the pulley line for 
refilling, regulated the temperature in the huge furnaces, and fed 
charcoal from enormous mounds to keep the fires burning hot enough to 
melt solid bronze for pouring. 
 
And straight down the middle of that hellish inferno, Sid Kaederman was 

limping his way toward escape. Skeeter plunged in after him, tasting 
the stink of molten metal on his tongue and in the back of his throat. 
We could die in here, he realized with a gulp of sudden fear. Every one 
of us. If Kaederman succeeded in ducking out of sight long enough to go 
to ground, he could use the darkness and that ear-numbing noise for 
cover, lay an ambush and pick them off one by one with that silenced 
pistol of his and nobody'd even hear the bodies hit the floor. 
 
"Split up!" Skeeter shouted above the roar as Kaederman dodged and 
ducked past startled foundrymen, darting into the maze of miniature 
canyons. "Try and cut him off before he can get out through a back door 
-- or go to ground and lay in wait someplace nasty! And for God's sake, 
be careful around those furnaces and crucibles! Go!" 
 
Tanglewood and Armstrong turned right and jogged warily into the near-
blackness. Their shadows flickered and fled into the surrounding 
darkness as they passed a backdrop of fountaining sparks from another 
massive pour. Margo followed Skeeter. "Are you all right?" she shouted 
in his ear. "You're limping!" 
 
"It's nothing, just a shallow scratch! Stings a little is all!" He'd 
suffered worse as a boy, learning to ride in the first place. Skeeter 
had the big Webley Green out, held at the ready, up near his chest, 
elbows folded so Kaederman couldn't knock it out of his hands should he 
come around a corner where the killer was hiding. Leading with a gun, 
sticking it out in front of you with locked elbows, was a fast way to 
disarm yourself and end up seriously dead. Only idiots in the movies -- 
and the idiots who believed them -- were stupid enough to lead with a 
firearm. 
 
Skeeter and Margo edged their way into the wood-and-iron ravines 
between cooling bell molds. They worked virtually back to back as they 
advanced, moving one haphazardly strewn row at a time. Molds of 
differing sizes and shapes jutted out unpredictably, threatening knees, 
elbows, shoulders. Heat poured off the stacks like syrupy summer 
sunlight, deadening reflexes and hazing the mind. It was hard to 
breathe, impossible to hear above the din of the foundry floor. Down 
the room's long central spine, bright gouts of light shot out at 
random, throwing insane shadows across the stacked molds to either 
side. 
 
Skeeter moved by instinct, hunting through the alien landscape. Sidle 
up to a junction, ease around for a snap-quick glance, edge forward, 
check the floor for droplets of blood, peer along the rows down either 
aisle for a hint of motion . . . Then on to the next junction, row 
after row, sweat pooling and puddling, the wool of uncreased trousers 
raw on bare skin and stinging in the wound down his inner thigh, hands 
slippery on the wooden grips of the pistol . . . Another fast, ducking 
glance --  
 
The bell mold beside Skeeter's head splintered under the bullet's 
impact. Iron spalled, driving splinters across his cheek and nose. Pain 
kicked him in the teeth, then he was dodging low, firing back at the 
blur of motion three rows down. The big Webley kicked against wet 
palms, the noise of the foundry so immense he barely heard the sharp 
report. Skeeter blinked furiously to clear his vision, waved Margo back 
and down. Wetness stung his eyes, sweat mingled with blood burning like 

bee-sting pain from the jagged slivers in his cheek where the bell mold 
had spalled. He blinked and scrubbed with a muddy, torn sleeve. When he 
could see again, he dodged low for another look, down at hip-height, 
this time. Sid Kaederman was leaning around a stack, waiting to shoot 
him, but he was looking too high. Skeeter fired and a wooden pallet 
splintered six inches away from Kaederman's chest. Skeeter cursed his 
blurring, tear-blocked eyes, and the sweat that had let the gun slide 
in his hands, and his lousy aim . . . 
 
"Go!" Skeeter yelled as Kaederman ducked back. They rushed forward and 
ran flat-out, gasping hard for breath in the stinking, steaming air. 
Down three rows, risk the peek . . . Kaederman was running, stumbling 
every few strides on his injured leg. Skeeter sprinted after, gaining 
fast. The paid killer glanced back, but failed to fire at him. 
 
He's out of ammo! Skeeter realized with a rush of adrenaline. There was 
no other rational reason for Kaederman not to whirl and fire dead at 
him. A surge of confidence spurred Skeeter to draw ahead of Margo, 
relentlessly whittling down Kaederman's lead. The hit man ducked down a 
sideways aisle, vanishing from view. Skeeter swore and closed the 
distance, ducked low through his own skidding turn. Harsh, sulphurous 
light flared, momentarily blinding him. The smelters were dead ahead. 
Workers with iron poles nearly four feet long, hooked on one end, and 
men with heavy prybars snagged a big crucible and tip-tilted it, 
pouring its blazing contents into the mouth of a bell mold four feet 
across, using the prybars to control the angle of the tilt. 
 
Sid Kaederman reached the newly-filled mold and started waving his gun 
at the stunned foundrymen, shouting that he would shoot them if they 
didn't get out of his way. The men stumbled back, away from the 
apparent lunatic. Then Kaederman ran along the line of pulleys, toward 
the far end of the foundry where access doors led to the street. 
Blistering hot crucibles, just filled with molten metal, swayed down 
from the smelters toward another big bell mold waiting to be filled. 
Kaederman glanced back, realized Skeeter was gaining . . . 
 
He whirled around and snatched up a long iron pole from the floor where 
a terrified bell caster had abandoned it with a clatter. Kaederman 
dropped his useless pistol and reached with the hooked pole, instead. 
He snagged the lip of a brimming crucible swaying its way toward him, a 
big one that must've held a bathtub's worth of blazing liquid metal. 
Pulling hard, Kaederman slammed the rim down and ran. Molten bronze 
flooded out across the floor. Liquid metal splashed and crested in a 
wave of destruction, spreading across the entire narrow space between 
stacked, newly-cast bells, an inch deep and still flooding outward. 
There was no way around it and no way to climb those red-hot iron molds 
to either side. Skeeter's forward momentum was too great to avoid the 
deadly lake in his path. 
 
So he jumped straight toward it. 
 
Toward it and up. He stretched frantically, reaching for the massive 
iron I-beam of the pulley system overhead. It's too high, I'm gonna 
miss it, oh Christ, don't let me miss . . . He dropped the Webley, 
needing both hands free. It fell with a splash and vanished into the 
scalding, hellish glow. Then his palms smacked against the I-beam and 
he grabbed hold, swinging his feet up in a frantic arc. He clamped arms 

and ankles tight, then just hung there, sloth-like, panting and 
sweating so hard he was terrified his grip would slide loose. Uncurling 
his fingers long enough to wipe first one hand, then the other, against 
his coat took a supreme act of will. 
 
Then he wriggled himself around, managed to crawl up and over the top 
of the narrow iron beam, and balanced on hands and knees, all but prone 
above the hellish puddle. A black crust had formed along the top, a 
thin scum of solid metal that seemed to breathe as it cooled. The 
molten metal beneath flashed and flared in a scaly pattern like the 
scutes on a crocodile's back. Kaederman had turned to run, dropping the 
long iron pole into the edge of the molten flood splashing back toward 
him, but he wasn't moving very fast, clearly tottering at the last of 
his strength. Margo, thank God, had dodged the lethal flow, ducking 
sideways into another canyon between bell molds. 
 
Breath regained and balance secured, Skeeter moved forward along the 
beam in a scooting crawl that was taking far too long. Swinging himself 
cautiously down once more, he passed hand over hand above the heaving 
mass of cooling metal, moving ape-like along the beam, swinging up 
again only to avoid pendulous crucibles. 
 
Kaederman, who'd managed to stumble maybe a dozen paces beyond the far 
edge of the puddle, glanced back . . . and tripped, sprawling flat. His 
mouth moved soundlessly as he scrambled up again. Then Skeeter was 
across and jumping down to face him. Kaederman lunged forward, snarling 
curses and giving him no time to draw his other gun. They grappled for 
long moments, gouging and punching. 
 
A blow from Kaederman's knee grazed the cut along Skeeter's thigh. Pain 
shot through the abused flesh. Skeeter staggered back a step and 
tangled his feet over the iron pole Kaederman had used to tilt the 
crucible. His stumbling footsteps kicked its far end askew, out of the 
puddle of molten bronze, trailing lethal beads across the foundry 
floor. Skeeter danced a wild jig-step and finally righted his balance, 
just a boot heel shy of the malevolent lake. The cool end of the long 
pole rolled and bumped into Kaederman's foot, a weapon ready for the 
snatching. Kaederman's face twisted in triumph. An unholy laugh broke 
loose. Before Skeeter could fling himself forward to stop him, 
Kaederman stooped and snatched up the pole in a two-handed grip --  
 
By the wrong end. 
 
Glowing and still half-molten, the pole dripped liquid bronze which 
flowed over both of Kaederman's hands. A terrible scream burst loose. 
He tried to let go. Kaederman staggered back, away from the puddle, 
face contorted, still screaming. The stench of cooking hair and meat 
struck Skeeter's nostrils. Then Kaederman's damaged fingers unclenched 
enough to let the pole drop. The skin of both hands sloughed away with 
it. Kaederman's knees gave way. He hit the floor and nearly splashed 
headlong into the glowing, syrupy-thick bronze. Skeeter snatched him 
back, dragging him bodily out of danger, and shoved him to the floor. 
Then held him there. Skeeter smiled down into stunned grey eyes. 
 
"Hello, Sid." 
 
He'd stopped screaming. Broken, gasping sounds tore free in their 

place. Shock was setting in fast, leaving him shaking and clammy under 
Skeeter's hands. Skeeter shook him slightly to get his attention. When 
that didn't register, he used the bastard's real name and shook him 
again. "Gideon! Hey, Guthrie! Look at me!" 
 
Dull eyes focused. His mouth moved, but nothing came past his lips 
except those strangled, hideous whimpers. "Listen, pal. You got a 
choice," Skeeter slapped his face gently to keep his attention. "You 
listening?" 
 
He nodded, managed to force out a single coherent word. "W-what?" 
 
Skeeter fished out his little RIC Webley and let Kaederman see it. 
"What I ought to do is shoot you where you lie, pal. You don't rate the 
oxygen you're breathing. But I'm gonna offer you a choice. Your pick 
all the way. If you like, I'll step away and let you crawl out of here, 
free and clear. No charges for murder. No prison time. No gas chamber. 
Of course, with the state of medical care around here, you'll lose both 
those hands for sure. And even if you didn't, you'd probably die from 
shock and infection and gangrene." 
 
Kaederman's eyes had glazed. "Wh-what's the -- ?" 
 
"What's your other choice?" Skeeter's grin sent a shudder through the 
injured man. "Why, you get to come clean. Tell the cops everything they 
want to know about your boss. Hand them Senator Caddrick and his mafia 
cronies on a silver platter. Give us enough to send them to the gas 
chamber, instead of you." 
 
Ashen lips moved, mouthing the words. "Goddamned little bastard . . . 
should've killed you on sight, Armstrong." 
 
Skeeter grinned down into Kaederman's glazed eyes. "Too bad, ain't it? 
What'll it be, then? I'll trade the medical care you need to save your 
hands, trade you a surgeon and a burn-care unit, for Senator Caddrick 
in prison. That's a fair trade, I think. One of those new prisons he 
helped fund, a no-frills, maximum security cage without television or 
libraries or anything to distract a guy except Bubba's hard-on in the 
next cage over. Couldn't happen to a nicer bastard, don't you agree? 
Maybe you'll even get a reduced sentence for turning state's evidence. 
How about it? We'll keep you out of pain, stabilize your hands for you, 
keep you alive long enough to get you to a burn specialist. Otherwise, 
I'll just leave you here." 
 
He jerked his thumb at the stench of the Victorian-era foundry. As the 
ashen killer shuddered, rolling his eyes at the grimy room, Skeeter 
added off-handedly, "Oh, and by the way. If you decide to stay here, 
and if you manage to survive shock and infection and amputation of 
those hands, I'm told Scotland Yard still hangs a murderer. And I know 
a couple of folks who'd be delighted to rat on you." 
 
Kaederman didn't answer for a long moment, just lay there sprawled on 
his back, trembling and sweating, his skin grey and his hands curled 
into meaty, scorched claws. He glared up at Skeeter while making 
horrible, strangled sounds and bit his lips until they bled. His body 
twitched spasmodically, his whole nervous system overloaded with the 
pain of the burns. 

 
"Okay," Skeeter shrugged, rising from his crouch and sliding his RIC 
Webley back into his shoulder holster. "Have it your way. Maybe you can 
actually crawl to the door. Dunno what you'll do once you're outside, 
though, with all that manure in the streets to drag yourself through 
and Whitechapel's toughs kicking you into the mud, just for chuckles . 
. ." 
 
Skeeter started to step away. 
 
Kaederman lunged up onto an elbow. "Wait!" He shook violently, eyes 
wild and desperate. "For God's sake, Armstrong . . . wait . . . Go 
ahead and take your revenge, curse it, kick my ribs in, smash my teeth, 
do whatever makes you happy -- just don't leave me to die in this 
hellhole!" 
 
Skeeter stood glaring down at him, drawing out the man's terror with 
cold, calculated loathing. How much pity had this bastard shown any of 
his victims? When Kaederman fell back, eyes closing over a moan of 
despair, Skeeter finally decided he'd had enough. 
 
"Okay," he said softly, crouching down again. "But you're gonna have to 
walk out of here on your own pins, Sid, because I'm not carrying you." 
He tugged the man by his coat lapels, levering him up to his knees and 
bracing him under one armpit. Noah Armstrong and Doug Tanglewood, their 
faces flushed from the intense heat of the bell molds, skidded up just 
as he got Kaederman onto his feet. Margo was close on their heels, 
having gone around the long way to avoid the puddle of cooling bronze. 
Skeeter glanced up. "Hi, Noah. Got a present for you. Sid, here, is 
going to teach us all a new song. Goes like this: 'All I want for 
Christmas is my boss in jail . . . ' " 
 
Sid Kaederman stared from Noah Armstrong's face to Skeeter's matching 
one and back again, eyes widening as the import of their ruse set in. 
Then his eyes turned belly up and his knees went south and Skeeter 
ended up carrying him out of the bell foundry, after all. 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Nineteen 
 
Kit hurled through Shangri-La's basement corridors, Sven Bailey 
pounding along in his wake, both of them grim and silent. John 
Lachley's footsteps echoed up ahead. He didn't have much of a head 
start. Kit flung himself around a twist in the corridor and caught 
sight of the quarry down a long straight-of-way, maybe fifty yards 
ahead. Easy shot. Kit fired -- and missed. Three times. Sven's gun was 
back in the pteranodon's cage, in a spot nobody wanted to retrieve it 
from. Lachley whipped into a side corridor. Kit and Sven reached it 
seconds later. They were gaining on him. Kit lined up the pistol sights 
as best he could while running full tilt, and tried again. 
 
He succeeded in blowing out the sides of four aquaria in rapid 
succession. 
 

Water and fish flooded across the floor as Kit spat curses. "Goddammit! 
I shouldn't have missed! Not seven times!" 
 
"Maybe he's got to go back to London, after all?" Sven growled. "And 
you're out of ammo, by the way." 
 
Kit glanced down. The slide had locked back. He'd shot the pistol dry. 
When he groped in his shirt pocket, he discovered nothing but 
emptiness. The spare magazine had fallen out during the fight and he 
hadn't noticed. Careless is stupid, he snarled at himself, and stupid 
can be fatal. 
 
He mashed the send button on his radio. 
 
"Kit Carson reporting. We're in pursuit, heading into Zone Eighteen! 
Sven and I are both out of ammo -- looks like the bastard can't be 
killed, after all!" Either that, or he was phenominally lucky. 
 
"Copy that, we have search teams triangulating on your location." In 
the background, he could hear the station announcer again. Gate Three 
is opening in three minutes . . . 
 
"Set up blockades out of Zones Seventeen and Eighteen," Kit gasped as 
as they skidded around a corner. He slammed one shoulder into a ten-
foot wall of stacked aquaria, which shifted with an ominous groan. 
Water slopped out of the topmost layer. A door slammed back and 
Lachley's footsteps receded upward. "Oh, hell, he's gone up a 
stairway!" 
 
"Come again?" the radio sputtered. 
 
"He took the stairs, heading for Commons!" 
 
"Copy that and relaying." 
 
Why was Lachley headed for Commons? Just running blind, heading up, 
same as many another fugitive, or was he planning something . . . 
 
Kit's eyes widened. "Holy -- Sven, Gate Three!" 
 
He mashed the transmit button again. "I think he's headed for Gate 
Three! And even if he isn't, leave a corridor open, try to herd him 
into it!" 
 
"What?" the radio sputtered. "Right into the middle of an incoming 
tour? Kit, are you out of your   -- Roger that. Kit, you are one 
devious bastard." 
 
"So give me a medal -- if this works. Sven, be ready for anything. I'm 
going to try something dangerous." 
 
"Chasing Jack the Ripper isn't?" 
 
He had a point, there . . . 
 
How much time? Kit wondered frantically as they plunged up the stairs 
four at a time. Christ, how much time's left? They burst out onto 

Commons at the edge of Frontier Town. Chronometer lights flashed 
steadily overhead. The vast open floor lay deserted, as empty of life 
as a midnight cemetery. Their footsteps slapped and echoed off the 
distant girders high overhead. Kit jumped a decorative horse trough 
filled with goldfish, which Sven whipped around, too short to go over 
it. 
 
He knew they were close when he felt the savage backlash of 
subharmonics from the gate. The sound that wasn't a sound vibrated 
through the vast, echoing stretch of Commons. A security team stood 
waiting at the entrance to the Wild West Gate's departure lounge, 
charged with keeping the in-bound tour from re-entering the station. 
Behind the security officers, the massive gate dilated slowly open, 
right on schedule. Lachley, running flat out, ran straight toward the 
rapidly widening black chasm which hovered three feet above the Commons 
floor and whipped through the open lanes snaking outward from the 
departures lounge. He clearly intended to shake pursuit by jumping 
through the moment it opened wide enough. 
 
Kit shouted into the radio, "Get those security officers away from the 
gate! For God's sake, move 'em out before he veers off!" 
 
Too late! Lachley had seen them. He skidded sideways, trying to vault 
over a row of chairs. Kit charged, frantically trying to recall where 
he'd been in early August of 1885. It didn't really matter. He was the 
only one in position to take out the Ripper. Kit's flying tackle caught 
Lachley's knees -- and sent them both reeling straight through the 
gaping black hole of the Denver Gate. 
 
They fell headlong down the dizzying drop. The station end of the 
tunnel lay at the end of a spyglass inverted, far away and shrinking. 
Lachley brought the knife up even as they fell like doomed meteors. The 
Denver end of the gate loomed huge. Kit tried to brace himself, 
wondered what it felt like to die . . . Then jarred his back. He 
sprawled, badly winded, across the dirt floor of the Time Tours livery 
stable. John Lachley snarled above him, teeth bared, knife poised to 
strike --  
 
And almost made it to the floor. 
 
His whole body wavered like candle smoke and vanished, a shadow eaten 
whole by a moonless night. For just an instant, a lingering look of 
shocked surprise floated where Lachley's face had been. Then his blood-
stained knife clattered to the dirt beside Kit's ear and a heavy pouch 
thumped down beside it, inside a flutter of stolen, up-time clothes. 
 
Sven thudded into the stable at Kit's feet, grunting on impact. 
 
Kit lay flat, just gulping air, oblivious to the shocked demands 
erupting on all sides. Furious guides tried to calm hysterical tourists 
who had just watched a man die, shadowing himself. Several women were 
sobbing, abruptly too terrified to go anywhere near the open gate. Kit 
shut his eyes for long, shuddering moments, trying to convince his own 
muscles that it was safe to move, now. 
 
He was still alive. 
 

Jack the Ripper was finally dead. 
 
Slowly, wincing at pulled muscles and bruises, Kit picked himself up 
and dusted himself off and gave Sven a hand up, as well. Tour guides 
were shouting above the general roar. Kit picked up Lachley's knife, 
plucking it out of the dirt with trembling fingers, and managed to 
retrieve the heavy pouch. He said to the nearest guide, "It's safe to 
bring them into the station, now. Quarantine was just lifted." Then he 
jerked his head once at Sven, turned his back on the whole shouting 
mob, and stepped back through the open Wild West Gate to go home. 
 
Once there, he intended to get quietly, massively drunk. 
 
 
 
I must be crazy . . . 
 
Jenna Caddrick couldn't believe she'd agreed to this. Couldn't believe 
she'd just stepped through the Britannia Gate to confront her father in 
front of half the world's television cameras. Camera flashes and 
television crews lit up the whole departures lounge, illuminating a sea 
of spectators beyond the velvet-rope barricades. A sniper could be 
lurking anywhere in that vast, heaving mob. Noah Armstrong, silent at 
her side, descended the stairs with eyes narrowed, intent on the 
business of keeping them alive long enough to testify. She rubbed her 
chin nervously, wishing Paula Booker had left her muttonchop whiskers 
in place. But Noah had inisted the surgeon remove the implanted 
disguise and restore Jenna's face to her own appearance, for the 
benefit of the cameras. Jenna felt naked, defenseless. 
 
Below them, Malcolm Moore's gurney had nearly reached the Commons 
floor, followed closely by Sid Kaederman's -- or rather, Gideon 
Guthrie's. The man who'd trailed her from Colorado to London, bent on 
murder, was unconscious, his burnt hands cradled in special harnesses 
above his chest. Margo Smith walked beside her fiancé's gurney, holding 
his hand as they carried him down to the station's medical crews. 
Jenna's throat closed at the thought of what these people had risked 
for her sake. Malcolm had nearly been killed and Skeeter Jackson had 
undergone plastic surgery, rearranging his whole face. Skeeter had been 
shot outside the Carlton Club, as well, saved only by his Kevlar vest, 
and had almost been killed at the bell foundry . . . 
 
She and Noah had nearly reached the floor when the inevitable shout 
came. 
 
"It's Jenna Caddrick!" 
 
The roar hurt Jenna's chest. She flinched back from the solid wall of 
noise, having forgotten during the weeks in London just how terrible it 
was to face a sea of screaming reporters. 
 
"Steady," Noah muttered at her elbow. "I don't see a sniper anywhere." 
 
Not yet . . . 
 
She glanced back and found Skeeter Jackson right on their heels, his 
face still a mirror of Noah's. He gave her a brief, tense smile. 

"You've got that Kevlar vest of mine on, right?" She nodded and Skeeter 
muttered under his breath, "Good. I know it works." Then they were down 
the last of the steel-grid steps and pushing foward between a cordon of 
security guards. 
 
Questions battered her from every side. Reporters screamed her name, 
demanding to know where she had been, how she'd escaped the Ansar 
Majlis death squads, a thousand, million questions that raked up old 
wounds and inflicted new ones. Then her father was there in front of 
her, open-mouthed and staring. Shock had dilated Senator John Paul 
Caddrick's grey eyes. A white pallor washed across his face as he met 
her gaze. She wondered how she had ever looked him in the eye without a 
reptilian loathing. 
 
Then he recovered his composure. Her father presented the cameras with 
a smile worthy of an Oscar and cried, "Jenna! Oh, thank God, baby, 
you're safe . . ." He rushed forward, arms outflung. Jenna had no idea 
what she intended to do or say. She'd been thinking about this moment 
for weeks, drenched in sour-smelling terror sweat each time she 
imagined it. But when he rushed at her like a demon from her worst 
nightmares, Jenna reacted without a moment's hesitation. 
 
She slugged him, point-blank. Slammed her fist so hard into his nose, 
the shock jarred her shoulder and left her hand numb. He staggered 
back, blood welling from both nostrils. For just an instant, a sewing 
needle dropped to the concrete floor would have sent echos bouncing 
through the vast station. Even the reporters had turned to stone, 
stunned motionless. 
 
Jenna drew a sobbing breath. "Don't touch me, you murdering son-of-a-
bitch! You paid those bastards to kill Aunt Cassie! You paid them to 
pose as Ansar Majlis, so the hit couldn't be traced back to you. Damn 
you to hell, you murdered her, and you murdered my fiancé, then you put 
out a contract on me, you sorry sack of shit! I've got enough proof to 
bring you down, you and your mafia pals with you. Gideon Guthrie's been 
singing for his supper and believe me, they're gonna throw away the 
key! If they don't pull the switch on the electric chair. And frankly, 
after what you did to Carl and Aunt Cassie, I'd pull it in a heartbeat. 
I hope you fry!" 
 
Her father stood swaying, waxy-pale, mouth working soundlessly. As the 
crowd roared its shock, his face twisted in a blurred grimace. Then he 
snatched open his coat and jerked out a small-caliber handgun. Noah 
Armstrong flung himself forward. The detective slammed Jenna down, away 
from the discharge of flame erupting from the muzzle. Another shot 
exploded as her father snarled, "Goddamn you to hell, Armstrong!" 
 
Then Skeeter Jackson was on the floor beside her, swearing in some 
language she didn't recognize, with a hole torn through his coat where 
her father's shot had barely missed him. Jackson's reflexes were good -
- he twisted aside even as her father fired again, mistaking him for 
Noah. The real Armstrong lay full length on top of Jenna, face down to 
protect her. Then a swarm of security officers buried her father, 
shoving him down under an avalanche of live bodies. The mob went mad, 
shrieking and hurling abuse that left Jenna numb. Skeeter Jackson 
grunted once, lying prone practically on top of Noah, and muttered. "I 
gotta get my own face back . . ." 

 
Jenna just shut her eyes, quaking under Noah's weight, too exhausted to 
move. 
 
"C'mon, kid," Noah's voice finally broke through, "you've got to 
testify, make it official." 
 
"Yeah . . ." 
 
Security officials were pulling them to their feet, surrounding them in 
a ring five bodies deep, hustling them out of the danger zone to a 
waiting security cart. Skeeter dragged himself up and followed. Through 
the numbing roar of the mob, another shocked cry went up. 
 
"Ianira Cassondra!" 
 
Then Jenna and Noah were thrust into the cart. Skeeter slid in after 
them and scooted over as Ianira and her family crowded in. The children 
sat on the floor, dark eyes wide and scared. The driver cranked the 
siren up full blast and the cart shot down Commons, taking them away 
from the whole screaming mess. Ianira leaned down to wrap both arms 
around her frightened children and Marcus held Ianira. Jenna's vision 
blurred as she met the cassondra's gaze. Ianira, at least, had come 
home. The cassondra and her family would be welcomed by people who 
loved them. Jenna had no one left in the world who cared about her. No 
one at all. Except her unborn child. 
 
And Noah Armstrong. 
 
Jenna leaned her elbows against her knees and buried her face in her 
hands and cried. Welcome home, Jenna . . . welcome the hell home. 
 
* * * 
 
A quarter of an hour later, Jenna told her story to a roomful of 
station officials, Interpol officers, and a whole, terrifying retinue 
of I.T.C.H. agents. Jenna would've frozen up, tongue-tied and shaking, 
if Noah hadn't been there, backing her up and presenting their 
evidence. Her father was in jail, sedated and under heavy guard. 
Skeeter Jackson was with Jenna, testifying under oath. Margo Smith and 
her grandfather, Kit Carson, had already given their sworn affadavits. 
When everyone had finished their preliminary testimonies, Skeeter 
handed over the tape from his scout log, recording Gideon Guthrie's 
confession to posing as Sid Kaederman in order to murder her and Noah. 
 
A long silence fell, finally broken by Agent Inga Kirkegard, the senior 
ranking I.T.C.H. officer. "I'll start by acknowledging the courage it 
took for all of you to do what you've done. You've saved countless 
lives, shut down a major international terrorist organization, exposed 
a ruthless conspiracy between mob interests and government officials, 
and kept this station operational. Not to mention ridding the world of 
Jack the Ripper. And you did so with surprisingly little loss of life, 
when the Ripper cults are taken into account." One corner of her mouth 
quirked slightly as she inclined her head toward Kit, acknowledging his 
pivotal role in on-station events Jenna had learned about on the way to 
the station manager's office. 
 

Then Kirkegard's eyes frosted over and she stared coldly at Jenna. 
"However, your methods are something else entirely. We won't even list 
the number of laws and temporal-travel regulations broken in this 
unfortunate situation. I suspect most charges will be dropped, since it 
is quite clear you and Mr. Armstrong acted in self defense, killing the 
contract murderers sent after you. There is also a matter of 
jurisdiction, since the killing was done down time. 
 
"In light of the large number of mitigating circumstances, I will 
recommend a judicial review and waiver of fines, rather than formal 
charges. That goes for all station residents who participated in the 
efforts to extract you and Mr. Armstrong alive. Now, Senator Caddrick 
brought a number of charges against the management of this station," 
Kirkegard said, turning her gaze to Bull Morgan and Ronisha Azzan. 
"After a thorough investigation of those charges, as well as 
countercharges filed by Mr. Carson, this team has officially dismissed 
all criminal counts initially brought by the senator. Those charges 
were clearly part of the overall fraud he perpetrated upon the public, 
including those made personally against you, Mr. Morgan." 
 
A weight visibly lifted from the station manager's broad, squat 
shoulders. Bull Morgan settled back in his massive chair and switched 
his cigar to one corner of his mouth. "Much obliged." 
 
Kirkegard nodded. "Ms. Azzan will be receiving a commendation from the 
Inter-Temporal Court for her superb handling of the multiple crises 
which struck this station in rapid succession, while Mr. Morgan was 
incarcerated. So will Mr. Carson," she glanced gravely at the world-
famous former time scout, "for safeguarding hundreds of lives and 
restoring the station's normal economic operations through his 
ingenious solution to the Ripper difficulty. We've taken into custody 
those members of the Ripper cults your searchers apprehended. They will 
be prosecuted to the full extent of up-time law. As will Senator 
Caddrick and Mr. Kaederman, or rather, Mr. Guthrie." 
 
She then turned her attention to Skeeter Jackson, who sat up straighter 
in his chair and swallowed hard. "It has come to our notice that you 
have led a rather, ah, checkered career, Mr. Jackson. We uncovered 
several old warrants and complaints filed, regarding your activities 
during the past several years." Sweat popped out along his brow. Kit 
Carson sat sharply forward, the brooding look turning his eyes abruptly 
dangerous. Jenna gulped, abruptly thankful she wouldn't be the one on 
the receiving end of Kit Carson's temper. Agent Kirkegard flicked a 
glance up at Kit, then smiled slightly. "Given the pivotal role Mr. 
Jackson played in this case, plus the character testimonials filed by 
this entire group, I believe the Inter-Temporal Court will vote to 
grant a general pardon and amnesty, in lieu of a commendation for 
services rendered." 
 
Skeeter relaxed so abruptly, Jenna thought he'd fainted. 
 
"I would suggest, Miss Caddrick, that you and Mr. Armstrong consider 
remaining on TT-86 for some time. Until the members of Mr. Guthrie's 
organization are rounded up and jailed, this station is without doubt 
the safest place for both of you. I.T.C.H. and Interpol can provide 
additional security to screen persons entering the station from New 
York. You will need to testify at the trial, of course, but I suspect 

you would prefer staying here to being placed in a witness protection 
program." 
 
Jenna shuddered. "No contest." 
 
Noah gave the I.T.C.H. officer a wan smile. "After my experience in 
London, I may just switch careers and offer my services as a temporal 
guide." 
 
Kit chuckled, startling everyone. "I'd say you've stumbled onto a 
lucrative career opportunity, there. Granville Baxter is always happy 
to find guides who know how to disappear in a down-time crowd." 
 
Armstrong grinned. "I hadn't thought about guiding in quite that way." 
 
"Consider it. I'll tell Bax to give you a call. You'll stay at the Neo 
Edo, of course, until permanent quarters can be found in Residential. 
Penthouse suite. And don't even try to argue. My pleasure." 
 
"Thank you," Jenna said quietly. "There isn't much I can do or say to 
show how deeply grateful I am to all of you. You helped save all our 
lives. My father may be a sorry bastard, but I won't forget that kind 
of debt. Ever." 
 
"Neither will I," Noah agreed. "And I suspect Mr. Jackson wants his own 
face back, after nearly taking a bullet meant for me. Twice, in fact." 
 
Skeeter grinned. "Now you mention it . . ." 
 
The meeting broke up with Bull Morgan handing around congratulatory 
drinks, then they crowded into the elevator. Noah slipped an arm around 
Jenna's shoulder where they stood jammed together in one corner. She 
leaned her head against the detective's shoulder, grateful for the warm 
gesture and so weary she could have fallen asleep on her feet. Kit 
Carson was saying, "Malcolm is still in surgery, but the orderlies left 
word. He's doing just fine." 
 
"Thank God," Margo breathed out. 
 
"By the way, if you're interested," Kit chuckled, "I've got another 
little job lined up for you, in a few weeks. A real field test of your 
scouting skills." 
 
"The Ripper Watch wasn't?" she shot back, causing even Jenna to smile. 
 
"Well," Kit shrugged, "we had a major new gate open up while you were 
chasing Jack the Ripper." 
 
"We did?" she asked breathlessly. "Are you really going to let me scout 
it?" 
 
He shook his head. "Sorry, imp, but Ripley Sneed already did." His 
apology visibly deflated her hopes. "But it's a real dilly. Ought to 
give you a good workout for your final field test." 
 
Margo caught her breath sharply in the crowded elevator. "Final field 
test?" It came out tiny with breathless hope. "As in, final exam before 

I really start scouting?" 
 
He chuckled. "If you pass. And no solo work for a good long while, yet, 
even if you do pass the field test. Malcolm goes with you or you don't 
go at all. I'll conduct the field test and put you through your paces, 
myself. And this is one gate you won't have to worry about shepherding 
tourists through. Bax has already agreed. Scholars and scouts only, for 
the next couple of months." 
 
"Just where does this thing lead?" Margo asked warily. 
 
"Chicago. 1871." 
 
Intrigued despite herself, Jenna sifted back through her skimpy 
knowledge of American history, randomly absorbed during her academic 
career. What was so special about Chicago in 1871? 
 
Margo's eyes had narrowed, however. "What month in 1871?" 
 
Kit grinned. "October." 
 
Margo's eyes shot wide. "Really? Omigosh! How soon do we leave?" 
 
"Four weeks. You'd better hit the books hard, imp." 
 
"You're on!" 
 
Jenna couldn't stand the suspense. "Where are you going? What's so 
special about Chicago in October of 1871?" 
 
Kit chuckled. "Well, Miss Caddrick, my granddaughter and I intend to 
discover whether Mrs. O'Leary's cow did or did not start the Great 
Chicago Fire." 
 
Jenna's eyes widened. Skeeter grinned. Noah started to laugh. 
 
"I have a feeling," Jenna muttered, even as her lips twitched, "that 
living on Time Terminal Eighty-Six is going to prove very interesting . 
. ." 
 
She fully intended to enjoy every minute. 
 
 
 
 
 
Epilogue 
 
At four o'clock in the morning on November 9, 1888, the Ripper Watch 
Team's video cameras captured James Maybrick committing the brutal 
slaughter of Mary Kelly in the cramped little room at number thirteen, 
Miller's Court. At eight o'clock that morning, those same cameras 
captured the arrival of a midwife who was known to perform illegal 
abortions for girls in trouble. The woman let herself in with a key 
Kelly had taken from Joseph Barnett after he and Kelly had quarelled 
and separated. 
 

The horrified midwife, who slipped in the blood and gore, badly 
staining her clothing, changed into one of Mary Kelly's dresses and 
shawls and burned her own in the hearth before fleeing the room, too 
deeply shocked and terrified to go to the police or even scream for 
help. Doing so would have required explanations for her arrival in the 
first place, which would have led to a stiff prison sentence. Mrs. 
Caroline Maxwell, a neighbor in Miller's Court, glimpsed the midwife 
leaving Kelly's room and mistook her for Mary Kelly, herself, thus 
confusing police with sober testimony that Mary Kelly had been seen 
alive at 8:00 A.M. 
 
London police never solved the Ripper mystery and never made a major 
arrest, although many suspects were named. The case destroyed Sir 
Charles Warren's career as police commissioner and sparked a massive 
social reform movement to alleviate the appalling conditions of poverty 
in which the Ripper's victims -- and more than a million other souls -- 
lived. The following spring, James Maybrick died of acute arsenic 
poisoning. His complicity in the Ripper case did not come to light for 
another century. His innocent American widow, her unfortunate affair 
with Mr. Brierly having come to public notice, was convicted of murder 
-- largely because of her adultery -- in a trial that shocked all of 
England and sparked a decade and a half of protests from the American 
State Department. Florie Maybrick served fifteen years in prison, then 
returned to the United States and lived in quiet anonymity under an 
assumed name, never realizing she had lived in the house that Jack 
built. 
 
 
 
 
 

