CHAPTER ONE
   Skeeter Jackson was a scoundrel.
   A dyed-in-the-wool, thieving scoundrel.
   He knew it, of course; knew it as well as anyone else in La-La Land (at
least, anyone who'd been on Shangri-La Station longer than a week). Not only
did he know it, he was proud of it, the way other men were proud of their
batting averages, their cholesterol counts, their stock portfolios.
   Skeeter was very careful to rub shoulders with men of the latter type, who
not only boasted of large 'folios, but carried enormous amounts of cash in
money belts declared through ATF at Primary (so they wouldn't be charged taxes
for any money they'd brought with them). Skeeter rarely failed to get hold of
at least some of that money, if not the whole money belt. Ah, the crisp, cool
feel of cash in hand ...
   But he wasn't just a thief. Oh, no. Skeeter was a master con artist as
well, and those skills (ruthless cunning, serpentine guile, the ability to
radiate innocent enthusiasm) were among the best.
   So-in honor of Yesukai the Valiant and for the very practical reason of
survival-he worked hard at being the very best scoundrel he could make
himself. Once he'd arrived (freshly scrubbed to get the New York filth off his
hide and out of his soul), it hadn't taken Skeeter long to create a life
uniquely his own on a time terminal unique among time terminals.
   There was only one La-La Land. He loved it fiercely.
   On this particular fine morning, Skeeter rose, stretched, and grinned. The
game's afoot, Watson! (He'd heard that in a movie someplace and liked the
sound of it.) The glow coming in beneath his door told him Residence lights
were on, not in their dimmed "night" mode. That was really the only way to
tell, unless you had an alarm clock with a Pm indicator light; Skeeter's had
burned out long ago, the last time he'd heaved it at the wall for rudely
awakening him with yet another hangover to regret.
   Showered and shaved with minimal time wasted, he dressed for the day-and
the next two glorious weeks. After some of the things he'd worn, the costume
he now donned felt almost natural. Whistling absently to himself, Skeeter-
working hard as ever on his chosen vocation-contemplated his brilliant new
scheme. And the one gaping hole in it.
   Surprisingly, the station's excellent library hadn't been much help. To
minimize information leakage, Skeeter had searched the computers, gleaning
bits of valuable information here and there (and managing to tot up more than
a week's worth of earnings against the computer-access account belonging to a
scout currently out in the field). That little scam was actually worth the
otherwise wasted effort, as the scout had once maligned Skeeter in public-
wrongly, as it happened; Skeeter hadn't even been involved. Skeeter, therefore
felt free to indulge his natural urge to cause the scout the greatest amount
of distress possible in the shortest amount of time, all without leaving
behind any proof the s.o.b. could use to prosecute.
   Irritatingly elusive, the one piece of the puzzle Skeeter needed most just
wasn't in any pilfered file.
   The only place to find what he needed was inside someone's head. Brian
Hendrickson, the librarian, would know, of course-he knew, just as sharply as
though he'd learned it mere moments previously, everything he'd ever seen,
read, or heard (and probably more-lots more), but Brian's dislike of Skeeter
was La-La Land Legend. After ruling out Brian, who was left?
   Just needing one more piece of expert advice, Skeeter was running out of

time to find it-and had never had many friends to find it from. Well, hell,
folks with his chosen vocation wouldn't have many friends, now would they?
Trust just didn't come with the territory. Having accepted that years ago,
Skeeter continued to mentally rummage through the list of people he might be
able to ask, tossed out all scouts, most guides (Agnes Fairchild was willing-
mmm, was she ever!-she just didn't know). He hesitated -- again -- on Goldie
Morran. She'd be motivated, all right, and she'd probably know, too; but he
wasn't about to share potentially enormous profits by confiding his plan to
any of the other scoundrels who made La-La Land their permanent home. To make
the score himself, Goldie-the-heartless-Morran, TT-86s leading authority on
rare coins and gems, was out.
   What he needed was someone who'd been there, firsthand.
   Other than a handful of rich visitors who'd been through the Porta Romae
multiple times-most of whom Skeeter had "liberated" from the burden of their
cash and were therefore to be avoided at any cost, Skeeter finally came up
with a single, qualified man in the whole of TT-86: Marcus.
   A startled grin passed across his face. As it happened, Marcus was probably
better suited to give Skeeter advice on this particular scheme than all the
so-called experts in La-La Land. Should've just gone to Marcus in the first
place and saved myself a heap of time and trouble. But he'd been embarrassed,
feeling a pang of inexplicable guilt at the thought of conning his best (and
practically his only) friend into helping him. Of course, he'd also have
missed racking up all those on line hours against that asshole of a scout ....
   By coincidence rare and somewhat miraculous, Marcus actually liked Skeeter.
Why, Skeeter had not a single clue. Downtimers often came an with the
strangest ideas, many of them quaintly useless, others so eccentric they
passed beyond the understandable into the misty, magical realm of things like
what made the gates work and what did women really want, anyway? He'd given up
on both, long ago, avoiding stepping through any more gates than absolutely
necessary and taking his flings where he could find them, not very
discontented when he couldn't. He didn't feel proud about his ignorance;
business, however, was business.
   So Skeeter finished the last touches on his "business uniform" then headed
for Commons to hunt down Marcus, then meet Agnes and her group for the tour.
   Skeeter liked the open airy feeling of Commons. Not only did it compensate
(a little) for the loss of vast, open plains of his teenage years, but more
importantly, it always smelled to Skeeter like money. Vast sums of cold, hard
currency changed hands here. It wasn't too much to ask of the gods, was it,
that some small trickle of that vast amount fall blissfully into his deserving
hands?
   Theology aside (and only the many gods knew what Skeeter's was: he
certainly didn't), Commons was just plain fun. Particularly at this time of
year. As he strode out into the body-jammed floor, picking his way through
multiple festivals and reenactments in progress, Skeeter had to shake his head
and grin.
   What a madhouse! There were, of course, the usual tourist gates with their
waiting areas, ramps, and platforms; ticket booths for those who'd waited to
arrive before deciding on a destination-fine, if you could afford the hotel
bills waiting for your tour to leave; timecard automated dispensers (hooked
into the station's database and set up to match retinal scans and replace the
original's temporal-travel data for those idiots who'd lost theirs); and of
course, timecard readers (at the entrance and exit of every gate, to scan
where and when you'd already been in a desperate effort to Prevent some fool
tourist from shadowing him- or herself).
   There were also shops and restaurants, on multiple levels, many with
entrances by balcony only; bizarre stairways to nowhere; balconies and girder-
supported platforms suspended three and four stories above the floor;

barricaded and fenced-off areas marking either unevenly recurring, unstable
gates or stable but unexplored gates; and-the piece de resistance, multiple
hundreds of costumed, laughing, drinking, quarreling, fighting, kissing,
hugging, gullible tourists. With fat wallets just waiting for someone's light-
fingered touch ...
   Just now Commons looked exactly like the North Pole might if Santa's elves
had gone quietly mad on LSD in the process of decorating the workshop. He
breathed in the smell of celebration and money and grinned up at the whole,
gaudy, breathtaking length of Commons, loving every bit of the craziness that
always overtook Shangri-La Station this time of year.
   "And what," a woman's voice said practically at his elbow, "are you
grinning about, Skeeter Jackson?"
   He looked up-then down-and found Ann Vinh Mulhaney, TT-86s resident
projectile weapons instructor. Ann was so petite she was smaller than her
teenaged son. Barely came up to Skeeter's biceps. She was, however, the second
or third deadliest person on station, depending on whether Kit Carson had
showed up at the range for some shooting practice most recently, or whether
Ann had (since Kit's last target practice) hit the gym mats for a series of
sweat-building katas and bone-pounding sparring sessions against Sven Bailey,
the station's widely known Number One deadliest individual.
   Skeeter felt ridiculous, towering over a woman who terrified him down to
his cockles. Uh-oh. What do I do now?
   Oddly, Ann was smiling up at him, like that famous painting of the Mona
Lisa. Like good old Mona, Ann revealed absolutely nothing in dark, knowing
eyes. The strange little smile on her lips did not touch them. For a moment,
he was actually cold-sweating scared of her, despite at least a foot and
several inches height advantage and a good chance at outsprinting her, even in
this crowd.
   Then something altered subtly and he realized the smile had just turned
friendly. What does she want? Does she want to hire me to steal something,
maybe, or bring her back a special souvenir as a surprise for somebody?
Skeeter not only couldn't understand how Ann's husband could actually live
with that deadly little viper, he honestly could find no sane reason why Ann
would even talk to him.
   She looked him up and down, then met his gaze. "Heard you were going
through the Porta Romae."
   Uh-oh. He answered very carefully, "Uh, yeah, that was sorta the plan. Me
and Agnes, you know."
   She just nodded, as though confirming the cinching of a wager with someone
about what Skeeter Jackson was up to now.
   He relaxed. Settling a wager was all right. Ann was certainly entitled to
ask him questions if the answers won her a tidy sum in some bet.
   But she was still smiling, friendly-like. The Christmas season, maybe?
Manifesting itself in a determined "do unto others" even if it killed her?
   She took the initiative once again. "So, what were you grinning about?
Misadventures, schemes, and scams downtime?"
   "Ann! You wound me!"
   She just laughed, eyes and the twist of her mouth clearly skeptical.
   "Honestly, I was just taking in all of... that."
   She followed his gaze and her eyes softened. "It is; um, overwhelming,
isn't it? Even crazier than last year's contest."
   Skeeter grinned again. "At least I don't see any three-story, arm-waving
Santas to catch fire this year."
   She shared his laugh. "No, thank goodness! I thought Bull Morgan was going
to fall into a fit of apoplexy when he saw the smoke and flames. Good thing
Pest Control's good at putting out fires, too."
   "Yeah. They were good, that day. You know," Skeeter said thoughtfully, "I

think the holiday season is my very favorite time of year on station. All of
that," he waved a hand toward the insanity surrounding them, "cheers a guy up.
You know?"
   Ann studied him minutely. "So, the holidays cheer you up, do they? Rachel's
hands are always full this time of year with half-suicidal people who don't do
holidays well. But with you, well, I think I can guess why."
   "Yeah?" Skeeter asked with interest, wondering how transparent he'd become
since leaving Yesukai's camp.
   "Let's see ... I'm betting-figuratively," she added hastily, "that the
holiday season is usually the closest you ever come to getting rich. True or
false?"
   He had to laugh, even while wincing. "Ann, with triple the ordinary number
of tourists jamming Commons, how can a guy lose? 'Course I'm happiest this
time of year!" He didn't add that the pain of five missed Christmases-holidays
that had nothing to do with the expensive bribes his parents piled under the
tree each year-were also responsible for his determined merrymaking as he
caught up on all the childhood holidays he'd been alone.
   Ann just sighed. "Skeeter, you are an irrepressible scoundrel." She caught
his gaze, then, and shocked him speechless. "But you know, I think if you ever
got caught and kicked off TT-86, La-La Land would be a lot less fun. You're
... intriguing, Skeeter Jackson. Like a puzzle; where all the pieces don't
quite fit right." With an odd little smile, she said, "Maybe I ought to ask
Nally Mundy about it." Skeeter groaned inwardly. Not too many people knew.
Skeeter's had been a fleeting, fifteen-second sound-byte's worth of fame,
timmed between a triple homicide and a devastating hotel fire on the evening
news, years ago. But Nally Mundy knew. Skeeter hadn't quite forgiven him for
discovering that juicy little tidbit to hound him about.
   Before he could lodge a protest, though, Ann said, "Well, anyway, good
hunting-whatever you're up to. See you 'round in a couple of weeks."
   She left before he could open his mouth.
   And Ann Vinh Mulhaney wishes one good hunting, no less. La-La Land felt
like it had turned upside down.
   Skeeter glanced up, more than halfway expecting to see crowds of people
thronging the Commons' floor, rather than the distant, girdered ceiling.
   "Huh," was his only comment.
   Skeeter glanced at the gate-departure board suspended from the ceiling and
whistled silently. He would have to stretch his legs if he wanted to catch
Marcus before he went off shift at the Down Time Bar & Grill. But he still had
several minutes' leeway until he had to catch up with Agnes for the Porta
Romae Gate departure.
   He picked his way cautiously through a horde of "medieval" damsels, knights
in handcrafted chain-mail armor, and throngs of pages and squires, even
"authentic" vendors and friars, all headed for Tournament down the newest of
TT-86s active gates, the "Anachronism" as 'eighty-sixers called it after the
name of the organization that used it most. It led, of all places, to North
America prior to the coming of the paleo-Indian population that would
eventually cross the Bering Strait and settle. two empty continents. Several
times a year, hordes--masses-of medieval loons flooded IT-86, every one of
them just dying to step through the Anachronism to play at war, medieval
style.
   Skeeter shook his head. From the realities of war as he'd seen it, Skeeter
couldn't find much in wholesale slaughter that should be turned into any kind
of game. For, it smacked a little of heresy (whatever that might be) to mock
the brave dead they pretended to emulate. Clearly, they got something from it
they badly needed, or they wouldn't keep doing it. Especially with the cost so
high.
   Not only did they have every other tourist's normal expenses, they had to

get permission to take their own horses and hunting falcons along, with stiff
penalties if any of the uptime animals got loose and started a breeding colony
millennia before they should have existed; they had to haul fodder and cut-up
mice for their animals; then had to find a place to keep said animals until
Anachronism's departure date and then, of course, they all had to get through
the gate in time, balking horses, screeching falcons, their own provisions as
well as the animals', in short, everything required for a one-month, downtime
Tournament and the honor to have fought in or attended one.
   The single thing he understood about them was their detestation of nosey
newsies. It was rumored that no newsie had ever gotten through with them. Or
if they had, they hadn't survived to tell the tale. North America was a bad
place, that long ago. Sabre cats, dire wolves-you name it. Meaning, of course,
that Skeeter's intention of stepping through the Anachronism was right up
there with his intention of walking up to Mike Benson and holding out his
hands to be cuffed.
   Skeeter watched with admiration as hawkers of "medieval wares" counted up
their sales and tourists pushed to hand over cash for "MAGIC POTIONS!";
crystals mounted as necklaces or stand-alone little trinkets, attuned to the
buyer's aura by placing it under the pillow for seven consecutive full moons;
charms for wealth, health, harmony, courage, and beauty; exquisite,
illuminated calligraphy with even more exquisite prices; plus relatively cheap
jewelry that commanded top-rate prices because it was "handmade in the most
ancient methods known to our medieval ancestors."
   In Skeeter's educated estimation, they were as much con artists as Skeeter
himself. They even kept back the good stuff (he knew; he'd pilfered a coveted
item or two for his quarters, to liven it up a bit), keeping it hidden to sell
at the Tournament, bringing along a supply of junk to sell to gullible
tourists, to help defray expenses a little. They were con men and women, all
might. They just had a different angle on the art than Skeeter did.
   Ianira Cassondra-who had occasionally made Skeeter's hair stand on end,
just with a simple word or two-called them fakes, charlatans, and even worse,
because they had neither the training to dabble in such things, nor the proper
attitude for it.
   "They will inadvertently hurt people one day. Just wait. Station management
will do nothing about them now; but when people start falling down sick with
all manner of strange illnesses, their trade will be banished." She'd sighed,
dark eyes unhappy. "And Management will most likely outlaw my booth as well,
as I doubt Bull Morgan is capable of telling the difference."
   Skeeter had wanted to contradict her, but not only was he half scared she
was reading the future, in the back of his own mind, Skeeter knew perfectly
well that Bull Morgan wouldn't know the difference, and wouldn't care, either,
just so long as the crummy tourists were protected.
   Skeeter thought dark, vile thoughts at bureaus and the bureauc-rats that
ran 'em, and skittered through long lines in Edo Castletown waiting for the
official opening of the new Shinto Shrine that was nearly finished. He dashed
past Kit Carson's world-famous hotel, past extraordinary gardens with deep
streams where colored fish kept to the shadows, trying to avoid becoming a
sushi lunch for some Ichthyornis or a Sordes fritcheus diving down from the
ceiling.
   Skeeter smiled reminiscently, recalling the moment Sue Fritchey had figured
out what their crow-sized "pterosaurs" really were: "My God! They're a new
species of Sordes! They shouldn't be living at the same time as a sternbergi
at all. My God, but this is... it's revolutionary! A warm-blooded, fur-covered
Sordes -and a fish eater, not an insectivore, but it's definitely a Sordes,
there's no mistaking that!-and it survived right up until the end of the
Cretaceous. All along, we've thought Sordes died out right at the end of the
Jurassic! What a paper this is going to be!" she'd laughed, eyes shining.

"Every paleontological journal uptime is going to be begging me for the right
to publish it!"
   For Sue Fritchey, that was heaven.
   Grapevine or not, Skeeter still hadn't heard what Sue had decided about the
pair of eagle like, toothed birds that had popped through an unstable gate
months ago. But whatever they were, they were going to make Sue Fritchey
famous. He wished her luck.
   Reaching the edge of Urbs Romae, with its lavishly decorated Saturnalia
poles and cut evergreen trees, also boasting paid actors to reenact the one
day a year Roman slaves could give orders to their masters, orders that had to
be obeyed and often had the watching audience laughing so hard, both men and
women had to wipe their eyes dry just to see the show. Skeeter slowed to a
walk, whistling cheerfully to himself, winking at pretty girls he passed,
girls who sometimes blushed, yet always followed his departure with their
eyes.
   Skeeter ducked beneath the sea of paper umbrellas tourists and residents
alike carried -- protection against droppings from aforementioned wild
prehistoric birds and pterosaurs-then he finally hunted out the Down Time Bar
& Grill where Marcus worked as a bartender.
   The Down Time, tucked away in the "Urbs Romae" section of Commons, was a
favorite haunt of 'eighty-sixers. Among other things, it was a great place to
pick up gossip.
   And in Skeeter's line of work, gossip usually meant profit.
   So he ducked under the girders which half hid the bar's entryway (another
reason 'eighty-sixers liked it: the place didn't advertise) and crossed the
threshold, already savoring the anticipation of setting his newest scheme into
delightful motion.
   The first person to see him, however, was none other than Kenneth "Kit"
Carson, retired time scout. Uh-oh ... Skeeter gulped and tried on a bright
grin, the one he'd learned to use as a weapon of self-defense long, long ago.
He'd been avoiding Kit's company for weeks, ever since he'd tried to sweet-
talk that penniless, gorgeous little redhead, Margo, into bed with him by
pretending to be a scout-only to learn to his terror that she was Kit's only
grandkid. Kit's underage only grandkid.
   What Kit had casually threatened to do to him ...
   "Hi, Skeeter. How they hangin'?" Kit long and lean and tough as a grizzled
bear-grinned up at him and took a slow sip from a cold glass of Kirin.
   "Uh ... fine, Kit. Just fine ... How's, uh ... Margo?" He wanted to bite
off his tongue and swallow it. Idiot!
   "Oh, fine. She'll be visiting soon. School vacation."
   As one very small predator in a very large pond, Skeeter knew a bigger
predator's smile when he saw one. Skeeter took a vow to make himself scarce
from anyplace Margo decided to visit. "Good, that's real good, Kit. I, uh, was
just looking for Marcus."
   Kit chuckled. "He's in back, I think."
   Skeeter shot past Kit's table, heading for the billiard and pool tables in
the back room. Very carefully, he did not reach up and wipe sweat from his
damp brow. Kit Carson scared him. And not just because the retired time scout
had survived more, even, than Skeeter had. Mostly, Skeeter Jackson had a
healthy fear of the older male relatives of any girl he'd tried to get into
bed. Most of them took an extremely dim view of his chosen vocation.
   Going one on one with a man who could break major bones as casually as
Skeeter could lift a wallet was not Skeeter's idea of fun.
   Fortunately, Marcus was exactly where Kit had said he'd be: serving drinks
in the back room. Skeeter brightened at once. Running into Kit like that--on
the eve of launching his new adventure-was not a bad omen, he told himself.
Marcus would be Skeeter's good luck charm for this venture. The old, familiar

itch between his shoulderblades was never wrong. Skeeter grinned happily.
   Look out, suckers. Ready or not, here I come!
   Marcus had just set drinks down on a newly occupied table in the back pool
room when Skeeter Jackson made a grand entrance and grinned in his direction.
Marcus smiled, very nearly laughing aloud. Skeeter was dressed for business,
which in this case meant a short, flamboyant tunic, more of a Greek Ionian-
style chiton, really, with knobby knees showing naked below the hem and legs
that were far more heavily muscled and powerful-looking than most people would
have guessed from the whipcord-lean rest of him. Judging by his costume,
Skeeter must be working the crowds that always gathered to watch the famous
Porta Romae cycle again.
   The god Janus-Roman deity of doorways and portals, had for some unknown
reason decreed that the Porta Romae would cycle open yet again in less than an
hour, moving the gate inexorably along to the next opening two weeks hence.
Marcus hid a shiver, remembering his single trip through that portal to arrive
here. He had never really believed in Rome's strange gods until his final
master had dragged him, terrified and fainting, through the Porta Romae into
La-La Land. Now he knew better and so never failed to give the powerful Roman
gods their proper libations.
   "Marcus! Just the person I'm dying to see." Skeeter's grin was infectious
and genuine. Very little else about Skeeter Jackson was, which made him one of
the loneliest people Marcus knew.
   "Hello, Skeeter. You wish your favorite beer?" Marcus was so uncomfortable
with Skeeter's lifestyle he tried hard not to mention it, in the probably vain
hope he could save the young a and downtimer from the life he led. Marcus was,
in fact, doubtless the only one in the whole of The Found Ones who offered the
odd young man his friendship. To be raised in two times, then set adrift in a
third ...
   Skeeter Jackson was greatly in need of a friend.
   So
   Marcus, busy as he was with demanding work at the bar and an equally
demanding-but more fun job as the father of two little girls, added a third
Herculean task to his life: the eventual conversion of Skeeter Jackson from
Scoundrel to Honest Man, deserving of the title Found One.
   Skeeter's grin widened. "Sure. I won't turn down a beer, you know that."
Both men laughed. "But mostly, I wanted to talk to you. Got a minute?"
   Marcus glanced out at the other tables. Most were empty. Nearly everyone
was out on the Commons, watching the fun as La-La Land's Roman gate prepare to
open into the past. Between now and then, a whole series of antics would
unfold as tourists and Time Tours guides and baggage handlers tried to get
through the portal with all their baggage, money purses, and assorted children
still intact, waiting impatiently while much of the previous tour exited the
Porta Romae in staggering, white-faced clumps. The rest coming back through
were fine, swaggering down the ramp like aloof, supremely self-confident Roman
Senators.
   Marcus shook off his mental astonishment that every tour came back like
this, some pleased as kittens with a bowl of cream and others ... Well, the
drawings circulating amongst The Found Ones said it all, didn't they?
   Marcus smiled at Skeeter, who waited hopefully.
   "Of course. Let me get the beer for you, please."
   "Get one for yourself, too. I'm buying."
   Oh-oh. Marcus hid a grin. Skeeter wanted something. He was a thoroughgoing
scoundrel, was Skeeter Jackson, but Marcus understood why, something most
'eighty-sixers didn't. Not even most Found Ones knew. Marcus hadn't even told
Ianira, although with his beautiful Ianira, what she did or did not know was
always a complete mystery to Marcus.
   Skeeter had been so drunk that night, he probably didn't remember

everything he'd said. But Marcus did. So he kept trying, hope against hope, to
befriend Skeeter Jackson, asking the gods who had watched over his own life to
help his friend finally figure it all out-and do something about it besides
swindle, cheat, and steal his way toward the grave.
   Marcus set down Skeeter's beer first, then took a chair opposite and seated
himself, waiting as was appropriate for Skeeter to drink first. Skeeter had
always been a free man, born into a good family, raised by another good man.
Even with the eventual understanding Marcus had reached that no one here could
call him slave, Skeeter was still Marcus' social superior in every way Marcus
had ever heard of.
   "Oh, I'm gonna miss that," Skeeter said after a long pull. "Now ... You
were born in Rome, right?"
   "Well, no, actually, I was not."
   Skeeter blinked. "You weren't?"
   "No. I was born in Gallia Comata, in a very small village called Cautes."
He couldn't help the pride that touched his voice. A thousand years and his
little village was still there--changed a great deal, but still standing
beneath the high, sharp mountains of his childhood, beautiful as ever under
their mantles of snow and cloud. The same wild, rushing stream still cut
through the heart of the village, just as it always had, clear and cold enough
to shock a grunt from even the stoutest man.
   "Cautes? Where the hell is that?"
   Marcus grinned. "I once asked Brian Hendrickson, in the library, about my
village. It is still there, but the name is different, just a little. Gallia
Comata no longer exists at all. My village, called now Cauterets, is in the
place you would know as France, but it is still famous for the sacred warm
springs that cure women who cannot bear children."
   Skeeter started to grin, then didn't. "You're serious."
   "Yes, why would I not be? I cannot help that I was born in conquered
territory and..."
   "About the women, I mean?" Skeeter's expression was priceless: another
scheme was taking shape visibly on his unguarded face.
   Marcus laughed. "I do not know, Skeeter. I was only a child when I was
taken away, so I cannot be sure, but all the villagers said it. Roman women
came there from all southern Gaul to bathe in the waters, so they could get a
child."
   Skeeter chuckled in turn, his thoughts still visible in his eyes. "They'd
have done better to sleep with their husbands-or somebody's husband, anyway-a
little more often."
   "Or drink less lead," Marcus added, proud of what he had learned in his few
years in La-La Land. Rachel Eisenstein, the head physician in the time
terminal, had told Marcus the levels of dissolved lead in his own blood were
dropping, which was the only reason he'd been able to father little Artemisia
and Gelasia.
   "Touche." Skeeter lifted his glass and drained half the brew. "Aren't you
going to drink any of that beer?"
   Marcus carefully poured a libation to the gods-just a few drops spilled
onto the wooden floor-then tasted his own beer. He'd be scrubbing the floor
later, anyway, so a little worship wouldn't anger his employers. They groused
more about the free drinks Marcus sometimes gave away to those in need than
they did about a little spillage.
   "Okay," Skeeter took another swig, "you were born in France, but lived in
Rome most of your life, right?"
   "Yes. I was sold as a young boy to a slave trader coming down the Roman
highway from Aqua Tarbellicae." Marcus shivered. "The first thing he did was
change my name. He said mine was not pronounceable."
   Skeeter blinked. "Marcus isn't your real name?"

   He tried to smile. "It has been for more than eighteen years. And you
probably could not pronounce my own name any more than the Romans could. I
have grown accustomed to `Marcus' and so I am content to keep it.
   Skeeter was staring at him as though he couldn't believe what he was
hearing. Marcus shrugged. "I have tried to explain, Skeeter. But no one here
understands."
   "No, I, uh, guess not." He cleared his throat, the expression in his eyes
making Marcus wonder what Skeeter remembered. "Anyway, you were saying about
Rome..."
   "Yes. I was taken to the city of Narbo on the coast of the Mediterranean
Sea, where I was put on a slave ship and sent to Rome, where I was kept in an
iron cage until the time came for me to be auctioned on the block." Marcus
gulped beer hastily to hide the tremors in his hands. Those particular
memories were among the ones that woke him up nights, shaking inside a layer
of cold sweat. "I lived in Rome from the time I was eight years of age."
   Skeeter leaned forward. "Great. See, Agnes got me a free ticket through
Porta Romae, she's guiding on the tour this trip, and it's a pretty quiet two
weeks, only one day of public games, on the very last day. That's why she
could get me through as a guest."
   Marcus shook his head. Poor Agnes. She hadn't been in La-La Land very long.
"You are shameful, Skeeter. Agnes is a nice girl."
   "Sure is. I never could afford a ticket to Rome on my own. So anyway, I got
this great idea, see, but I've never been there, so I thought maybe you could
help me out?"
   Marcus fiddled with his beer glass. "What is the idea?" He was always
cautious not to commit himself to any of Skeeter's perpetually shady schemes.
   "It's perfect," Skeeter enthused, eyes sparkling with glee. "I wanted to do
a little betting-"
   "Betting? On the games?" If that were all Skeeter wanted, he saw no harm in
it. It was strictly illegal, of course; but Marcus didn't know of a single
tourist who hadn't tried it. And it was so much less worse than what it might
have been, all Marcus felt was a kind of giddy relief. Maybe Agnes was a good
influence on Skeeter? "Very well, what did you want to ask me?"
   Skeeter's grin revealed relief and triumph. "Where do I go? To make the
bets, I mean?"
   Marcus chuckled. "The Circus Maximus, of course."
   "Yeah, but where? The damned thing's a mile long!"
   Ahh...
   "Well ... The best place is on the Aventine side of the Circus, near the
spot where the gladiators enter the arena. They come in through the starting
boxes, of course, at the square end of the Circus, closest to the Tiber River.
But the public entrances closest to there are very popular betting sites, as
well. There are the professional gambling stalls, of course,"
   Marcus mused, "but I would stay away from them. Most will find an excuse to
cheat a colonial blind. Of course, much of the betting takes place in the
stands themselves, while the bouts are underway." He wondered what Skeeter's
reaction would be to watching men butcher one another. Many tourists came back
physically ill.
   "That's great, Marcus! Thanks! If I win, l'll cut you in on the deal."
   If Skeeter Jackson remembered that generous offer two weeks from now-and
followed through on it Marcus mused, he would have done more for Marcus than
he could possibly know. Ever-present worry over finances swiftly captured
Marcus' attention and swept his thoughts far away from the table where his
friend was drinking his beer. Ianira, despite his protests and pride, had
insisted on contributing to his "debt-free-fund a sizeable chunk of her
earnings made by giving historians whatever information she could for the
"primary research source" fees. Ianira also sold genuine ancient Greek recipes

for all manner of cheesecakes, though she had paid for learning to make every
single variety under the whip (and more) in her first husband's house
downtime.
   The cheesecakes' delightful flavors and characteristics, Marcus now knew,
had once been discussed in the Athenian Agora as seriously as any philosophy
by the most important men in Athens. Their recipes had been lost for
centuries, but Ianira, hurting still from her husband's brutality, knew them
all by heart, had memorized them in a terror to survive. Now, with amusement
healing old scars, she sold the recipes one by one to Arley Eisenstein, who
gave her a percentage of his profits--substantial, given the cheesecakes'
reborn stunning success.
   Ianira made money faster than Marcus had ever believed possible,
particularly after she became the proud owner of a free-standing stall that
catered to the strange and increasingly bizarre "acolytes" who sought her out
as though on pilgrimage. Some of them had paid the price of the Primary Gate
just to look at her, praying she would say something to them. Some even gave
her money, as though she were the most revered being in the world and their
money was the only offering they could give.
   Ah, money. When Marcus had tried to refuse her money, out of pride and
dignity, she'd caught his hand and forced him to look at her. "You are my
chosen, my beloved!" Dark eyes held his, burdened with so much he wanted to
erase forever. Neither money nor Marcus could erase the past: brutal marriage
or, worst of all, Ianira's terrifying, heavy, close-held secret knowledge of
the rituals (both public and carefully hidden private), of the many-breasted
Artemis of Ephesus, where she had grown to maidenhood in the world-famous
temple. At that moment, those bottomless eyes flashed with what must have been
the same look that had prompted the rash Trojan prince Paris to risk
everything to flee to the windy plains of Troy with the much-sought-after
Helen as his mistress.
   Even in memory, Marcus' head spun hopelessly under the onslaught of that
look. He had, of course, melted utterly at the winning smile that followed,
not to mention the touch of her hands. "I am desperately selfish of you,
Marcus. I do not understand this `honor' of yours, so stubborn to pay off an
illegal debt; but if this money will help fulfill that demand inside you, then
I will be sure never to allow you to deny my help." In a rare gesture of
emotion, she clutched him tight as if afraid to let go. Her uptilted face
revealed a sea of tears bravely held brimming on her eyelashes. Still holding
him, she said in roughened voice, "Please. I know you are proud and I love you
for it. But if I lose you..."
   He had crushed her close, trying with everything in him to promise that he
was hers forever, not just the way things were now, with no formal words
spoken, but the correct way, the way of formally taking her as his public wife
just as soon as he could rid himself of hated debt to the man who had brought
him here and set him the task of learning-and keeping secret records of-which
men traveled the gates to Rome and Athens and what they brought back.
   He didn't understand his one-time master's orders, any more than he
understood how beautiful, highborn Ianira could love a man who had been a
slave nearly all his life. So he simply kept the records, considering it a
challenging puzzle to be solved, a clue to what made his former master's brain
work while slowly gathering the money to pay his slave debt. He took Ianira's
money, little as he wanted to, because he was desperate to get out from under
such debt, to gain at least a little of the status that would put him on
something approaching her own level.
   Marcus' bittersweet thoughts were rudely interrupted by the unmistakable
voice of Goldie Morran. Instant irritation made his skin shudder, like a
horse's when big, biting flies descended to slake their thirst. Marcus
sometimes wondered, looking at Goldie Morran, if she had been called Goldie

for the shining, golden hair Roman women had once so coveted they'd had wigs
made from the tresses of their slaves (impossible to tell now-Goldie's hair
was, at present, a peculiar shade of Imperial Purple, leaving little clue as
to its original color), or because she was an avaricious old gargoyle who
wanted nothing in the world more than cold, hard cash-preferably in the form
of gold-coinage, dust, nugget, whatever she could get her claws on.
   Harpy-eyes glanced his way. "Marcus, get me a beer."
   Then she sank down into one of the chairs beside Skeeter, inviting herself
into their private conversation. As Marcus poured beer from the tap, seething
and manfully holding it back-Goldie Morran was a regular customer-she glanced
at Skeeter. "Hear you're going downtime. Isn't that new, even for you?"
   Marcus set the beer in front of Goldie. She took a long, slow pull while
waiting for Skeeter's usual outburst.
   Skeeter surprised them both.
   "Yes, I'm going to Rome. I'm taking a slow two-week vacation so I can get
better acquainted with Agnes Fairchild. She and I have become rather close
over the last week or so and, besides, she has the right to take a guest with
her on slow tours." He spread his hands. "Who am I to turn down a free trip to
ancient Rome?"
   "And what," Goldie glanced up coyly, the neon lights in the bar doing
strange things to her sallow face and genuinely purple-silver hair, "what
exactly is it you intend to steal."
   Skeeter laughed easily. "I'm a scoundrel and you know it, but I'm not
planning to steal anything, except perhaps Agnes' heart. I might have tried
for yours, Goldie, if I thought you had one."
   Goldie made an outrageous sound, glaring at him, clearly at a loss for
words-perhaps a Down Time Bar & Grill first. Then, turning her back to him,
Goldie gulped down the remains of her beer and slammed down a scattering of
coins to pay for it. They jounced, slid, and rolled in circles; one even fell
to the hardwood floor with a musical ringing sound.
   Silver, a part of Marcus' mind said, having become intimately acquainted
with Roman coinage and its forgeries.
   Goldie, leaning over Skeeter's chair very much like a harpy sent by the
gods to punish evildoers, said, "You will live to regret that, Skeeter
Jackson." The chill of a glacier filled her voice. And underlying the frozen
syllables, Marcus heard plainly a malice thick as unwatered Roman wine. It
hung on the air between them for just an instant. Then she whirled and left,
flinging over her shoulder, "Why you choose to become friends with uneducated,
half-wild downtimers who can scarce bathe themselves properly is beyond me. It
will be your ruin."
   Then she was gone.
   Marcus discovered he was shaking with rage. His dislike of Goldie Morran
and her sharp tongue and prejudices had just changed in a way that frightened
him. Dislike had flared like a fire in high wind, smoldering from a half-burnt
lump of coal to a roaring conflagration consuming his soul-and everything
foolish enough to come too close.
   Marcus was proud of his recently acquired education, which included several
languages, new and wonderful sciences that seemed like the magical
incantations that made the world run its wandering course through the stars-
rather than the stars wandering their courses around it-even mathematics
explained clearly enough that he had been able to learn the new ways of
counting, multiplying, dividing, learning the basics of multicolumn
bookkeeping along with the new tools-all of it adding up to something no
scribe or mathematician in all of Ancient Rome could do.
   Perhaps a boy from Gallia Comata could be considered half-wild, but even as
a chained, terrified boy of eight, he had known perfectly well how to bathe
and had amused his captors by requesting a basin each night to wash the dirt

and stinking fear sweat off his skin.
   He actually jumped when Skeeter spoke.
   "Vicious old harpy," Skeeter said mildly, his demeanor as perfectly calm as
his person was neat and eternally well groomed. "She'll do anything to throw
her competition off form." He chuckled. "You know Marcus here, sit down again-
I would dearly love to see someone scam her."
   Marcus sat down and managed to hold his sudden laughter to a mere grin,
although he could not keep it from bubbling in his eyes. "That would be
something to witness. It's interesting, you know, watching the two of you
circle, probe defenses, finally sending darts through chinks in one an other's
armor."
   Skeeter just stared at him.
   Marcus added, "You both are strong-willed, Skeeter, and generally get
exactly what you want from life, same as Goldie. But I will tell you something
important." In this one particular case, at least, Ianira was not the only
"seer" in his family. The story was there, plain to witness for anyone who
simply bothered to look, and knowing people as he did, the future was not
difficult to predict. He finished his beer in one long swallow, aware that
Skeeter's gaze had never left his face.
   "Goldie, ' Marcus said softly, "has declared war upon you, Skeeter, whether
you welcome it or no. She reminds me of the Mediterranean sharks that followed
the slave ship, feeding off those who died. No ... the sharks did only what
they were made to do. Goldie is so far gone in the enjoyment of her evil
deeds, there is no hope of salvaging anything good from her."
   He returned Skeeter's unblinking gaze for several moments. Then his friend
spoke, almost coldly as Goldie had. "Meaning you think me worth salvaging. Is
that it, friend?"
   Marcus went ice-cold all through. "You are a good man, Skeeter," he said
earnestly, leaning forward to try and make his friend understand. "Your heart
is as generous as your laughter. It is merely my hope that you might mend your
morals to match. You are a dear friend to me. I do not enjoy seeing you
suffer."
   Skeeter blinked. "Suffer?" He began to laugh. "Marcus, you are truly the
wonder of the ages." His grin melted a little of the icy fear in Marcus'
heart. "Okay, I'll promise I'll try to be a good little tourist in Rome, all
right? I still want to do that betting, but nothing more devious than that.
Satisfied?"
   Marcus sagged a little in his chair. "Yes, Skeeter. I am." Feeling more
hopeful than he had in months, he was forced to apologize for having to
abandon his friend so soon after coming to a somewhat uneasy understanding of
one another's intentions in this odd friendship. "I am most sorry, my friend,
but I must return to work, before the manager returns from watching the Porta
Romae cycle, and I have not yet finished all the chores he set me to do. Go
with the gods when you step through Porta Romae, Skeeter. Thank you for the
beer. And the company."
   Skeeter's grin lit up his face again. "Sure. Thank you. See you in a couple
of weeks, then. "
   Marcus smiled, then busied himself cleaning vacated tables and wiping down
the bar. Skeeter Jackson strolled out like a man about to own the world.
CHAPTER TWO
   Agnes Fairchild was a nice girl. Not too pretty, but sweet and generous.
And great in bed. By skeeter's standards, the shy, academic types were often
the most fun: overcoming their inhibitions and showing them a thing or two
about mad, wet sex was as good as getting a stunning "10" into bed. He often
regretted the fact that his lovers never stayed with him long, but, hey, there
were new women coming through La-La Land all the time. And after Skeeter's

childhood experiences, he was not choosy about looks. Willingness and
sincerity were what counted. A knockout in your own bed was great. But a
bombshell in somebody else's bed was no fun at all.
   So when Agnes Fairchild walked into Skeeter's life, he was more than
pleased. And when she opened up the chance to do some scheming outside the
time terminal, he showered her with every charm at his command. She even
taught him enough Latin to get by in case they were separated-which he
wouldn't and did not allow to happen-not until the day of the games. Agnes was
good at her job, too. Skeeter enjoyed tagging along with her tour group almost
as much as he enjoyed a passionate lover willing to share intimacy during
sultry Roman nights. The ancient city come to life was like a Hollywood movie
set to Skeeter-but a movie set full of real people with real money he could
pry loose from real hands that wouldn't miss a few pilfered coins, because
they were all dead already.
   Of course, he didn't tell Agnes that. He just enjoyed her company and
sights like Augustus' giant sundial and the huge Emporium of market stalls
that backed the wharves and warehouses of the Porticus Aemeha -- where he
picked up a bit of profit with light-fingered skill-and bided his time while
charming everyone from the richest billionaire in the group-whose money pouch
Skeeter coveted-to the smallest, wide-eyed little girl who called him "Unk
Skeeter." He even liked tickling and teasing her when she tickled and teased
him. She was cute. Skeeter had discovered to his surprise that he liked kids.
There'd been a time when the sight of another child-particularly boys-had made
his blood run cold.
   Long time ago, Skeeter. Long, long time ago. You're not everybody's bogda
any more. You're not anybody's bogda anymore. And that was the best part of
all. As long as he kept up the con games, the swindles, the mastery of skills
a-bitter, deadly childhood had taught him, Skeeter Jackson would never again
be anybody's isolated, lonely, private tribal spirit-in-the-flesh, a position
that had, much of the time, amounted to that of victim, unable to retaliate
when teased, taunted, or hooted at in careful privacy by the other boys,
because it was unseemly behavior for a bogda to roughhouse, no matter what the
provocation. So he'd developed the knack of endurance and remained a victim
because that was the only thing he could do, other than steal the belongings
of certain tormentors and plant them in the yurts of other tormentors. He'd
grown skilled at the game and enjoyed the results with bitter, malicious glee.
   And all of that was something few people understood, or ever could
understand, because Skeeter would sooner die than admit any of it to those who
hadn't already figured it out for themselves.
   He wondered, sometimes, if his friend Marcus carried memories as
frightening as his own? After two weeks in Rome, he was convinced of it. After
witnessing what went on casually on the streets, he deliberately asked Agnes
to take him to see the slave markets. What he found there ... well, if Skeeter
had harbored any shred of scruple, it was erased by the sights and sounds of
that place.
   Anything he stole from any rich Roman bastard was money the wretch deserved
to lose: The more, the better. For a moment, Marcus' words about him and his
standing with Goldie Morran made sense. There were levels and levels of
depravity. Compared to these pros, Skeeter was a saint. He watched through
narrowed eyes endless parades of rich, arrogant Roman men carried through the
streets in fancy sedan chairs and recalled the bitter cold winds which swept
endlessly across the steppes where he'd grown to teenhood.
   He recalled, too, the glint of winter sunlight on sharp steel and the
myriad ways of killing a man the people who'd raised him had taught their
sons. And as he remembered, Skeeter watched wealthy Romans abuse helpless
people and bitterly wished he could introduce the two groups for an intimate
little get-together: Roman to Yakka Mongol, steel to steel.

   Because that would never happen in Skeeter's sight, he elected himself the
Yakka Clan's sole emissary in this city of marble and misery and money. He
could hardly wait to start depriving them of serious amounts of gold earned on
blood, not just a purse here and there just begging to be lifted by nimble
fingers. His long-awaited chance finally came the morning of their last day in
Rome. The entire tour group left the inn near dawn.
   "Form up in your groups," Agnes called, echoed by other Time Tours guides
and even a freelancer or two hired for guiding their employers safely to
places not on the main tour, then safely back again. Since Skeeter was closest
to Agnes, it was her voice he paid most attention to as they formed up in the
silvery, pearl-hued morning. "We'll be taking seats together in the upper
tier, which is reserve for slaves and foreigners. Be sure you have the proper
coinage with you to purchase admission tickets and don't forget to collect a
colored handkerchief to cheer on your favorite racing team. The gladiatorial
games will begin after midday, once the racing is completed..."
   Skeeter wasn't really listening. He was planning his scheme and trying to
recall Marcus' instructions. He had a pouch half full of copper coins, mostly
unciae, or one-twelfth of an as, the as being a pound of copper divided into
twelve "ounces" (the first coins Romans had minted, according to Agnes). They
were- mixed with a few silver denarii and sestercii, plus a few gold aurii on
top just to make it look good. Agnes had loaned him the silver and gold coins
so he could-as he'd explained it impress local merchants that he really did
have money. That way, they'd be less likely to gyp him. "Agnes, I don't want
them to think I'm some provincial rube not worth wasting their time on."
   And like the sweet girl she was, she'd believed every word.
   He wondered how long she'd be able to stomach watching what Romans did to
non-Romans. Two weeks was more than enough for him, even without watching the
games, and he'd spent five years in the yurts of the Yakka clan.
   "Skeeter?"
   He glanced up and found Agnes smiling at him. "Yeah"
   "Ready?"
   "Am I ever!"
   Her smile was so enchanting, he kissed her, earning hoots and whistles from
half the crowd. She blushed to the roots of her mouse-brown hair.
   "All right, people, let's go!"
   Skeeter followed eagerly as Agnes led the first group away from the inn
Time Tours owned on the Aventine Hill and ushered her charges into the narrow,
winding streets of an already crowded, noisy Rome. Games day, Skeeter
identified the electric difference from the tours' previous mornings. Skeeter
hung back, letting Agnes gain distance. Tourists eager for their first and for
many of them, only-look at genuine Roman games surged ahead. Skeeter grinned,
then slipped quietly away from the group and headed for the Circus Maximus by
the route Marcus had given him two weeks previously.
   He knew the entrance he wanted was near the starting gates of the mile-long
structure. Shops selling food, wine, commemorative mugs with scenes of chariot
racing molded into them, even shops selling baskets and seat cushions did
brisk business despite the early hour. The morning air was clear and golden as
dawn brightened the hot, Latin sky. The scents of frying peas and sausages
mingled with the smell of wine, the stink of caged animals, and the sweat of
several thousand men and women pushing their way toward the entrances. A few
betting stalls did even brisker business, a sight that made Skeeter all but
salivate.
   Yesukai, your wandering bogda has done found himself in paradise/
   The streets were confusing, though, and so were the entrances. There were
more archways into the great Circus than he'd expected. And crowds jammed each
one. Which entrance, exactly, had Marcus meant? He walked all the way to the
squared-off end of the Circus, down by the stinking Tiber, which flowed past

the starting gates just beyond a couple of little temples he recognized from
photos. The scream of caged cats and the bleating of zebras assaulted
Skeeter's ears. Down here, too, were men stripped to the waist, hauling the
great cages into place from barges tied up at the river. Teams of high-strung
racing horses fought their handlers, while collared slaves rolled tiny, tea-
cup chariots of wicker and wood-into place for the first races. Men and boys
who must be charioteers, given the colors of their tunics, stood around in
groups, looking deadly earnest as they discussed what must have been last-
minute strategy.
   Well, Skeeter decided, I'll just pick the nearest entrance to all this and
hope for the best. This ought to be just about where Marcus meant.
   He found a likely looking spot and prepared to launch his scheme. Although
Agnes had taught him some "survival phrases" he hadn't known, Skeeter had
begun work several weeks previously. Through that pilfered library account,
he'd learned as many Latin phrases as he could, aware he'd need them for his
patter, as well as understanding the likeliest responses he'd get back from
potential customers. And if he didn't understand something, Skeeter had
carefully learned, "Please, I'm just a poor foreigner, your Latin is too
complicated. Would you say it more simply?" He'd even researched what kind of
markers to give out to those who placed bets. No need to learn how to make
payouts ...
   Since the gladiatorial fights wouldn't take place until afternoon, Skeeter
had a simple plan-collect a ransom in betting money, then simply vanish while
the races were on. He'd hightail it back to the inn, apologize to Agnes later
this afternoon by claiming he hadn't been feeling well, then tonight when
Porta Romae cycled, he'd step back into La-La Land a rich man. And an
untouchable rich man, so long as he didn't try to step uptime with any of his
winnings.
   Rubbing metaphorical hands, Skeeter Jackson looked over the crowd, reined
in an impish grin of anticipation, took a deep breath ... and shouted, "Bets,
place your bets, gladiatorial combats only, best odds in town ... ."
   Within half an hour, Skeeter had begun to wonder if his scheme were going
to pan out, after all. Most of the people who approached him declined to wager
at all. Those who did were mostly poor people who wagered a copper as, or more
likely, one of the cheaper copper coins based on a fraction of an as. Great.
Must've picked the wrong damned entrance. He was just about to try a different
arched entryway when a lean, grizzled man in his early forties, sporting a
short-trimmed head of reddish-blond hair, sauntered over, trailed by a
collared slave.
   "Bets, eh?" the man said, eyeing Skeeter appraisingly. "On the combats?"
   "Yes, sir," Skeeter grinned, trying to hide the sudden pounding of his
pulse. Judging by the gold the man wore and the embroidery on his tunic, this
guy was rich.
   "Tell me, what odds do you place on the bout with Lupus Mortiferus?"
   "To win or lose?"
   A flicker of irritation ran through dark amber, lupine eyes. "To win, of
course."
   Skeeter didn't know a damned thing about Lupus Mortiferus or his track
record. He'd simply been quoting made-up odds all morning. He smiled and said
cheerfully, "Three to one."
   The lean man's eyes widened. "Three to one?" Startlement gave way to
sudden, intense interest. "Well, now. Those are interesting odds, indeed.
You're a stranger, I think, by your accent."
   Skeeter shrugged. "If I am?"
   His mark grinned. "I'll place a bet with you, stranger. How about fifty
aurii? Can your purse handle that big a bite?"
   Skeeter was stunned. Fifty gold aurii? That was ... that was five thousand

silver sestercii! When he thought of the money he'd get exchanging fifty gold
aurii at Goldie Morran's shop back in Shangri-La Station ...
   "Of course, friend! Of course. I may be a foreigner, but I am not without
resources. You just surprised me." Skeeter prepared the marker.
   "Stellio," the grizzled Roman addressed his slave, "fetch fifty aurii from
my money box." The man produced a key from a pouch at his waist and handed it
over.
   The slave dashed into the crowd.
   "I have pressing business elsewhere," the Roman said with a smile, tucking
the marker into his pouch, "but I assure you my slave is trustworthy. He was a
complete knave when I bought him, which is why he bears that name, but
sufficient correction can cure any man's bad habits." The Roman laughed. "A
slave without a tongue is much more docile. Not to mention silent. Don't you
agree?"
   Skeeter nodded, but felt a little sick. Once, as a boy, he'd seen a man's
tongue cut out ...
   The Roman strolled off into the crowd. Clearly, Skeeter had quoted the
wrong odds on Lupus whatever. But on the bright side, he wouldn't be around
when this guy came to collect his hundred-fifty aurii. Skeeter repressed a
shiver. Just as well. He wondered with a pang of genuine pity what that poor
slave had done to merit having his tongue cut out.
   No wonder Marcus didn't want to come back here. Ever.
   Skeeter continued taking bets, filling his money pouch and giving out
markers while waiting for Stelho to return. Shrill notes from Roman trumpets,
sounding the beginning of the opening parade, floated on the clear morning
air. A roar went up from the crowd. Skeeter took a few last bets, then spotted
Stellio running toward him. The man was panting, mouth hanging open with
exertion from his run. Skeeter swallowed hard. He didn't have a tongue.
   "Nrggahh," the poor man said, shoving the pouch into Skeeter's hands.
   He ran off again before Skeeter could say a word in response. Feeling a
little queasy still, Skeeter opened the pouch and tipped shining gold into his
hand. The slave hadn't cheated him. Fifty gold aurii ... They glittered in the
sunlight, striking glints like lightning against the dark Gobi sky. Skeeter
grinned as he counted them back into the pouch, then tightened the drawstring
and secured it to his waist. Just wait until Goldie sees these!
   A few stragglers placed bets, mostly with copper coins ranging from full
asses through the whole spectrum of its fractions: the sextans, the guadrans
and trims, a quincunx, several semis coins, the cheaper septunx, the bes, and
dodrans, one dextans and deunx each, and of course, the inevitable and popular
uncia. He even got a couple more silver sestercii-then the trumpets signaling
the start of the first chariot race sang out.
   Time to leave.
   He decided to buy a little wine to cool his throat and used some of his
takings to purchase it from a nearby shop which nestled under the stands, one
of several hundred other little stalls, from the look of it. He noticed some
shrimp set delicately on grape leaves and decided to try some. Mmm! The Romans
know how to cook a shrimp! That finished, Skeeter noticed some cheesecakes
along the back shelf. Several were molded into the shape of a woman's breast.
   He asked and was told, "Almond cheesecake. Whole is all I sell."
   Well, that one in the corner looked pretty small. He gestured toward it and
the proprietor duly placed it in front of him, then collected the coins
Skeeter produced from his "winnings." One bite and he knew that, good as this
was, Ianira Cassondra's were so much superior it was like comparing caviar to
potted meat. As he munched contentedly, a roar went up inside the stadium.
"First race, huh?" Skeeter asked conversationally, proud of his acquired
Latin.
   The man looked startled. "Race? You hadn't heard? The Emperor requested a

special opening to the day's games."
   Paying only half attention, Skeeter said, "Really?" He was hungrier than
he'd thought and this cheesecake wasn't bad, washed down with the last of his
wine.
   "Yes," the shopkeeper told him, considerable surprise running through dark
eyes. "A special exhibition bout by the Emperor's favorite gladiator."
   "What?" He nearly strangled on cheesecake and ovine.
   "Yes. Bout to first blood in honor of Lupus Mortiferus' hundredth
appearance in the arena." The man chuckled. "What a champion. Haven't been
better'n one to four odds on him since his eightieth victory. Bout ought to be
finished any minute-"
   Skeeter didn't wait to hear more. He didn't have a hundred-fifty aurii to
pay off that idiotic bet. Damn, damn, damn! He shot out of the shop, leaving
the half-eaten cheesecake behind. He headed down the long facade of the
Circus, toward town. The River Tiber ran its merry way somewhere behind him.
He kept his pace at a fast walk, not wanting to draw attention to himself by
running. As much money as he was carrying, someone might mistake him for a
thief.
   Okay, Skeeter, just stay calm. You've been in worse spots. He's not going
to come collecting that money right away, even if the bout is going on right
now. Just get back to the Time Tours Inn and hide out until the gate cycles
and you'll be just fine. You've gotten through worse. Lots worse.
   Another roar broke from the high tiers of seats. Skeeter winced. Then
silence fell over the great arena. Skeeter wanted to break into a run, but
held himself to a brisk walk, like some businessman intent on important
business.
   Then, the sound of nightmare: "Hey! Hey, odds maker!"
   He glanced around-and felt his cheeks go cold.
   It was the lean, grizzled Roman who'd placed the bet, about a hundred yards
behind him. Even from here, Skeeter could see the blood spattered on his
clothes and arms.
   Oh, man, I gotta bad feeling that IS Lupus Mortiferus.
   Skeeter did the only logical, honorable thing he could.
   He ran like hell.
   "Stop! Stop, you-"
   The rest of it was Latin Skeeter hadn't learned yet.
   He ducked around the first corner he came to and picked up speed. The money
pouches at his belt swung and bruise thighs with every stride. The streets
near the Circus were a maze of narrow alleys and crooked, twisting
passageways. Skeeter dodged and ran with everything in him, convinced he could
outrun the heavier Roman with ease. Given his skill at vanishing in the places
he'd lived as a child, losing himself in Rome ought to be a piece of cake.
   But his pursuer was faster than he looked.
   Skeeter glanced back and bit back a yelp of terror. The man was still with
him-and gaining. Thunderstorms rolling across the vast plains of Outer
Mongolia had looked friendlier than that Roman's face. And he had a long knife
in his hand. A really long one.
   Skeeter skidded around another corner, crashed through a group of women who
shrieked curses at him, and kept going. Can't just go to the inn.. He'd track
me there and carve me up into little bits of Skeeter Where, then? Clearly, he
hadn't studied the layout of the city adequately. Skeeter cut around another
corner, dashed down a long straight-way, zipped around another corner-
   And yelled, even as he tried to stop.
   The street ended abruptly in a drop-off straight into the Tiber. Momentum
carried him over the edge. Skeeter sucked in air, knowing the gold would weigh
him down. Then he splashed feet-first into the muddy river and sank toward the
bottom. Skeeter swam frantically for the surface, holding his breath and

kicking with every bit of strength he had left. His face broke water. He
gulped air into burning lungs.
   Something hard grazed his shoulder. Skeeter yelled, went under, strangled
... then caught at something that splashed down right in front of him. He was
lifted completely out of the water. For an instant, he was face-to-face with
an astonished slave rowing a large boat. The man was so shocked, he dropped
the oar. Skeeter plunged like a rock back into the river. A tremendous
backwash sent water into his sinuses. But he hung onto the oar and managed to
drag his head above water again. He blinked river water and hair out of his
eyes, coughing weakly and drawing in shuddering lungfuls of air that only set
him coughing harder.
   The boat above him was a shallow-draft thing that looked like a pleasure
yacht of some sort. Rowers all along the side leaned over to stare at him.
Several oars fouled badly, cracking into one another like gunshots. The whole
yacht ewed in the water.
   Great. Talk about not attracting attention.
   A glance over one shoulder revealed Lupus Mortiferus on the bank, shaking
his fist and cursing inaudibly. Just get one out of this one, God, and I swear
I'll never come back to Rome again. I'll stick to obnoxious tourists and
government bureaucrats and other deserving UPtimers. Skeeter clung to the oar,
pulled along by the yacht's momentum for a couple of moments, allowing him to
regain his breath; then an overseer stalked to the gunwales to see what was
fouling the oars.
   "What the-"
   Skeeter lost most of the curse in the translation, but the general gist
seemed to be, "Get the hell off my oar!"
   Skeeter was about to marshall a sob story to convince the guy to let him
climb aboard when the s.o.b. snaked out a whip that caught Skeeter right
across the hands. Pain blossomed like acid. He yelled and let go
involuntarily-and plunged back into the river. Skeeter snorted a noseful of
water before he managed to kick his way back to the surface.
   Gotta get to shore ... before I ... wear out and drown. That gold was
heavy. But the few minutes' rest clinging to the oar had helped. Skeeter
struck out for the nearest bank, which thankfully was opposite the Circus and
the wrathful Lupus Mortiferus. By the time he reached the riverbank and
crawled out, sodden tunic clinging to his thighs and back, Skeeter was shaking
with exhaustion. But he still had the gold. And he was still alive.
   He'd just begun to celebrate those two facts with a shaky grin when a
terrifying, familiar voice shouted, "There! He's there!"
   Lupus Mortiferus had crossed a bridge Skeeter hadn't even noticed.
   And he had friends with him.
   Big, mean, ugly-looking ones.
   Skeeter swore shakily under his breath and shoved himself to his feet.
Can't possibly outrun 'em.. Hell, he could scarcely stand up. Out-talk 'em?
Convince 'em the whole scam had been a simple miscommunication? In English, he
could probably have pulled it off. But not in Latin. The language handicap
made that impossible. Wondering what Romans did with confidence men they
caught-a roar of voices from the Circus gave him a clue-Skeeter looked wildly
around for some way out of this.
   What he saw was a group of horse handlers loading racing teams onto a barge
for the trip across to the Circus. The horses were between him and the group
of enraged gladiators. Skeeter didn't have many skills, but living in a yurt
of the Yakka Clan, one thing he had learned to do was ride. If it had four
legs and hooves, Skeeter could ride it.
   So he ran straight toward the men hunting him and caught a glimpse of
shocked amazement on Lupus Mortiferus' face. Then he said to a surprised
animal handler, "Excuse me, but I need that," and snatched the bridle of the

nearest racehorse still on shore. He was on the animal's back in a flash. The
startled horse reared and screamed, but Skeeter had stayed with horses
ornerier than this. He slammed heels into the animal's flanks and brought its
head and forelegs down with a savage jerk on the reins. The horse got the
message: This ain't no novice rider on, my back.
   Skeeter hauled the horse's head around and kicked the animal into a fast
gallop. The racing handlers yelled and cursed him, but he put distance between
himself and all his pursuers in nothing short of miraculous time. This horse
could run.
   Skeeter laughed in sheer delight and leaned low over the animal's neck. The
whipping mane caught his face with a wiry sting-The muscles bunching under his
thighs rippled in perfect rhythm. He missed the iron Mongol stirrups, shaped
like the tips of Dutch wooden shoes, to which he'd grown accustomed, but he
hadn't lost his sense of balance-and he'd learned to ride bareback, just to
prove to Yesukai that he could, and hopefully to be permitted the chance at
learning to ride proper ponies with proper saddles.
   Pedestrians scattered out of his way with curses and screams. He laughed
again at the horse's astonishing speed. "Must've liberated me a champion!"
   It was several years overdue, but Skeeter had finally completed his manhood
ritual. Wow! Finally! My first real horse-thieving raid! Too bad no Yakka
clansmen were around to witness it and celebrate the occasion.
   The Yakka khan had not permitted Skeeter to go along on such raids, fearing
his funny little bogda might be injured, which would bring bad luck. Skeeter
grinned. Never thought I'd get a chance to do this. Not bad for a kid who fell
through an unstable gate and ended up in a place nobody thought he'd survive!
   He hated to give the horse up.
   But riding a stolen race horse through Rome while its handlers and several
really pissed-off gladiators were chasing him was not a smart move. And
neither his Mama nor-particularly-his foster Mama had raised a fool. In fact,
Yesukai's stolen bride had not only accepted her marriage, but had begun to
rule her husband's yurt like a queen born to the task and, alone among
strangers, she had adopted the funny little bog who was in much the same
predicament, teaching him a great deal and smiling on him with great favor.
   So, having learned caution from both his adoptive parents, Skeeter pulled
the animal to a walk, cooling him out, then halted as soon as he dared and
patted the beast on the neck. Dried sweat clung to his hand.
   "You did good by me, fella. Thanks. I owe you. Too bad I can't make it up
to you."
   The horse blew softly into his face and nudged his chest, friendly-like.
"Yeah," Skeeter said with a smile, stroking the velvety-soft nose, "me, too.
But I gotta run an you've gotta race."
   He tied the reins to the nearest public fountain, so the horse could at
least get a drink of water, then set out to find himself a good, deep hidey-
hole until the Porta Romae cycled sometime near midnight. The jingling of gold
in the pouch at his waist sounded like victory.
   Skeeter grinned.
   Not a bad day's work.
   Not bad at all.
CHAPTER THREE
   Lupus Mortiferus didn't like losing.
   In his line of work, defeat meant death. And like most gladiators, losing a
wager was an almost omenlike foreshadowing of trouble to come. The Wolf of
Death, as the School had named him, was going to find that miserable street
vermin and shake his money loose, or see him die in the arena for thievery.
   All he had to do was find him.
   He and his friends stood muttering in a group as the cheat escaped on Sun

Runner, one of the greatest champions ever to run in the Circus. The handler
was beside himself with fury. Already several other handlers had mounted to
give chase, but the thief had a good lead on a fast horse. Lupus Mortiferus
didn't hold out much hope that anyone would catch the rat.
   "So," Quintus nudged him with an elbow, "you were gonna make a hundred-
fifty aurii, just like that, huh?"
   "Guess the Wolf isn't as smart as he thought," another friend laughed.
"Getting a little long in the tooth and a little short on savvy?"
   Lupus just ground his teeth and held silent. He'd needed that money to
start a new life. Having just purchased his own freedom last year, he'd barely
begun to save enough to leave the arena for good. Then, in one glorious
moment, some country rube offers the chance to get there three times faster
... and he turns out to be a sneak thief.
   "You go on back," Lupus led. "My big matches aren't for hours, yet. Then
I'll follow those racing handlers, see what I can find. The Wolf does not give
up this easily."
   He took another round of ribbing he had, after all, walked right into the
rat's smiling arms-then stalked in the direction the racing handlers had gone.
I will find that little puke and I will by Hercules break every bone in. his
cheating body to pieces and after that I'll break the pieces into pieces
   He met the riders coming back, leading Sun Runner by the bridle. Sweat had
dried on him, but he'd been properly cooled out or the handlers wouldn't have
been smiling in such enormous relief.
   "Found him tied to a public fountain," one of them explained when asked.
"Three blocks farther on."
   Lupus nodded and stalked on. He found the fountain, but no trace of the
thief. So he started bribing shopkeepers for information. He hit paydirt on
the third bribe.
   "Yeah, he strolled off that way, whistling like he owned the Emperor's
palace."
   "Thanks." Lupus flipped him a second silver sestertius and headed that way.
The streets here weren't quite as twisted and winding as they were across the
river. Lupus spotted him within five minutes. Every impulse in him said,
"Now!"
   But he held back.
   If he followed the little snake back to his lair, he might recover more
than just the money he'd lost. Who knew how much this rat had swindled since
coming to Rome? The thief led him a merry chase. Evidently, he was intent on
touring the whole blasted city. He paused now and again to buy wine and
sausages with money he'd swindled from other victims, then bought a few
trinkets a woman might enjoy wearing.
   By the time the little rat re-crossed the Tiber and stopped to stare at the
great temple complex atop the Capitoline hill, Lupus was out of time. Either
he had to shake the rat down now and get back his money or he'd miss the
fighting matches for which he was scheduled today. He was actually advancing,
hand on the hilt of his gladius, when a third alternative occurred to him.
   He had noticed a couple of wide-eyed beggar brats staring at him and paused
to consider what use he might make of them.
   "Are you really Lupus Mortiferus?- the bolder of the two asked, eyes round
with wonder and a glint approaching fear.
   I am.
   Wide eyes went rounder.
   Lupus smiled coldly. "Want to earn some money?"
   Mouths dropped open. "How?"
   "See that man?" he pointed out the thief. "Follow him. Find out where he
lives and tell me and I'll give you enough silver to buy slaves of your own."
   The boys gasped. "We'll follow him! But how can we let you know where he's

gone?"
   Lupus sighed. Starvation left a man stupid and these boys looked like they
hadn't eaten properly in years. "One of you stay wherever he's gone," Lupus
said patiently. "The other of you, come find me. I'll be at the starting
boxes, waiting."
   He gave each boy a couple of copper asses as incentive, showing them the
silver in his purse as greater incentive, then headed grimly back toward the
Circus. He had some fights to win. Given his mood, Lupus Mortiferus pitied his
opponents today. The crowd ought to be very pleased with his performance. And
afterward ...
   Afterward, a certain foreign thief would learn the bite of Roman revenge.
   Agnes Fairchild's voice rose on a half-scream of hurt rage. "You used me,
Skeeter Jackson! How ... how dare you-"
   "Agues-"
   "Don't touch me! My God, to think I gave you a ticket, money, slept with
you! I hate you! All you wanted was a chance to sneak away and make a bunch of
illegal bets!"
   "Now, Agnes-"
   "I could lose my job!" Tears in her eyes sparkled in the lamp light, but
they were angry tears more than fear. "I can't believe you would do this to
me." She hugged both arms around herself and refused to look him in the eye.
   "Look, kid, you're a nice girl. I happen to like you a lot. But business is
business. Good God, Agnes, you take a bunch of bloodthirsty perverts to the
arena to watch men butcher each other, you ferry around zipper jockeys so they
can rape prostitutes in downtime brothels, and you don't bat an eyelash, but
let a man make a little wager-"
   "Get out of my sight! I wish I'd never laid eyes on you, Skeeter Jackson!
If I thought I could get away with it, I'd ... I'd maroon you here! That'd be
rich, leave you stuck in Rome with all the people whose money you swindled!"
   Skeeter gave up. He'd broken up with his share of women, although he rarely
understood why, exactly, but he'd never had one react this violently. Well,
there was the exception of Margo. She'd said a few choice things to him, after
she'd found out he wasn't a time scout after all. And he hadn't even managed
to get her into bed!
   All of which was useless to pursue. He would miss Agnes' company,
particularly in the sack, but the amount of gold in the pouches at his belt
was more than incentive to dismiss her serious overreaction. It'd only been
one little day's wagering, for God's sake. Yesukai would've been singing his
praises to the entire clan around the cookpots.
   Oh, well. Easy come, easy go. So much for this scheme. Guess Ill have to
come up with something else that doesn't involve a downtime gate. Of course,
with his winnings today, he could take all the time he wanted, deciding his
next intrigue. He left Agnes sitting in her private room at the Time Tours Inn
and rejoined the festivities in the dining room, aware that she was crying as
he shut the door, aware of a pang of guilt down inside himself, but also aware
that she'd brought most of her anguish on herself.
   Sheesh. One little bet.
   You'd have thought he'd stolen her heart or something. Women. Can't figure
'em, any way you look at it. When he got back to TT-86, he was going to march
straight into the Down Time Bar & Grill and get roaring drunk. Hell, he'd buy
drinks for everybody there and get well-and-truly Mongolian drunk with
friends. After the fit she'd pitched, he deserved a little celebration.
   Maybe he'd even find someone willing to console him in the privacy of his
apartment afterwards. Some sweet, soft-skinned tourist willing to assuage the
sense of loss and loneliness he couldn't quite dismiss as he entered the
raucous main room of the Time Tours Inn. Yeah, that was the ticket. Wine and
women. Age-old cure for what ailed the heart.

   Skeeter put on his best smile and wondered how many pockets he might have
the chance to pick before the Porta Romae Gate cycled a few hours hence.
   The thief had taken up lodgings at an inn situated pleasantly on the
Aventine. It bustled with customers. Lupus paid both boys and watched them
scamper off, then stepped into the crowded room. A few people gave him odd
looks, but he was served with good food and better wine than he'd expected.
The man he sought was in a far corner, all smiles and triumph, talking to a
plain-looking slave girl who smiled at him the way a well-bedded woman smiles
at a man who's tumbled her frequently. Lupus hid his own smile as they left
for more private surroundings, then heard the beginnings of an argument
through their closed door. It ended with the thief storming back into the main
room, thunderclouds in his eyes, whereupon he struck up a lively discussion
with the nearest girl.
   All does not go well, then, between master and concubine. He chuckled,
finished his meal, and left the inn to wait for darkness. All he needed to do
was wait until the guests bedded down for the night and the thief was his.
   He could have called for the city watch to arrest the man, but his
reputation was already damaged. So far, only his closest friends knew of his
foolish loss. Let the city watch discover it, and his name would become a
laughingstock from the janiculum to the Campus Martius. This was a score he
intended to settle personally. To his great chagrin, however, a banquet or
great party of some kind was being celebrated inside, with loud laughter and
singing in some barbaric tongue he couldn't place. It went on until the night
grew very late.
   "Will these colonial clods never bed down and sleep?"
   Carts and heavily laden wagons rumbled past in the darkness, casting
lantern light on weary-faced drivers and dark, rutted paving stones. Another
hour passed, then another, and still the party roared on. Hugging his
impatience to his breast like a well-honed dagger, Lupus waited.
   What happened next surprised him beyond all belief.
   Every single one of the revelers left the inn in a packed group, led by
lantern light and collared slaves through the wagon-jammed, dangerous streets.
The man Lupus sought was there amongst them, grinning like a trained monkey.
Lupus followed, one hand on the pommel of his sword. He trailed the group to a
wine shop on the Via Appia. Judging from the positions of the stars, it must
be nearly midnight, yet nearly forty people entered the dark, silent wineshop.
Some were giggling, some reeling, while some looked like they might be ill at
any moment.
   Lupus' prey entered without so much as a backward glance over his shoulder.
An open door at the rear of the shop spilled lantern light into the now-empty
shop front with its counters, stone benches, and tight-lidded amphorae of
wine. Beyond was clearly a small warehouse where the shopkeeper stored his
stock. Lupus slipped across the street and cautiously entered the public area
just as someone closed the warehouse door. Darkness smothered him in an
instant. He swore under his breath and waited for his night vision to return.
He listened at the edge of the door, but could hear nothing.
   Then a strange buzzing began to vibrate the bones of his skull. There was
no real sound, but he clapped hands over both ears, trying to shut out the
unpleasant sensation. What manner of wine shop is this. Sweat started out on
his brow. He wasn't afraid, exactly-
   The warehouse door opened again, unexpectedly
   Lupus hurled himself into the shadows behind the counter.
   Some fifty people emerged from the warehouse room--but none of them were
the ones who'd gone inside moments before. The last person through closed the
door to the warehouse, leaving Lupus hidden in shadows while lanterns swung in
the night and giggles and whispers in that same foreign tongue reached his
ears. Lupus stared at the departing group, while the bones of his skull ached.

Gradually the sound that wasn't a sound faded away. The men and women who'd
just left the warehouse disappeared around a street corner.
   Lupus emerged slowly from behind the humble limestone countertop, glancing
from the closed warehouse door to the street corner and back. Then he tried
the door. It wasn't locked. Someone had left a lamp burning; the shop owner
must mean to return shortly, else he'd have blown out the lamp. Lupus searched
the room thoroughly, if somewhat hastily, but found absolutely no trace of the
forty-odd people who had entered this room moments earlier. Nor could he find
a doorway or hidden trap in the floor. The room was absolutely empty, save for
racks of dusty amphorae. The nearest of those, shaken gently, proved to be
full.
   Standing in the center of the deserted room, Lupus Mortiferus felt an
unaccustomed trickle of fear run up his spine. His quarry had vanished,
apparently into thin air, taking Lupus' hard-won money with him. Lupus swore
softly, then returned the amphora to its place in the rack, turned on his
heel, and strode out again. He would discover the secret of that wine shop.
The people who came and went from it had to come through somehow, as they were
not spirits from the underworld, but flesh-and-blood men and women. And since
Lupus-superstitious though he might be-did not believe in outright magic, he
would find that way through. All he had to do was follow the next group more
closely.
   And once through.. .
   Lupus Mortiferus, the "Wolf of Death" of Rome's great Circus, smiled
cruelly in the starlight. "Soon," he promised the thief. "Soon, your belly
will meet my blade. I think you will find little enough stomach for my
revenge-but my steel will find more than enough of your stomach."
   Laughing darkly at his own joke, Lupus Mortiferus strode away into the
night.
   Gate days always packed in the customers at the Down Time Bar & Grill. With
the Porta Romae cycling, Marcus had all he could handle keeping up with drink
tabs and calling sandwich orders to Molly. The clink of glassware and the
smell of alcohol permeated the dim-lit interior as thickly as the roar of
voices, some of them bragging about what they'd done/seen/heard downtime and
others drowning whatever it was that had shaken them to the core and yet
others denying that anything at all was bothering them.
   All in all, it was a pretty normal gate day. Marcus delivered a tray full
of drinks to a table where Kit Carson and Malcolm Moore were sharing tall
tales with Rachel Eisenstein. The time terminal's physician wasn't taken in by
either man, but she was clearly having a good time pretending to believe the
world's most famous time scout and La-La Land's most experienced freelance
time guide. Marcus smiled, warmed more by their welcoming smiles than their
more-than-generous tips, then moved on to the back room, shimmying skillfully
between pool players intent on their games, to a corner where Goldie Morran
was deeply involved in a high-stakes poker match with Brian Hendrickson.
   Marcus knew that look in Goldie's eyes. He held in a shiver. She must be
losing-heavily. Brian Hendrickson's face gave away nothing, but the pile of
money on his side of the table was a good bit larger than the pile on
Goldie's. Several interested onlookers watched silently. Goldie (who somehow
reminded Marcus unpleasantly of a certain haughty patrician lady a former
master had visited on carefully arranged assignations), glanced from her hand
to meet Brian's steady regard. Her lip curled slightly, sure of him. "Call."
   Hendrickson showed his cards.
   Goldie Morran swore in a manner Marcus still found shocking. More money
traveled to the librarian's side of the table.
   "Your drinks," Marcus said quietly, placing them carefully to one side of
cards, money, and outthrust elbows.
   Out in the main room, a familiar voice sang out, "Hey, Marcus! Where are

you?"
   Skeeter Jackson was back in town. He hid a pleased grin.
   Marcus quietly collected empty glasses from the poker table, noted the lack
of a tip from Goldie and the modest tip from the librarian, then hurried out
and found his friend beaming at the entire roomful of patrons.
   "Drinks," he announced elaborately, "are on the house. A round for everyone
on me!"
   Marcus gaped. "Skeeter? That is ... that will be very expensive!" His
friend never had that kind of money. And the Down Time was crowded tonight.
   "Yep! I scored big for a change. Really big!" His grin all but lit up the
dark room. Then he produced a wallet full of money. "For the drinks!"
   "You won the bets?"
   Skeeter laughed. "Did I ever! Serve 'em up, Marcus." He winked and handed
Marcus a heavy pouch, whispering, "Thanks. That's for your help." Then he
sauntered over to a table, where he found himself the center of much
attention, most of it from tourists. The pouch Skeeter had given him was very
heavy. Marcus began to tremble. When he opened the drawstrings, the number-and
color-of the coins inside made his head swim. There must be ... He couldn't
see properly to count the money. But if it wasn't enough to pay off his debt,
it was close. Very, very close. His vision wavered.
   Skeeter had remembered.
   Marcus knew that in this world of uptimers and 'eighty-sixers, grown men
did not weep, as Roman men did with such free abandon. So he blinked
desperately, but his throat was so thick he couldn't have spoken to save his
own life. Skeeter had remembered. And actually followed through on the
promise. I won't forget, Marcus made a silent vow. I won't forget this, my
true friend.
   He stuffed the money into a front jeans pocket, deep enough to keep it safe
from pick pockets, then blinked fiercely again. He wished desperately he could
leave the Down Time and share his news with Ianira now, but he had several
hours left on his shift and she would be in the middle of a session with an
uptime graduate student, one of many who consulted-and paid-her as a singular,
primary source. She had told him once that some uptime schools did not allow
students to use such recordings or notes, considering them faulty, if not
downright fraudulent, sources. Anger had sparked like flint against pyrite in
her eyes, that anyone would dare to question her honesty, her integrity.
   But a lot of other schools did accept such research as valid. Marcus
discovered a deep, abiding joy that Ianira would no longer have to reduce
herself to selling off little pieces of her life just to save money for
Marcus' debt. He could tell her later of his good fortune, of their good
friend and ally. Already he anticipated the joy in her dark eyes.
   Perhaps I can even support another child. A son, if the gods smile on us.
Thus preoccupied with dreams, Marcus started taking the drink orders Skeeter's
generosity had prompted. Skeeter plopped down enough cash to buy the drinks
he'd promised and then some.
   Goldie Morran and Brian Hendrickson emerged from the back just then,
evidently because Goldie had run out of either money or patience. Their
admiring entourage followed like schooling fish.
   "What's this about drinks being on Skeeter?" Goldie demanded.
   Skeeter rose lazily from the seat he'd taken and gave her a mock bow. "You
heard me right. And you know I've got the money." He winked at her this time.
   Ahh ... Goldie had done the money changing for Skeeter's winnings. Goldie's
expression deepened into lines of bitterness. "You call a couple of thousand
money? Good God, Skeeter, I just dropped that much in one poker game. When are
you ever going to graduate from the penny-ante stuff?"
   Skeeter froze, eyes going first wide then savagely narrow. He was the focal
point of the entire room, tourists and 'eighty-sixers alike. A flush crept up

his face, either of embarrassment or anger-with Skeeter, it was never easy to
tell.
   "Penny-ante?" he repeated, with a dangerous glint in his eyes. "Yes, I
suppose from your point of view, that's what I am, Goldie. just Skeeter's
penny-ante bullshit, same as always. Now, if I had your juicy situation, maybe
I'd hit it big a little more often, too. You're no better than I am, Goldie,
under all that fancy crap you hand your customers.-
   A sewing needle dropped to the wooden floor would have sounded like an
alarm klaxon in the silence that followed.
   "And just what do you mean by that?" Goldie was breathing Just a touch too
hard, nostrils pinched one moment, flaring the next, lips ash white.
   "Oh, come off it, Goldie. You can't con me, we're too much alike, you and
I. Everyone in La-La Land knows you scam any customer you can." Several
tourists in the room started visibly and stared at Goldie with dawning
suspicion. Skeeter shrugged. "If I had a fancy shop and the chance to snatch
rare coins at a fraction of their worth, or had the kind of bankroll you've
conned over the years, hell, I could drop a few thousand in a poker game, too,
and not miss it.
   "Like I said, you're no better than I am. You scam, I scam, and everybody
here calls us backstabbing cheats. If you didn't use all that fancy crap in
your head about coins and gems, you couldn't scam half of what I do in a week.
Frankly, coins and gems is all you know. Hell, I could probably top you two or
three to one, if you had to make a living the way I do."
   Goldie's cheeks went slowly purple, nearly matching her hair.
   "Are you issuing a challenge to me?"
   Skeeter's jaw muscles clenched. Something in his eyes, a glint of steel
harsh as the Mongolian desert skies, caused Marcus to shiver. Then Skeeter
grinned, slowly, without a trace of mirth in those steely eyes.
   "Yeah. I think I am. A challenge. That's a good idea. What about it,
Goldie? Shall we give it a week?
   Anything you make using knowledge of rare coins, gems, antiques and the
like doesn't count. At the end of the week, the person with the most cash
takes the whole pot. How about it? Do we have a bet?"
   The reek of tension and sweat filled the crowded room as every eye
swivelled to Goldie Morran, the dowager con artist of La-La Land. She merely
curled a lip. "That hardly seems like a stake worth bothering myself over,
considering how little you manage to rake in during an average week." Her eyes
narrowed and a smile came to thin lips. Marcus shivered. Walk carefully, my
friend, she means to have blood. "I don't make fools' bets."
   Skeeter took a dangerous step forward, eyes flashing angrily in the dim
light. "All right, how about we up the stakes a little, then? We'll make it a
real bet. Let the wager run for three weeks-hell, let's make it one month,
even. That'll take us right through the holidays. At the end, loser leaves TT-
86, bag and baggage, and never comes back."
   Goldie's eyes widened for just a moment, causing Marcus to bite his lips to
hold back his protest-never mind a dire warning to take care. Then she
actually laughed. "Leave TT-86? Are you mad?"
   "Are you chicken?"
   For an instant, Marcus thought she might actually strike him.
   "Done!" She spat out the word like a snake spitting venom. Then she whirled
on poor Brian Hendrickson, a man who wouldn't have cheated a stray flea. He
was watching the whole affair round-eyed. Goldie stabbed a long-nailed finger
at him. "You. I want you to officiate. This is a for-goddamn-real bet. I win
and we're rid of that two-bit little rat for good."
   Skeeter's cheeks darkened. But that was the only sign of emotion. He
smiled. "I win and we're finally rid of the Duchess of Dross."
   Goldie whirled on him, lips open to snap back something scathing, but Brian

Hendrickson stepped between them.
   "All right, we have a wager challenged and accepted" The librarian glanced
from one to the other. "You two have no idea how much I would give to get out
of this, not to get stuck in the middle, but with a wager this serious,
somebody's got to keep you two as honest as possible.
   "He sighed, then reluctantly admitted, "I guess I'm the man to do it, since
I know as much about rare coins and gems as you do, Goldie. All right, every
day each of you reports to me. I hold all winnings and track all losses. I
judge whether a winning counts. Goldie, you are forbidden to use your
expertise to scam tourists. You'll have to find some other way to cheat your
way to victory"
   Brian's eyes revealed clearly how little pleasure he was taking in this,
but he went doggedly on. "Money earned legally doesn't count. And one more
thing. If either of you gets caught, you automatically lose. Understood?"
   Goldie sniffed autocratically. "Understood."
   Skeeter glared at her for a moment, naked desire for revenge burning in his
eyes. Marcus remembered what Skeeter had said, that night he'd been so drunk
he'd started confiding secrets Marcus had never dreamed existed. He'd known
already that his friend carried with him a monstrous capacity for cold,
calculating vengeance. That icy-cold desire now left Marcus terrified for
Skeeter's safety. He wanted to shout, "You don't need to prove yourself!" but
it was far too late, now. The money in his jeans pocket felt heavier than
ever, nearly as heavy as his heart.
   His friend would spend the next few weeks doing exactly the kinds of things
Marcus was trying to make him stop doing, or he would risk having to leave the
station forever. Marcus didn't want to lose a friend, any more than the
Downtimer Council would want to lose a "Lost One" located and identified by
one of their members. Marcus prayed to any Roman or Gaulish gods and goddesses
that might be listening that Skeeter would win this bet, not Goldie.
   She could afford to start over somewhere else.
   Skeeter Jackson couldn't.
   In that moment, Marcus felt a loathing of Goldie Morran he couldn't begin
to put into words. He turned away, busying himself behind the bar, as Brian
Hendrickson finished laying down the rules. He didn't notice when Goldie left.
But when he glanced around the room and failed to find her, the relief that
flooded through him left him weak-kneed. Conversation roared to a crescendo
and he was so busy serving drinks, he didn't see Skeeter leaving either. He
swallowed hard, sorry for the lost opportunity to speak with his friend, but
he still had work to do.
   So, very quietly, Marcus served drinks, collected bar tabs, and stuffed
tips into his jeans, all the while worrying about the fate of his one good
friend in all the world-or time.
CHAPTER FOUR
   Lupus Mortiferus had not survived a hundred combats in the Roman arena by
giving up easily. He waited from the Kalends of the month until a single day
remained before the Ides, either he or his slave following the strangers who
had emerged from that wine shop on the Via Appia in the middle of the night.
Lupus watched men, women, quarrelsome children, and puckish teens gawk at
marble temples, enter brothels with erect-phallus signs poking out of the
sides of dingy brick buildings, or file excitedly into the circus to watch the
racing and the combats.
   For all that time, nearly half the lunar month, Lupus bided his time and
whetted the edge on his gladius as sharp as he whetted his desire for revenge.
He endured stoically the jokes and jibes that still continued. A few of the
jokesters took their jests to the grave, blood and entrails spilling on the
sands of the arena while the crowd roared like a thousand summer thunderstorms

in his ears.
   And then, the waiting was done.
   They left in the middle of the night, as before, slaves showing the way
with lanterns. Following them was ridiculously easy. Lupus ordered his slave
home and slipped from one shadowed shopfront to another, booted feet soundless
on the stone paving of the sidewalk. Several of the young men had clearly
drunk too much; they reeled, clutching at slaves or at one another, and tried
to keep up. As the group approached the wine shop on the Via Appia, Lupus
quietly insinuated himself into the group, hanging near the back.
   A slave near the front called out something in a barbarous tongue. The
group entered the wineshop by twos and threes. Lupus noted uneasily that the
slaves assigned to guard the group were carefully taking count of those who
passed into the shop's warehouse. Just when he feared discovery, one of the
young men near him began to void the contents of his alcohol-saturated
stomach. Lupus hid a grin. Perfect! Slaves converged on the boy, holding his
head and trying to urge him forward. The sight and smell of the boy's vomit
triggered a chain reaction amongst the drunken youths. Another boy spewed as
he stumbled into the warehouse. Lupus took his arm solicitously, earning a
smile of gratitude from a harried woman wearing a slave's collar.
   Elated, Lupus dragged the sick youngster into a corner and let him throw up
the wine and sweetmeats he'd obviously gorged on during the day. Yet another
boy in the group began to throw up. Women in stylish gowns moved away, holding
their breath. Frowns of disgust wrinkled painted lips and manicured brows. A
little girl said very distinctly, "Yuck." Lupus wasn't certain just exactly
what the word meant, but the look on her face was clear enough. Even the older
men were giving the sick boys a wide berth. Lupus was pressed into the corner
with the sick youngsters, ignored by everyone except the boy who clung to his
arm and groaned.
   Then the air began to groan:
   It wasn't an audible sound, but it was exactly like the painful buzzing in
his skull the last time he'd been close to this warehouse. Lupus swallowed a
few times and tried to find the source of the noise that wasn't exactly a
noise. A hush fell over the crowd, punctuated messily by the sounds of
wretchedly ill boys and a few murmured words of encouragement from their
slaves. Lupus glanced at a blank stretch of wall, wondering yet again why
everyone had crowded into this particular warehouse
   The wall began to shimmer. Colors scintillated wildly through the entire
rainbow. Lupus gasped aloud, then controlled his involuntary reaction. A quick
glance showed him that no one had noticed the sweat that had started on his
brow. That was a relief, but it still took all his courage to continue looking
at the pulsing spot on the wall. Captivated by the sight, he couldn't look
away, not even when a dark hole appeared in the scintillating, circular
rainbows, his hindbrain whispering to run! The hole widened rapidly until it
had swallowed half the warehouse wall. Lupus fought back once more the
instinct to run, then swallowed instead and whispered softly, "Great war-god
Mars, lend me a bit of your confidence, please."
   People started stepping into it.
   They flew away so fast, it was as though they'd been catapulted by a great
war machine. Someone took the other arm of the boy Lupus was "helping" and
pulled him toward the gaping hole in the wall. Lupus wanted to stand rock-
still, terrified of that black maw that swallowed people whole down its
gullet. Then, thinking of vengeance and his carefully sharpened gladius, he
drew a deep breath for courage and moved forward in the midst of the half-
dozen boys who were manfully struggling to overcome their illness. Lupus
hesitated on the brink, sweating and terrified-
   Then squeezed shut both eyes and stepped forward.
   He was falling ...

   Mithras! Mars! Save me
   He went to his knees against something rough and metallic. Lupus opened his
eyes and found himself kneeling on a metal gridwork. The boy who had gone
through with him was vomiting again. Men hauling baggage stumbled past them,
struggling to get around. Lupus hauled the kid to his feet and dragged him in
the direction the others had taken, down a broad, gridwork ramp. Chaos reigned
at the bottom, where several other of the boys were still holding up the line,
vomiting piteously all over a young woman in the most outlandish clothing
Lupus had ever seen. Everyone in line was trying to slide some sort of flat,
stiff vellum chip into a boxlike device, but the boys were making a mess of
the entire procedure. The young woman said something that sounded exasperated
and disgusted and glanced the other way
   Lupus, who had no flat, stiff vellum chip to insert into the device,
slipped quietly past and fled for the nearest concealment: a curtain of
hanging vines and flowering shrubs that screened a private portico. Panting
slightly and cursing the fear-borne adrenalin that poured through his veins
the way it did just before a fight, Lupus Mortiferus took his first look at
the place where the thief who'd stolen his money had taken refuge.
   He swallowed once, very hard.
   Where am I? Olympus?
   He couldn't quite accept that explanation, despite the terrifying magic of
a hole through a wall that sometimes existed and sometimes didn't. Atlantis,
perhaps? No, that had been destroyed when the gods were young. If it had ever
existed at all. Where, then? Rome was civilization in this world, although
traders spoke of the wonders of the far, far east, from whence expensive silk
came.
   Lupus didn't know the name of the cities where silk was spun into cloth,
but he didn't think this was one of them. It wasn't a proper "city" at all.
There was no open sky, no ground, no distant horizon or wind to rustle through
treetops and evaporate sweat from his skin. The place was more like an
enormous ... room. One large enough to hold the towering Egyptian obelisk on
the spine of the Circus Maximus -- with room to spare between its golden tip
and the distant ceiling. The room was large enough that he could have laid out
a half-length chariot-race course down its length, had there not been shops,
ornamental fountains and ponds, decorative seats, and odd pillars with glowing
spheres at the top scattered throughout its length, along with a riot of
colorful Saturnalia and other, unfathomable, decorations from floor to
ceiling. The delighted shrieking of young children brought home just how lost
he was: a mere child of five clearly knew more about this place than he did.
   Staircases of metal everywhere climbed up to nothing, or to platforms which
served no sane purpose Lupus could divine. Signs he could not read scattered
strange letters colorfully across the walls. A few areas were fenced off,
leaving them inaccessible despite the seeming innocuous blankness of the walls
behind them. The image of the wine shop's wall opening up into a hole through
nothingness was so powerfully and recently embedded in his soul, Lupus
shuddered, wondering what lay behind those innocent-seeming stretches of wall.
People dressed as Romans mingle with others in costumes so barbaric and
foreign, Lupus could only stare.
   Where am I?
   And where, in all this confusion of shops, staircases, and people, was the
thief he sought? For one terrible moment, he shut his eyes and fought the urge
to charge straight up the ramp and back through the hole in the wall. He
managed to bring shuddering breaths under control only with difficulty, but he
did control himself. He was the Death Wolf of the Circus Maximus, after all,
not a milk-fed brat to fear the first strangeness life hurled his way. Lupus
forced his eyes open again.
   The hole in the wall had closed.

   He was trapped here, for evil or good.
   For just a second, terror overrode all other concerns. Then, slowly, Lupus
gripped the pommel of his gladius. The gods he worshipped had answered his
hourly prayers in their own mysterious fashion. He was trapped, yes.
   But so was the thief.
   All Lupus had to do was find a way to pass himself off as a member of this
sunless, closed-in world long enough to track the man down, then he would wait
for the next inexplicable opening of the wall and fight his way back home, if
necessary.
   The corners of his lips twisted into a mirthless smile.
   The thief would rue the hour he had cheated Lupus Mortiferus, the champion
Death Wolf of Rome. That decision holding hard-fought fear at bay, Lupus
clutched the pommel of his sword and set out on his hunt.
   Wherever populations of illegal refugees spring up without legal status
inside an existing, "native" population, certain networks are formed almost as
automatically as baby whales swim straight for the surface to gulp that first,
essential breath of air. Almost by unconscious accord, mutual aid systems will
emerge to help illegal aliens survive, perhaps in time even thrive, in a world
they do not understand, much less control.
   In the time terminals that had grown around those areas where gates formed
in close-enough profusion to warrant building a station, this unwritten rule
held as true as it did in the squalid streets of L.A. or New York, in the
streets of every major coastal city, in fact, where refugees of The Flood
which had followed The Accident, crowded together for safety, almost without
hope of finding any, each and every pitiful one of them without papers to
prove their identity or country of origin. Those uptime refugees struggled to
survive under even worse conditions, sometimes, than refugees trapped forever
on the time terminals. It didn't bear mentioning the living conditions of the
tidal waves of refugees fleeing endless, senseless wars raging throughout the
Middle East and the Balkans. Whole armies of them fled illegally across
national borders, fleeing genocide at the hands of enemies, many of them dying
in the attempt.
   Men and women, children and strays, those who wandered into the terminals
through open gates and found themselves trapped without uptime legal rights,
without social standing, protected by the thinnest of "station policies"
because the uptime governments couldn't decide what to do about them-set up
social systems of their own in courageous attempts to cope. A few went
hopelessly mad and wandered back through open gates, usually unstable ones,
never to be seen again. But most, desperate to survive, banded together in
sometimes loosely, sometimes tightly knit confederations. Often speaking only
the common language of gestures, they share news and resources as best they
could, sometimes even going so far as to hide from official notice any
newcomers who might be exploited or injured by regulations and officialdom's
sometimes harsh notice.
   On TT-86, management under Bull Morgan made such extreme efforts necessary
only rarely, but all downtimers shared a common bond few uptimers could really
understand. It was the experience of being lost together. Like the Christian
sects of Rome which had once met in the catacombs beneath the city or the
cells of Colonial American patriots hiding out from British armies and meeting
in any root cellar or thicket they could find, La-La Land's downtimer Council
met underground. Literally underground, beneath the station proper, in the
bowels of the terminal where machinery (which filled the air with chaos and
noise) kept the lights running, the sewage flowing, and the heated or chilled
air pumping; down where massive steel-and-concrete support beams plunged into
native, Himalayan rock, the refugees created their culture of survival.
   Amidst the noise and whine of machines they barely understood, they met in
the cramped caverns of La-La Land's physical plant to bolster one another's

courage, pass along news of critical importance to their standing, and share
fear, grief, loss, and triumph with one another. A few had taken it upon
themselves to hold special classes in uptime languages, while those most able
to understand the world in which they were trapped did their best to explain
it to those least able.
   Uptimers knew about it, but most didn't pay much attention to the
"underground society's" activities. On TT-86, management cared enough to
provide an official psychologist on the payroll, whose sole duty was to help
them adjust, but "Buddy" didn't really understand what it meant-emotionally,
in the depth of one's belly-to be torn away from one's home time and become
trapped in a place like the bustling time terminal that La-La Land had become
over the years.
   So downtimers turned to their own unofficial leaders in times of need or
crisis. One of those unofficial leaders was Ianira Cassondra. Sitting waiting
for Marcus to return to home to her, she spent a quiet moment bemused with the
thought that her own history was, in many ways, more unlikely than the odd
world in which she now led others through an unlikely existence. Ianira, born
in Ephesus, the holy city of the Great Artemis Herself, had learned the
secrets of rituals no man would ever understand from priestesses who followed
the old, old ways. Ianira, secluded from the world as only a priestess of
Artemis could be, was then, at sixteen, ripped from that world and sold into
virtual slavery through the marriage bed-tearing her away from beloved Ephesus
to the high citadel of Athens, across the Aegean Sea. Ianira, abandoned by her
kinsmen, was left in the shadow of the dusty Agora where Athenian men met
under blazing clear light to stroll amidst vendors of figs, olive oil, and
straw baskets while they discussed and invented political systems that would
change the world for the next twenty-six hundred years. Secluded from all that
she knew, Ianira had tried to learn the mysteries of the patron goddess of her
new home, only to be kept a virtual prisoner in her new husband's gyneceum.
   Ianira the "Enchantress," who had once danced beneath the moon in Artemis'
sacred glade, bow in hand, hair loose and wild, had prayed to her mother's
ancient Goddesses to deliver her-and, finally, They had heard. One night,
Ianira had fled the gyneceum and its imprisoning "respectability," driven by
grief and terror into the night-dark streets of Athens.
   Half bent on seeking asylum in Athene's great temple at the crowning height
of the city-and half intent on throwing herself from the Acropolis rather than
endure another night in her husband's home-Ianira had run on bare feet, lungs
sobbing for air, her body weak and shaking still from the birthing chair in
which she had so recently been confined.
   And there, in those silent, dusty streets where men changed history and
women were held in bondage, her prayers to Athene, to Hera, to Demeter and her
daughter Proserpina, Queen of the Underworld, to Artemis and Aphrodite and
even to Circe the Enchantress of Old, were finally answered. Pursued by an
enraged husband, she ran as fast as she could force her flagging body, knowing
all too well what fate awaited her if her husband caught her. Ianira's bare
toes raised puffs of dust in the empty, moonlit Agora, where the columns of
the gleaming white Hephestion rose on a hillock to one side and the painted
Stoa where philosophers met to discourse with their disciples rose ghostlike
before her in the haunted night.
   Still bent on trying to reach the shining Parthenon above her, Ianira
darted into an alleyway leading up toward the Acropolis and heard a beggar man
seated on the ground call out sharply, "Hey! Don't go through there!"
   A glance back showed her the figure of her husband, gaining ground. Terror
sent her, sobbing, up toward Athene's great temple. She literally ran into the
solid wall of a small cobbler's shop hugging the cliff face, staggered back--
and saw it happen.
   Inside the open doorway of the cobbler's shop, the dark air had torn

asunder before her disbelieving eyes. Her gown fluttered like moth's wings as
she faltered to a halt, staring at the pinpoint of light and movement through
it. Dimly, she was aware of people crowding around her, her husband's curses
at the back of the crowd. She hesitated only a moment. At the embittered,
battered age of seventeen, Ianira Cassondra lifted her hands in thanks to
whichever Goddess had listened-and shoved past startled men and women who
tried to stop her. She stepped straight into the wavering hole in reality, not
caring what she found on the other side, half-expecting to see the grand halls
of Olympus itself, with shining Artemis waiting to avenge her defiled
priestess.
   She found, instead, La-La Land and a new life. Free of many of her old
terrors, she learned to trust and love again, at least one man who had learned
caution from harsher masters than she had yet found. And even more precious,
something she had not thought possible, she had found the miracle of a young
man with brown hair and a laughing heart and dark, haunted eyes who could make
her forget the brutality and terror of a man's touch. He would not marry her
yet. Not because she had left a living husband, but because in his own mind-he
was not honorably free of debt. Ianira had never met this man who owned
Marcus' debt, but sometimes when she went into deep trance, she could almost
see his face, amidst the most unlikely surroundings she had ever witnessed.
   Whoever and wherever he was, waiting for Marcus to finish his days' labors,
Ianira hated the hidden man with such a passion as Medea had known when she'd
snatched up the dagger to slay her own sons, rather than let a replacement
queen raise them like slaves. When-if-he returned, Ianira mused, she herself
would find no barriers to taking-up her own dagger and punishing the man who
had treated her beloved so callously. It would not be the first time she'd
offered the pieces of a sacrificial human male to ancient Artemis, she who was
called by the Spartans Artamis the Butcher. She had thought herself long past
the need for such bloody work; but when her family was threatened, Ianira
Cassondra knew herself capable of anything. Quite a change from that time in
her life when the thought of sleeping with a one-time slave would have been
revolting to her-but the contrast between a year of "honorable" marriage and
Marcus' tender concern for a stranger lost in a world the gods themselves
would have found bewildering, had worked a magic Ianira could recognize.
Sharing Marcus' bed, his fears and dreams, Ianira gave him children to ease
the pain in his heart-and her own.
   To her surprise, Ianira found she not only enjoyed the humble, mundane
chores she had never before been forced to do, but also she enjoyed the
surprising status and acclaim her abilities and personality had earned her.
Odd to be so suddenly sought after-not only by other lonely downtimer men, but
by tourists, uptimer students, even professors of antiquities. In this strange
land, Ianira had discovered she could make many things, beautiful things:
gowns, baubles and ornaments, herbal mixes to help those in suffering. After a
few of these items had sold, demand was suddenly so great, she'd asked Connie
Logan if she would please teach her to use one of the new machines for sewing,
to make her gowns faster.
   Connie had grinned. "Sure. Just let my computer copy down any embroidery or
dress patterns you use an you've got a deal!"
   Connie was a shrewd businesswoman. So was she, Ianira remembered with a
smile. "The embroidery? No. The dress patterns? Yes, and welcome."
   Connie shook her head and sighed. "You're robbing me blind, Ianira, but I
like you. And if that Ionian chiton you're wearing is any example of what you
can do ... you've got a deal.
   So Ianira used Connie Logan's workshop to create the chitons she was
stockpiling toward a future business of her own. She'd spent her entire
pregnancy with Gelasia sewing, making up little bags to hold dried herbs,
learning to make the simple but beautiful kinds of jewelry she recalled so

clearly from her home and her now-dead husband's. And finally it paid off,
when she got the permit from Bull Morgan to open a booth, which Marcus made
for her in his free time. They painted it prettily and set up for business.
   Which was good, if not as phenomenal as she'd once or twice hoped. But
good, still, more than enough to pay for itself and leave extra for family
expenses, including Marcus' debt-free fund. Theirs was an odd marriage-Ianira
categorically refused to acknowledge the year of rape and abuse in Athens as a
legitimate marriage, as she had not consented-but the odd marriage was filled
with everything she could have wanted. Love, security, children, happiness
with the kindest man she'd ever known ... sometimes her very happiness
frightened her, should the gods become jealous and strike them all down.
   Marcus reeled in from work the night the Porta Romae cycled, far gone in
wine he rarely took in such quantities, and shook his head at the supper she'd
kept warm for him. Ianira put it away efficiently in the miraculous
refrigerator machine, then noticed silent tears sliding down his cheeks.
   "Marcus!" she gasped, rushing to him. "What is it, love?"
   He shook his head and steered her into the bedroom, not even bothering to
undress-either of them, then held her close, nose buried in her hair, and
trembled until he could finally speak.
   "It-it is Skeeter, Ianira. Skeeter Jackson. Do you remember me laughing
when he left for Romae, promising to give me a share of his bet winnings?"
   "Yes, love, of course, but-"
   He shifted a little, pressed something heavy inside a leather pouch into
her hand. "He kept his promise," Marcus whispered.
   Ianira held the heavy money pouch and just listened, holding him, while he
wept the kindness of an uptimer friend who had given him the means at long
last to discharge his heavy debt and finally marry her.
   "Why?" she whispered, not understanding the impulse which had driven a man
universally regarded as a scoundrel to such generosity.
   Marcus looked at her through eyes still flooded with tears. "He knows, I
think, a little of what we have known. If he could only find what we have
found ...."
   Marcus sighed, then kissed his wife. "Let me tell you." Ianira listened,
and as Marcus' tale proceeded, vowed to store in her heart the story of
Skeeter Jackson, who had, in his boyhood, stumbled through an open gate into
an alien land.
   "He was drunk that night," Marcus whispered to her in the darkness, so as
not to waken their young daughters in the crib beside their shared bed. "Drunk
and so lonely he started to talk, thinking I might understand. What he told me
... Some of it I still do not understand completely, but I will try to tell it
to you in his own words. He said it began as a game, because of his father..."
   The game, Skeeter had recalled through a haze of alcohol and pain, had
begun in deadly earnest. "It was my father's fault, or maybe my mother's. But
you know, even when you're only eight, you can figure the score, figure it
'bout as accurately as any bookie making odds in New York. Dad, he bought the
whole Pee-Wee League basketball team matching uniforms. Made sure our games
got local TV coverage. Did the same for my junior League baseball team. Spent
a lot of money on us, he did. And you know what, Marcus? He never came to a
game. Not one. Not a single, stinking, stupid game. Hell, it wasn't hard at
all to figure the score.
   Dad didn't give a damn about me. Just cared 'bout how much prestige he
could buy. How many customers his publicity would bring in, God damn him. He
was a good businessman, too. So rich it hurt your teeth just thinking' about
it."
   Marcus, only vaguely comprehending much of what Skeeter said, knew that the
young man was hurting nonetheless, worse than any resident he'd ever listened
to on a late, slow night at the Down Time Bar & Grill. Skeeter stared into his

whiskey glass. "Fill'er up again, would you, Marcus? That's good." He drained
half the glass in a gulp. "Yeah, that's good ... So, it's like this, I started
stealing things. You know, things at the mall. Little stuff at first, not
because I was poor, but because I wanted something I got by myself. I guess I
just got too goddamn sick of having Dad throw some expensive toy at me like a
bone to some flea-bitten dog that had wandered in, just to keep it quiet."
   He blinked slowly and gulped the rest of the whiskey, then just reached for
the bottle and poured again. His eyes were a little unfocussed as he spoke,
his voice a little less steady. "In fac', I was at th' mall the day it
happened. After The Accident, you know, that caused the time strings,
ever'body knew a gate could open up anywhere, but, hell, they usually cluster
together, you know, like the TV said all my life, in one little area small
enough to build a time station around'em and let the big new time tour
companies operate through 'em. But, my friend," he tipped more whiskey into
his glass, "sometimes gates just open up, no warning, no nothing, in the
middle of some place ain't no gate ever been seen before."
   He drank, his hand a little unsteady, and entirely without his volition,
the story came pouring out. He'd been careless, that time, they'd caught him
shoplifting the big Swiss Army Knife. But he was little and blubbered
convincingly and was slippery enough to dodge away the minute their guard was
down. He'd considered, for a few moments after the guard grabbed him, letting
the scandal hit the papers and television news programs, just to get even with
his father. But Skeeter didn't want the game to end that way. He wanted to
perfect it-then present his Dad with a scandal big enough to wreck his life as
thoroughly as he'd wrecked Skeeter's, game after missed baseball and
basketball and football game, lonely night after lonely night.
   So away he dodged, into the crowded mall, with the angry guard hot on his
heels and Skeeter whipping around startled shoppers, dodging into department
stores and out again through different exits on upper levels, and skidding
through the food court while the guard giving chase radioed for backup.
   It was all great fun-until the hole opened up in the air right in front of
him. The only warning he had was an odd buzzing in the bones of his head. Then
the air shimmered through a whole dazzling array of colors and Skeeter plunged
through with a wild yell, face flushed, hair standing on end, T-shirt glued to
his back with sweat and his sneakers skidding on nothing.
   He landed on stony ground, with a sky big as an ocean howling all around
him. A man dressed in furs, face greased against a bitter wind, stared down at
him. The man's expression wavered somewhere between shock, terror, and
triumph, all three shining at once in his dark eyes. Skeeter, winded by the
chase and badly dazed by the plunge through nothingness, just stood there
panting up at him for endless moments, eye locked to eye. When the man drew a
sword, Skeeter knew he had two choices: run or fight. He was used to running.
Skeeter usually found it easier to run than to confront an enemy directly,
particularly when running allowed him to lay neat traps in his wake.
   But he was out of breath, suddenly and shockingly frozen by the bitter
wind, and confronted with something a few thieving raids at the mall had not
prepared him to deal with: a man ready to actually kill him.
   So he attacked first.
   One eight-year-old boy with a stolen Swiss Army knife was no match for
Yesukai the Valiant, but he did some slight damage before the grown man put
him on the ground, sword at his throat.
   "Aw, hell, go on and kill me, then," Skeeter snarled. "Couldn't be worse'n
being ignored."
   To his very great shock, Yesukai-Skeeter learned later just exactly who and
what he was-snatched him up by his shirt, slapped his face, and threw him
across the front of a high-pommelled Yakka saddle, then galloped down a
precipitous mountainside that left Skeeter convince they were all going to

die: Skeeter, the horse, and the madman holding the reins. Instead, they
joined a group of mounted men waiting below.
   "The gods have sent a bogda," Yesukai said (as Skeeter later learned, once
he could understand Yesukai's language. He had heard the story recounted many
times over the cook fires of Yesukai's yurt.) He thumped Skeeter's back with a
heavy hand, knocking the breath from him. "He attacked brave as any Yakka
Mongol warrior, drawing the blood of courage." The man who'd slung him over
his saddle bared an arm where Skeeter had cut him slightly. "It is a sign from
the spirits of the upper air, who have sent us the beginnings of a man to
follow us on earth."
   A few younger warriors smiled at the ancient Mongol religious tenet;
grizzled old veterans merely watched
   Skeeter through slatted eyes, faces so perfectly still they might have been
carved of wood.
   Then Yesukai the Valiant jerked his horse's fretting head around to the
north. "We ride, as I have commanded."
   Without another word of explanation, Skeeter found himself bundled onto
another man's saddle, thrust into a fur jacket too big for him, a felt hat
with ear flaps tied under his chin-also too big for him-and carried across the
wildest, most desolate plain he had ever seen. The ride went on for hours. He
fell asleep in pain, woke in pain to be offered raw meat softened by being
stored between the saddle and the horse's sweating skin (he managed to choke
it down, half-starved as he was), then continued for hours more until a group
of black-felt tents he later learned to call yurts rose from the horizon like
bumps of mold growing up from the flat, bleak ground.
   They galloped into the middle of what even Skeeter could tell was some kind
of formal processional, scattering women and children as they smashed into the
festive parade. Screams rose from every side. Yesukai leaned down from his
saddle and snatched a terror-stricken young girl from her own pony, threw her
across his pommel and shouted something. The men of the camp were running
toward them, bows drawn. Arrows whizzed from Yesukai's mounted warriors. Men
went down, screaming and clutching at throats, chests, perforated bellies.
Deep in shock, Skeeter rode the long way back to the tall mountain where he'd
fallen through the hole in the air, wondering every galloping step of the way
what was to become of him, never mind the poor girl, who had finally quit
screaming and struggling and had settled into murderous glares belied by
occasional whimpers of terror.
   It was only much later that Skeeter learned of Yesukai's instructions to
his warriors. "If the bogda brings us success, I command that he be raised in
our tents as a gift from the gods, to become Yakka as best he can or die as
any man would of cold, starvation, or battle. If he brings the raid bad luck
and I fail to steal my bride from that flat-faced fool she is to marry, then
he is no true bogda. We will leave his cut-up body for the vultures."
   There was no compassion in Yesukai for any living thing outside his
immediate clan. He couldn't afford it. No Mongol could. Keeping the Yakka
clan's grazing lands, herds, and yurts safe from the raids of neighbors was a
full-time job which left no room in his heart for anything but cold
practicality.
   Skeeter had come to live in terror of him-and to love him in a way he could
never explain. Skeeter was used to having to fend for himself, so learning to
fight for scraps of food like the other boys after the adults had finished
eating from the communal stew pot wasn't as great a shock as it might have
been. But Skeeter's father would never have troubled himself to say things
like, "A Yakka Mongol does not steal from a Yakka Mongol. I rule forty-
thousand yurts. We are a small tribe, weak in the sight of our neighbors, so
we do not steal from the tents of our own. But the best in life, bogda, is to
steal from one's enemy's and make what was his your own-and to leave his yurts

burning in the night while his women scream. Never forget that, bogda. The
property of the clan is sacred. The property of the enemy is honorable gain to
be taken in battle."
   Boys, Skeeter learned, stole from one another anyway, sometimes starting
blood feuds that Yesukai either ended cruelly or-on occasion-allowed to end in
their own fashion, if he thought the wiser course would be to drive home a
harsh lesson. Hardship Skeeter could endure. Fights with boys twice his age
(although often half his size), nursing broken bones that healed slowly
through the bitter, dust-filled storms every winter, learning to ride like the
other boys his age, first on the backs of sheep they were set to guard, then
later on yaks and even horses, these Skeeter could endure. He even learned to
pay back those boys who stole from him, stealing whatever his enemies
treasured most and planting the items adroitly amongst the belongings of his
victim's most bitter enemies.
   If Yesukai guessed at his little bogda's game, he never spoke of it and
Skeeter was never reprimanded. He desperately missed nearly everything about
the uptime home he'd lost. He missed television, radio, portable CD players,
roller blades, skate boards, bicycles, video games-home versions and arcade
games-movies, popcorn, chocolate, colas, ice cream, and pepperoni pizza.
   But he did not miss his parents.
   To be accepted into the Yakka clan, with its banner of nine white yak
tails, as though he actually were important to someone, was enough, more than
enough, to make up for a father who had abdicated all pretense of caring about
his family. Not even the mother who, after her son had been missing for five
years only God knew where, more than likely dead, the son who had been rescued
by a time scout who'd given his life rescuing Skeeter-had welcomed him home
with a cursory peck on the cheek, obligatory for the multiple media cameras.
She had then, in her chilly, methodical way, calmly set about making lists of
the school classes he'd need to make up, the medical appointments he'd need,
and the new wardrobe that would have to be obtained, all without once saying,
"Honey, I missed you," or even, "How did you ever survive your adventure?"
never mind, "Skeeter, I love you with all my heart and I'm so glad you're home
I could cry"
   Skeeter's mother was too busy making lists and making certain he was
antiseptically clean again to notice his long, still silences. His father's
sole response was a long stare of appraisal and a quiet, "Wonder what we can
make of this, Hmm? TV talk shows? Hollywood? At least a made-for-TV movie, I
should think. Ought to pay handsomely, boy."
   And so, after two weeks of bitterly hating both of them and wishing them
gutted on the end of Yesukai's sword, when Skeeter's father-in the midst of
signing all the contracts he'd mentioned that first day-decided to send him to
some University school to have his brain picked on the subject of twelfth-
century Mongolian life and the early years of Temujin., firstborn son of
Yesukai-merely for the fee it would bring, Skeeter had done exactly what
Yesukai had taught him to do.
   He had quietly left home in the middle of the night and made his way to New
York by way of a stolen car to continue his real education: raiding the enemy.
The man and woman who'd given him life had become members of that enemy. He
was proud-deeply proud--of the fact that he'd managed to electronically empty
his parents' substantial bank account before leaving.
   Yesukai the Yakka Mongol Khan, father of the one-day Genghis Khan, had
begun Skeeter's formal training. New York street toughs furthered it. His
return to La-La Land, a time terminal he recalled as a half-finished shell of
concrete with few shops and only one active gate open for business, run by a
company called Time Ho! was the journeyman's equivalent of completing his
unique education.
   So, when Skeeter said, "My father made me everything I am today," he was

telling the bald-faced, unvarnished truth. The trouble was, he was never sure
which father he meant. He possessed no such uncertainty about which man's
values he'd chosen to emulate. Skeeter Jackson was a twenty-first century,
middle-class, miserable delinquent who had discovered happiness and purpose in
the heart and soul of the Yakka Mongol.
   And so he smiled when he worked his schemes against the enemy-and that
smile was, as others had sometimes speculated, absolutely genuine, perhaps the
only "genuine" thing about him. 'Eighty-sixers had become the closest thing
Skeeter now had to a family, a tribe to which he belonged, only on the
fringes, true; but he never forgot Yesukai's lesson. The property of Clan was
sacrosanct. And there was no greater pleasure than burning the enemy's yurts
in the night-or, metaphorically, scamming the last, living cent out of any
tourist or government bureaucrat who richly and most royally deserved it.
   If others called him scoundrel because of it ...
   So be it.
   Yesukai the Valiant would have applauded, given him a string of ponies for
his success, and maybe even a good bow-all things that Skeeter had coveted.
La-La Land was the only place where a latter-day Mongol bogda could practice
his art without serious threat of jail. It was also the only place on earth
where-if life grew too unendurable or the scholars caught up with him-he could
step back through the Mongolian Gate, find young Temujin, and join up again.
   "Y'know," Skeeter slurred, downing yet another glass of whiskey, "nights
when m' luck's down and I got no one, sometimes I swear I'm gonna do just
that. Walk through, next time th' Mongolia -Mongolian-Gate opens. Haven't done
it yet, Marcus. So far," he rapped his knuckles against the wet surface of the
wooden bar, "m' luck always takes a turn for the better, jus' in time. But my
Khan, he always said luck alone don't carry a man through life. That's why I
work so damn hard. It's pride, don' you see, not jus' survival. Gotta live up
t' Yesukai's standards. And genr'ally-" he hiccuped and almost dropped his
glass, "-genr'ally it's fun, 'cause a' bureaucrats anna' damn arrogant
tourists are a bunch a' idiots. Incomp'tent, careless idiots, don' even know
wha's around 'em." He laughed a short, bitter laugh. "Let'm stay blind'n deaf
'n stupid. Keeps the money coming, don't it?'
   He met Marcus' gaze with one that was almost steady, despite the appalling
amount of whiskey he'd consumed.
   "If no one else unnerstan's, so be it. 'S not their life t' live. 'S mine."
He thumped his chest, staining a Greek chiton of exquisite cut and embroidery
when the remaining whiskey in his glass sloshed across the garment and puddled
in his lap. "Mine, yunnerstand. My life. And I ain't disappointed, Marcus. Not
by much, I ain't."
   When Skeeter began to cry as though his heart were breaking, Marcus had
very gently taken the whiskey glass from his hand and guided him home, making
sure he was safely in bed in his own apartment that night. Whether or not
Skeeter recalled anything he'd said, Marcus had no idea. But Marcus remembered
every word-even those he didn't quite understand.
   When Marcus shared the precious story of Skeeter Jackson with Ianira, she
held her beloved close in the darkness and made sacred promises to her
Goddesses. They had given her this precious man, this Marcus who cherished not
only Ianira herself, but also their beautiful, sloe-eyed daughters. They had
given Ianira a man who actually loved little Artemisia and tiny little
Gelasia, loved their cooing laugher and loved dandling them by turns on his
knee and even soothing their tears, rather than ordering either beautiful
child left on the street to die of exposure and starvation simply because she
was female.
   There in the sacred privacy of their shared bed, Ianira vowed to her
Goddesses that she would do whatever lay in her power to guard the interests
of the man who had given her beloved the means to discharge his debt of honor.

When Marcus joined with her in the darkness, skin pressed to trembling skin,
she prayed that his seed would plant a son in her womb, a son who would be
born into a world where his father was finally a free man in his own soul. She
called blessings on the name of Skeeter Jackson and swore a vow that others in
the downtimer community would soon know the truth about the smiling, strange
young man who made such a point to steal from the tourists yet never touched
anything belonging to residents, and always treated downtimers with more
courtesy than any 'eighty-sixer on the station, with the possible exceptions
of Kit Carson and Malcolm Moore.
   Ianira understood now many things that had been mysterious to her. All
those cash donations, with no one taking responsibility for them ...
Downtimers had a champion they had not dreamed existed. Marcus, not
understanding why she wept in the darkness, kissed her tears and assured her
in ragged words that he would prove himself worthy of the love she gave so
freely. She held him fiercely and stilled his mouth with her own, vowing he
had proven his worthiness a thousand times over already. His response brought
tears to her eyes.
   In the aftermath of their love, she held him while he slept and made plans
that Marcus would neither understand nor approve. She didn't care. They owed a
debt which was beyond profound; Ianira would repay it as best she could. And
the only way she could think to do that was to further the fortunes of the man
who had given Marcus the means to purchase back his sacred honor.
   Ianira kissed Marcus' damp hair while he slept and made silent, almost
savage, decisions.
CHAPTER FIVE
   Wagers in La-La Land were big news. Essentially a closed environment for
full-time residents, gossip and betting took the place of live television and
radio programs, except for a couple of new on-terminal news programs run more
like "gossip hour" than a real news broadcast. The Shangri-La Radio and
Television Broadcasting system, an experimental outfit, to say the least, ran
taped movies and canned music when down-and-out newsies weren't conducting
official gossip sessions.
   And like all other newsies, who were snoops at heart, if someone bet on
something, everyone in La-La Land would eventually hear about it, the process
just speeded up a little now thanks to S.L.R.T.B.'s inquisitive, intrusive
staff. Even minor bets, like how long it would take a new batch of tourists to
react to pterodactyl splatters on their luggage, became juicy tidbits to pass
along over a beer, across the dinner table, or over the new cable system.
   When two of Shangri-La Station's most notorious hustlers made a wager like
the one Goldie Morran and Skeeter Jackson had made, not only did it spread
like wildfire through the whole station, it captured the top news slot of the
hour for twenty-four hours running and made banner headlines in the Shangri-La
Gazette: POCKETS-PICK'EM OR PACK'EM! The banner headline was followed
immediately, of course, by intimate details, including the full set of rules
laid down by librarian Brian Hendrickson.
   Skeeter read that article with a sense of gloom he couldn't shake. Everyone
who lived on TT-86 knew he never went after residents, but now the tourists
would be warned, too, drat it. He crumpled up the newspaper and glared across
Commons, wondering how much Goldie had scammed so far. Goldie had no such
principles where cheating and theft were concerned, which meant residents were
watching their wallets and possessions with extra care. It hurt Skeeter that
many now included him in that distrust, but that was part of the game.
   He glanced up at the nearest chronometer board to see which gate departures
were scheduled and pursed his lips. Hmm ... The Britannia Gate to London
tomorrow, Conquistadores this afternoon, medieval Japan through Edo
Castletown's Nippon Gate in three days, and the Wild West gate to Denver in

four, on a clockwork routine of exactly one week. He didn't like the idea of
going after tourists headed for the ancient capital of the japanese shogunate.
Some were just gullible businessmen, but lots of them were gangland thugs-and
all too often the businessmen traveled under the protection of the gangs.
   Skeeter had no desire to end up minus a few fingers or other arts of his
anatomy. If he were desperate enough . he'd risk it, but the other gates were
better bets. For now, anyway. The nearest gate opening would be the South
American "Conquistadores" Gate. That would present plenty of opportunity for
quick cash. He could set up more elaborate schemes for the later gates, given
the time to work them out. And, of course, he kept one eye eternally peeled
for Mike Benson or his security men. He did not want to get caught and Benson
would have security crawling around all the gates, now that word of the wager
was out.
   Skeeter cursed reporters everywhere and went to his room to get into
costume. If he had to dodge security, he'd better do something to disguise
himself.
   Otherwise, he'd be looking for a new home next time Primary cycled. The
fear that he would be forced to do just that put the extra finishing touches
on his disguise.
   When Skeeter finally finished, he grinned into the mirror. His own birth
mother-God curse her, wouldn't have recognized him. He rubbed his hands in
anticipation-then swore aloud when the telephone rang. Who could possibly be
calling, other than Security or some damnable snoop of a reporter who'd
somehow dug up the truth about Skeeter from some dusty newspaper morgue?
   He snatched the phone from the hook, considering leaving it to dangle down
the wall, then muttered, "Yeah?"
   "Mr. Jackson?" a hesitant voice asked. -Skeeter Jackson?"
   "Who wants to know?" he growled.
   "Oh, ah, Dr. Mundy. Nally Mundy."
   Skeeter bit his tongue to keep from cursing aloud.
   That goddamned historical scholar who interviewed downtimer after downtimer
had been here so long he was practically considered a legitimate 'eighty-
sixer. Well, Skeeter wasn't a legitimate downtimer and he wasn't about to talk
to Nally Mundy or any other historical scholars about anything, much less his
years in Mongolia. In some ways, scholars were worse than newsies for nosing
around in a guy's private life.
   Mundy must've seen the news broadcasts or read the Gazette, which had
reminded him to make The Monthly Call. Sometimes Skeeter genuinely hated Nally
Mundy for having come across that years-old scrap of newspaper clipping. Some
thoughtless fool must've put it into a computer database somewhere, one that
had survived The Accident, and Mundy, thorough old coot that he was-had run
across it on a search for anything that survived relating to Temujin.
   He actually groaned aloud while leaning his brow against the cold wall. The
sound prompted a hesitant, "Have I called at an inconvenient time?"
   Skeeter nearly laughed aloud, imagining all too clearly what the good
historian must be thinking. Skeeter's reputation with women being what it was
... "No," he heard his voice say, while the rest of him screamed, Yes, you
idiot! Tell him you're screwing some tourist through the bed so you can get
out of here and steal anything you can get from all those Conquistadores!
They're even stupider than you are! But he couldn't very well say that.
Fortunately, Dr. Mundy rescued him from saying anything at all.
   "Ah, well, good, then." The good doctor-like all 'eighty-sixers-knew better
than to ask Skeeter anything about his current affairs (business or
otherwise), but some men were stone-hard persistent about Skeeter's past
affairs. "Yes, then, well, to business." Skeeter reined in considerable
impatience. He'd heard all this before from the fussy little man. "I'm
starting a new series of interviews, you see, with generous compensation, of

course, and there is so much you could reveal about Temujin's early years, the
father and mother who molded him into what he eventually became. Please say
you'll come, Skeeter."
   Skeeter actually hesitated a moment. Generous compensation, huh? The old
fiddler in other people's lives must've received a beaut of a grant from
somewhere. And Skeeter did need money badly, for the bet. But Brian
Hendrickson would never allow money earned from an interview with Nally Mundy
to count toward his bet.
   "Sorry, Doc. Answer's still no. Don't want my name and photo scattered all
over the goddamned world. I've made a few enemies, you know, over the years.
Professional hazard. I'd be pretty goddamned stupid if I let you put my name
and photo all over your next little research paper. Hell, it wouldn't be
stupid, it'd be suicidal. Forget it, Doc."
   A nasal sigh gusted through the receiver. "Very well, then. You do have my
number?" (Skeeter had thrown it into the trash a long time ago.) "Good." Mundy
took his silence for assent, a trick Yesukai had taught him: when to speak and
when to hold silent as a lizard on the sun-warmed rocks. "If you change your
mind Skeeter, whatever the reason, whatever the hour, please call me. We know
so very little, really about Temujin, his early childhood, his relatives-
anything that could shed light on the boy who grew up to be Genghis Khan."
   Skeeter did realize enough to know that sending researchers down the gate
would be tantamount to murder. The scout who'd brought him back had died in
the attempt. Either Temujin's band of hunted brothers and followers would kill
them, or Temujin's enemies would. He really was the only source. And since
Yesukai had taught him the knack of remaining silent, he did so. The Dreaded
Call would come every month of every year, anyway, regardless of what Skeeter
did. Maybe one of these days he'd even be desperate enough to accept Mundy's
terms. But not yet. Not by a long shot.
   "Well, then, that's it, I suppose. I always hate letting you go, young man.
One of these days I'm going to read in the Gazette that you've ended up dead
through one of your endless schemes and that would be a great loss to
scholarship. A very great loss, indeed. Do, please call, then, Skeeter. You
know i'll be waiting."
   Skeeter ignored the nearly overt sexual overtone to that last remark and
thought, Yeah, you'll be waiting in a pine box before I tell you a single
syllable about Yesukai and his wife and their son ... The moon would turn
blue, hell would freeze over, and Skeeter would settle down to a nice, honest
way to make a living before he talked to Nally Mundy.
   Yakka Mongols did not betray their own.
   He snorted, checked his disguise in the mirror, smoothed out the smudge on
his forehead where he'd leaned against the wall, then put Nally Mundy and his
grandiose dreams of a Pulitzer or Nobel-or whatever the hell he'd win for
Skeeter's intervievrall firmly out of mind. He was actually whistling a jaunty
little war tune when he locked his door and headed for the Conquistadores Gate
with its truncated pyramid, colorful wall paintings, fabulous Spanish
restaurants, "peasant" dancers whirling to holiday music played on guitar and
castanet, their full skirts and rich, black hair flying on a wind of their own
making-and, of course, dozens of pinatas in wild colors and shapes, hanging
just out of reach, due to be smashed open at the appointed hour by as many
kids as wanted to join in the fun.
   Skeeter was whistling to himself again as he pilfered the equipment he'd
need, then headed off to the Conquistadores Gate to see what profits might be
drummed up.
   Goldie Morran tapped slim, age-spotted fingers against the glass top of her
counter and narrowed her eyes. Publish their bet, would they? She'd find a way
to get even with that idiotic reporter, make no mistake about that. And the
editor, too-another score to settle.

   Goldie smiled, an expression that signaled to those who knew her well that
someone's back was about to be stabbed with something akin to a steel icicle.
   Goldie did not like to be crossed.
   That ridiculous little worm, Skeeter Jackson, wasn't the only upstart on
this time terminal who would pay for crossing her. The nerve of him,
challenging her to such a bet. Her smile chilled even further. She'd already
made arrangements for his eviction and uptime deportation, trough a little
side deal she'd made with Montgomery Wilkes. "I'll rid you of that little
rat," she'd purred over a glass of his favorite wine.
   Montgomery, nostrils pinched as though speaking to her were akin to
smelling a skunk dead on the road for five days, said, "I know the kind of
games you play, Goldie Morran. One day I'll catch you at them and send you
packing." He smiled-and Goldie was smart enough to know that the head ATF
agent on TT-86 had the power and the authority to do just that, if he caught
her. Light glinted in his cold, cold eyes, always shocking with their contrast
to his bright red hair. His smile altered subtly. "But for now, I'm more.
interested in Skeeter Jackson. He's a pest. Technically, he never enters my
jurisdiction, so long as he doesn't try to take anything uptime, but he's bad
for business. And that's bad for tax collection."
   He leaned back in his chair, black uniform creaking where the creases bent,
and held her gaze with a glacial smile.
   Goldie, maintaining a smile that hurt her face, nodded solemnly. "Yes. I
understand your job very well, Montgomery." Better than he understood it
himself, the autocratic... "Believe me, I know just how bad for business the
Skeeters of this world are. So... it's in our mutual interest to be rid of
him. I win a harmless little wager, you say goodbye to a thorn in your side
forever."
   "If you win."
   Goldie laughed. "If? Come, now, Monty, I was in this business before that
boy was born. He doesn't have a chance and he's the only one in Shangri-La
Station who doesn't know it. Draw up the papers. Date 'em. Then toss him
through Primary and good riddance."
   Montgomery Wilkes actually chuckled, a laugh Goldie got on tape-thereby
providing the necessary proof she needed to win that little private wager on
the side with Robert Li about the outcome of her conversation with the head
ATF agent. Montgomery Wilkes had then drained his glass, nodded as pleasantly
as she'd ever seen him nod, and had taken his leave, plowing through a crowd
of tourists like a wooly rhinoceros charging through a scattered herd of
impala.
   Back in her shop, Goldie once again tapped her fingertips against the cool
glass of her counter, then swept away the latest copy of the Shangri-La
Gazette in one disgusted movement. The newspaper fluttered into the trash can
at the end of the counter, settling like dead butterflies. Skeeter win? Ha!
That little amateur is about to eat his boast, raw. The shop door opened,
admitting half-a-dozen customers due to depart in a few hours through the
South American Conquistadores Gate. They needed to exchange currency. Goldie
smiled and set to work.
   Marcus' shift ended shortly after the cycling of the Porta Romae, which
left him rubbing shoulders with crowds of men and women dressed as wealthy
Romans. Although he knew them to be impostors, he could not overcome the
ingrained need, beaten into him over years, to scurry deferentially out of
their way, to the extreme of hugging the wall with his back flat against the
concrete when necessary to avoid offending any single one of them. Most were
decent enough and a few even smiled at him-mostly women or young girls, or
swaggering little boys full of themselves and willing to share their
excitement with any passerby.
   Several young men, however, had been seriously ill-a common enough

occurrence for returning tourists. Downtimers like himself, hired as cleaning
staff for the time terminal, were busy mopping up the mess. Marcus nodded to
one he knew passingly well, a Welshman from Britannia who had pledged some
sort of lifelong oath to Kit Carson-a time scout Marcus held in awe, almost
more because of the kindness he showed Marcus than because he had once
survived the Roman arena.
   When Marcus nodded to Kynan Rhys Gower, he received a return grimace and
half-hearted smile. "Stupid boys," Kynan Rhys Gower said carefully in the
English everyone here used-or tried to. "They drink much, yes? Make stink and
mess."
   Marcus nodded Roman fashion, tipping his head back slightly. "Yes. Many
tourists come back sick from Rome. Especially boys who think they are men."
   Kynan's sun-lined face twisted expressively as he rolled his eyes toward
the ceiling. "Yes. And Kynan Rhys Gower washes it."
   Marcus clapped his shoulder. "I have done worse work, my friend."
   The stranded Welshman-who had no hope at all of ever returning home, having
stumbled into La-La Land through an unstable gate that had not opened again-
met his gaze squarely. "Yes. Worse work. In Rome?"
   Marcus didn't bother to hold in the shiver that caught his back. He
couldn't have, had he tried. "Yes, in Rome." He was just about to speak again
when a man dressed in an expensive tunic, wearing a gladius belted to his
waist, stepped out from behind a vined portico and shot a tentative glance
both ways before heading past them. Marcus blinked. He knew that face. Didn't
he? He stared at the man's retreating back. Surely he was wrong. The face in
his memory, the face that man wore, didn't belong to a tourist-it was someone
he'd seen in Rome long ago, before his latest master had brought him to Time
Terminal Eighty-Six then vanished uptime on his ever-mysterious business.
   "Marcus?" Kynan asked quietly. "Something is wrong?"
   "I-I'm not sure. I-" He shook his head. "No. It could not be. It is only a
man who looked like someone I once saw. But that is impossible. All tourists
look alike, anyway," he added with a feeble attempt at a grin.
   Kynan laughed dourly. "Aye. Ugly and rude. I finish, yes? Then maybe you
come to my room, we eat together?"
   Marcus smiled. "I would like that. Yes. Call me on the telephone."
   Kynan just groaned. Marcus laughed. Kynan Rhys Gower still called the
telephone "Satan's trumpet-but he'd learned to use it and was beginning to
enjoy its convenience. Marcus had no idea who "Satan" was supposed to be. He
cared very little for the religious beliefs of others in La-La Land, figuring
it was a man's own business what gods he worshipped.
   Whoever this "Satan" was, Kynan feared him mightily. Marcus admired the
courage it took the Welshman to use the telephone. He was hoping time would
cement the tentative friendship growing between them. Marcus had many who
called him "friend" but very few he could truly call on as friend when trouble
struck.
   "I will call," Kynan agreed, "when I wash this. And myself" His grimace was
all too expressive. Kynan's disgust of tourists ran far deeper than Marcus',
who found most of their baffling antics amusing more than maddening.
   "Good." Marcus gave him a cheery smile, then headed in the direction of his
own rooms in Residential to shower and change clothing and see what he might
contribute to the joint meal out of the family's meager supplies-riches,
compared to what Kynan Rhys Gower would have at his place, though. He wondered
if Ianira might have left one of her famous cheesecakes in the refrigerator.
He grinned, recalling the sign Arley Eisenstein had posted in the Delight's
menu-holder the last time Ianira had sold him a recipe: "A Bite of History ...
A Taste of Heaven." If she'd left any of their last one, he could raid a slice
or two to contribute. Marcus' grin deepened as he recalled Ianira's
astonishment over the serious discussions even important politicians and

philosophers of Athens had held routinely on the merits of this or that type
of cheesecake. He hadn't known the delicacy was so ancient.
   Arley had paid her enough money that she'd been able to open that little
stall he'd made for her in the Little Agora section of Commons, near the
Philosophers' Gate, which was owned by the uptime government. Even Time Tours,
the biggest company in the business, had to pay to send its tour groups
through Philosophers' Gate. Tickets to ancient Athens were expensive. Several
touring companies had even approached Ianira about guiding, for a fabulous
salary and benefits. She'd turned them down in language they'd found shocking,
but which Marcus understood in his bones.
   He would not have set foot through the Porta Romae again for anything less
than rescuing his family.
   He was strolling toward her booth, to ask if she might like to join him at
Kynan's place for dinner, when he spotted the man with the gladius again.
Whoever the fellow was, he ducked furtively through a door which led to the
storage rooms of Connie Logan's Clothes and Stuff shop.
   Finding that peculiar, Marcus paused. Was the man on Connie's payroll? He
knew the eccentric young outfitter constantly hired agents to travel downtime
researching costumes, fabrics, utensils, and other assorted items used in
daily life on the other side of La-La Land's many gates, but Marcus didn't
know this man.
   And there was still that odd tingle of near-recognition chilling his spine.
It couldn't be ... could it? He decided to wait, settling down beside a
shallow pond stocked with colorful fish, and watched the door. Brian
Hendrickson strolled by, deep in conversation with a guide. They were speaking
Latin. From the sound of it, Brian was in the middle of a language lesson,
stressing the finer points of conversational Latin to the relatively new
guide. Across the way, Connie's storeroom door opened again. The man Marcus
was following stepped out into the open. A woman nearby started to giggle.
Even Marcus gaped. Cowboy chaps over jeans, topped by a Victorian gentleman's
evening jacket, finished off by a properly wrapped but ludicrous toga and
stovepipe hat ...
   For an instant, his gaze locked with the other man's.
   A dark flush stained weathered cheeks. The man Marcus was positive he'd
seen before ducked back into Connie's warehouse. The giggling tourist caught a
friend's attention and hurried over to tell her what she'd just seen. The door
opened again moments later; this time, his quarry emerged wearing only the
jeans and chaps and a western-style shirt. Marcus noted that he still wore the
gladius, however, hidden carefully beneath the leather chaps. That worried
him. Should I report this?
   Concealed weapons were against station rules. Openly carried weapons were
fine. But only when stepping through a gate was one permitted to conceal one's
personal weapons. Those were the rules and Marcus was careful to live by them.
But he also knew it wasn't always a good idea to mix one's affairs with those
of a stranger. Well, he could always report the fellow anonymously to Mike
Benson or one of his security men through a message on one of the library
computers.
   Or he could simply ignore the whole thing and go take that shower. He had
just about decided on the latter course of action when the stranger turned to
glance back at him. Something in the movement, the set of the mouth and the
dark light in those eyes, clicked in Marcus' memory. Shock washed through him
like icy water. He gripped his seat until his hands ached. It wasn't possible
... yet he was certain. As certain as he had ever been about anything in his
life. Sweat started under his shirt and dripped down his armpits.
   Rome's Death Wolf, Lupus Mortiferus, had come to Shangri-La.
   What purpose could the Circus's deadliest gladiator possibly have in coming
here? Marcus the former slave didn't know-but he intended to find out. He owed

the men and women who'd befriended him here that much. Heart in his throat,
blood pounding in his ears, Marcus waited until the Wolf of Death turned his
attention elsewhere, then cautiously eased from his seat and began to follow.
   Skeeter Jackson, in heavy disguise, wheeled his cart toward a tourist near
the Conquistadores Gate. The man was in the middle of a nasty harangue
directed at a harried tour guide. Her face was flushed with anger, but her job
prevented her from venting it. Skeeter stepped in with a smile.
   "Sir, baggage check for leave-behind luggage?"
   The man turned to note the other tagged suitcases on Skeeter's cart, each
tag with the owner's name and hotel scrawled across it, with the tear-off stub
missing. The tour guide's eyes met Skeeter's and widened in recognition. For a
second, he thought he'd been blown for good. Then her eyes flashed briefly
with unholy joy. She winked and fled, leaving Skeeter's quarry to his just
deserts.
   "Why, yes, that would be convenient. That idiotic guide-"
   It was the same old story. Stupid tourist doesn't read the rules, then
takes out his mad on the guides. Skeeter smiled as charmingly as he could-
which was very, and tagged the man's expensive leather bags, tearing off
numbered receipts which he handed over. "Thank you, sir. All you need to do to
reclaim your luggage on return is present those claim stubs to your hotel.
Have a good trip, sir."
   The man actually tipped him. Skeeter hid a grin, then maneuvered his now-
full cart toward the edge of the growing crowd. And there, just as he was
passing a woman whose cases were also on his cart, it happened. He came eye-
to-eye with Goldie Morran.
   "Is that the man?" Goldie asked the tourist whose cases Skeeter had
"checked."
   "Yes!"
   Goldie smiled directly into Skeeter's eyes. That was when he noticed
security ringing the area.
   "All's fair in love and bets, Skeeter, darling." Goldie's eyes glinted far
back in their depths with murderous amusement.
   It was either ditch hard-won gains or lose the bet and his home. Skeeter
did neither. Goldie's own mouth had uttered his one chance for salvation.
   "Mike!" he yelled, "Hey, Mike Benson! Over here!"
   Goldie's eyes went round and her pinched mouth fell slack.
   Benson lost no time approaching. "As I live and breathe ..."
   Before he could finish, Skeeter said indignantly, "Here I am saving these
poor folks from Goldie's clutches, making sure she doesn't make a grab for
their luggage, and she has the nerve to accuse me -well, Mr. Benson, I want
you to take a good look at these tags, here. I was on my way to all these
hotels to turn over these cases, when Goldie, here, furious I'd got in her
way, started making nasty accusations."
   Every tourist within earshot was goggle-eyed, listening to nothing else.
   Mike's forehead creased with vertical and horizontal lines. "And you just
expect me to swallow that pack of-"
   "Not only do I insist you believe it, I demand an escort to every one of
these hotels so I can make sure every bag is locked safely away. Don't trust
Goldie, Mr. Benson. She might have me waylaid by some of those paid thugs of
hers."
   Mike Benson stared from one to the other, then started-astonishingly-to
laugh. "Look at the pair of you. Priceless! Okay, Skeeter my boy, let's go put
these cases in the hotels' lock-up rooms. I'll go along just to be certain
nobody waylays you on the trip."
   Skeeter seethed inwardly, having hoped Mike would let him just trundle his
cart away for some time to rifle the contents of watches, cameras, jewelry,
etc. Instead, he smiled and said, "Sure thing."

   "Just a minute!" Goldie snapped. "If you're so altruistic, why the
disguise?"
   Skeeter smiled into her eyes, noting the fury in them. "Why, Goldie, so
your agents wouldn't recognize me and drop a sap across the back of my head to
get these." He waved expansively at the suitcases. "There's gotta be a fortune
in uptime jewelry in 'em, and who better than you to break up the pieces and
fence the stones?"
   Without waiting for a smarter and potentially deadlier protest from Goldie,
Skeeter shoved his cart forward through the aping crowd and sang out, "Coming,
Mr. Benson Gotta lot of work waiting, getting these good people's cases back
safe."
   Benson did as he'd promised, following Skeeter to each and every hotel on
Skeeter's list. He verified each case as it was put into storage, then checked
his list against Skeeter's supposed-to-be-fake manifest of names, hotels,
uptime addresses, the works, not to mention the claim-ticket numbers. He
grunted when the work was finally done. "Huh. Kept you clean this time, at
least."
   "But Mr. Benson, you wound me. Honest."
   "Don't `Mr. Benson' me, punk. I was a damned fine cop before you were even
born, so give it a rest. You came close, buddy, but you slithered out of it.
Just be sure I'll be watching you double-close from now on."
   "Well, sure. Hey, thanks for the escort!"
   Benson just gave him a dour look. Skeeter lost no time vanishing into the
thick holiday crowds, heading for the hotel he had "borrowed" the cart and
claim tickets from. He didn't want to leave any loose strings if Benson should
question the hotel manager or bellhops. Not that Benson could prove anything.
He just didn't want to go through what Benson benignly referred to as his
"lean-on-'em-a-little-and-they'll-sing" speech.
   Although as the head of ATFs presence on TT-86, meaning that technically,
Montgomery Wilkes was the highest-ranking officer of the law on the station,
Monty's actual jurisdiction was limited to the Customs area near Primary (much
to Monty's everlasting, abiding rage, since he guessed how often he got
hoodwinked outside that jurisdiction).
   In all else, Benson reigned supreme. And if he wanted to keep Skeeter
locked up for a month on bread and water, just for questioning, there was
nothing in the station's charter that prevented him from doing just that. It
was one of the reasons Skeeter was always so careful-and it was also the
impulse behind his effort to try a little scamming downtime, away from
Benson's watchful eye.
   Of course, that'd nearly gone sour, would have if not for that gorgeous
racehorse. The Lupus Mortiferus incident had prompted Skeeter to give up any
further thoughts of downtime scamming until he knew a whole lot more about the
culture he was planning to rip off. He understood far better, now, why guides
and scouts spent all their free time-most of it, anyway-studying.
   That Skeeter's target would be Rome again was a foregone conclusion,
despite his somewhat desperate, drowning promise. He intended to hit rich
Romans often and hard, because the arrogant bastards deserved it so much. But
not just yet. He needed a lot of hours in the library and its soundproof
language booths. And before he could do so much as that, he needed to win a
little bet, first. Goldie had already proven ruthless enough to arrange for
him to get caught.
   Goldie'd get what she had coming, of that Skeeter was certain.
   He could hardly wait to wave bye-bye as she hauled as much as she could
afford to pay taxes on when she was forced uptime and use the rest of her
assets to make bail. Skeeter chuckled. If things really went his way, he might
even have enough at the end of the bet to buy out what Goldie couldn't take
with her, including that breeding pair of Carolina parakeets some visitor had

brought back from Colonial Williamsburg. Extinct birds, and she had a breeding
pair of 'em. Could get more any time she wanted, too, by pulling the right
strings-the ones attached to her downtime agents. Skeeter made a little wager
with himself that Sue Fritchey didn't even know they were on station.
   Well, if it came down to those birds (rumor had it Goldie was actually
attached to them, emotionally) or Skeeter's continued life on TT-86, he'd know
exactly what to do. Call up Sue Fritchey and make her famous all over again.
Undoing Goldie in the process.
   The klaxon and announcement came over the Commons' big speakers, warning of
the impending cycling of the Conquistadores Gate. Skeeter grinned, wondering
what had happened to Goldie after he'd left. Hopefully, at least a third of
what she deserved, interfering like that in one of his scams. At least now
he'd been warned about the way she intended to play this out, which might give
him the edge he needed to Win. Disconsolately, thinking of the thousands of
bucks' worth of easily sold items in those lost suitcases, Skeeter headed for
the library to have Brian value his "tips" into the official betting ledger.
   Skeeter hunted him out behind the front desk, where the librarian was busy
updating the computer's research index, actually deleting the lurid red
"stamp" across the face of an entry page that read: ALL KNOWN COPIES DESTROYED
IN AFTERMATH OF THE ACCIDENT. LIBRARIAN WILL UPDATE THIS LISTING SHOULD THIS
STATUS CHANGE.
   Brian didn't get a chance to remove very many of those stamps from the
system.
   "Hey, Brian. What turned up somewhere?"
   Hendrickson swung around to face him. "Oh, it's you." His accent was wildly
at odds with his appearance, which was that of an ex-military, scholarly
gentleman. His dark face curved into a genuine smile. Despite the words, he
kept smiling. "Somebody found a copy of Pliny the Younger's collection of
histories hidden in their grandparents' attic. Asked the nearest university
were they interested or should they just toss it out? The university paid 'em
for it-a hundred-thousand, I believe it was-and had an armored car with armed
guards pick it up for safe transportation. After they sealed it in a nitrogen
atmosphere.
   "Anyway, the university scanned the whole bloody thing and started selling
copies on CD to every time terminal library, every other university or public
library that wanted one. Library of Congress asked for five."
   Skeeter, who had no idea who Pliny the Younger was, managed to pull off a
sufficiently impressed whistle of appreciation. "Weren't taking any chances,
were they?"
   "No. It's the last known copy in the world. A translation, as it happens,
which is too bad, but still a copy, nonetheless. To scholars and scouts, it's
absolutely priceless."
   "Huh. I know you're not supposed to try and steal artwork from downtime
unless you can prove it would've been destroyed anyway. Same goes for books
and such, huh?"
   "Oh, absolutely." Brian's eyes twinkled. "And Skeeter -- don't even think
of trying it. Stolen antiquities are out of both Mike's and Monty's
jurisdiction. That's a federal matter and the bully boys uptime don't look too
kindly on somebody breaking-at least, getting caught breaking-the First Law of
Time Travel."
   "So that's why Robert Li's our official representative of-" he had to stop
a moment to recall the actual name, not just the acronym "-the International
Federation of Art Temporally Stolen? So he can copy the stuff for everybody's
use, then send an I.F.A.R.T.S. agent downtime to put it back where it came
from?"
   "Precisely. There's an enormous uptime market for such things." Brian
looked at him. "And if you decide to join ranks with the breakers and smashers

raping our past of its treasures, I'll testify at your trial and urge the
death penalty."
   Brian Hendrickson's intensity scared him a little. Skeeter held both hands
up, palms toward the librarian. "Hey, I was just curious. I've got a lot of
catching to do myself, you know, since I never really finished grade school-
never mind high school."
   Homesick longing struck him silent before he could go any further.
   Brian looked at him in an odd fashion for a moment, then-in a much gentler
voice-asked, "Skeeter? Just why did you come here?"
   "Huh? Oh." He dug into his pocket, pulled out the coins and bills he'd
received as "tips" on the almost successful suitcase pilfering he'd attempted,
and explained what had gone down.
   Brian glanced at the money, repeated Skeeter's story word-for-word (not
scary-terrifying) then shook his head.
   "What do you mean, the tips don't count?"
   Brian Hendrickson, his dark face set now with lines of distaste, all trace
of his earlier joy wiped away by deep unhappiness, said coolly, "You earned
those tips for fair labor. If you'd succeed in stealing the luggage, the
contents would've counted, but the tips still wouldn't have. So I can't count
them now, even though they're all you managed to hang onto."
   "But-but the damned tourists are warned they're supposed to check leave-
behind luggage at the hotels, not with `curbside' guys like me. The tips are
stealing, same as the luggage would be."
   Brian just shook his head. "Sorry, Skeeter. A tip is, by definition,
something earned as part of a service accorded someone else. The cases are
safely locked away, the tips are income-pure and simple-so your twenty-oh-
seventy-five doesn't count."
   Skeeter stuffed the bills and coins back into his pockets and stalked out
of the library.
   Who'd ever heard of such a thing, not counting scammed tips?
CHAPTER SIX
   "Please have your timecards ready so the scanner can update them as you
approach the gate ..."
   Goldie had, fortunately, managed to escape the angered, hot-blooded
Spaniards who were the most frequent customers through the Conquistadores
Gate. One lady about ten years Goldie's junior shoved through the crowd to
follow.
   "Wait! Wait, please, I wanted to thank you!"
   Goldie stopped and turned, allowing a puzzled smile to drift into place.
"Thank me? Whatever for?"
   "For ... for saving my luggage." The woman was still out of breath
slightly. "You see, my husband and I were going downtime to research some of
our ancestors. We'd planned to attend the hotel's Christmas ball as a kind of
celebration after we got back and, I know I'm silly, but I packed away my gown
and great grandmother's diamond tiara, necklace, and a few other matching
pieces in that suitcase. You've saved me so much grief! I never did believe
the ridiculous story that young man told the security chief and neither did
Rodrigo. Please, let me say thank you."
   She was holding out a slightly used bill with a one and an undetermined
number of zeroes after it.
   "I couldn't possibly," Goldie protested weakly, having deciphered the
number of zeroes. A thousand dollars?
   "Oh, please, Rodrigo and I have more money than we know how to spend, but
those jewels are absolutely irreplaceable. Please. Take it."
   Goldie faked reluctance beautifully, allowing the other woman to push it
into her slack hand. She closed careful fingers around the bill, and while she

maintained an outward mask of surprise and lingering reluctance, inwardly she
was gloating. A thousand bucks! A thousand! Wait until Skeeter hears about
this! Maybe he'll choke on envy and we'll be rid of him even sooner!
   Goldie thanked her generosity, pocketed the bill, reassured her that she
hadn't missed the gate departure yet, then watched her disappear into the
crowd milling around the waiting area. Then, exulting in her good fortune,
Goldie headed toward the library, grinning fit to crack her skull. Strike one,
you little fool. Two more and you're out for the count! Nobody loved a wager
more than Goldie Morran-and nobody else in La-La Land came remotely close to
Goldie's orgasmic pleasure at cheating to win. It was not how the game was
played that counted with Goldie. It was about how much she could rook out of
the opposition's wallet, downtime coinage, or bank account.
   Just a few more days and Skeeter Jackson would be gone.
   For good.
   She passed Kit Carson, who was sitting at a cafe table sharing a beer with
his pal the freelance guide, Malcolm Moore. She grinned and waved, leaving
them to stare after her.
   Let 'em wonder.
   After what Skeeter had tried to do to Kit's grandkid, those two would
surely be more appreciative than most when Goldie's plans came to full
fruition. Goldie very carefully did not think about what she had very nearly
done to Kit's granddaughter. Even Kit had eventually admitted the whole
disaster had been entirely Margo's doing, accepting the challenge to go after
those diamonds through an unstable gate.
   Too bad about losing that scheme, though. Goldie sighed. Win some, lose
some. At least Margo was uptime at school, toiling to repay her grandfather
the money Kit had paid Goldie for that worthless hunk of African swampland.
Goldie patted her pocket and regained her smile, then headed for the library
so Brian Hendrickson could record her "take" in his official bet ledger. He
might even laugh when she recounted her tale of that cretinous woman giving
her a reward. La-La Land's librarian had so far found very little humor in
Goldie and Skeeter's bet. This ought to change his tune.
   Goldie didn't exactly need to stay in Brian's good graces to continue her
own profitable business, but burning bridges unnecessarily was just plain-and
simple foolishness. There were certainly times when Brian's encyclopedic
memory had proven useful to her. And there would doubtless be other times in
the future she'd want to call on his knowledge. So, scheming and dreaming to
her heart's content, Goldie Morran smiled at startled scouts on their way into
or out of the vast library and found Brian Hendrickson on his usual throne.
   The expression in his eyes was anything but welcoming.
   "Hello, Goldie. What are you doing here?"
   She laughed easily. "What do you think, silly?"
   Brian just grimaced and turned back toward the master computer file he was
updating.
   "Here." She set out the thousand dollar bill that idiotic but wonderful
woman had given her. "Put this on my ledger, would you, dearie?"
   He eyed the money. "And how, exactly, did you come by it?"
   She told him.
   Then stormed out of the library, money stuffed back into her pockets. How
dare he not count it?
   "Reward for good deeds doesn't count, my eye! That overstuffed, self-
important.."
   Goldie seethed all the way back to her shop.
   Once there, among her shining things, Goldie comforted herself with the
knowledge that Skeeter's "tips" hadn't been counted, either. Then she got to
work. Part of her mind was busy figuring out how to scam the next batch of
tourists unfortunate enough to enter her shop, while another part was

preoccupied with how to foil Skeeter's next attempt. That-plus a swig from a
bottle she kept in reserve under her counter and fifteen minutes' solitude
with her beloved, deeply affectionate Carolina parakeets-got her through a
long, dead-flat afternoon. Not a single tourist entered to exchange uptime
money for down or downtime coinage for uptime credit.
   By the time Goldie closed her shop for the day, she was ready to do murder.
And Skeeter Jackson's grinning face floated in the center of every lethal
fantasy she could dredge up. She was going to win this bet, if it was the last
thing she ever did.
   And Skeeter would pay in spades for daring to challenge her!
   Goldie entered the Down Time Bar & Grill, ordered her favorite drink from
Molly, the downtime whore who'd stumbled through the Britannia Gate into TT-
86, and settled in the billiards room to wait for some drunken tourist who
thought he knew how to play the game to wander in and become her next victim.
   Lupus Mortiferus was afraid-almost as afraid as he'd been his first time on
the glittering sands of the Circus. He struggled not to show it. Nothing about
this insane world made sense. The languages bombarding his ears were very
nearly painful, they were so incomprehensible. Every now and again he would
hear a word that sounded almost familiar, making the wrenching dislocation
even worse. Some of the lettering on the walls reminded him of words he knew,
but he couldn't quite make out their sense. And everywhere he turned were
mysteries, terrifying mysteries-that beeped, glowed, hummed, screeched, and
twittered in alien metals and colors and energies he would have called
lightning or the ominous glow of the evil-omened lights in the northern night
skies, had they not been imprisoned by some god's hand in pear-shaped bulbs,
long tubes and spiraling ones, plus all manner of twisted shapes and
disturbing colors of glass.
   And the sounds ...
   Voices that erupted from midair, coming from nowhere that he could see,
blaring messages he couldn't begin to understand.
   Have I fallen into a playground of gods?
   Then, unbelievably, he caught a snatch of Latin. Real, honest Latin.
   ` ... no, that isn't at all what I meant, what you have to do is ..."
   With a relief that left him almost in tears, Lupus found the speakers, a
dark man who was certainly of African origin: Carthaginian, perhaps, or
Nubian--although his skin was too light for Nubia. He was speaking with a
shorter, nondescript man in shades of brown at whom no one in Rome would have
given a second glance.
   Lupus followed them eagerly, desperate for someone he could actually
communicate with in this mad place. He followed them to a room-a vast, echoing
chamber of a room-filled with shelves of squarish objects made from thin
vellum and rows of... what? Boxes men and women sat before and talked to-and
the boxes talked back, their glowing faces flashing up pictures or streams of
alien words.
   Lupus held in a shiver of terror and wondered how to approach the dark man
who clearly knew Latin better than the brownish one. He was about to approach
when two other men entered and collared the dark-skinned man first. Lupus
melted into the shadows behind a bank of tall shelves and hugged his
impatience to his breast, biding his time until the dark man who could speak
Lupus' tongue would be alone and approachable.
   "So," Kit Carson asked, relaxing back into his chair, "what do you have
planned for Margo's visit?"
   Malcolm Moore flushed slightly. The light in Kit's eyes told him exactly
what Kit expected them to do. Fortunately, Kit approved-provided Malcolm's
intentions were honorable and he took reasonable precautions against
pregnancy.
   "Well," Malcolm said, running a fingertip through the condensate on the

tabletop, "I was thinking of a little visit to Denver. I've checked my log
entries, there shouldn't be any risk of Shadowing myself. I wasn't in London
during the week the Denver party will be downtime."
   Kit nodded. "I think that's a good idea. Margo should like it, too-and
it'll complement her American History studies very nicely."
   Malcolm grinned. "Sure you won't come along?"
   Kit just grimaced. "I was in London that week. That whole month, in fact.
You two lovebirds go along and have a good, careful time." Kit sighed. "It's
strange. I didn't think it would happen, but ... her letters are changing,
Malcolm. Their tone, the intelligence behind her observations and comments."
   Malcolm glanced up, noting the furrow on Kit's brow. "So you did notice?
Figured you wouldn't miss it. She's growing up, Kit." That brought a flinch to
his friend's eyes. He'd just barely begun to know her when she'd vanished:
once, almost for good, the second time off to college. Trying to help his
friend get used to the idea, Malcolm said, "Hell, Kit, she grew up in that
filthy little Portuguese gaol. But now she's growing in ways it's hard to put
into words."
   Kit nodded. "Yeah."
   Malcolm punched Kit's shoulder. "Don't take it so hard, Grandpa. Her mind's
coming alive. I can hardly wait to see what directions her thoughts take her
next."
   Kit laughed sourly. "Just so long as it isn't toward a South African
diamond field." Then Kit blinked and stared past Malcolm's shoulder. "Speak of
the devil ..."
   Goldie Morran passed, smiling so sweetly at them Malcolm wondered who'd
just died.
   "What can she be up to?"
   Kit laughed sourly. "Given that wager between her and Skeeter, God knows.
Want to play tag-the-nanny goat and follow along?"
   Malcolm grinned. "If that sour old goat has ever had kids, I'll eat this
table. Goat I'll allow. Nanny? Not even in the British sense, Kit." His grin
deepened, however. "Sure sounds like fun, though. Quick, before we lose her!"
   Kit's eyes glinted as they scurried for the door, dropping more than enough
money on the front counter to pay for consumables plus tip. Each of them knew
the consequences should Goldie ever discover the double scam they'd pulled on
her with Margo's help-not that she could really do anything, not legally,
anyway. Their uptime diamond strike was one of La-La Land's best-kept secrets.
And that was a monumental achievement in its own right.
   Malcolm and Kit quickly determined that Goldie Morran's goal was the
library. They took up places at computer terminals near the counter,
ostensibly doing research, but more than close enough to overhear Goldie's
screech when her "take" was disallowed.
   She stalked out of the library in a towering rage.
   Kit stepped over to Brian's counter. Malcolm abandoned his computer, too,
and leaned on his elbows beside Kit.
   "So what's new?" Kit asked casually.
   His long-time friend gave him an evil stare, then shrugged. In his
wonderful, outlandish accent, he muttered, "Oh, why not. You're not involved,
after all." Brian Hendrickson grimaced expressively, the skin around his eyes
tightening down so much Malcolm grew alarmed. Then, curtly: "They have begun a
war of attrition. A serious one. Goldie just spoiled one of Skeeter's schemes
in a way that could have been fatal for Skeeter, anyway. I suppose spoiling
each other's schemes is better than letting them rip off unsuspecting
tourists, but this ... I didn't think their idiotic wager would turn this
deadly. I suppose I should've seen it coming from the very start."
   He wiped his brow with a handkerchief plucked from a pocket, then neatly
folded and replaced it with such style, Malcolm found himself seriously

envious of the librarian's unconscious panache. Malcolm clearly needed to do a
covert study of Brian's movements and work until he'd copied them motion-
perfect. On London tours, those elegant movements would serve him well.
Particularly with the hopeful plans he'd been developing in the back of his
mind. Then Brian sighed mournfully. "I still can't believe I allowed myself to
be drawn into this."
   Malcolm, who was about to comment that Brian had voluntarily put himself
exactly where he was, abruptly spotted a man in Western getup watching them
ferally from the shadows across the room. He blinked. Not a scout, not a
freelance guide, not even a Time Tours, Inc. guide. Malcolm made it his
business to keep close watch on the competition-.particularly since Time Tours
Inc. was indirectly responsible for the death of his previous employer and
close friend.
   The mystery-man's face arrested his attention for a moment. But I've seen
that face before, I know I have. But where? Maybe a tourist Malcolm had
approached at some point, looking for a job? God alone knew, he'd begged work
from thousands of transient tourists over the past several years, before he
and Kit and Margo had become repugnantly wealthy. (They didn't flaunt it-
didn't need to-but it certainly was a great deal of fun, just looking at his
bank account's balance, which had hovered near negative numbers for so long.)
   Maybe one of the tourists had remembered him and was looking for a good
guide?
   No... whoever he was, his attention was focused directly on Brian. For some
reason he couldn't explain, that very fact sent a chill racing up Malcolm's
spine. He wondered if he should speak, then thought better of it. If Brian
Hendrickson had a profitable side deal going with someone, it was none of his
business. But he did use it as an excuse to leave, now they'd discovered what
they'd wanted.
   Malcolm nudged Kit with an elbow. "I think there's someone waiting to talk
to Brian. Why don't we grab a bite of lunch. I'll fill you in on my plans for
Margo's visit."
   Brian's expression cheered immensely. "Miss Margo is returning? Capital!
Have her come by and say hello, would you?"
   Kit laughed. "Count on it. Malcolms taking her to Denver. Even with her
studies at school, she'll have timescout-type research to do before they step
through the Wild West Gate."
   Brian chuckled. "It's a date, then."
   Malcolm cast a last, uneasy glance at the man in cowboy getup standing in
the shadows, then shrugged the whole thing off. He had better things to look
forward to: like Margo's kisses. He grinned in anticipation. The ring he'd had
made from the sample diamond she'd sent was ready and waiting. All she had to
do was say yes. Counting the hours and minutes until Primary cycled and
brought her back into his life again, Malcolm strolled out of the library with
his hopefully future grandfather-in-law and suggested the Epicurean Delight
for lunch.
   "We haven't been in a while. And I understand Ianira Cassondra's been
selling Arley some ancient Greek cheesecake recipes-long lost delicacies and
confections."
   Kit nodded. "The Greeks were so fond of cheesecake, we have written
complaints from a Greek, a married man who asked for cheesecake for his dinner
and was, um, to put it delicately, irate when he didn't get it. Weren't there
supposed to be dozens of different flavors?
   Malcolm nodded. "Yeah. And from what I've heard, just one slice of whatever
type of cheesecake he's made for the day is enough to make a California
billionaire pay a thousand or more just to get the whole thing!"
   Kit laughed, an easy, relaxed sound that reassured his friend. "Sounds
great," Kit agreed vehemently. "I've been hearing those same rumors and I, my

friend, am a cheesecake-a-holic. Let's test it out, eh?"
   Malcolm chuckled and thumped his friend's wiry, granite-hard gut and said,
"At least you work it off somewhere.
   Kit grimaced. "Sven Bailey is a fiend from Hell. He even looks like one."
   "So I'd noticed. And so Margo complained-bitterly, those first few lessons
with him. And then, would you believe it, our little imp started to love
having Sven kick her around the mat like a sack of squashed potatoes."
   "Ah, yes; but she learned, didn't she? C'mon Malcolm, let's eat! Skimpy
lunch and all the cheesecake we can hold!"
   They set out, lauding like lids. The "cowboy they'd left lurking behind in
the library was so far from his thoughts, it was almost as though the man had
never existed.
   Ianira Cassondra was attempting to sell an amber and silver bracelet and
necklace set to a genuine tourist through the howling idiocy of her self-
proclaimed acolytes. Did uptimers have nothing better to do with their lives
than hound and harass her, day and night, month after tedious, temper-
provoking month? The Little Agora was seething with gossiping `eighty-sixers
when Chenzira Umi-a grey-haired, stately Egyptian merchant who'd fallen, a
drunken accident, through the Philosophers' Gate not too many months after
Ianira had stumbled through--elbowed and shoved his way to the side of her
little booth.
   In Greek, which he spoke only well enough to dicker, nobody else on station
(except the Seven) spoke his ancient Egyptian (although Ianira knew well
enough that Chenzira earned much of his meager living by teaching his long-
dead language's proper pronunciation, including some odd inflections, to
uptime scholars), Chenzira reported. "Goldie badly done. She broke attempt by
Skeeter." ..gyp
   Ianira paled so disastrously the tourist dickering over the jewelry
actually noticed-and frowned in genuine concern.
   "My dear," he said in the drawling tones of an American Texan, "what in
thunderation's wrong? You're whiter'n the underbelly of a rattler what's just
shed his skin. Here, honey, sit down."
   "Thank you, no, please, I am fine." She fought off shock and worry and
mastered both, plus her voice. "I apologize profoundly for causing you
distress. Did you want the bracelet and necklace for your wife?"
   He glanced from Ianira to the jewelry, the calmly waiting Chenzira, bringer
of bad tidings (noticeable in any language), then up at the surrounding
vultures. He scowled impartially, evidently not liking his face and voice
recorded without his permission any more than she did.
   "How long these nosy bastards-uh-vultures been after you, honey?"
   "Too long," Ianira said, half under her breath.
   His pop-up grin startled her. "Hell, yeah, I'll take 'em, and throw in some
of those funny-lookin' scarves there. Marty, my wife, she's nuts about stuff
like that yeah, those, right there-and what's this little doohicky here for?
Love charm? Well, hell, gal, gimme a dozen of those!"
   His friendly grin-despite Ianira's inner turmoil -- was infectious. She
rang up the bill, bagged everything into velvet bags she'd sewn herself-ending
with one large easy-to-carry parcel with a secure drawstring, and handed him
the itemized bill she'd written out in a somewhat shaky hand.
   He handed back double the price listed on every item, gave her a jaunty
wink and an, "It'll be fine, honey, don't you fret, now, hear?" and vanished
into the crowd before she could protest or give back the extra money. She
stood trembling for a moment, the sounds and bright sights of the Commons
washing over her like a dim, color-puddled dream, while she stared at money
she and the father of her children so desperately needed, while on all sides,
six to seven deep, her maddening acolytes Minicammed, voice-recorded, and
jotted notes on every single second of that interchange. She wanted to scream

at them all, but knew from experience any action other than business as usual
would bring twice as many watchers who'd stay another week hoping a revelation
would be near.
   Chenzira leaned closer, his disgusted tone of voice helping bring her
whirling mind back on track. "If I your beauty and charms had, Ianira, I, too,
such deals make would. You demon are-under soft skin!" Gentle, deep laughter
took any possible accusation from Chenzira's words. Along with the other
downtimers in The Found Ones community-not to mention being elected to The
Council of Seven almost from his first few weeks here-Chenzira was a born
haggler, as many an unfortunate downtimer had discovered to his or her woe.
   And since Chenzira Umi was as shrewd a man as Ianira had ever met, she,
too, merely smiled. "And had I your canny wits," she countered calmly, "I
would not be a huckster of this junk."
   Chenzira smiled; but said nothing, in that mysterious Egyptian way of his.
Ianira received the impression strong one-he still deferred to her as Head of
the Seven. Then he leaned close again and said very quietly in his own
language, which All of The Seven now had to learn, "You must convene the
Council. The Seven must decide what is best and summon a general Council
immediately afterwards to vote on it. This atrocity, this interference must
stop."
   "Yes," she agreed, already somewhat proficient in Chenzira's native
language. A smile tugged at her lips as she imagined the idiotic,
eavesdropping throng trying to translate this conversation!
   She asked-also in Egyptian-"Could you watch my shop a little?"
   He nodded.
   Ianira bolted from the booth, outrunning her merciless followers by a few
staggering strides to a nearby hotel lobby. "Private in-house phone?" she
gasped, damning the fact that women's clothing from her own time was not
designed for an all-out, freedom-winning dash.
   The desk clerk, who knew Ianira's reputation-and pitied her for the never-
ending madness of her enthralled seekers-stepped back and all but shoved her
into the hotel office, muttering, "Lock the door and l'll hold 'em at bay."
   She gave him a startled glance of thanks, then banged shut the door and
snapped the lock. It was cool and quiet inside the hotel office. She lifted
the receiver and dialed a trustworthy in-house line. One phone call, she knew,
would lead to others. Many others.
   Having set things in motion, she returned to her stand, having to push her
way through angry Seekers, all of whom were taller than she was, and forced on
a bright smile for a couple of genuine customers who'd stopped to -window-
shop."
   "Thank you, Chenzira Umi" she said formally. "You have been of great help."
   Chenzira's unexpected grin (as the Seekers took up their disgruntled
positions, furious they'd missed even those few, short moments of The Great
One's words) startled Ianira.
   "What?" she asked.
   Chenzira nodded at the man and woman peering at her stock. "Your previous
customer knows them. They lost no time seeking out this `find of the year' if
I remember the words. I am not yet so good at English."
   "Thank you, Chenzira Umi," she breathed as she turned toward her customers
with a bright smile.
   Chenzira Umi was long gone, faded into the crowd as nondescript as any
other bald tourist, before Ianira noticed the new price markers. Her eyes
widened ever so slightly: in her absence, he had doubled the price on
everything she sold. And the customers were buying: jewelry, Greek style
clothing for both men and women (in a matching pattern she'd sewn lovingly),
scarves, and charms of all sorts.
   Even all the copies she had in stock of a little, hand done booklet Dr.

Mundy had helped her write, print, and bind, which they'd titled, There I
Lived: Athens in Its Golden. Age and Ephesus, 5th Century B. C. Trading Center
and Home to The Great Temple of Artemis, Seventh Wonder of the Ancient World.
The booklet was nothing, of course, to the scholarly work he was building from
the sessions she spent with him, but it was a decently scripted, informal
"chatty" little booklet full of odd little facts and anecdotes, some
previously unknown until Ianira's arrival. It was a popular item, even outside
the sales to maddening Seekers.
   One of her long-term plans as First of the Seven was to assist other
downtimers in writing similar booklets, which she would then sell and pass
along the money to the authors, taking no commission, for this would be Found
Ones' business, not her own.
   By the time La-La Land's first-shift "business day" was over, that single
phone call made from the cool, quiet hotel office-she must remember to reward
that wonderful, understanding clerk with some little trinket of thanks had
borne its intended fruit. Ianira made her way to the madhouse of La-La Land's
School and Day-Care Center where her daughters played with the other children.
She picked them up, then took backstation staircases down into the bowels of
Time Terminal Eighty-Six for a secret meeting of The Found Ones.
   Since this was an informal meeting, no ceremonial garb was needed nor were
her daughters a nuisance to anyone. Others of the Seven who had arrived ahead
of her were already discussing the news. The day after Skeeter Jackson's gift
to Marcus, Ianira had passed word of his true standing to other women in the
downtimer community and they, in turn, had passed it to their men. Word had
traveled through the entire community before bedtime. For the first time since
their arrival, the downtimers of La-La Land knew that, alone of the uptimers,
they had found someone who understood.
   Many who had looked on him with disgust as a simple thief had immediately
begun to cheer on his exploits. Anything to punish the uptimers who used them
for grunt labor, without a single thought for their welfare, was worth a cheer
or ten. Astoundingly, in a few short days Skeeter had rapidly taken on the
status-thanks to Ianira's judicious meddling-of their champion and hero for
causing uptimers to suffer monetary losses and public humiliations.
   Also thanks to Ianira, it became unwritten law that Skeeter's past was a
private secret to be kept from all uptimers on the station. Parents warned
children, and those children held their tongues.
   Word of the wager between Skeeter and Goldie Morran, at first simply an
affair between uptimers, had abruptly taken on new significance. Fear like the
shock-waves of an earthquake traveled through their community. If Skeeter
Jackson lost his bet, they would lose their spirit-champion. So when Ianira
placed that phone call and word spread that Goldie Morran had deliberately
spoiled one of Skeeter's attempts, and that a general session would follow a
meeting of the Seven, narrow-eyed men and women gathered in the depths of
Shangri-La Station to discuss what should be done about it, while wide-eyed
children listened in silence to the anger in their elders' voices.
   "We could slide a knife between her ribs," one gray-haired man muttered.
   "Poison would be better," a younger man countered. "She would suffer
longer."
   "No, we don't need to kill her," Ianira said over the babble of voices as
she joined the other Six on the low dais. Silence fell as abruptly as night
fog rolled over the wharves of Ephesus. The Seven had previously decided the
only course they could safely take. Now it was up to the Seven to convince the
others.
   She held her daughters close, partly from protective love she could
scarcely give coherent tongue to, and partly because she was-as a former high-
ranking Priestess of Artemis-aware of the symbolism their stance of
togetherness roused. Those who stood nearest to her saw not only a mother and

her children, but looked at her little girls and understood in their viscera
that the children's father owed more than anyone on this station to Skeeter
Jackson.
   Which was precisely what she wanted them to think.
   Had she been born uptime rather than down, she'd have been running the
government inside two years.
   Although most of the gathered Found Ones came from times and places where
women were expected to remain silent on pain of beating, even men who had
grown to grey-beard stature had learned to respect Ianira-and in this matter,
she had the right of a mother whose children were threatened. That right was
so universal, even those men who had found the adjustment to TT-86 and in
particular-the status of women in TT-86, held their tongues and listened in
respectful silence.
   She looked from face to silent face and nodded slowly, understanding their
message without the need for words. "We don't need to kill her," Ianira
repeated. "All we need to do is ensure she loses her bet."
   The smiles that lit multiple eyes-dark eyes and light ones, black and grey
and brown and blue ones, and the occasional clear amber or green ones-all were
smiling, cold as Siberian ice.
   "Yes," someone on the edge of the crowd murmured, "the gems dealer must
lose that bet. Which would be the better strategy, Council? Help Skeeter with
his work? Or plot to destroy the moneychanger's schemes?"
   Ianira laughed, tossing thick, black hair across one pale shoulder.
"Destroy the money-changer's schemes, of course. Skeeter can hold his own when
it comes to stealing from the uptimers who kick and rob so many of us. All we
have to do is make sure the money changer steals less. Much less. It ought to
be fun, don't you think?"
   Laughter rippled through a group which moments before had been grim enough
to contemplate violent murder, consequences be damned just the thing the Seven
had feared. Agreements were made to watch the money-changer's every move.
Assignments were given to those best suited to the task of foiling Goldie
Morran's schemes-or, if necessary-stealing her winnings before she could "log"
them with Brian, as the rules of the wager demanded.
   Ianira kissed her daughters' hair and smiled softly.
   Goldie Morran would rue the day she had dared interfere with Marcus' patron
and champion. Rue it as bitter as wormwood and never once guess why she failed
in her every effort. Ianira pledged silent sacrifices to her patron Goddess
Artemis of moon-pale hunting dogs and silver arrows notched through eternity
to her moon-wrought bow, as well as pledges to her adopted Goddess, Pallas
Athena of spear and shield, Athenian war helmet and above all Justice, should
they secure victory for Skeeter Jackson.
   She left the meeting with her own assignment and returned home to put
supper into Artemisia and Gelasia, then put both girls into their little beds.
She worked on Council business, while waiting with great anticipation for
Marcus to finish his shift at the Down Time Bar & Grill.
   She hummed an old tune as she worked, one her grandmother had taught her as
a child, all the while quietly hugging to herself the secret of the
astonishing money she'd made at the booth today-thanks to wise, old, mercenary
Chenzira's meddling with her prices. In the all-but-silent backdrop of their
apartment, the dinner she'd prepared for her love bubbled and simmered its way
toward perfection in the endlessly miraculous oven.
   Goldie was cashing out money for tourists returning uptime from a tour when
she spotted them: three small, innocent-looking coins that were worth several
thousand dollars each, they were so rare. Avarice warred with caution. She
wasn't supposed to make use of her knowledge to obtain them. She couldn't buy
them at a fraction of their value and claim the collector's price or Brian
would disallow them completely. So she smiled in her cold heart and simply

short-changed the tourists. Stealing the coins should certainly count. She
waited until the batch of tourists had gone before putting up her "Out to Tea"
sign and locking up the shop.
   She could hardly wait to gloat to Skeeter about the day's success. Goldie
headed for the library at full tilt, a battleship plowing through seas of
disgruntled tourists, and cornered Brian behind his counter.
   "Brian! Just take a look at these! Stole 'em fair and square!"
   Brian examined the coins with care. "Very nice. Mmm... Yes, very nice,
indeed. Let's see, now." He glanced up, a frosty look in his dark eyes.
"Valuing these is really quite simple. This one, that'll give you a bet credit
of twenty-five cents, this one's face value is what, thirty-five cents? Hmm
... The silver content of this one's a little thin. I'd say about a buck
thirty for the three."
   Goldie stared, mouth agape and not caring who saw it. She honestly couldn't
find her voice for whole seconds. When she finally did find it, heads turned
the length of the library.
   "What? Brian Hendrickson, you know perfectly well what those three-"
   "Yes," the librarian said repressively, interrupting her before the tirade
could build momentum. "Their collector's value is probably in excess of five
thousand dollars. But I can't give you that kind of credit for them and you
know it. Rules of the bet. You stole a couple of coins. Face value-or metals
value, whichever is higher. That's it. Feel free to sell them for what they're
really worth, but you won't get credit for that on the bet."
   He pulled out a little ledger book and made an entry. Goldie couldn't
believe it. A dollar and thirty stinking cents. Then she caught sight of
Skeeter's last entry in a column next to hers: zero.
   That was something. Not much, but something.
   Goldie stormed out of the library, determined to eat Skeeter Jackson's
liver for breakfast. Chuckles behind her only rubbed salt in a raw wound.
She'd pay Brian back, too, she would. Just wait and see if she didn't. A buck-
thirty. Of all the humiliating, backstabbing
   A feathered Ichthyornis screamed past on a powerdive into a nearby
fishpond. The splash drenched Goldie from waist to knees. She screeched at the
toothed bird and cursed it in language that caused mouths to drop in a fifty-
foot radius. Then, catching herself, Goldie compressed her lips, glared at the
people staring at her, and sniffed autocratically.
   Skeeter might be behind, but a dollar and thirty cents wasn't a lead, it
was an insult. She'd show that upstart little pipsqueak what an amateur he
really was or her name was not Goldie Mon-an. She smiled tightly. The
expression hurt the skin of her face and started a nearby toddler whimpering
against its mother's skirts.
   Goldie Morran had not yet begun to scam.
   Skeeter, having successfully picked several pockets in a crowded cafe,
returned to the library to hand over his take for Brian to hold, per the rules
of the bet. When he caught sight of Goldie's last entry, he laughed out loud.
   "A buck thirty?" His laughter deepened, the primal joy of a half-wild
Mongol who has pulled one over on the enemy.
   Brian shrugged. "You're taking the news more cheerfully that she did."
   "I'll bet!"
   Brian said repressively, "You already have, Jackson. Now beat it. I have
real work to do."
   Skeeter laughed again, refusing to be insulted, and let his imagination
linger on what Goldie's face must have looked like as she received the
unpalatable news. Bet her face had gone nearly as purple as her hair! He
strolled out of the library, hands in pockets and whistling cheerfully. The
Commons certainly was a pretty place this time of year ...
   A heavy hand grabbed his shoulder, spinning him roughly around. His back

connected with a concrete wall, driving the breath momentarily from his lungs.
Skeeter blinked and focused on the face of a man he'd last seen standing on
the banks of the River Tiber, cursing him for all he was worth.
   Oh, shit
   Lupus Mortiferus.
   In modern clothes and a towering rage. "Your entrails aren't really worth a
hundred-fifty gold aurii-but they'll do!"
   "Uh ... " Skeeter said, trying to buy time before the gladiator choked
and/or stabbed the life out of him. How the hell did he get on to the station?
Not that it mattered. He was here-and one look into those dark, murderous eyes
told Skeeter he was about to die.
   Or worse.
   So Skeeter did the only thing that might possibly save him. He dropped to
the floor like a limp rag doll. His opponent paused just an instant too long.
Skeeter rolled, kicked Lupus Mortiferus' feet out from under him, scrambled
up, and ran. A bull's bellow of fury followed him. One quick glance showed the
enraged gladiator in close pursuit. No river to jump into this time. No horse
to steal, either. How the hell did he get into TT-86?
   He wove and dodged through the dense holiday crowds, ducked past a cluster
of blinking, six-foot-five decorations, and shouldered someone aside when they
blocked his way. An autocratic screech and a splash were followed by Goldie
Morran's voice cursing him in language almost as colorful as Yesukai at his
best. He took a brief second to wish he'd had the time to enjoy the sight of
Goldie dripping wet from purple hair to spike-heeled toes-but that gladiator
was right on his heels. He rounded the fish pond and pounded through Edo
Castletown. In his wake, men dressed like samurai shouted obscenities at his
pursuer, who shoved several of them bodily to the floor in his charge.
   Ooh, Yakuza, Skeeter thought with a wince as he glanced back to see
tattooed men swearing at the gladiator's back. Too bad they hadn't managed to
lay hands on him.
   He pounded out of Edo Castletown into Frontier Town, with its Wild West
Gate, bars, saloons, and show-girl halls. Frontier Town's saloons offered a
confusing maze of darkened rooms where bar girls served whiskey, poker games
lasted until all hours, and rinky-tink piano players hammed it up on
artificially battered upright pianos. Skeeter ducked into the nearest, sliding
under a series of tables in the dim-lit bar, scattering card players and
whiskey glasses in his wake as men jumped back in startled surprise. Then
whole tables crashed to the floor behind him. The gladiator had waded in,
snarling something in Latin. A fist fight broke out somewhere to his rear.
Skeeter didn't care. He dove across the bar, catching a glimpse of the
barkeeper's shocked expression in the mirror, then hauled butt back for the
door while Lupus Mortiferus battled his way through a mob of really pissed-off
"cowboys" including at least one wrathful time scout who knew martial arts.
   Having bought himself a couple of minutes' lead, Skeeter blasted through
the saloon doors into the bright Commons again and pelted back through Edo
Castletown, where the first Shinto observances had begun at the new shrine. A
deep bell-tone shimmered through the air as the first worshipper pulled the
bellrope to sound the gong that would catch the attention of the resident,
sacred kami. A glance over his shoulder revealed the irate gladiator battling
his way past a dozen really irate Yakuza thugs. Lupus Mortiferus had knocked
them down on their first dash through Castletown, causing them to lose serious
face in public. They were out for vengeance. He grinned, leaped the low fence
marking off the new shrine, gaining traction in the expanse of white gravel,
ducked under the shrine, and vaulted the fence on the other side while
outraged japanese curses poured after him in waves. One swift glance showed
Lupus Mortiferus in even greater trouble as the worshippers vented righteous
ire upon the gladiator.

   Sorry about that, really, Skeeter told the certain-to-be-offended kami.
I'll, uh, come ask your pardon later. Honest.
   Skeeter cut hard into a side corridor leading toward the maze of corridors
that made up Residential. A bellow in the distance told him the chase,
although badly slowed for Lupus Mortiferus, was still on.
   Skeeter pelted up a staircase and rounded a wicked bend at a full run,
grabbing a heavy rope garland and swinging around the outside of the girder
that supported a balcony platform above, using it like Tarzan's vines to whip
around at maximum speed. Below him, gasps of shock and fear arose from the
packed Commons floor. Great. All I need's an audience. Three changes of
corridors, two more staircases, and another turn brought Skeeter out onto a
wide balcony of shops and restaurants overlooking Commons.
   Far back, but rounding the corner after him, Lupus Mortiferus was still
coming. Cripes, doesn't anything stop that guy? Skeeter tipped over clothing
racks, cafe tables, and fully-lighted Christmas trees. He kept running,
providing any and all barriers he could that the gladiator would have to jump
or pick up first, then skidded down a gridwork staircase, mostly sliding down
the banister. A flock of roosting pterosaurs screeched and took wing in
protest. They swooped and dove, knocking wreathes, plastic candy canes, and
all sorts of other decorations off girders and balconies-which created panic
amongst the tourists gaping in his wake.
   Skeeter heard curses-but they were farther and farther behind. He hit the
next balcony level still running flat out, slammed a seven-foot plastic Santa
to the balcony floor behind him, and spotted an open elevator. Skeeter grinned
and dove into it. He punched 5 and the doors closed. The elevator shot upward,
carrying him to the upper floor of a hotel's graceful balcony. Skeeter stepped
out onto lush carpet, rather than bare gridwork hearing the very distant
sounds of pursuit below, then slipped into the hotel's hallway, covered with a
different color carpet, but just as luxurious as the balcony's. Skeeter jogged
easily down the line of gilt-numbered doors and found an interior elevator
which took him to the basement.
   Under the hotel were weapons ranges and a gym. Skeeter ducked through the
gym, found another elevator tucked back in the men's shower area, which had
been placed there for the convenience of residents who wanted to head straight
up after a workout. He rode it up to the third level of Residential.
   When he finally stepped out into a silent corridor, there was no sign of
the gladiator. Skeeter leaned against the wall and drew several deep breaths,
then slowly relaxed. He couldn't help grinning. What a chase! Then reality
settled over him like a blast of Mongolian snow. With Lupus Mortiferus on the
station, Skeeter was in real trouble. What to do about it? Skeeter narrowed
his eyes. He could always go to Bull Morgan and report the downtimer, but that
would mean having to confess his downtime scam to the station manager. And
that would get him into serious legal trouble with Management, with a probable
eviction from TT-86 as the result. He wouldn't need to lose the wager to lose
his home.
   If the gladiator were reported-and questioned-the result would be the same.
The damned gladiator would be given refuge, but Skeeter would be kicked uptime
to fend for himself in a world he had grown to hate. And if that gladiator
caught up with him, he was a dead man.
   "Great," Skeeter muttered to the listening walls. "Not only do I gotta win
this bet, now I gotta stay alive while doing it."
   He straightened his shoulders and lifted his chin. The boy who'd survived
life in Yesukai's camp wasn't a quitter. He was no professional fighter-
certainly no match for someone like Lupus Mortiferus-but he knew a few tricks.
He wasn't happy, but he'd cope.
   He always had, no matter what life handed him.
   Tired, hungry, and thirsty, Skeeter headed for his little apartment, hoping

Lupus Mortiferus didn't tumble to the fact that any computer in La-La Land
listed his address bold as a Mongolian sky, on an entry screen Skeeter
couldn't hack into and purge-not without drawing serious attention to himself
from Mike Benson's sharp-eyed gang. He thumbed open his door and retreated
into his private little refuge to fret over the problem, knowing as he opened
the fridge for a beer and turned on the shower that wishing would not make
this particular problem vanish.
   He took a long pull from his beer and made the wish anyway.
   From his viewpoint, Skeeter figured the gods owed him a break or two. For
once, maybe they'd listen?
   Lupus Mortiferus stood panting in the middle of an empty corridor, hand on
the pommel of his gladius, eyes narrowed in a rage that filled his veins until
his ears roared with it. Where had that little bastard slipped away to? So
close ... and the rat had vanished into thin air.
   Again.
   "I will find you, odds maker,- Lupus swore under his breath. "And when I
do.. ."
   Meanwhile, he had to find someone to communicate with. That dark-skinned
man had answers Lupus needed. It took him nearly an hour of confused wandering
through the mad place before he found it again, but find it he did. And the
man was still there, perched comfortably behind a wooden counter. Girding on
courage as though it were armor, Lupus strode up to the counter and greeted
him in Latin.
   The man glanced up, surprise showing in deep brown eyes. "Hello. Guide? Or
scout? Don't think I've seen you before. Just in from another station? Brian
Hendrickson, Station Librarian."
   The man stuck out a hand.
   Lupus stared at it, wondering what in the world the man was babbling about.
The words were Latin, but their meaning ... He might as well have been
speaking some obscure desert tongue like Palmyrene or the incomprehensible
babble of a Scythian horseman.
   "Well," the man was saying, staring at him with rising curiosity, "the
computers are at your full access, of course. With that getup, I'd thought you
were headed down the Wild West Gate. Planning on a freelance trip to Rome?
It's a lucrative gate, certainly, and thanks to Kit's leaning a little on Bax,
Time Tours is giving freelancers a freer hand with the customers. You
shouldn't have any problem at all making a good living if you decide to stay."
   The man made no sense at all. With a rising sense of panic he couldn't
control, Lupus tried to marshall a single question, but found his tongue glued
to the roof of a mouth gone dry with fear. The gods make sport of me for fun
... .
   Whatever the man said next, it wasn't in Latin. His brow furrowed in open
puzzlement. That was more than Lupus could take. He couldn't afford to be
found out as an imposter in this place of divine madness. He bolted for the
door. Mithras, help me, he prayed in growing misery. I don't know where to go
or what to do. Lupus didn't quite run down the bewildering confusion of
staircases, ramps, shops, ponds, and imitation streets that made up the main
room of this world, but he moved fast enough to put distance between himself
and the man who was most certainly coming to the conclusion that Lupus did not
belong here.
   He was halfway down the long, long stretch of room when he realized he was
being followed. The man was younger than he, brown-haired and slender enough
that Lupus could easily break him in half with bare hands. Lupus knew a jolt
of fear that stabbed from heart to groin, anyway. The gods who ran this mad
playground had found him out.
   Then anger, pure and simple, scalded him to his bones.
   I have been swindled, cheated, and dragged out of my very world. I will not

submit meekly to this!
   He took a side corridor that led into a quiet, private part of this world
and hid in a shadowed niche. Sure enough, the young man following him took the
same turn. Lupus gripped his sword and slid it sweetly out of its scabbard.
Someone would give him answers or pay the consequences of their refusal.
   He waited patiently for the quarry to come close enough to strike.
   One moment, Marcus was completely alone in the Residential corridor, having
lost sight of his quarry. The next, he was crushed painfully against the wall,
sword at his throat. He gasped. Lupus Mortiferus ...
   Shock detonated in the other man's eyes. Marcus only realized he'd gasped
the man's name aloud when the gladiator demanded, "You know who I am?"
   "I-" Marcus thought he might well faint from terror. How many men had the
Wolf of Death killed during his bloody career? The thought of leaving Ianira
and little Artemisia and Gelasia alone, trying to survive without him, drove
him nearly to gibber. "I know-I know you, yes. I saw you, once. Many years
ago. Before a fight. At-at one of the gladiator feasts-"
   The sword blade stayed pressed against his throat. "Where am I? What place
is this? And why have the masters of it sent you trailing my steps?"
   Marcus blinked in surprise. ",`Nobody sent me. I saw you earlier and
thought I recognized you. I-I just wanted to ask what you were doing here. You
shouldn't be here at all. Please, I beg of you, Lupus Mortiferus, don't kill
me, I have children, a family-"
   The blade remained at his throat, but the pressure eased up just a bit.
"Kill you?" the gladiator snorted. "The only man in this mad place who speaks
Latin that makes sense? Do you think the Wolf of Death a complete fool?"
   Marcus began to hope he might survive. "How did you come here? The Roman
gate is very well guarded-" His eyes widened. "Those boys who got sick, when
the gate cycled. You must have come through during the confusion."
   Lupus Mortiferus narrowed dark eyes. "Gates? Talk sense. And answer my
question! Where am I?"
   Marcus knew he'd once been a slave, but it had been years since anyone had
used that tone with him. `The last time I saw you," he dared flare back, "you
were still a slave. Where is your collar? Or have you run from the school?"
   Lupus' dark eyes widened. For an instant, Marcus saw his own death
reflected there. Then-shocking him beyond all reason-the Wolf of Death lowered
his sword. "I bought my freedom," he said quietly. "Then the money I earned
with this sword, the money I was saving to start a new life, was stolen by a
blackhearted street-rat of a foreigner. I followed him here." The threat
returned to his eyes. "Now tell me, where is `here'??"
   Marcus blinked several times, struggling with emotions that ran the gamut
from pity to terror and back again. "If you will put away the gladius, I will
tell you. In fact, if you put away the gladius, I will take you to my own
rooms and try to help you as best I can. What I have to say will not be easy
for you to understand. I know you are a proud man, Lupus Mortiferus-you have a
right to be-but you will need help to survive here." Some glint in Lupus' dark
eyes toll Marcus he'd hit a raw nerve. "I have a woman and daughters to
support, but I will do my best to help. From what I remember, you didn't begin
your life in Rome either. In that, we have something in common. You have asked
for answers. I offer them and more. Will you come with me?"
   The gladiator paused for several heart-shattering moments, then sheathed
his sword under the ridiculous cowboy chaps. The gladius snicked softly into
place under the concealing leather. "I will come. I think," he said softly,
"the gods have left me no choice."
   The admission shocked Marcus speechless.
   But he recalled all too vividly his own first days in La-La Land, with
their wrenching, sick dislocation and the terror every sight and sound
brought. This man had been badly wronged by someone from TT-86. Marcus would

do what he could to make amends.
   The Wolf of Death followed silently behind as Marcus led the way toward his
small apartment. He wondered with a sinking terror in his gut what Lupus
Mortiferus would do when he saw Ianira's delicate beauty. He was strong
enough-and ruthless enough to take her while Marcus watched helplessly from
the floor, bloodied and dazed, perhaps even bound and gagged. Surely Lupus
would adhere to guest/host laws? But Lupus was neither Roman nor predictable.
Marcus had no idea what he would or wouldn't do.
   But he had given his word and Lupus Mortiferus had been wronged.
   And the laws here, he recalled with effort, were not those of Rome. If
Lupus Mortiferus tried to hurt his beloved, he could call for help---or send
her and his daughters to live with others who could and would protect them.
   Afraid and torn between honor and multiple duties, Marcus led the gladiator
to his little home deep in the recesses of Residential.
   Ianira had just taken a cooling cheesecake out of the oven, placing it on a
rack on the counter beside simmering pots and sizzling pans filled with their
dinner, when the apartment door opened. She glanced up, a smile on her lips
... and let the smile die, unborn, at the look in Marcus'eyes. His face was
ash pale.
   He held the door for a stranger dressed for the Denver Wild West Gate. Eyes
downcast, Marcus' posture screamed his feelings of fear and inferiority. The
stranger's dark gaze darted about the room, paused briefly on her, then
returned to a scrutiny of the room as though expecting it to contain lethal
traps.
   With her eyes alone, Ianira sought Marcus' gaze and begged the question: Is
this the man.? Your former master? She realized she'd begun to tremble only
after the slight movement of Marcus' head indicated, No, this is not the one.
   The relief that flooded her whole being was short-lived. If this were not
Marcus' mysterious uptime previous master, who, then, that he inspired such
terror and deference in her beloved? When Marcus spoke, he spoke in Latin and
kept his voice soft-the voice of a slave addressing a social superior from his
own world.
   "Please, you are welcome to my home. This is Ianira, the mother of my
children. A high-born woman of Ephesus," he added with just a touch of defiant
pride in his eyes and voice. The dark-eyed stranger gave Ianira a long, clear-
eyed stare which left her trembling again, from anger, this time. She knew the
look of a man hungry for a woman's body. That look was a ravening fire in this
man's eyes when he stared at her.
   "Ianira, Lupus Mortiferus has stumbled through the Porta Romae in pursuit
of a man who stole his money. He needs shelter and our help."
   Ianira relaxed marginally, but remained alert for trouble. Why was Marcus
so visibly shaken, so subservient, if all he offered was asylum to a fellow
downtimer in need? By rights, he should be playing the role of social
superior, not struggling to hide obvious terror.
   Taking the plunge, Ianira recalled her duties as hostess in Marcus' home.
"You are welcome as our guest," she said in her careful Latin. Marcus spoke
Greek better than she spoke Latin. Their common household tongue was English.
Living as they did, it was a survival ritual they practiced as much for the
sake of their children as for the practice speaking the dominant language of
the time terminal. Most of the languages Ianira heard spoken on the station,
particularly japanese-were utterly beyond her. But English she learned from
necessity and Latin she learned from love. She could even understand a little
of Marcus' native Gaulish, although he rarely used it except to swear at or by
gods neither Athens nor Ephesus had ever known.
   Marcus gazed worriedly at the man who continued to stare at Ianira as
though the jeans and T-shirt she wore didn't exist. The look sent chills down
her back and made her long to close her hands around a weapon to defend

herself.
   "Ianira," Marcus added with a touch more courage in his eyes, "is highly
placed on the Council of Downtimers in this world. She owns her own business
and is well respected even by those from uptime, who control the fate of all
downtimers who stumble into the station. She is important in this world." The
warning in his voice was unmistakable--and it had effect. Lupus Mortiferus'
look changed from that of a man who is considering taking what he desires by
force to that of speculative curiosity.
   Marcus ended the introductions by saying quietly, "Ianira, Lupus Mortiferus
is the most famous gladiator to fight in the Circus Maximus at Rome. He has
won the Emperor's favor many times and has killed his way to victory in more
than a hundred fights by now, I should guess. He will need our help adjusting
to La-La Land and to find the thief he seeks. It is his desire to find that
thief, recover his stolen money, and return home."
   That was against the law. They both knew it.
   But a man like Lupus Mortiferus, who had survived combat in the arena,
wasn't likely to abide by any such rule. Clearly, Marcus wanted only to help
him regain his money as quickly as possible so the man would leave again.
Ianira found herself agreeing with that silent desire which burned so brightly
in Marcus' frightened eyes. She did not want Lupus Mortiferus to stay on Time
Terminal 86. The shorter his visit, the greater her peace of mind. But until
he left, he was an invited guest in the home of the father of her children.
   She gestured gracefully, playing the role she had learned so well under the
lash in her husband's home. "Please, come in. Sit down. The evening meal is
nearly ready. It is very simple fare, but nourishing, and there is Greek
cheesecake for afterward."
   Lupus Mortiferus' eyes came back to hers. "Greek? I thought you were from
Ephesus?"
   "I was born in Ephesus, yes, but came to live in Athens for a year before
stumbling through the Philosophers' Gate, as it is called here. You came here
by way of the Porta Romae."
   Lupus treated them to a mirthless laugh. "Gate of Rome. How incredible. So
you really did live in Athens? The cheesecake is genuine?"
   She held back a proud, haughty smile by main force of will. Romans felt a
humble respect for anything Greek, believing-as well they ought!-that Greek
culture was culture.
   "I have heard much of Greek cheesecakes from wealthy patrons."
   Ianira forced a light laugh. "Indeed, my recipes are genuine. I knew them
by heart-and I was born about six hundred years before you were."
   Shock detonated in the man's dark eyes.
   Ianira laughed again, knowing she played a deadly game, but knowing also
that she could more easily risk it than a man. "Welcome, Lupus Mortiferus, to
La-La Land, where men and women from many different places and times come
together under one roof. You have much to learn. Please. Sit down and rest. I
will bring refreshments for you and serve the dinner. Then we will talk of
things you must know in order to survive here."
   The piercing look he gave her was difficult to interpret, but he took a
seat on their plain brown couch. The vinyl squeaked as the leather of his
chaps rubbed it. Ianira noticed the sword half concealed beneath them, but
said nothing. Guest laws notwithstanding, Lupus Mortiferus was a man lost in a
world he could not possibly comprehend-one that Ianira herself, after three
years, took mostly on faith, translating "technology" into "magic" for
anything she didn't understand.
   For what it was worth, she knew there were uptimers who did the same when
confronted by the power of the gates through time.
   As for the weapon, keeping it would reassure him, more than any words of
welcome they could offer. Ianira served fresh fruit juice to the men, deciding

against the wine she'd previously planned for their dinner she had no
intention of serving alcohol to a potentially explosive guest then returned to
the kitchen. Marcus would normally have joined her to help, but the presence
of their guest held him against his will in the room that served double duty
as living and dining area.
   Artemisia, strapped into her toddler's high chair beside the device that
kept foods and drinks wonderfully chilled, even frozen, cooed and giggled at
her mother's reappearance. Ianira stooped to kiss her child's hair, then
filled a bottle with apple juice and gave it to the little girl. While Gelasia
slept peacefully in the crib in their one bedroom, Artemisia sucked on the
rubber nipple contentedly, gurgling occasionally as her wide, dark eyes
followed her mother's movements around the kitchen.
   Low male voices, intense and frightening, crept like ghosts into the warm
kitchen. Irrationally, Ianira wanted to stand between her children and their
new guest with the gun Ann Vinh Mulhaney had taught her to shoot. She knew her
reaction was irrational and overprotective, but the Goddess' warnings of
impending danger were not to be lightly ignored.
   Why hast thou sent this man, Lady? she asked silently, addressing her
frightened prayer to the great patroness of Athens itself, wise and fierce
guardian of all that was civilization. I fear this guest, Lady. His glance
causes me to tremble with terror. What warning is this and how should I listen
for Thy answer? Is he the danger? Or merely the messenger? The portent of a
greater danger to follow?
   In the closed environment of La-La Land, there were no sacred owls to give
her omens by the timing of their cries or the direction of their flight. But
there was in-house television. And there were birds-strange, savage, toothed
birds so ancient that Athene herself must have been young when their kind flew
the darkling skies of Earth. Artemisia, her attention caught by the moving
colors of the television screen, dropped her bottle of juice against the high
chair's tray with a bang. A chubby finger pointed.
   "Mama! Fish-bird! Fish-bird!"
   Ianira looked-and felt all blood drain from her face. She had to clutch the
countertop to keep from sliding to the floor. An Ichthyornis had struck a
brown fish and was devouring it while it struggled. Blood flowed in all-too-
lifelike color. Ianira lunged across the narrow kitchen, driven by terror, and
snapped off the machine with shaking hands. The screen went dark and silent.
Fear for Marcus rose like sour bile in her throat.
   No, she pled silently, keep this death away from our threshold, Lady. He
has done nothing to merit it. Please ...
   Ianira's hands were still trembling when she carried the dishes out to
their small dining table and offered the food she had prepared for their
evening meal. It took all her courage to smile at their guest, who tore into
the food like a ravening wolf. Lupus Mortiferus ... Wolf of Death... Ianira
did not yet know precisely how danger would come to Marcus through this man,
but she was as certain of it as she was certain that her shaky breaths were
barely holding terror at bay.
   Ianira Cassondra had lost one family already.
   She would do murder, if necessary, to keep from losing another.
CHAPTER SEVEN
   The Britannia Gate was rich with possibility.
   Skeeter chose a likely looking mark dressed in expensive, Victorian-style
garments and followed him discreetly until the "gentleman" entered a public
restroom. Skeeter entered behind him, took care of business, then-while they
both washed their hands at the automatic sinks he dared break the cardinal
rule of silence in the men's washroom.
   "Travelling to London, too?" he asked, buttoning the fly of his own

Victorian-era togs.
   The man shot him a startled glance. -Er, yes."
   Skeeter smiled. "Take some friendly advice. That place is crawling with
pickpockets. Worse than you'll ever read in Dickens." That, at least, was
God's own truth. "Don't carry all your money in some predictable place, like a
pocket wallet. Some nine-year-old kid'll snatch it and be gone before you even
know it's missing."
   "I-yes, we were warned about pickpockets," the man stammered, "but I wasn't
quite sure what I should do about it. Someone suggested maybe I should ask an
outfitter, you know, for a moneybelt or something-"
   "I'll show you a trick I learned the hard way." Skeeter winked. "Wrap your
money in a handkerchief and tuck it inside your shirt, so it sits inside the
waistband of your trousers."
   The mark looked doubtful.
   "Here, let me show you what I mean." He pulled out a standard white
handkerchief stuffed with his own money and demonstrated. "Here, I have a
spare hanky. You try it."
   The man looked doubtful for a moment longer, then relaxed. `Thank you. I
will." He pulled a huge bankroll out of an expensive leather wallet and tucked
the money into the center of the hanky, tying it clumsily.
   "I'm afraid I'm not very good at this."
   "Here, let me help."
   Skeeter tied the corners expertly and tucked it into place, showing the
mark exactly how the handkerchief was supposed to fit. Then he retrieved it
and said, "Try it again" as he tucked his own money-filled hanky back into his
own waistband.
   The mark-having no idea that Skeeter had deftly switched handkerchiefs on
him-tucked Skeeter's much smaller "bankroll" into his slacks. "Yes, that works
wonderfully! Thank you, young man. Here, let me give you a tip or
something..."
   "No, I wouldn't dream of it," Skeeter reassured him. "Hope you have a good
visit in London. Some really spectacular sights. Can hardly wait to get back,
myself."
   He grinned at the other man, then strolled out of the washroom gloating
over his success. With any luck, the tourist wouldn't discover the switch
until he was through the Britannia Gate. Time Tours would bail him out for the
duration of the tour-although they'd charge him double price as refund for
their trouble and he'd learn a valuable lesson he clearly needed about hanging
onto what was his.
   Meanwhile, this haul ought to put Skeeter several hundred ahead of Goldie.
He headed directly for the library to have his winnings logged, whistling
cheerfully. A group of half-grown boys in Frontier Town-- aw, nuts, looks like
the uptime abandonees just cut class again-dashed out of a restaurant directly
in his path, yelling and whooping in an excess of energy. Crashes and yells
inevitably followed their retreat. Skeeter snorted. Bunch of mannerless
hooligans, smashing up anything they could lay hands on just for jollies.
   Time Tours, Inc. and the smaller touring outfits tried every trick they
could to keep parents from taking kids downtime. After that kid in Rome had
gotten himself killed and Time Tours had ended up settling for a huge sum of
money (despite the fact it was entirely the fault of the stupid kid and his
too-bored-to-be-bothered parents), the outward ripple was as simple as it was
inevitable: no touring outfit wanted any kid running wild downtime.
   So the new policy to cope was simple: parents either signed a waiver and
paid an enormous extra fee for kids' downtime tickets, or they "abandoned" the
kids on the station. Theoretically, Harriet Banks, the Station's school
teacher, was assigned to watch them. In practice, Harriet had to watch -and
teach, Residents' kids, keep tourists' kids from leaving, and make certain

that none of the toddlers or infants in the Day Care Center were injured,
sick, or just plain obnoxious with the other kids. Skeeter thought Bull
should've done something ages ago or one of these days he was going to find
himself with a full School and Day Care Center and no one to mind the store.
   Bored, usually spoiled, tourists' kids got out of hand constantly, running
wild through the station like feral dogs through a butcher's shop. Skeeter
found himself caught up in their midst while they darted in mad circles,
shouting, "Bang, I got you!" and "No, you didn't, you louse, you missed me
clean!"
   Several caromed off his shins in their antics.
   "Hey! Watch the toes!"
   "Sorry, mister"
   They darted away, still shouting and playing their idiotic game. Those boys
were too old to be playing cowboys and Indians. They were at that uncertain
age when their games should've been more like "who can look up the prettiest
girl's skirt first?" He muttered under his breath-then halted mid-mutter.
   The next words out of him were so foul, an ichthyornis took offense, shook
out its oil-free, sodden feathers, and flopped over to another bush to finish
drying its wings.
   There was no mistake. Skeeter felt nothing but emptiness inside the
waistband of his pants. Disbelieving, he actually jerked his shirt out of his
slacks and stared. The handkerchief was gone. So was his own wallet, from his
back pocket.
   Those murderous, conniving little
   The boys had run in the general direction of Goldie Morran's shop.
   That she'd stoop to bribing tourists-tourists kids, to roll him, right
there in public ... The humiliation was unendurable. Bet or no bet, Goldie was
gonna pay for this one. Skeeter stormed toward her shop in a towering rage,
not even certain what he meant to do. A dark-haired girl stepped into his
path, barring his way. Skeeter tried unsuccessfully to step around, felt his
mind go strangely grey and distant, then blinked and found himself staring
into Ianira Cassondra's bottomless eyes. The exotically beautiful girl who
lived with Marcus took hold of his arm, her grip urgent.
   Skeeter saw the self-styled acolytes who followed her everywhere closing in
through the holiday crowds.
   "There is no time to explain properly, Skeeter. Just let it go," she
murmured softly. "Goldie Morran is not the only one on this station with
supporters. She will not win her bet. This I swear by all I hold sacred."
   She was gone so fast, he wasn't certain for several moments she'd actually
been there. He stared after her, wondering what in the world she had meant,
and confirmed that his senses hadn't lied, because there went her entire
retinue of acolytes clutching cameras, notepads, vidcams, and sound recorders
in eager hands, trailing after her like boy dogs after a svelte little bitch
in heat. Skeeter really didn't know what to think. Sure, he'd given` Marcus
that money, which meant he and Ianira must be grateful to him, and he'd been
donating money to The Found Ones for months and months, but even if they were
serious, what could Marcus and Ianira do against Goldie Morran? The Duchess of
Dross had powerful allies and agents everywhere.
   Still, Ianira's impassioned words disturbed him. They could get themselves
thrown off the station, interfering with an uptimer's business which Skeeter
profoundly did not want to happen: the only place they could be sent would be
an uptime prison. Without their kids. Skeeter gulped. Things were getting too
far out of hand, much too fast, all because that purple-haired harpy couldn't
content herself with putting into motion her own scams.
   No, she had to do everything possible to destroy Skeeter's.
   Another part of him, the scared-kid part of him hidden down inside,
desperate to stay on TT-86 at any cost, actually prayed Ianira had cooked up

some scheme that would cause all sorts of hell for Goldie Morran-just one that
wouldn't put Marcus and his little family in danger. Whatever she'd meant,
she'd diverted Skeeter's dangerous rage long enough to cool into sensibility.
If he'd actually gone into Goldie's shop, there was no telling what he might
have done.
   Standing for murder charges would certainly get him kicked off the station.
   Rubbing his chin speculatively, Skeeter decided to kiss goodbye the lost
bankroll and wallet. He could always get the station ID cards replaced, even
the Residents Only ATM cards, allowing access to onstation bank accounts. Not
that his had much in it, currently. Most of his winnings from Rome were
already gone. He grimaced, realizing he'd have to eat his pride to go into
Bull Morgan's office and admit a vividly edited version of what had happened
so he could get replacement cards. As for the lost bankroll he'd stolen, he'd
just try again somewhere else, with some other scheme or maybe just some other
restroom and mark. He didn't have much choice. Even if he did face Goldie
down, he couldn't prove anything. And she'd make him a laughingstock for
falling prey to one of his own tricks. Ianira was a smart girl. Skeeter owed
her more than he'd realized.
   He sighed philosophically and changed course, heading for Bull Morgan's
office before trying the Prince Albert Pub to see what action he might pick up
there. If he didn't score something big soon, he was a lost man. As he took
the lift to the station manager's capacious office on the second floor,
Skeeter realized Ianira's comments had shocked him in another way: he did have
people rooting for him, friends among the downtimers he hadn't realized would
back him so staunchly.
   Very well, he would try harder. For their sake as well as his. It was
comforting to know he wasn't entirely alone.
   Kynan Rhys Gower had no love for Skeeter Jackson.
   It was said by those who knew that Skeeter had attempted to seduce the
grandchild of Kynan's liege lord, Kit Carson, by passing himself off as
something he was not. Kynan had not been a resident of Time Terminal Eighty-
Six when Skeeter Jackson had lied about being a time scout. But during the
period when Kynan was struggling hardest to adjust to his new life, he had
very nearly been killed protecting the lady Margo. Therefore, any man who
would stoop so low as to besmirch her honor was-and had to be-a sworn enemy.
   However, life in this place he had been forced to call home was never as
simple and straightforward as it had been in his own time. He began to realize
the depth of that truth when Ianira, a Greek beauty some called the
Enchantress, but who seemed to Kynan a very devoted wife and mother, called
for a Downtimers' Council meeting in the bowels of the time terminal. There,
she revealed word of the latest development in the bet between the Scoundrel
and Goldie Morran-and what he heard made Kynan Rhys Gower's blood sing.
   Goldie Morran was stealing from the Scoundrel. But Ianira wasn't pleased.
Instead, she was asking their help. Ianira Cassondra was actually asking them
either to steal back from Goldie, or to ruin as many of her schemes as
possible, to pay a debt she and Marcus, unbelievably-owed the Scoundrel, along
with all other Found Ones. He'd missed the last meeting due to his work
schedule and hadn't had a chance to catch up on Council business since.
Everything he heard amazed him.
   A thief had actually given money to a downtimer, to the whole community of
downtimers, keeping his word. Kynan despised the philandering Scoundrel. But
the chance to act against Goldie Morran, with the Found Ones' full Council
blessings ...
   Kynan Rhys Gower, too, had a score to settle, one it would give him great
pleasure to set right. The scars on his back and chest were mute testament to
what Goldie Morran's greed and persuasive, silver tongue had wrought mute
testament to the near loss of his life in the fetid, steaming heat of an

African twilight, with witch hunters hard on his heels and a crossbow bolt
aimed dead at the lady Margo's breast.
   Goldie Morran had lied to him about the conditions under which he was to
work for her, had lied to him about the extensive, potentially fatal dangers,
then had arrogantly refused to pay him because their "adventure" had failed.
It was his liege lord, Kit Carson, who had risked death in more ways than even
Kynan could understand, Kit Carson who had rescued Kynan from the clutches of
the Portuguese witch hunters, Kit Carson who had made certain that the wounds
Kynan had sustained were mended by the great magic available to healers here.
And it was Kit Carson who had paid him solid coin for his part in the work
Goldie Morran had hired him to do. And paid him, moreover, twice the amount
Goldie had named.
   Kit Carson was Kynan's liege lord, Goldie Morran a proven enemy. Kynan
might not love Skeeter Jackson, but if helping that scoundrel's cause brought
disgrace and banishment for Goldie Morran, well, there were worse ways a man
could spend his time and effort. He needn't actually help Skeeter make money,
all he needed to do was prevent Goldie from earning any. The stranded Welshman
chuckled to himself and began laying careful plans.
   Goldie was sipping wine at an "outdoor" cafe table in Victoria Station,
listening to the tourists preparing for departure down the Britannia Gate. One
of them, seated nearby, was a florid-faced man who kept wiping his brow with a
handkerchief and patting his coat pocket.
   "I tell you, Sally has been after me so long I finally agreed to bring her
on this tour, but I had no idea it would all be so expensive! The ticket into
Shangri-La, the ticket through the Britannia Gate, the hotel bills here and
downtime, the costumes. Good God, do you know how much money I just dropped in
that Clothes & Stuff place? I tell you, I'm down to my last five thousand and
Sally will pitch a fit beyond belief if I don't buy her expensive presents in
London, and then there's the ATF tax to pay on whatever we bring back ...."
   His companion, looking bored, just nodded. "Yes, it's expensive. If you
can't afford it, don't go."
   The disgruntled man with the florid face huffed. `'hat's easy for you to
say. You don't live with my wife."
   The other man at the table glanced at a pocket watch. "I'm due on the
weapons ranges. See you later, Sam."
   He paid his bill and departed, leaving the florid Sam to mop his brow all
by himself. Goldie smiled and moved in. She picked up her wine glass and
approached his table.
   "Mind if I join you?"
   He glanced up, surprise widening his eyes, then belatedly mumbled, "Sure,
sure, sit down."
   Goldie took her seat with the dignity of a dowager empress settling into
the ancestral throne. "I'm sorry, but I couldn't help overhearing your
conversation. I hope you don't think it forward. of me, but there are ways to
cut the cost of a time tour. Considerably. You can even turn a tidy profit on
occasion. If," she smiled, "you're ... mmm ... willing to bend the rules a
little? Nothing genuinely illegal, mind you, just a tad ... exciting. I've
tried it dozens of times, myself, or I wouldn't recommend it."
   She sipped her wine and waited, smiling politely.
   Her mark blinked a few times, taking in Goldie's expensive Victorian-era
tea-gown and glittering jewelry.
   He blinked a few times more, swallowed loudly enough to be heard two tables
away, then went for it. "What ways?"
   Goldie leaned forward slightly, just touching Sam's hand with well-
manicured fingertips. Diamonds winked from one ring, sapphires from another.
"Well, as you know, we uptimers are legally forbidden to bet on sporting
events downtime-boxing, horse races, that sort of thing-because we might be

able to find out the results in advance. ATF considers that an unfair
advantage,"
   She allowed a tinge of aristocratic disdain to creep into her voice and
glanced derisively in the direction of Primary, with its Bureau of Access Time
Functions tax collectors, luggage-searching busybodies, and officious
bureaucrats.
   Sam grunted once. "So I've been told. Our guide said we'll be watched to
keep us from doing any betting while we're in London. Interfering, high-
handed..."
   Goldie let him rant at length, then brought the conversation around toward
her intended direction again. "Yes, I know all that, dearie." She patted his
hand. "As I said, I've done this dozens of times. It's very simple, really.
You find out the winners of whatever race you want to bet on, then give that
information and your money to one of the downtimers hanging around the
station. Many of them pick up odd jobs at the last minute for Time Tours as
baggage handlers, so it's really a very simple matter to arrange. The
downtimer places your bet and collects your winnings. You give him a small
cut, and voila! You've helped defray expenses, at the very least. And best of
all, you split the earnings downtime, so you can either convert it to uptime
money the ATF can't touch or buy a few trinkets to bring home as souvenirs."
   Goldie lifted her wineglass, tilting it so that the endless light in the
Commons glittered on the jewels adorning her fingers. Come on, Sammie boy. Go
for it. Not that any downtimer'll come near your lovely bankroll. She smiled
politely and sipped wine as though the outcome of his decision meant nothing
whatsoever to her. Hook him, then tell him the idiot downtimer wandered
through a gate and Shadowed himself, went ` Poof!" money and all. Complain to
management if you like, but of course, it's your word against mine and there's
that matter of admitting an attempt to place an illegal bet ....
   Sam wiped his brow one last time with a wilted handkerchief, then said
decisively, "I'll do it! I will. Tell me how."
   Goldie set her wineglass down. "As it happens, I've already made
arrangements with a gentleman to place a bet for me this trip. He can place a
bet for you, as well, on the same race. The wagering stands at ten-to-one. I'm
placing ten grand on it. This time next week, I'll have a cool hundred
thousand more in my retirement fund."
   Sam, his face flushed now with excitement rather than nerves, reached for
his coat pocket and pulled out a fat wallet. Goldie salivated and swallowed
while toying idly with her wineglass to keep her fingers from trembling in
anticipation of all that lovely money.
   "How much..." Sam was muttering. "How much to risk? Oh, hell, here. Have
him bet it all."
   The man handed her British pound notes which added up to five thousand
dollars, American. Goldie smiled again, her predatory heart singing. Then a
shadow fell across the table. They both glanced up. Goldie widened her eyes in
astonishment.
   "Kynan Rhys Gower!"
   "I come, lady, as I promise. The bet, lady. Do I hear right? I make bet for
this man, too?"
   Goldie blinked once, owl-like, aware that her lips had fallen into a round
O of surprise. Then she forcibly recovered her composure. "Why, yes, that's
right, Kynan. I just didn't realize you'd come early to collect my stake."
   "I prompt, lady. Place bet good. All bets." He winked.
   Then he plucked the money from nerveless fingers before she could part lips
to protest. Kynan bowed and kissed her hand gallantly, then bowed to Sam, who
was beaming, clearly impressed by the charade. Goldie didn't know what to do.
   But if Kynan Rhys Gower thought she'd let him out of her sight, he was a
greater fool than she thought.

   The Welshman bowed again and started to leave.
   "If you'll excuse me," Goldie said hastily, "Kynan and I have business of
our own to finish."
   "But--"
   "Don't worry, we'll be on the tour together. I'll catch up to you at the
Britannia Gate, Sam."
   Goldie fled after the Welshman, who had already vanished around a corner of
Victoria Station's cobbled, twisted "streets" of shop fronts, cafes, and pubs.
She spotted him ahead and picked up speed.
   "Kynam!"
   The Welshman ducked into a pub and vanished in a wooden-floored room with
air so thick from cigar smoke and alcohol fumes, it was as though a marshland
miasma rose from dozens of beer mugs, brandy snifters, whisky glasses, and
stinking black stogies. Goldie stood glaring from the threshold until her
eyesight adjusted, but there was no sign of Kynan Rhys Gower.
   "Has anybody seen Kynan Rhys Gower?" she demanded of the crowded room at
large.
   "Headed toward the loo, love," someone sang out.
   Grim-faced, Goldie stormed into the men's room, not caring a fiddle for the
shocked men who grabbed at open flies and cursed her in scalding terms when
she started searching stalls.
   Kynan was not in the "loo."
   She emerged, color rising high in her cheeks from sheer ire.
   Then someone came past, saying, " ... won't believe it! Biggest domestic
screaming fight I've ever seen! Yelling cat and dog, they are, her waving a
fist full of money at him, and the poor schmuck trying to explain it was for
her he'd got himself swindled ... ."
   Goldie cursed once aloud, explosively, earning curious stares from several
'eighty-sixers hanging on this gossip.
   "Something wrong, Goldie?' Rachel Eisenstein asked, her brow furrowing
slightly.
   "Not a thing!"
   Rachel shrugged and turned back to the storyteller. "Think it'll require
stitches before they're done?"
   Goldie stormed away from the terminal's head physician and the rest of the
gossipers yammering about her money.
   That ... that honor-bound, incompetent, downtime rat! . .
   He'd given the blasted money back to Sam's wife!
   She beat a dignified, hasty retreat toward her moneychanging shop, seething
inside as she tried to come up with some other scheme that would net her a big
gain over that mongrel cur, Skeeter Jackson.
   Goldie slammed shut the shop door so hard, the bell jangled wildly against
the glass. She stalked behind her counter and indulged in at least five
minutes of unrestrained, sulky cursing where nothing but her glittering coins
and jewels could hear.
   Then, drawing several savage breaths, she added Kynan Rhys Gower to the
list of names she owed serious paybacks. And then-caution overcoming wrath--
she carefully struck his name off her list again. For reasons personally
painful to recall, Kynan Rhys Gower was under Kit Carson's personal-and far-
reaching-protection. After what Goldie Morran had suffered as a result of
Kit's wrath, she did not want to find herself on the losing end of another
deal with Kenneth "Kit" Carson, world-famous time scout and land-shark
businessman.
   Goldie muttered under her breath. "Damn meddling scouts, guides, and
downtimers, one and all." She turned her savage anger toward a more productive
target: Skeeter Jackson. She had to know what he was up to. After that
blitzkrieg attack by those boys she'd hired, he'd gone virtually underground.

Goldie tapped long, manicured nails against the glass countertop, noticed the
rings she'd borrowed from her inventory. She replaced them in the glass case
with a snort of disgust, then reached thoughtfully for the telephone. She
might not have won this battle, but the war was far from over.
   All communities, no matter their size, have rituals by which they measure
the passage of time and gauge the meaning of life. These rituals serve
purposes beyond seemingly superficial appearances; they provide necessary
cohesion and order within the primate group to which humanity belongs, they
sustain continuity in the endless chaos of life, they ensure proper passage
from one phase of life into the next as the individual grows from childhood
into adulthood responsibility and from there into old age, all within the
context of the social group to which that individual belongs. This need for
ritual is so profound, it is locked within the genetic code, transmitted over
the generations from the vast distance of time when Lucy and her predecessors
roamed the steaming plains of Africa, learning to use tools and language in a
hostile, alien world-a world whose harsh beauty struck awe into the soul, a
world where the terror of instant death could not be fully comprehended.
   And so humans learned to survive via the evolution of rituals, changing not
so much their physical bodies as their cultural, social patterns of behavior.
In a world without rituals, humans will create their own, as in the gangs of
lawless children who had before and still did, after The Accident, terrorized
the streets of major cities.
   The more chaotic the world, the greater the need for ritual.
   La-La Land was an utter morass of conflicting cultures, religious beliefs,
and behavior patterns. Its very nickname reflected the insane nature of the
small community of shopkeepers, professionals, law enforcers, medical
personnel, scholars, con artists, time-tour-company employees, stranded
downtimers, freelance time guides, and the most insane of all the residents,
the time scouts who explored new gates, risking their lives with each new
journey alone into the unknown past.
   In order to keep the peace, Station Management and representatives of the
uptime government both had laid down sets of rituals-codified into law-by
which residents and tourists alike were required to abide. Others sprung up
naturally, as such things will any time human beings come together into more
or less permanent groupings of more than one. (And, in fact, even hermits have
their own rituals, whether or not they care to admit it.)
   In La-La Land, there were two rituals of paramount importance to every
resident: Bureau of Access Time Function's incessant attempts to enforce the
cardinal rule of time touring, "Thou Shalt Not Profiteer from Temporal Travel"
and the residents' unceasing attempts to thumb their collective noses at said
cardinal rule.
   The High Priests of the two opposing factions were Bull Morgan, Station
Manager, whose sole purpose in life was to maintain an orderly, profitable
station where a body could do pretty much as he or she pleased, so long as the
peace was kept-and the other was Montgomery Wilkes, head ATF agent, a man
dedicated to enforcing the cardinal rule of time touring at all cost.
   Inevitably, when Bull and Montgomery locked horns, sparks flew. This, in
turn, had given rise to a third universal ritual in La-La Land. Known
affectionately as Bull Watching, it involved the placement of bets both large
and small on the outcome of any given encounter between the two men. In its
classic form, Bull Watching provided hours of entertainment to those men and
women who had chosen to live in a place where light blazed from the ceiling of
the Commons twenty-four hours a day, but where the only real sunlight came
from the occasional trickle through an open gate.
   In this sunless, brightly lit world, it was inevitable that Montgomery
Wilkes would grow ever more bitter as residents flouted his authority at every
possible moment and made bets that infuriated him about every word he did or

did not utter. When Goldie Morran came to him with her plan to rid the station
of Skeeter Jackson, he saw a golden opportunity to rid it of Goldie Morran, as
well--a woman he knew in his bones broke the cardinal rule of time touring
with every gate that opened, but was slick enough not to get caught.
   In taking that wager with Skeeter-and then coming to him-she had sealed her
own doom.
   Montgomery Wilkes intended to deport both of the scoundrels before this
business was done. That decision made, he indulged in a little ritual of his
own. He called it "inspecting the troops." The ATF agents assigned to TT-86
called it words impossible to repeat in polite company.
   Dressed in black uniforms that crackled when they walked, their hair cut to
regulation length (Montgomery had been known to use a ruler to measure hair
length to the last millimeter), every ATF agent in the ready room snapped to
attention when he stalked in, six feet, one hundred-eighty pounds of muscle,
close-cropped red hair, crackling green eyes, and set lips that underscored
the lines of discontent in his face.
   As he faced his agents, eyes alight with a martial glow that struck terror
into their collective hearts, he said, "The time has come for you to start
living up to those uniforms you wear. This station has hemmed us in, crowded
us into a corner, prevented us from doing much more than searching luggage and
levying taxes on the few items that actually get transported uptime.
Meanwhile, we sit by and watch while out-and-out crooks scam fortunes under
our very noses."
   Shoe leather creaked in the silence as he paced the front of the room. He
turned to glare at the nearest agents. "Enough!"
   With brisk movements, he switched on a slide projector and clicked
controls. Goldie Morran's pinched countenance filled a ten-foot wall.
   "This is Goldie Morran. Gems and rare coin dealer, money changer, currency
expert, and con artist." Slides clicked in the silence. "This is smiling
Skeeter Jackson. I don't think I have to tell you what kind of rapscallion
this two-bit thief is." He cleared his throat deliberately, pinning the
nearest agent with a baleful green stare. "I also know that every one of you
has heard by now about their little bet."
   Not a single agent in the room dared crack a smile; not with the boss
pacing three feet away. A few began to sweat profusely into their stiff black
uniforms, wondering if their side bets on the outcome of "the wager" had been
discovered.
   "Ladies and gentlemen," he folded his hands behind his back and stood in
the center of the projected image of Skeeter Jackson, so that the colors from
the slide wavered across his uniform and face like stained glass taken from a
madhouse, "we are going to let these two have enough rope to hang themselves.
I have had a bellyful of watching these 'eighty-sixers hoodwink their way
through life, as though the sacred laws which we have been hired to uphold
didn't even exist. We may not be able to deport them all and close down this
station, but by God, we can catch these two! And I intend to do just that. By
the end of the week, I want Goldie Morran and Skeeter Jackson in custody for
fraud, theft, and anything else we can think up and make stick. I want them
deported uptime to jail where they belong, or I'll have the reasons why a
crack troop of ATF agents is incompetent to catch two smalltime crooks in a
closed environment. Is that understood?"
   Nobody said a word. Hardly anybody breathed. Many kissed pensions goodbye.
Without exception, they cursed the fate that had landed them in this career,
on this station, under this boss.
   "Very good. Consider yourselves warriors in a timeless battle of good
against evil. I want undercover teams combing this station, looking for anyone
who might testify against either of those two. I want other undercover teams
to set up sting operations. If we can't catch them in a fair scam, we'll by

God entrap them in one of our own making. And if I hear of anyone betting on
the outcome of this wager, I'll have pensions, so help me! Now move it! We
have work to do!"
   Agents in black fled the room to receive assignments from their captains
and lieutenants and sergeants. Montgomery Wilkes remained behind in the empty
ready room and gazed cold-eyed at the projected visage of smiling Skeeter
Jackson. "I'll get you," he said softly to the colored light on the blank,
ten-foot wall. "I will by God get you. And it's about time Bull Morgan
understood just who the law around here really is."
   He stalked out onto the Commons on course for the station manager's office.
CHAPTER EIGHT
   Like most time terminals, TT-86 attracted gifted scholars from around the
world, many of them the very best at what they did. Robert Li was no
exception. As an antiquarian, he was sought out by private collectors and
museums alike as a consultant and had been instrumental in identifying
numerous quality forgeries.
   There was good reason for this: no one excelled Robert Li at producing
forgeries of the genuine article. His work was-usually-strictly legal.
Tourists and museum reps often brought items uptime to his studio to be
reproduced in exquisite detail, which were then exported to museums around the
world as legal replicas bearing the IA trademark. Occasionally, however, like
most other 'eighty-sixers, Robert Li would get a bellyful of ATFs high-handed
tactics.
   He had an exceptionally strong-if unique-sense of right and wrong. The
closer Montgomery Wilkes' people watched his operation, the more ire he
swallowed until, inevitably, it broke out in such indignant expressions as
assisting thieves smuggle out their wares! (Of course, only after he'd charged
them a substantial amount of cash to reproduce the item.)
   Even so, far more frequent were the times when scouts had returned "stolen"
items to their original times when he felt an item shouldn't go missing
although, again, he usually reproduced it, first. And occasionally, an item
crossed his counter that was so breathtaking, so unique that he simply
couldn't resist. He could wax rhapsodic about Min porcelain, but Greek bronzes
threw him into utter fits. Unknown to ATF---or anyone else, for that matter-
Robert II kept a private safe the size of his bedroom, where he stored his
most precious belongings. His collection of ancient bronzes rivaled that of
the Louvre and surpassed that of uptime collectors with far more money than he
had.
   Some things, one simply did not sell.
   Greek bronzes were one; friends were another.
   Goldie Morran was, at heart, a cheating scoundrel who would've sold her own
teeth, if they d been worth enough, but she was also a friend and one of the
few people in the world whose knowledge of rare coins and gems approached his
own. Goldie had done him a favor or two over the years, obtaining items here
and there which his heart had coveted, and he harbored a secret admiration for
her skills.
   Unlike Kit Carson, he never tried to best her at billiards or pool, knowing
his own limitations as fully as his strengths. Normally Goldie would've
respected his lack of desire to wager against her. He was equally aware,
however, that with Goldie's livelihood on the line, she would consider nothing
sacred. So when she entered his studio, Robert Li buttoned his pockets, locked
the cases and cabinets he could reach, and put on his best smile.
   "Why, Goldie, what a surprise to see you."
   She nodded and placed a carbuncle with ornate carving across its upper
surface on a velvet pad left lying on the countertop.
   "What do you think of it?"

   He eyed her speculatively, then picked up the gem and a jeweler's loupe.
"Mmm ... very nice. The depiction of the statuary on the spine of the Circus
Maximus is excellent and I've never seen a better representation of the
turning posts. Who forged it for you?"
   Goldie sniffed, eyes flashing irritation and disappointment. "Bastard.
How'd you know?"
   He just gave her a sorrowful look from under his brows.
   Goldie sniffed again. "All right, but would it fool most people? Even a
discerning collector?"
   "Oh, without a doubt. Unless," he smiled, "they hired someone like me to
authenticate it."
   "Double what I said before. Triple it. How much?"
   Robert laughed quietly. "To keep quiet? Or provide authentication papers?"
   "Both, you conniving-"
   "Goldie." The reproach in his voice was that of a lover wounded by his
lady's mistrust.
   "Robert, you owe me a few. I'm desperate."
   "ATF's watching me like a hawk. Word's out: Monty's planning to nail you
and Skeeter, send you both packing to an uptime jail."
   Goldie could swear more creatively than anyone Robert Li knew-and he knew
all the time scouts operating out of TT-86.
   Robert knew better than to pat her hand, but sympathy seemed called for.
"Well, I suppose you could always poison Wilkes, but I think it would be
easier to steer clear of anyone you don't know for the next few days. This
place is crawling with undercover agents."
   Goldie's eyes, sharper than ever, flashed dangerously. "Bull know about
that? If ATFs undercover, they're way outside their jurisdiction and
Montgomery Wilkes for damn sure knows it."
   Before Robert could answer, Kit Carson entered the shop, sauntering over in
a gait calculated to appear lazy, but which covered ground with astonishing
speed. "Hi. Heard the news?"
   "Which news?" Goldie demanded, exasperation coloring her voice.
   Kit chuckled and winked at Robert. "Reliable eyewitnesses said the shouting
could be heard through the soundproofing."
   "Bull and Monty?" Robert asked eagerly. -Ten says Monty stepped over the
line just a tad too far this time."
   "No bet," Kit laughed. "You'll never guess what Bull's done now."
   Goldie, carefully covering the carved carbuncle with her hand, asked, "Bull
`fishpond him'?"-referring to the time Margo had taken offense at being mauled
by a multibillionaire with a thing for nubile redheads. Margo had thrown him
into the fishpond.
   Kit laughed heartily. Robert Li was sure Goldie had intended, with careful
calculation, to remind Kit of that particular incident. And such a ruckus the
dripping wet old goat had raised, too, threatening to sue everything and
everyone he could.
   Fortunately, Bull Morgan had pointed out that said goat would have to file
suit in the jurisdiction where the assault had taken place, then explained
that no lawyers at all were permitted to hang their shingles anywhere inside
TT-86. Better that way for everyone.
   Of course, the way Margo looked and moved ...
   A man could hardly be blamed for trying. Malcolm Moore was one lucky son if
she said yes.
   Kit leaned forward conspiratorially. "Good guess, but nope, you're way off
the mark."
   Kit's little audience leaned forward, unaware they did so.. Kit grinned.
"Bull Morgan had Mike Benson place dear old Monty under arrest. Threw him into
the brig with seventeen boozers, half-a-dozen brawlers, and three flea-bitten

thieves clumsy enough to get caught."
   "WHAT?"
   The demand came out in stereo, Goldie's screech hitting soprano.
   Kit's grin lit his thin, mustachioed face like an evil jack-o-lantern.
"Yep. Seems like during their, er, meeting over jurisdiction up in Bull's
office, Monty's sense of outrage and diligence to the letter of the law
prompted him to, um, an assault."
   Robert Li gasped. "Monty hit Bull? And he's still alive?"
   "Oh, no," Kit laughed, eyes twinkling. "Much better than that. Monty
assaulted Bull's prize porcelain of the Everlasting Elvis.. You know the one,
sat on his desk like some serene Buddha for years after he, er, borrowed it
from that cathouse in New Orleans."
   Goldie's eyes went as round as the carbuncle she'd tried to hide from Kit's
sharp-eyed gaze. "He broke Bull's Elvis?"
   "They're still digging pieces out of the wall. And ceiling. And carpet."
   "Oh, dear God," Robert said hoarsely, covering his eyes. "You know what
this means?"
   "Oh, do I ever. Open season on ATF agents and station security alike. The
fights-and they're getting dirty, fast have already started. Just thought I'd
warn you. Things are likely to get hot around here for a while. Oh, one last
thing."
   He winked at Robert. "That carbuncle you're trying to hide, Goldie? Forget
selling it to that sweet young thing who asked if you could find her one.
She's the newest narc on Monty's payroll."
   Goldie's mouth dropped open. Robert grinned. Kit rarely had the pleasure of
catching her so completely off guard. Goldie very primly closed her mouth.
Then, with as much dignity as she could muster, she said, "I am not even going
to ask. Good day, gentlemen."
   She took her carbuncle and left.
   Robert glanced curiously at Kit. "This girl you're talking about. Is she
really Monty's?"
   Kit chuckled. "Hell if I know. But she walks and talks like ATF, for all
the lace and perfume and goo goo eyes she's been making at Skeeter Jackson. He
hides every time she comes near. And I've never known that boy's instincts
about undercover cops to fail."
   "She sounds guilty to me," Robert chuckled. "Poor Skeeter. Poor Goldie.
What terrible, tangled webs."
   Kit grinned. "Yeah, well, hey, they wove 'em all by themselves, didn't
they? I just don't like the idea of ATF throwing its weight around where it's
got no real jurisdiction. They mind their checkpoints, we mind our business.
Problems like Goldie and Skeeter, we handle internally."
   Robert Li laughed aloud, recalling just how Kit had "handled" his own
family "problem" with Skeeter. The youngster was still -shy whenever Kit was
around.
   "When's Margo due in?" he couldn't resist asking.
   Kit's world-famous grin flickered into existence. "Next time Primary
cycles. Malcolms taking her to Denver."
   "So I heard."
   "Is nothing secret around here?"
   Robert Li chuckled. "In La-La Land? Get real. Whoops, here comes a
customer."
   Kit wandered out past a young woman who wandered in. Kit paused in the
doorway, giving Robert the high sign that this girl was trouble, then left
whistling jauntily Robert Li watched the tourist narrowly as she paused to
look at antique furniture brought uptime from London, then glanced
appreciatively at a cabinet filled with jade jaguar gods.
   "Is there anything in particular I could help you with?" Robert asked

politely.
   "Hi. I was wondering if you could help me out? I'm interested in buying
something for my Dad's birthday and he's crazy about Roman antiquities. And
he's a sports nut, too. So when this gems dealer showed me a gorgeous stone
with a carving of the Circus Maximus on it ..." She batted eyelashes a half-
inch long and let the sentence trail off.
   She was all lace and perfume and goo-goo eyes. And her voice would've
liquefied thousand-year-old honey. But Kit was right: this kid walked like a
trained agent and despite the melt-in-your-mouth patter, her voice held a burr
that told Robert, Monty's riding 'em hard, all right. This kid's out for
blood. Robert Li folded his hands into the sleeves of the Chinese-style
Mandarin's robe he affected while in his studio and waited for her to
continue. Having a Chinese maternal grandfather gave him certain physical
attributes that came through despite his mother's Scandinavian heritage; it
also gave him an excuse to go inscrutable on demand. The tactic, so effective
with other customers, even threw her off-stride. She floundered visibly for a
moment, then recovered.
   "I was hoping you could give me an appraisal, you know, so I'd be sure I
was paying a fair price for lt."
   "I am an antiquities dealer," Robert said humbly, "with some small
knowledge of furniture and a slight interest in South American jades, but I do
not presume to claim expertise in valuing gemstones."
   "There's an IFARTS sign in your window," she challenged, as perfectly well
aware as he what was required to become an WARTS official representative.
   "Dear lady, I fear my consultation fee would be a complete waste of your
money."
   "Consultation fee?"
   "A trifling charge for my time and services. It is not against IFARTS rules
and one does have to make a living." He smiled politely. "I fear a thousand
dollars to tell you, `I don't know' would be a great strain on the budget of
someone as sensible as I perceive you to be. Surely you could go to one of the
gems dealers on the station for such an appraisal?"
   Her eyes narrowed in dawning suspicion. "Everyone recommended you."
   "I would, of course, be happy to do my best, but there is also my
reputation to consider. Think what damage I would do if I valued such a thing
wrongly. You would be cheated, the current owner of the gem would be cheated
and possibly greatly offended, and no one would trust my judgment again. I
know my limits, dear lady, and my reputation will not stand such a strain as
you ask."
   She compressed her lips. He could all but see the thoughts seething behind
her eyes: You're in an it, you bastard, you're all in on it and I'll never
prove a thing on her ....
   "Thank you," she said curtly. All trace of sweetness and goo-goo eyes had
vanished. "I hope you have a pleasant day."
   The hell you do, girlie. Robert smiled anyway. "And a pleasant day to you.
And your father. May his day of birth be blessed with the freedom in life he
so earnestly desires."
   Robert thought for a moment she would actually break cover and scream at
him that Montgomery Wilkes wouldn't be in jail long, by God! but she didn't
She just marched out of his studio as though she were on parade ground. She's
young, Robert sighed, and that idiot Wilkes is ruining her already. What a
tight fisted, anal-retentive fool. Then Robert reminded himself that the ATF-
no matter how attractively packaged-was the enemy and busied himself placing a
few phone calls. There were friends who deserve fair warning before that
little number came to call.
   Clearly, she was out for Goldie's blood.
   Robert Li sold many things, for many prices.

   But he had never sold a friend. Not even a snake of a friend like Goldie
Morran. Just because she'd sell him out at a moment's notice didn't mean he
needed to reciprocate her lack of morals, never mind plain bad manners. And
that was something ATF agents just didn't seem to comprehend. Not the ones
trained by Montgomery Wilkes, anyway. Sometimes Robert wondered what drove the
man so. Whatever it was, it boded ill for many an 'eighty-sixer before this
business with The Wager was finished.
   He dialed a number from memory.
   A voice on the other end of the phone said, "Hello?"
   "There's a sweet young thing on Monty Wilkes' staff making the rounds,
trying to sting Goldie, and maybe you in the process. She just left here and
she's goddamned good. All honey and goo-goo eyes until she realizes she can't
have what she wants. Can't miss her. Just thought you ought to know."
   "Huh. Thanks. I'll start passing around word, myself. You wanna take A to M
or N to Z?"
   "I'll finish in the group where I started. A to M."
   "N to Z it is. Thanks for the tip-off."
   The line went dead.
   Robert grinned. Then punched another set of numbers.
   "Your attention, please. Gate One is due to open in five minutes. All
departures, be advised that if you have not cleared Station Medical, you will
not be permitted to pass Primary. Please have your baggage ready for customs
inspection by agents of the Bureau of Access Time Functions, who will assess
your taxes due on downtime acquisitions ..."
   Malcolm Moore leaned over to Kit and said, "I wouldn't want to be in that
line today. Those agents look bloody angry."
   Kit chuckled. "You'd think with their boss in jail, they'd be more relaxed,
not edgier than ever. Of course, after the fights some of 'em have been in
..."
   Half the male agents in sight sported blackened eyes and bruised knuckles.
A few of the women bore scratches down their cheeks. Mike Benson had been
forced to discipline half his own staff-then, he'd had to order the ATF agents
into temporary quarters in one of the hotels nearest Primary, just to separate
them from Station Security until the worst blew over.
   "I rather expect most of them wish Skeeter Jackson and Goldie Morran had
never been born, never mind made that idiotic wager," Malcolm noted wryly.
   Kit glanced up at the chronometer board again.
   Malcolm laughed. "The clock won't move any faster just because you keep
staring at the numbers."
   Kit actually flushed, then rubbed the back of his neck. "Yeah, well, I
guess I've missed the brat."
   Malcolm cleared his throat. "Well, since you mention it, I am rather
anxious to see her again."
   Kit gave him an appraising glance. "Yes. She might say no, you realize."
   "I know." The quiet anguish in his voice betrayed him. He couldn't shake
the fear that his notorious luck might still be holding steadily on "bad."
   "She might say no to what?' a voice boomed behind them.
   Malcolm winced. He and Kit turned to find Sven Bailey, hands on hips,
watching them like a bemused bulldog.
   "What in bloody hell are you doing here?" Malcolm muttered.
   Sven grinned, a sight that made most men's blood run cold. "Waiting for my
pupil, of course. Gotta see if she remembers anything I taught her."
   Kit chuckled. "If she doesn't, we'll both wipe up the mat with her."
   "Oh, goodie." Sven Bailey, widely acclaimed the most deadly man on TT-86,
rubbed thick-fingered hands gleefully. "I can hardly wait. I never get to have
that much fun with the tourists."
   Malcolm rubbed one finger along his nose. "That's because the tourists

would sue."
   The terminal's martial arts and bladed-weapons instructor grunted. "No
lawyers allowed in La-La Land and you know it."
   A new voice said, "Good thing for you, too, isn't it, Sven?"
   They glanced around to find Ann Vinh Mulhaney grinning up at him. Very
nearly the only person on TT-86 who dared laugh at Sven Bailey, the petite
shooting instructor's eyes sparkled with delight. Their matched heights
produced a comical appearance: squat fireplug, stood beside a sleek bird of
prey.
   "What is this," Malcolm muttered, "a welcoming committee?"
   "Well, she is my student," Ann pointed out. "I'd like to say hello and see
if she remembers anything." Her eyes flashed with unspoken humor, whether at
Malcolm's discomfiture or in remembrance of Margo's early lessons, Malcolm
wasn't sure.
   Sven just snorted. When Ann glanced curiously at her counterpart, Kit
chuckled. "That was Sven's excuse, too. You two are complete fakes. Why you
should even like that brat after what she put us all through is beyond me."
   "Like her?" Sven protested. He managed to look hurt, an astonishing feat,
considering that his eternal expression was that of a rabid bulldog about to
charge. "Ha! Like her. That's good, Kit. I just want another look at that
Musashi sword guard of yours. You know, the one you said I could peek at if I
trained her."
   "And I," Ann said sweetly, pulling off the wheedling tone far more
effectively than Sven, "covet another week in the honeymoon suite at the Neo
Edo." She batted her eyelashes prettily.
   Kit just groaned. Malcolm grinned. "You're as bad as they are, Kit, if you
expect me to buy that theatrical groan any more than I buy their excuses."
   Kit just crossed his arms and compressed his lips in a pained expression,
as though he'd crunched down on a poisoned seed pod and didn't know whether to
admit it or curse. "Friends." Disgust dripped like ice from voice.
   "Kit," Ann laughed, touching his shoulder in a friendly fashion, "you are
the biggest fake of any 'eighty-sixer walking this terminal. It's why we love
you."
   Kit just snorted rudely. "You sound like Connie. Do all the women on this
station get together and compare notes?
   Ann winked. "Of course. You're famous. Half the tourists who come here are
dying for a glimpse of the Kit Carson."
   Kit shuddered. His loathing of tourists was La-La Land legend. "I would
remind you, I'm not the only famous `Kit Carson' by a long shot."
   Sven nodded sagely. "But you're both scouts, eh?"
   Kit grinned unexpectedly. "Actually, I'm not named for Kit Carson, Western
scout, at all."
   All three of them stared. Malcolm scraped his jaw off the floor before the
others. "You're not?"
   Kit's eyes twinkled wickedly. "Nope. I used to build balsa airplanes and
launch 'em when I was a kid, then shoot 'em down with a slingshot off the side
of some cliff. Dahlonega, Georgia," he added dryly, "might not have much left
but a checkered history, but cliffs we had in plenty. So when I started
hitting every little balsa plane I'd made with a nice, fat rock, he took to
calling me `Kit' for his favorite WWII Ace Pilot, L. K. `Kit' Carson. Came
darn near to matching Chuck Yeager's record."
   "A fighter pilot," Sven said, eyes round with lingering astonishment.
"Well, hell, Kit, I guess that's not too bad a thing, being named after a
flying ace. Ever have a chance to do any real flying?"
   Kit's expression went distant. Malcolm knew the look. "Yeah," he said very
softly.
   Before anyone could -pry the station announcer interrupted.

   "Your attention, please. Gate One is due to open in one minute ..."
   The four watched in companionable silence as the circus of a Primary
departure wound up to a crescendo of baggage searches, purple faces, outraged
protests, and the exchange of shocking sums of money collected by agents in no
mood to put up with anyone's lip on this particular departure. By the time the
gate began to cycle, causing the bones behind Malcolm's ears to buzz, tempers
were ragged on both sides of the tables.
   "Good thing the gate's about to open or we'd have a fight or two, I think,"
Malcolm muttered to no one in particular.
   "Yep," Sven said with characteristic loquacity.
   The sound that was not a sound, heralding the opening of a major gate,
intensified. Beyond the imposing array of barriers, armed guards, ramps,
fences, metal detectors, X-ray equipment, and dual medical stations stood a
broad ramp which rose fifteen feet into the air, then simply ended. Light near
the top dopplered through the entire visible spectrum. Then Shangri-La
Station's main gate-and sole link with the rest of the uptime world-dilated
open.
   Uptimers streamed into the station, hauling baggage down that long ramp
toward the Medical station barring the way. One by one, station medical
personnel scanned and logged medical records. Malcolm waited in a cold sweat
for the one slight figure in all that crowd he'd waited months to see-and
dreaded meeting again. Then, before he was ready for it, she was there, hair
back to its natural flaming red, all trace of brown dye banished until she was
ready to take up time scouting as a professional.
   Margo ...
   Malcolm's belly did a rapid drawing in. How could he have forgotten what
that little slip of a girl could do to a man's body chemistry, just by walking
down an ordinary ramp? Margo was dressed-to Malcolm's astonishment in a chaste
little floral-print dress that came nearly to her ankles. The swing of its
long skirt and the way it clung to skin he vividly recalled the taste and
touch of did bad things to Malcolms breath control. Her hair was longer, too,
and-if possible sexier than ever as it curled around her ears. Oh, God, what
if she says no? Please, Margo, don't walk down that ramp and tell new you've
met some boy at school ....
   She caught sight of him and her face lit up like Christmas on Picadilly.
She shifted a heavy duffle bag to wave and blow a kiss right at him. His belly
did another rapid drawing in that made breathing impossible. He waved back.
His knees actually felt weak.
   "Buck up, man," Kit muttered in his ear. "You're white as a sheet."
   The ring in his pocket all but burned him through the cloth. He'd thought
to give it to her here, but with all these well-intentioned onlookers ...
Then, again before he was ready, she'd cleared station medical and dropped the
duffle bag to run straight into his arms.
   Margo Smith had not forgotten how to kiss.
   By the time they disentangled, spontaneous applause had broken out even
amongst tourists Malcolm had never laid eyes on. Margo flushed, grinned, then
flung her arms around Kit.
   "I missed you!"
   "Humph!" Kit said, crushing her close despite the attempt at pretense. "The
way you greeted Malcolm, I thought you'd forgotten your grandfather existed!"
   Margo shocked them all by bursting into tears. "Forget you?" She hugged him
more tightly than ever. "Don't you count on it!"
   Malcolm cleared his throat while Kit shut his eyes and just held her. After
the losses Kit had suffered, Margo's impromptu demonstration meant more than
she could possibly know. And after the terrible fights they'd had, it was good
to see that look on Kit's face.
   Eventually she dried her eyes and sniffed sheepishly. "Sorry. I really did

miss you. Sven! And Ann! You came to see me!"
   Ann hugged her former pupil tightly. "Welcome home, Margo."
   Sven Bailey, true to his nature, demonstrated his affection by launching a
snap kick right at her midriff. Margo wasn't there when it should have
connected. Despite the hampering cloth of her long dress, she danced aside and
managed to land a stinging punch before grabbing Sven and hugging him tightly.
He made a single sound of outrage, turned as red as Margo's hair, and
extricated himself with slightly-less-than-excessive force.
   "Huh. Good to see you remembered some of what I drilled into you, girl."
   Margo grinned. "Just a little. Care to spar later? I've been practicing."
   Sven Bailey's eyes lit up like an evil gnome's. "You're on!"
   Then, shocking everyone, he picked up Margo's luggage and set out with it,
calling over one shoulder, "Neo Edo? Kit's apartment? Or Malcolms place?"
   Margo flushed bright pink, glanced guiltily at Kit, bit one lip, and said,
"Uh, Malcolm's?"
   Kit's face fell until Margo hugged him again and whispered, "Just for
tonight, okay? I mean, well, you know."
   Kit turned brighter red than Sven had.
   Ann laughed aloud. "That's twenty you owe me, Kit."
   Kit just produced the money and said repressively, "You had better be safe
about it, Margo."
   Margo put out a pink tongue. "I promised that before I went off to school.
And I don't break my promises." At his look, she added, "Not anymore. I
learned that lesson! But I want dinner with you at the Delight, so you'd
better not have any dates lined up for tonight!"
   Kit relaxed into smiles again. "Arley's already reserved our table."
   "Good! College food sucks!"
   "Watch your mouth," Kit said mildly.
   "Well, it does." But she smiled as she said it.
   Her gaze caught sight of the brave decorations strangling Commons and her
mouth and eyes turned into little O's of wonder. "Oh, Malcolm, look! When did
that happen?"
   Kit laughed. "Another new 'eighty-sixer tradition you haven't been
introduced to yet. Winter Holiday Decorations Contest. The vendors around each
gate try to outdo one another. Last year, a three-story, arm-waving plastic
Santa caught fire."
   "Oooh, bet the stink of that took a while to clear."
   Malcolm chuckled. "Yes. Whichever way you choose to interpret that."
   Margo sighed. The gaudy spectacle was clearly, in her eyes, utterly
enchanting. Then she shook herself and glanced at Kit. "Oh, uh, by the way?
I've decided going back uptime to that school you got me into is a complete
waste of time. Brian's got a much better library and, well, it's just awful!"
   Before Kit could erupt into a violent temper, Margo held out one hand.
"Just think about it. We'll, uh, talk more later. Okay?"
   Kit hrumphed and said, "All right, my girl, but you're gonna have to talk
pretty fast and damn convincingly to change my mind."
   Margo laughed, a grown-up burble more than a childlike giggle. "Oh, I will.
Don't you fret about that."
   When she grabbed Malcolms hand, Malcolm felt like the air around his brain
was fizzing and sparkling. He wondered if Margo could actually feel how hard
his heart was thumping through the contact of her fingers against his.
   "Any interesting prospects in that group?" Ann, who'd taken in the entire
by-play with wide, fascinated eyes, asked. She nodded toward the other
uptimers as they headed down the brightly lit, gloriously garish Commons.
   "Hmm ... actually, yeah. There's this group of paleontologists headed
downtime through the Wild West Gate. Couple of PhDs, three grad students.
They're all set-they think," she chuckled, "to study the Bone Wars."

   "Bone Wars?" Ann echoed, sounding astonished.
   Margo glanced up at Kit, looking smug as a cat that's sneaked a choice
morsel off someone's plate. "Yeah, the Bone Wars. There were these two
paleontologists, see, Cope and Marsh, who got into a war with one another
collecting fossils from the American West. It was kind of an undeclared wager
to see who could name the most new specimens and mount them in museums back
east. Heck of a wager, too, let me add. Their agents would actually sneak into
one another's camps and smash up specimens, shoot at one another, real
exciting stuff. But they brought out a king's ransom in dinosaur bones,
between them, because of the competition. Named tons of new species and genera
and stuff. So, anyway, these guys-well, one of the grad students is a woman-
they want to study it firsthand. Said they've already got their own weapons,
rifles and pistols, but they were all cased up for the trip through Primary. I
made 'em promise to show me their rifles and stuff before they left and made
'em swear to God and all the angels they'd see you for lessons first. I think
one of 'em would rather touch a live rattlesnake than the guns he brought
along."
   Ann grinned. "Good girl!"
   Margo chuckled. "It was easy. The four of 'em who were guys were drooling
all over themselves for an excuse to talk to me." She rolled her eyes. "Men,."
   The stab of white-hot jealousy that shot through him stunned Malcolm. Margo
glanced up quickly. She must have felt his hand twitch, because she said, "You
all right, Malcolm?"
   "Fine," he lied. Just what do these so-called paleontologists look like? He
studied the incoming uptimers, but there were so many, he wasn't sure which
group they might belong to.
   Margo squeezed his hand. "Hey. Malcolm. They were boring."
   The way her eyes sparkled when she smiled made his insides go hot and cold.
"Really?" There, that had come out reasonably steady. Buck up, man, as Kit
says. She hasn't said no yet.
   Margo flounced as only Margo could. Malcolm followed the movement with a
tortured gaze. She added, "Hah! Their fossils would've been more interesting!
I Just wanted a peek at their rifles."
   Kit laughed. -Malcolm, I'd say you just won your standing bet, eh?"
   Margo colored delicately. "I wouldn't say that. The time limit on that bet
ran out ages ago."
   Malcolm sighed. "Well, there are' other ways of getting your life's story,
I suppose."
   "Hmm. We'll just have to see how creative you are, Mr. Moore." But she
squeezed his fingers.
   "At least," Kit said, eyeing them askance, "you seem to be picking up your
American history nicely. Maybe Malcolm's idea wasn't such a bad one, after
all."
   "Malcolm's idea," Malcolm growled, "was supposed to be Malcolm's surprise."
   Margo just looked up at him, wide-eyed. "You planned a surprise for me?"
   Heat rose into his face. "Yeah. And Grandpa's doing his damndest to spoil
it."
   "Got a bet on?" Margo asked suspiciously.
   "Not me," Malcolm sighed. "But I wouldn't be surprised if Kit does."
   "Kit and everyone else in La-La Land," Ann said
   "Mind if you have company for dinner, or is this a family affair?"
   Margo blushed. "Uh, would you mind if we had lunch tomorrow, instead?"
   "Not at all." Ann had to reach up slightly to ruffle Margo's hair. "Imp.
It's good to have you home."
   She strolled off with a backward wave.
   Kit rubbed the back of his neck. "I, uh, have some things I have to take
care of ..."

   "So soon?" Margo wailed.
   He glanced at Malcolm. "I think Malcolm wants you to himself for a while.
Grandpa can wait. But not long," he added with a fierceness in his voice that
his playful smile could not quite disguise.
   She hugged him tightly. "Promise."
   Kit kissed the top of her head, then gently disentangled himself. "Dress up
pretty for dinner, okay?"
   "I will."
   He ruffled her hair much the way Ann had, then left Malcolm alone with her.
Malcolm swallowed hard, finding his throat suddenly dry. "Did you, uh, want to
catch a bite to eat first?"
   Margo's green eyes smoldered. "I'm starving. But not for food. C'mon,
Malcolm. It's me. Margo.
   He ventured a tentative smile. "That therapy of yours seems to have
helped."
   She grinned. "Yeah, the rape counselor I've been seeing is good. She's
helped unkink me a whole lot. But I like being in your arms better." Without
warning, those smoldering eyes filled with tears and she threw her arms around
him. "God, I've missed you! My head aches with everything that horrid school
stuffs into it! I want you to hold me and tell me I'll get through this."
   "Hey, what happened to my little fire eater?"
   Wetness soaked through his shirt. "She got lonely"
   Had any uptime boys comforted her during that loneliness? Malcolm hoped
not. "My place is this way," he murmured, wrapping an arm around her. "We, uh,
have a lot to talk about."
   "Yeah?" She brightened and sniffed back tears. "Like what?"
   "Oh, lots of stuff." They caught an elevator for Malcolm's floor. "Goldie
and Skeeter are in the middle of a wager, for one. Whichever of them scams the
most in a month-and Goldie can't use her knowledge of rare coins and gems-gets
to stay in La-La Land. The other one has to leave."
   Margo's eyes widened. "You're kidding? That's a serious wager!" Then she
grinned, evilly. "Any way we can help Skeeter?'
   "I thought you hated him!"
   Margo laughed, green eyes wicked as any imp newly-arrived from Hell's own
furnace. "I do. But Goldie deserves worse than what we gave her. Lots worse."
The steel in her voice reminded Malcolm of his favorite poet: But when hunter
meets with husband, each confirms the other's tale:
   The female of the species is more deadly than the male ... .
   "Huh. Remind me never to get on your wrong side, young lady." The memory of
those terrible days in Rome, searching for her, were almost more than he could
bear. Margo's squeeze on his hand said a great deal more than her eyes, and
they spoke of a pain and longing that hurt Malcolm like a physical blow. His
faltering hopes began to regain their feet.
   Sven Bailey had left Margo's luggage in the "lock-me-tight" mail bin
outside each Resident's apartment. Malcolm unlocked the bin, rescuing Margo's
cases, then opened his door and ushered her inside.
   "You've redecorated! Wow! You actually have furniture!"
   Malcolm shrugged. "A little money never hurts."
   Margo laughed. "Don't be upset with me, Malcolm. I know it's my fault I
nearly got us killed, but see. Something good did come of it." She swept a
grand gesture at the room, nearly knocking over a lamp. "Whoops! Sorry."
   That was his Margo, all right. But would she be his Margo?
   "I, uh, had a little something, I, uh, that is ..."
   "Malcolm," she took both his hands in her own, "what is it? It's me. The
addle-brained brat you had to rescue off a Portuguese witch-burning pyre.
You're actually shaking! What's wrong?"
   He stared into those bottomless green eyes, filled now with worry and even

the beginnings of fear. When she reached up and brushed her lips across his,
he felt something inside his soul melt. If she said no ...
   "It's okay, Malcolm. Whatever it is. Just tell me."
   No more stalling, he thought grimly. Then he fumbled in a pocket for the
little velvet box. "I, uh, went uptime for a little vacation, had this made
for you."
   She opened the box curiously, then went absolutely white.
   "Malcolm?" Her voice wavered. So did those luminous green eyes.
   "Will you?" he whispered.
   An agony of indecision passed across her heart-shaped face, causing
Malcolm's heart to cease beating.
   "Malcolm, you know my heart-my whole soul's set on scouting," she
whispered. "You, you wouldn't object?"
   He cleared his throat. "Only unless you objected to my coming along."
   Her eyes widened. "But"
   "I thought it was high time I got over being a coward."
   Margo was suddenly in his arms, crying and kissing him at the same time.
"Don't ever say that! Do you hear me, Malcolm Moore? Never, ever say that!"
   An Irish alley-cat glare he knew so well transformed her adorable, heart-
shaped face as the eyebrows dove together and green eyes smoldered. "He does,
does he? Am I the only one on this station who didn't know I was getting
married?"
   Malcolm rubbed his nose in embarrassment. "Well, uh, you know La-La Land."
   "Do I ever." But the look in her eyes softened. "Margo Moore. I like the
sound of that."
   The sound of his name linked with hers did strange things to Malcolm's
blood chemistry. The light in the room dimmed. "So ... How's Denver sound for
the honeymoon? I've got tickets ... ."
   Margo's kisses were enough to drive a sane man over the brink. When they
came up for air, Margo breathed against his lips, "Sounds perfect. Now stop
stalling, Malcolm Moore, and take me to bed!"
   He carried her there, long dress trailing, without another word spoken. He
was afraid the brutal violations she had suffered at the hands of those
damnable Portuguese traders would somehow raise a barrier between them that
neither could overcome. But the softness and passion he remembered so well
from Rome redoubled in the silence of his bedroom, sending Malcolm nearly out
of his mind with the need to touch and cuddle and bring joy where she had
suffered so much pain. After their loving came to a shuddering, reluctant end,
Margo cried again, nearly as hard as she had that terrible day in Rome. But
this time instead of running, she clung to him and let him comfort her with
silly, nonsensical words meant to reassure. Evidently they did, because she
fell asleep cradled against the hollow of his shoulder, tear trails streaking
her cheeks and his bare skin. Malcolm kissed her hair and marveled, wondering
if she would ever trust enough to share her mind as she had come to trust
sharing her body.
   The ring glittering softly on her left hand gave him, hope. It was a start,
anyway. Just as this joining had been. Malcolm lay awake, languorous and
wondering, for hours, just holding her while she slept. When she finally woke,
their second coming together was even sweeter than the first. And this time,
as she drifted off once more against his chest, the words he had longed to
hear came like a sigh in the darkness.
   "I love you, Malcolm Moore. Hold me..."
   And so he did.
CHAPTER NINE
   "His name is Chuck," the voice on the other end of the phone said. "Chuck
Farley."

   Skeeter had no idea who the caller was, but they had his undivided
attention. "Yes? What about him?"
   "He came through Primary alone. Without a tour group. He's wearing a money
belt he didn't declare through ATF. Right now, he's asking around at the
hotels for the best time periods to visit."
   The line went dead before Skeeter could ask who the caller was, why they'd
called him, or how they'd obtained this juicy tidbit of information. Was
Goldie setting him up? Or the ATF? Or was this legit? He hadn't forgotten
Ianira's strange intensity on the subject of who was going to win this bet.
   Maybe he possessed more allies than he'd realized.
   Skeeter decided to hunt up Mr. Farley and see for himself what this lone
uptimer might be up to. And if that money belt were for real ... then Skeeter
might just win his wager in one fell swoop. All it would take was a little
finesse on his part. The question was, which scheme to use in the initial
approach? Rubbing his hands in anticipation, Skeeter set out to do a little
snooping of his own.
   Scouting the territory in advance, Yesukai had taught him, was key to any
victory. He'd find out what Chuck Farley was up to and use that to craft his
plans to deprive the gentleman of that well-filled, undeclared money belt.
Skeeter grinned and headed toward the Commons with a jaunty whistle.
   "Undeclared? You're sure" Goldie's voice came out sharp, excited.
   "Positive. I saw it under his shirt when he went to the can. And it's fat.
Could be thousands tucked into that thing."
   Golden dreams floated before Goldie's eyes, like sugar plums and gallant
Nutcracker princes, along with visions of Skeeter in handcuffs, hauled kicking
and protesting through Primary by Montgomery Wilkes while she waved bye-bye
like a sweet little grandmother.
   "What's his name and where is he now?"
   The voice on the other end chuckled. "Calls himself Chuck Farley. He's
hotel hopping, asking questions. Like what gates are the best to visit.
Doesn't seem to have any particular destination in mind. Thought that was a
might odd, so I started asking around. Time Tours says he doesn't have a
ticket through any of their gates and none of the little companies have him
booked through the state-owned gates, either."
   "Well, well. Thank you very much, indeed."
   Goldie hung up the phone thoughtfully. Either they had a speculator on
their hands, intent on making an illegal fortune, or they'd stumbled across a
rich fool looking for a thrill. No telling, until she had the chance to
chitchat him personally. Whichever the case, she intended for that money belt
and its delightfully undeclared contents to end up in her possession. Idiot.
Chuck Farley had no idea that he'd just stepped into Goldie Morran's parlor.
And like the nice, gentle spider she was, she set about weaving her silken
webs of deceit to pull in this fat little fly all for herself.
   Skeeter stood in the shadows of a fake marble column across from the
Epicurean Delight, watching a slim, nondescript fellow with dark hair and
unremarkable eyes read the posted menu. Chuck Farley wasn't much to look at,
but the trained eye revealed the unmistakable presence of that money belt the
anonymous tipster had telephoned about. Skeeter was about to step out into the
open to join him in "perusing" the menu when Kit Carson, Malcolm Moore, and-of
all people-Margo Smith showed up, chatting animatedly. Skeeter swore under his
breath and kept to the shadows. Margo sported an enormous diamond on her left
ring finger. Huh. What she sees in that guide is beyond me. Malcolm Moore was
even more nondescript than Chuck Farley, with a notorious string of bad luck
dogging him, to boot.
   Of course, he'd been a little more prosperous lately. Some scheme he and
Kit had going-and the fact that Skeeter couldn't get the real dope on it was
driving him crazy. Nonetheless, he kept a tight rein on his curiosity. Skeeter

was even more curious than the next 'eighty-sixer, but he steered far clear of
anything connected with Kit Carson. Yesukai had taught him well--Skeeter knew
when he was outgunned. The clever warrior chose his prey with care. Glory was
one thing; stupidity quite another. Five years in Yesukai's yurt had more than
taught Skeeter the difference.
   The group paused outside the Delight, exchanging polite words with Farley
as they glanced over the menu. Come on, go inside, already, before he decides
to take a seat.
   Farley nodded courteously in return and joined the long line of uptime
patrons waiting for a table. Unless one were a Resident, tables at the Delight
were difficult to come by. Reservations were booked weeks in advance and long
waits were the norm. But Residents always found a spot at one of the
"reserved" tables
   Arley Eisenstein held for 'eighty-sixers. Skeeter's mouth watered. The
scents wafting out of the world-famous restaurant tantalized the senses, but
Skeeter didn't have the kind of money to foot the bill for a meal at the
Delight, not even when he wasn't saving every scrap of cash he owned to win a
wager like this one.
   Of course, he had conned his way in a time or two, getting some trusting
uptimer with more money than sense to buy him a gourmet meal. But that didn't
happen often, and the fact that Skeeter was ravenously hungry only made
matters worse. Voices from waiting patrons floated across the Commons, making
it impossible to hear what Kit Carson and his party were saying. Skeeter
hugged his impatience to himself. If they would just go in, he could wander
over and find a reason to strike up a conversation with Chuck Farley.
   A downtimer Skeeter recognized as the Welsh bowman who'd come through that
unstable gate from the Battle of Orleans a few months back pushed a wheeled
dustbin past, then paused and exclaimed aloud. Margo hugged him, laughing and
asking questions Skeeter couldn't quite hear. When she showed off the ring on
her hand, the Welshman made deep, deferential bows to both Kit and Malcolm.
   Kynan Rhys Gower was one of the very few downtimers Skeeter didn't feel
comfortable around. For one thing, the man had pledged some sort of medieval
oath of fealty to Kit, which made his business very much Kit's business-and
therefore very much not Skeeter's. For another, the Welshman looked murderous
every time he glanced in Skeeter's direction. Skeeter had no idea what he'd
done to antagonize the man, having never recalled even speaking directly with
him, but then, the Welshman's temper had manifested itself in decidedly odd
ways since his arrival. He was unpredictable, at the least.
   At times, he'd bordered on certifiable-like the time he'd attacked Kit with
nothing but a croquet mallet, bent on murder.
   Skeeter crossed both arms over his chest and slumped against the column.
Great: An impromptu welcome home party right in front of my rich little mark.
Talk about luck... Maybe Malcolm Moore's was contagious? Skeeter certainly
hadn't had much luck bringing any of his schemes to fruition since challenging
Goldie to this stupid bet. What was I thinking, anyway? Everyone knows it's
impossible to beat Goldie at anything. If anyone's certifiable, it's me.
Still, the challenge she'd thrown down had stung his pride. He hadn't really
had a choice and he knew it. Probably she'd known, too, blast her for the
backstabbing harpy she was. At least Brian Hendrickson's records proved
Goldie's lead a small one. A couple of good scams and he'd be ahead. Well
ahead.
   Skeeter leaned around the column to see where his "mark" was-and heard a
solid thunk next to his ear. Startled, he turned his head. A knife haft
quivered in the air, the metal blade still singing where it had buried itself
in the plastic sheathing of the fake column. Skeeter widened his eyes. If he
hadn't leaned around just when he had ...
   He jerked around, looking through the crowd

   Oh, God.
   Lupus Mortiferus.
   The gladiator charged.
   Skeeter bolted, yanking the knife out of the column as he went, so he
wouldn't be completely weaponless if the enraged Roman actually did catch up
with him this time. Diners waiting patiently in line stared as he dashed past,
knife in hand, with a gladiator in cowboy chaps in hot pursuit. A sting made
itself felt along the side of Skeeter's neck He swore and swiped at it, then
gulped. Blood on his fingertips told him just how close he'd come. A swift
glance down showed a thin line of drying blood on the edge of the knife he'd
snatched.
   Holy ... if that was poisoned ... then he'd be in big trouble, and soon.
His legs went shaky for a couple of strides, then he dodged up a staircase and
pounded down a balcony crowded with shoppers. Weaving in and out between them,
Skeeter made it to an elevator. The door opened with a soft ding. He dove
inside and punched the top floor. The elevator doors slid closed just as the
enraged gladiator stormed past an outraged knot of shoppers.
   The car surged smoothly upward. Skeeter collapsed against the wall,
pressing a hand to his neck. Damn, damn., damn! He needed to go to the
Infirmary and have Rachel Eisenstein look at this. But pride-and fear-sent him
plunging into the heart of Residential, instead. If he reported the injury to
Rachel, he'd have to explain how he'd managed to sustain a long slice across
the side of his neck. And that would lead to unpleasant confessions about
profiteering from time travel ...
   Nope, a trip to the infirmary was out.
   And that blasted downtimer might have learned enough about La-La Land by
now to anticipate him going to the clinic, anyway. Skeeter cursed under his
breath and headed for home. By the time he made it to his apartment, Skeeter
was trembling with shock and blood loss despite the hand he kept tightly
pressed to the wound. Blood seeped between his fingers to drip down his shirt.
He was tempted to call Bull Morgan and report the attack, consequences be
damned. That gladiator scared him. Winning the wager with Goldie was one
thing. Dying for it was quite another. Hand shaking, he locked the door and
stumbled into the bathroom, swearing softly at the ashen cast of his face when
he switched on the light.
   He dabbed gingerly at the long, shallow slice, hissing. between his teeth.
"Sorry, Yesukai, but that stings." Antiseptic, antibiotic cream, and bandages
made him look like the victim of a wide jawed vampire. "Turtleneck sweaters
for a while," Skeeter muttered. "Just great. I really, genuinely hope that
goddamned knife wasn't poisoned."
   If it had been, he'd know soon enough.
   He still wavered between calling Bull Morgan and keeping silent as he
switched off the bathroom light and stumbled into his living room. He switched
on the in-house TV news channel and flopped into his favorite chair, exhausted
and scared and still trembling slightly. He needed food and sleep and
painkillers. Food and sleep could be had without leaving the apartment.
Painkillers ... well, aspirin thinned the blood, which was no good. He'd have
to settle for something like ibuprofen, if he had any.
   The evening newscast's theme music swelled through the darkened little
apartment. La-La Land's news program was, like the Shangri-La Gazette, more a
gossip forum than a real news show. Most of the so called journalists who
drifted into and out of the anchor job were muckrakers who couldn't get work
uptime for one good reason or another. They tended to shift from time terminal
to time terminal in the hope that some juicy tidbit worthy of a real network
job would relaunch their uptime careers. They also complained perennially
about the lack of budget, equipment, and studio room. Skeeter shrugged-and
winced. After his return uptime as a child, he'd grown utterly disgusted with

them, camping out on the lawn for a chance at a photo session and maybe even
an exclusive with the kid who'd lived with Genghis Khan's father and the
toddler who would become Genghis Khan, himself.
   Journalists had been a large factor in his decision to simply leave during
the night and head for New York.
   In the Big Apple, rotten to its scheming, seamy core, stories like his
could easily be buried under the sensationalism of expose after expose on
corrupt politicians, waving crime, and the spreading violence and sin that
made the City the place for one little half-wild adopted Mongol to practice
hard-won skills. Skeeter sighed. Those had been rough years, rougher in many
ways than living in Yesukai's camp. But he'd survived them. The thought of
going back...
   "I could always walk through the Mongolian Gate again, he told himself.
Temujin's out there somewhere fighting for his life against Hargoutai and his
clan right about now. Temujin would take me in, might even remember the boy
who used to do tricks to amuse him at night while the men were busy eating and
telling stories and drinking themselves so sick they'd have to go outside and
vomit. Living with Temujin'd certainly be better than going back to New York.
Just about anything would be better than going back to New York.
   He wasn't sure he'd live long, if he went back, and Skeeter Jackson had
become terribly fond of creature comforts, but there were fates worse than
dying young in battle.
   Speaking of which ... should he call Bull Morgan or not?
   The news program he'd been waiting for had come on, flashing the familiar,
sickly-sweet face of "Judy, Judy Janes!" onto the screen. She smiled at the
camera, looking (as always) every eyelash-batting bit as idiotic as she
sounded. But her opening statement caught Skeeter's attention fast.
   "A disturbance this evening on the Commons just outside the Epicurean
Delight has left 'eighty-sixers mystified and Security baffled. An eyewitness
to the event, well-known station resident Goldie Morran, was willing to share
her impressions with our viewing audience."
   The camera treated Skeeter to a close-up of The Enemy.
   Skeeter swore creatively. In Mongolian.
   "Well, I couldn't be sure, everything happened so fast, but it looked to me
like Skeeter Jackson bolted from behind that column over there and ran from a
man I've never laid eyes on."
   "Are you positive about that identification, Ms. Morran?"
   Skeeter's official station identification photo appeared briefly on screen,
grinning at the audience. The caption read "Unemployed Confidence Artist."
Skeeter saw red-several seething shades of it.
   The camera cut back to the Commons and Goldie's moment of triumph. Her eyes
glittered like evil jewels. "Well, no, I couldn't swear to it, but as you
know, Skeeter and I have made a rather substantial wager, so I've been at some
pains to keep track of his movements. I'm afraid I wouldn't do Station
Security much good as a prosecution witness, but it certainly did look like
him. Of course," she laughed lightly, "we get so many scoundrels through, and
so many of them look alike ..."
   The rest of the report was nothing more than innuendo and slander, none of
it provable and every word of it calculated to wreck any chance he had at
conning a single tourist watching that broadcast out of so much as a wooden
nickel. Skeeter closed his fists in the semidarkness of his apartment. Report
his injury? Hell would freeze first. He'd win this wager and kick that purple-
haired harpy from here to-
   Skeeter punched savagely at the channel changer. His apartment flooded with
soothing music and slowly shifting vistas taped both downtime as well as
uptime. He'd deal with that pissed-off gladiator as best he could, on his own.
Nothing was goin to sour this wager. Not even Lupus Mortiferus and his-fifty

goddamned golden aurii.
   He found the nearly fatal knife and closed his hand around the hilt.
Skeeter Jackson wasn't a trained fighter, he hadn't been old enough when
"rescued" by an astonished time scout-but he knew a trick or two. Lupus
Mortiferus might just be in for as big a surprise as Goldie Morran. He flipped
the knife angrily across the room, so that it landed point-first in the soft
wallboard. Nice throwing blade. Bastard. That knife was not an ancient design.
Either he'd stolen it ... or someone was helping him.
   Skeeter meant to find out which. And, if someone were helping him, who. The
sooner he found out, the better. Neutralizing that gladiator had become
imperative.
   Unlike most Mongols, who learned early to place a very low value indeed on
human life, Skeeter Jackson valued his most highly. He did not plan to die at
the hands of a disgruntled downtimer who went around cutting out the tongues
of the poor wretches he owned and gutting people for sport and coin.
   Stranded as he was between the two worlds that had molded him, Skeeter
Jackson listened to music in his darkened apartment, endured the thumping pain
in his neck, and wrestled with the decision over whether or not to kill the
gladiator outright by some devious method, or scheme some way to send him back
where he belonged-permanently.
   It was a measure of how deeply those two worlds tugged at him that he had
not resolved the question by the time he nodded off to sleep in the early
hours of the morning.
   Malcolm joined Margo as she emerged from the shower, aglow in a healthy,
sexy way that made his insides turn to gelatin. He managed to find his voice
and keep it steady. "You always did look great in skin, Margo."
   Margo just beamed and winked, then adjusted her towel invitingly to dry her
back.
   Malcolm groaned and seized the towel, but managed to dry her back as gently
as he might a frightened fawn. "Been doing your homework, then?" He couldn't
believe how husky his voice sounded.
   Margo started to laugh. "You bet! Every free moment I get outside of
classes. You wouldn't believe the nickname some of my friends have given me."
   "Oh?" Malcolm asked, raising one brow to hide the knot of fear that some of
those friends might be young and masculine enough to capture her attention.
   "Yes. Mad Margo. That's what they call me. I don't go to parties or
overnighters or field trips-unless they're related to something important I'm
studying, and I positively never go out on a date."
   "Sure about that?" Malcolm half-teased.
   Green eyes that a man could get lost in turned upward and met his, quite
suddenly serious and dark. "Never." She squeezed his hand. "Do you honestly
think all those little boys who swill beer and brag about their conquests
could possibly interest me? After what we've been through, Malcolm? It'd take
an act of God, maybe more-to pry us apart."
   Malcolm dropped the towel and kissed her tenderly. It didn't stay tender
long. When they finally broke apart, panting and on fire, Malcolm managed,
"Well. I see."
   Margo's eyes laughed again, the green sparkle back where it belonged. "Just
wanted to convince you, is all."
   Malcolm ran the tip of his tongue over swollen lips, then grinned. "Good!"
But when he bent for another go-round, Margo laughingly danced away, causing
his mind and gut actual pain.
   "Oh, no. I'm squeaky clean. I'd like to stay that way for at least another
hour, Mr. Moore!" Then she darted into the bedroom they shared and emerged
less than two minutes later, clad in very chic black jeans, a sweater that
would've made an old man's eyes pop, and dark, soft boots. Malcolm realized
with a jolt that her clothing had Paris stamped all over it. She didn't flaunt

herself in trendy, gaudy colors but stuck by well made items that would be in
style forever. "All right," she said, fluffing her hair as it dried-hair that
looked like a Parisian salon had styled it "you mentioned something about
lunch?"
   "Mmmm. Yes. I did, at that. Very well, Margo, gentleman it shall be-for
now!"
   He wriggled his brows wickedly. Margo laughed, secure of him. They left the
apartment and found the corridor to the nearest elevator shaft. They moved
easily, hands locked. The air between them sizzled with unseen but palpable
heat. When they stepped into the elevator, Margo said huskily, "Your place or
mine? After lunch?"
   Malcolm couldn't hold back the jolt of need that went though him, but he
retained enough presence of mind to recall that Margo, while nominally on
vacation, needed to spend some educational time outside Malcolm's bed. Or
couch. Or dining room floor. Or...
   He sighed. "Neither just yet. There's someone I think you ought to meet."
   Green, expressive eyes went suddenly suspicious. "Who?"
   Malcolm chuckled and tickled her chin. "Margo Smith, are you turning
jealous on me? Anyway, you'll like her. Just trust me on this one. She lived
here already, but hadn't set up her shop yet when you first came to La-La
Land. But she's well worth meeting. Trust me."
   "Okay, I'm game. So after lunch, show me!"
   For a moment Margo sounded exactly as she had just a few short months ago.
Nice to know not everything had grown up quite yet. He didn't ever want that
part of her to change. "I'll show you, all right," he chuckled. "But before
lunch. I insist."
   Margo pouted while Malcolm punched the button for Commons. The elevator
whirred obediently upward. Malcolm steered her into the Little Agora District,
vastly different from the genuine Agora's golden era. For one thing, there
were no tethered or caged animals waiting to be purchased and ridden or eaten.
For another, neither Socrates nor his pupils were anywhere to be seen.
Instead, there was one particular booth positively jammed with customers.
Other booth vendors looked at the crowded one with expressions that ran the
gamut from rage to deep sorrow. Malcolm drew Margo straight toward the jam-
packed booth.
   Of course.
   "Are you sure whoever this is wont mind interrupting her sales? She's got a
ton of business there."
   Malcolm grinned. "She'll thank us. Trust me."
   He shoved and elbowed his way through the crowd with shocking rudeness,
until Margo found herself staring at the most exotically beautiful woman she
had ever seen. Her eyes, black as velvet, were far older than the early
twenties she seemed to be. Even as Margo stared, wondering what it was that
was so compelling about her, the woman broke into an exquisite, somehow
ancient smile. "Malcolm! Welcome!"
   Margo felt herself shrink in stature and confidence. While she'd been off
at college, alone, Malcolm had been free to ...
   "Ianira, this is Margo. She is Kit Carson's granddaughter and the woman I
plan to marry."
   Another dazzling smile appeared, this time directed disconcertingly toward
Margo. "I am honored to meet you, Margo," she said softly. "Malcolm is a
twice-lucky man." The dark eyes seemed to pierce her very soul. "And he will
take away the pain in your heart, as well, I think," she said in an even
softer voice. "He will make you forget your childhood and bring you much
happiness." Margo stared, unable to figure out how she could know, unless
someone of the few who did know had gossiped. Which in La-La Land would be
entirely in character, except the only people who knew were her father, her

grandfather, and Malcolm Moore.
   When she glanced around for Malcolm, she realized with a jolt that every
"customer" at the booth was busy either writing furiously, holding out a tape
recorder, or fiddling with the focus on a handheld vidcam. Sudden fury swept
her; she made a grab at and barely hung onto her temper at the intrusion into
her privacy. Margo took a deep breath, then deliberately turned back to
Ianira. Margo found a smile far back in those dark eyes, a smile which
understood her anger and the reasons for it. "Thank you," she said slowly,
still rather confused, because she was certain neither Kit Carson nor Malcolm
Moore would have told anyone. And she was utterly certain her father had never
set the first toe on TT-86's floor. Ianira's return smile this time was every
bit as enigmatic as the Mona Lisa's, yet reminded her of graceful white
statuary recovered from lost millennia to stand, naked or artfully draped, in
vast, marble museums.
   Malcolm said quietly, "Ianira Cassondra came to TT-86 a few years ago.
Through the Philosophers' Gate."
   "You're a downtimer, then? I hadn't guessed," she added, as Ianira nodded
slightly. "Your English is fabulous.
   A brief smile like sunlight on cloud tops passed over Ianira's face. "You
are too kind."
   Nervous, Margo focused her attention on the actual booth and its contents.
Exquisitely embroidered cotton and linen gowns similar to the one Ianira wore
were neatly folded up amidst dress pins, hair decorations, lovely scarves,
tiny bottles of God only knew what, piles of various kinds of stones and
crystals-with a select few hanging on cords to catch the light-charms of some
kind which looked extremely ancient, carved carefully from stone, wood, or
precious gems, even little sewn velvet bags closed by drawstrings, with tiny
cards on them which read, "Happiness," "Wealth," "Love," "Health," "Children"
in fake "Greek-looking" letters. There were even incense sticks, expensive
little burners for them, and peeking out here and there, CDs with titles like
Aphrodite's Secret: The Sacred Music of Olympus.
   And, topping it all off, extraordinary jewelry of an extremely ancient
design, all of which looked real, and from the prices could've been.
   "You have quite a booth," Margo said, hearing the hesitation in her own
voice.
   Ianira laughed softly, a sound like trickling, dancing water. "Yes, it is a
bit ... different."
   Malcolm, ignoring the crowd around them with their scribbling pens, tape
recorders, and vidcams, said, "Margo, you remember young Marcus, don't you?"
   "The bartender from the Down Time? Yes, very well." She could feel the heat
in her cheeks as she recalled that first, humiliating meeting with Kit. The
blush was innocent, as it happened, but Ianira might wonder. "Why?"
   Malcolm smiled and nodded toward Ianira. `They're married. Have two
beautiful little girls."
   "Oh, how marvelous!" Margo cried, completely forgetting her earlier doubts.
"Congratulations to you! Marcus is so... so gentle. Always so anxious to put a
person at ease and treat them like royalty. You must be very happy."
   Something in those fathomless dark eyes softened. "Yes," she whispered.
"But it is not wise to speak of one's good fortune. The gods may be
listening."
   While Margo pondered that statement, Malcolm asked, "Have you had lunch,
Ianira? Margo and I were just on our way. My treat, and don't give me any lame
excuses. Arley Eisenstein's made enough money over the cheesecake recipes
you've already given him, you might as well share the taste, if not the
wealth.
   Unexpectedly, Ianira laughed. "Very well, Malcolm. I will join you and your
lady for lunch."

   She lowered prettily painted plywood sides and locked the booth up tight
with bolts shot home from the inside, then finished off with a padlock. They
smiled when Ianira finally joined them. Ianira held a curious, largish package
in brown paper tied up with string, which reminded Margo of a favorite musical
with nuns and Nazis and narrow escapes.
   "Special delivery after lunch?" Malcolm asked.
   Ianira just smiled. "Something like, yes."
   Margo, oblivious to that exchange, found herself envying the way Ianira
walked and the way that dress moved with every step she took. She tried, with
some fair success, to copy Ianira's way of moving, but something was missing.
Margo vowed silently to buy one of those gowns-whatever it cost-and try out
the effect on staid, British Malcolm Moore, who melted in her arms and kissed
her skin with trembling lips as it was, every time they made love.
   Unhappily, the entire mass of curious scribblers, tapers, and vidcammers
followed close on their heels all the way down the Commons.
   "Who are those people?" Margo whispered, knowing that whisper would be
picked up and recorded anyway.
   Ianira's lip curled as though she'd just stepped in excrement. "They are
self-appointed acolytes."
   "Acolytes?"
   "Yes. You see, I was a high-ranking priestess in the Temple of the Holy
Artemis at Ephesus before my father sold me in marriage. I was only part of
the price to close a substantial business transaction with a merchant of ivory
and amber. The man he gave me to was ... not kind."
   Margo thought of those horrid Portuguese in South Africa-and her father-and
shivered. "Yes. I understand."
   Ianira glanced sharply at her, then relaxed. "Yes. You do. I am sorry for
it, Margo."
   Margo shrugged. "What's past is past."
   The statement rewarded her with another brilliant smile. "Exactly. Here, it
is easier to forget unhappiness." Then she laughed aloud. -The day the ancient
ones" she pointed to the rafters, where fish-eating, crowsized pterodactyls
and a small flock of toothed birds sat "came through the big unstable gate, I
hid under the nearest booth and prayed someone would rescue me. When I dared
peek out, I found the huge one covered in nets and the small ones flying about
like vengeful harpies!"
   Both Margo and Malcolm laughed softly.
   Malcolm rubbed the back of his neck, while his cheeks flushed delightfully
pink. "You should've seen me, that day, trying to hold that monster down and
getting buffeted around like a leaf in a tornado. I finally just fell off and
landed about ten feet away!"
   They were still laughing when they reached the Urbs Romae section of the
time terminal. Malcolm steered them into the Epicurean Delight's warm, crowded
interior, toward one of the tables eternally reserved for 'eighty-sixers.
Frustrated acolytes seethed outside, unable to get in without the requisite
reservations or status as 'eighty-sixers. Tourists, most of whom had made
reservations months in advance, stared at them with disconcerting intensity.
Margo heard a woman nearby whisper, "My God! They're 'eighty-sixers! Real
'eighty-sixers! I wonder who?"
   Her lunch companion gasped. "Could he be Kit Carson? Oh, I'm just dying to
catch a glimpse of Kit Carson!"
   "No, no, didn't you see the newsies? That's Malcolm Moore, the mysteriously
wealthy time guide, and that's Margo Smith, Kit Carson's granddaughter. I
remember it because it was a granddaughter he didn't even know existed. Made
headline news on every network for an entire half an hour! I taped the
stations I wasn't watching, just to compare versions. I can't think how you
missed it. And that other woman seated with 'em? Just you take a guess as to

who she is?"
   "I-I'm afraid I don't recognize her-"
   "You know all those Churches of the Holy Artemis that've been springing up
all over the place? Well, that's Ianira Cassondra, the Living Goddess, an
enchantress who knows the ancient ways. Lives here, now, to escape
persecution."
   The other woman's eyes had widened so far, just about all that remained of
her face was eyes. "Really?"
   It came out a kind of repressed squeal. "Oh, oh, where's my camera-?"
   She fumbled a small, sleek camera and pointed it toward them.
   Margo flushed red. Ianira looked merely annoyed. Malcolm just grinned,
first at Margo, then at the ladies who'd been whispering so loudly; then he
rose from his chair and bowed at the waist, tipping an imaginary tophat. The
flash momentarily blinded Margo, catching Malcolm mid-hat-tip. Both women went
white, beet-red, and hungry-eyed all in the space of two seconds. Then they
beamed what they thought were seductive, or at least winning-smiles back at
him.
   "Hey," Margo said, wrapping her fingers around his, "you're took. An' don t
you go 'round forgettin' it, now, or I'll hafta take a skillet to you!"
   He chuckled. "Just part of the show, dear. Never know when it'll get you a
rich customer. Besides, you're not allowed to hit me until after we're
married." He lifted one brow, then. And just when. did you start learning Wild
West lingo?"
   "Oh, awhile back, I reckon."
   He wrapped gentle fingers around her wrist and scowled his blackest,
enraged scowl. "You two-timin' me, woman, with some no 'count cow-punchin'
range rat?"
   "Oh, God, that's depressing. And I thought I was actually making progress
with it." She batted his hand away from her wrist. "You're terrible. Love you
anyway." Then, "I didn't notice tourists doing that sort of thing last time."
   "Oh, they were. You just didn't notice because you were too busy turning
that alley-cat glare on everything and everyone who stood in your way-even
those poor, abused books you used to read and fling across Kit's apartment
whenever you got frustrated. Or attempting to toss Sven on his backside, if it
killed you."
   Margo went beet-red again. "Didn't know Kit'd told you about the books,"
she mumbled, noticeably not apologetic about trying to mop up the gym with the
instructor who'd given her multiple bruises every single night.
   His eyes softened. "Hey, Margo. It's okay. We all got out in time and
you're doing wonderfully well, now that you're into your studies so deeply."
   Margo just nodded, afraid to try her voice.
   Ianira, who had taken in the entire exchange silently, began to chuckle.
"You will do well, the pair of you." Two heads whipped around guiltily. Ianira
laughed aloud. "Oh, yes. Fire of Youth and Caution of Experience, with streaks
of childlike play and frightened love in you both. Yes," she smiled, "you will
do well together." Before either of them could speak, Ianira stretched
slightly. "Oh, what a relief to get away from those hounds." She pointed
silently with her glance toward the window where her acolytes stood with
despairing expressions, then said something low in ancient Greek, something
that sounded holy and apologetic.
   When she'd finished, and Margo was sure she'd finished, she asked
curiously, "Don't they drive you crazy? Do they follow you around like that
all the time?"
   "Very nearly, and yes." Expressive eyes went suddenly tired. "It does get a
bit wearing at times. Still, a few of them are actually teachable. I am told,
for I will never be allowed uptime, that I have sparked an entire revival of
Artemis worship. You heard those women. Simply by being here and occasionally

speaking directly to a few of them," again, she nodded very slightly to the
window, "I have accidentally begun something that even I do not know where the
ending will lie."
   "Yeah, you have. Believe me, have you ever. There are no less than three
Artemis temples just on campus, because response was so high they had to build
another and then a third one to hold all the students attending the
ceremonies. How many are in town, I don't think anyone knows."
   Ianira pondered that in silence--and judging by her eyes, sorrow.
   "Hey, Ianira, don't feel so terrible. I mean everything we do or don't do,
say or don't say has an impact on something or someone else. And none of us
know even half, never mind most of the endings. I mean, look at the Church of
Elvis The Everlasting."
   "El-vis?" Ianira asked uncertainly. "I do not know this god."
   Margo giggled. A genuinely delighted, little-girl giggle. "Yeah. Elvis
Presley, singing star. Here's an aging rock'n' roll legend found dead on the
toilet, for God's sake, with a whole bunch of chemicals in his blood. That was
back in 1976. Wasn't too long before folks started writing songs about him, or
claiming they'd seen The Everlasting Elvis at some grocery store or in their
living rooms, or maybe hitchhiking some interstate and a trucker lets him in,
talks to him for a while, then he'd say something like, 'Gotta go, now friend.
Good talkin' to you. See you at Graceland some day.' Then he just vanishes."
   Ianira was laughing so hard, there were tears in her eyes. "Please, Margo,
what is a `rock 'n' roll' singer? Why was this El-vis so popular?"
   Surprising them both speechless, Malcolm shoved back his chair, ran
impromptu fingers through his hair so it looked more or less appropriate, then
in an astonishingly good imitation of Elvis' voice, sang a stirring,
bloodpounding rendition of "Heartbreak Hotel." Complete with world-famous hip
thrusts. He grabbed up the vase from their table and sang into the pink
carnation as though it were a microphone and crooned the chorus to applause,
whistles, and feminine shrieks. Then with a single movement, he whipped the
dripping carnation and tossed it straight at Margo. She let out a sound
somewhere between scream and fainting ecstasy while the transformed Malcolm
bowed to the thunderous applause all through the Delight. He bowed to every
corner in turn, saying, "I wanna thank you for comin' and sharin' my show. I
love you all, baby. Gotta go, now. My 'nanner sandwich is waitin'."
   He sat down to another thunderous round of applause, shrieks for "MORE!"
and an entire hailstorm of carnations. All three ducked, finding themselves
covered in no time with dripping wet flowers.
   "See," Malcolm grinned, coming up for air-with a red carnation stuck
sideways in his hair-"no sequined suit, no fancy guitar in fact, no guitar at
all, and I'm not nearly as good an imitator as lots of guys are. But you saw
the response from the people in here." They were still brushing off
carnations. Malcolm signaled for a waiter. "They went completely nuts. That's
the definition of the ultimate rock 'n' roll star: being so good at what they
do, their audiences go crazy. Happened with the Beatles, too; but they called
Elvis `The King of Rock' long before he died and got himself apotheosized."
   Margo took up the rest of the explanation as best she could. "Pretty soon,
there was a single `Church of Elvis the Everlasting.' The main temple was-is-
his estate at Graceland, Elvis' mansion near Nashville, Tennessee. Trouble
was, while lots of folks made the pilgrimage, lots more couldn't afford it. So
before you know what's happening, there are thousands of Churches of Elvis the
Everlasting, all over the country.
   And all of 'em mail their cash tithes overnight express to the High Temple
at Graceland."
   Margo grinned. "Man, you should see that place! There was a documentary on
it one Friday night a few weeks back, and since I didn't have much to do, I
watched it." She rolled her eyes. "A real king would be jealous. There's an

altarpiece, must be twenty-four feet of black velvet, with another piece
coming down the pulpit to the floor. Believers who can sew are still working,
on it. The Everlasting Elvis on the pulpit is finished in gold and silver
threads, diamonds, rubies, emeralds, you name it, they used it to decorate
that drop of cloth.
   "And no cheap, synthetic velvet, either, but the real stuff that would cost
me, let's see, at least seven weeks of saving up every bit of my allowance,
just to buy a piece of real velvet as big as the altar piece, never mind the
twenty-four-foot runner. That is supposed to illustrate the entire life of the
Everlasting Elvis."
   Margo giggled. "I can't help wondering if they're going to show him
ascending as the Elvis Everlasting, rising into grace from that toilet seat he
died on? Oh, that whole place is crazy. The whole fad is crazy. Worshipping a
dead rock 'n' roll singer? Puh-leeze."
   Ianira was still wiping tears of hilarity from the corners of her eyes.
"Your whole uptime world, I think, is just as crazy as worshipping a dead man.
You have a gift, Margo, for telling a story." Ianira's smile was brilliant.
"You could go into training, fire-haired one. So few see so clearly at your
age."
   Margo flounced in place. "Humph. It ain't the age, it's the mileage," she
muttered, paying tribute to one of her favorite last-century classics.
   "You see what I mean?" Ianira said softly. "You just did it again. You
should get training before you go scouting on your own. You may well have need
of it someday."
   Margo couldn't say anything. Once again, Malcolm came to her rescue. He
passed menus around and said lightly, "Ianira, who has accumulated quite a bit
of `mileage' for her age, has become something of a celebrity uptime, as you
mentioned with all those temples on your campus. Right after The Accident,
there was a group of kooks, I forget what they called themselves-"
   Margo supplied the answer: `The Endtime Saviors."
   "Yes," Malcolm said with a "thank you" and a kiss both pantomimed, "these
Endtime Saviors decided right after The Accident that the End was upon us.
They kept looking for a sign. A prophet who would usher in the next age of
mankind. Or should I say `womankind'? Unfortunately, they've decided Iamra is
that sign. She's regarded as a prophetess, the Voice of the Goddess on Earth."
   Margo rubbed the tip of her nose. "Well, if she can say to everyone what
she said about me and my poor, checkered past, I can understand why."
   "No," Ianira laughed softly. "It is just that you and I resonate so
closely. Our experiences, different as they are, have enough similarity to
feel the resonance and understand clearly its source."
   Margo shook her head. "I dunno. I guess if that's how you do it..."
   Ianira smiled slightly. "It is part of my training in the Mysteries of
Artemis, you see, in the great Temple at Ephesus, where I was born. Oh, how I
miss Ephesus!" Her exotic eyes misted for just a moment and it came to Margo
with a jolt just how terribly homesick most downtimers must be, torn away from
everything they knew and loved, never allowed to go home, wandering at best
from menial job to menial job, maybe even switching stations in the hopes of
improving their situation.
   Margo thereby swore a sacred oath to treat all downtimers, not just Kynan
Rhys Gower, a great deal more courteously.
   Ianira was still speaking. "After marriage, when my husband carried me
across the Aegean Sea to Athens, pride of Greece, I vowed to study as best I
could the Mysteries of the majestic Athene who guarded his city. Not even he
could deny me that, not with my stature from Ephesus. So I learned, and
learned to hate my life outside the Temple, inside his gyneceum."
   Margo, round-eyed, could only reply, "Oh. I-I'm sorry."
   Malcolm chuckled. "Hits most people that way. Ianira's name means the

Enchantress, you know. She's what you might call an international, temporal
treasure, locked away safe and sound inside TT-86's concrete walls."
   Ianira flushed and made a small sound of disagreement.
   "Say what you will," Malcolm said mildly, "an international, temporal
treasure is exactly what you are: Dr. Mundy-- a professor of history who
interviews the downtimers," he added for Margo's benefit,"-says it constantly.
Best information he's found in all his life, he says, and he's getting it all
in glorious detail from you, Ianira. Besides," he winked, "being an
international, temporal treasure does pays the bills, doesn't it?"
   Ianira laughed aloud. "You are impossible, Malcolm Moore, but yes. It does,
handsomely. It was a good idea Marcus had, to put up such a booth when crassly
miseducated, uptimer fools began to seek me out. We're almost out of debt to
the Infirmary, now."
   "That's great, Ianira. I've very happy for you. I know how close it was
with your little girl."
   Ianira gave him a sad, sweet smile. "Thank you. It was in the hands of the
gods-and Rachel Eisenstein, may the Lady bless her eternally-but she is now
healthy enough to return to the Station Babysitting Service and School. I
would dearly love to get my hands on the tourist who brought that fever back
to the Station with him! Malcolm, after lunch, perhaps you would care to join
me? I always go there after lunch to check on my babies. And I have an idea
which may help relieve a bit of the strain on poor Harriet Banks. She tries so
hard and it is just not fair."
   Malcolm just said, "Yeah. I know. I'll be happy to come along. Got a few
ideas of my own, I do. We'll compare notes after lunch. Margo?"
   She shook her head, eyes apologizing to Ianira as best she could. "I have
to get in some weapons practice before we go to Denver. I'm a little rusty and
even if I weren't, I'd still practice because my scores just weren't all that
good before my, uh, adventure. So I thought I'd try out a couple of period
rifles, a few handguns, see how I do with them."
   "You are wise," Ianira smiled that archaic, mysterious smile. "A woman who
thinks herself without limits is a dangerous fool-and I have seen so very many
of them." The acolytes were still outside, filming and scribbling notes.
Ianira glanced their way with the merest flick of her gaze, but managed to
convey utter contempt for the lot of them. Margo blinked, having no earthly
idea how she'd just done that, but wanting to learn the secret of it for
herself.
   Ianira reached out and covered Margo's shocked hand. "You have begun to
understand that you have limits, Margo, even as all humanity has limits. What
I find even more astonishing-and delightful-for a girl your age, you have
already discovered what many of them," she nodded toward the window, "will
never discover." Then once more, the offer came, causing even Malcolm to
stare.
   "It would be my great joy to train you, Margo, for there is such a fire in
your soul as I have not seen since my childhood, when my own dear instructor,
the sister of my mother, was chosen as High Priestess. Light would dance from
her hair, her fingertips, there was so much fire inside her. She did many
great things and was everywhere honored as a great and shrewd leader during
times when leadership was desperately needed.
   "You look nothing like her, Margo, yet you could be her. And, youthful as
you are, you have already taken the first steps on your own journey to
wisdom." Then, letting go Margo's hand, which tingled as though live
electricity had poured through it, Ianira fished under the table and slid the
brown-paper packet over toward Margo, When Margo gave her a puzzled look,
Ianira said softly, "Your Malcolm is a man with a beautiful soul. He is dear
to us, to the Council of Seven, to the whole community of downtimers, The
Found Ones. Consider the contents of the package a wedding gift from all of

us, so that you might please Malcolm even more than you do now, and so that
Malcolm will not just love you, but worship you, for that is what you both
need and deserve. Nothing less will do. I can only hope this offering of silly
trinkets will help."
   "Uhm," Margo cleared her throat. "Do I open it now? Or save it for the
wedding night?"
   Ianira laughed. "That is your decision. But the way Malcolm is staring from
you to that package and back, with such speculation in his eyes, I would
suggest you open it now."
   Margo glanced over and saw the intense hunger in Malcolm's face, which
turned bright red when he realized he'd been caught out. Hastily he cleared
his throat and said, "I was only curious, after all."
   Both women laughed. Margo dipped into an across-the-shoulder purse no
bigger than a diskette box and pulled out a small but useful Swiss Army knife.
She made quick work of the string, then turned the carefully tucked package
onto its back, took a deep breath, and opened it.
   Inside lay the most exquisite gown from Ianira's rack and jewelry nestled
in its fold: not the cheap stuff, but the stuff that had the look and feel of
genuine antiquity.
   "Oh!-My God! Oh, my God! Ianira, you shouldn't have-I can't possibly
accept--"
   Ianira stopped her attempted refusal by leaning forward and placing soft
fingertips across Margo's lips. "Just accept. As a friend."
   Margo's eyes filled. "Why are you doing this? I just met you-"
   "Oh, no, child. We have known each other through many lifetimes. Wear it
and please each other, that you also may be together for many lifetimes."
   Margo didn't hear much through the next few seconds. She kept staring at
the lines of sparkling embroidery, the heavy silver necklace, bracelets,
earrings, with all the stones in them prepared in the ancient way: simple,
round-topped cabochons, even the diamonds. It was beyond beautiful. Margo
could find no words to say how beautiful it was.
   Ianira and Malcolm were speaking again, forcibly yanking Margo out of
uncustomarily deep thoughts. "-firearms practice schedule on her own, same
with the martial arts. And she studies, my God, the girl studies!"
   Ianira laughed softly. "Would you have her any other way?
   Malcolm said without hesitation, "No."
   Ianira glanced over to Margo. "I will ask the Lady's blessing on your
practice."
   "Hear, hear," Malcolm agreed. "After lunch, you go play with guns. I'll
come down later and see how you're doing, get in a little practice, myself.
Then well get clean, eat in, and try on that," he nudged the half-opened
package, "before bedtime. Well before bedtime."
   Margo smiled her best, heart-stopping smile. One elderly gentleman well, he
was hardly a gentleman at finding himself the focus of that smile, had
literally collapse on the street, leaving strangers to hunt his pockets for
the nitroglycerin and to call the ambulance. After that experience, Margo was
careful just how far she turned on that particular smile-and then realized
with a jolt that she and Ianira weren't so different, after all. It startled
her into meeting the other woman's gaze.
   Ianira knew. Somehow, she knew exactly what Margo had just discovered.
Moreover, she approved, eyes twinkling merrily. Margo swallowed hard as the
silent invitation passed over Malcolm's bent head. Someday, Margo attempted to
convey with eyes and tiny gestures. Someday I will seek you out for training.
I have the funniest feeling I'm supposed to study with you, that I am going to
need to learn what you teach me.
   Iamra merely nodded and smiled again, a mysterious little smile full of
knowledge and agreement. Margo smiled back her acceptance.

   Malcolm the Ever-Vigilant (missing the exchange entirely) glanced up from
his menu and smiled at them both. "Well, then, what shall we order for lunch?"
CHAPTER TEN
   One look at the firing line and Margo's gut muscles tightened in dismay.
   Please, anyone but that bunch!
   Maybe they were just finishing up their session?
   Margo's nostrils pinched tight, causing her upper lip to curl in a
completely unconscious expression of disgust. The group of five intent
paleontologists she'd met at the uptime station in New York, where Shangri-
La's Primary opened, were just beginning to unpack a luggage cart, laying out
their sundry gun cases for a private lesson.
   Aw, rats. Some of Ann's lessons took hours to complete.
   She didn't dislike the paleontologists, exactly. Well, not the woman,
anyway. But three of the four men had spent their entire time in Primary's
uptime waiting lounge all but drooling while they stared directly at her. Or,
rather, at her chest. It was a reaction she was more than accustomed to, but
she still didn't like it.
   Chalk up another change, Margo. You don't like being stared at anymore.
   Already, the group had noticed her and the renewed stares made her feel
like a sleazy 42nd Street hooker. Margo began to consider-seriously-buying
some of the uglier but more fully concealing peasant clothing in Connie
Logan's Clothes & Stuff.
   Paleontologists, hah!
   The only truly interesting thing Margo had discovered about them was where
and when, exactly, they were heading. Cope and Marsh had fought over a huge
chunk of territory. She shook her head slightly.
   The damned fools were deliberately walking right into the middle of the
fight, hoping to rescue one of the new-species fossil skeletons that one side
or the other had smashed up into tiny, useless fragments, so that it had been
lost to science forever. The girl, one of three graduate students selected for
this trip, had explained; at least, she'd mentioned somethin about a diary one
of their professors had stumble on in a used bookstore, written by one of the
actual field agents charged with bringing back as many intact new specimens as
possible.
   Using that diary as a guide, they'd plotted out this madcap adventure and
actually expected not only to find and rescue one or more of the smashed
skeletons, but to get the bones back through the Wild West Gate and uptime to
the museum affiliated with their university.
   Margo was glad they'd had enough sense to take her advice an get some good
instruction on how to use whatever they'd brought along, but that did not mean
she wanted to practice with them.
   Come on, Margo, bear up l Maybe if I take that farthest lane? If it's not
reserved already, it ought to do. The lanes were sometimes reserved in advance
for a scout who was planning to push an unexplored gate and wanted to learn to
use a nice, little hideout gun. It was a practice Kit disapproved of-and a
habit he had very carefully made certain she never picked up, but scouts were
independent agents, so to speak, so each made his own decisions on what to
take downtime. Kit had warned her there were a few really marginal scouts who
routinely broke what he considered to be the sacred rules of scouting.
   Carrying a gun downtime into an unknown time and place, where any gun might
be an anachronism, wasn't stupid. It was suicidal.
   She didn't spot anyone else on the range, though, which bolstered her
hopes. The paleontologists were talking excitedly while dumping gun cases onto
Ann's benches. Lots of gun cases. Margo winced at the way they just casually
bounced the stuff around, allowing them to slide to the floor, banging them
together, using the muzzle end of a thin leather case to shove a larger, much

heavier case farther down the bench to make room for the rifle with its now-
possibly-ruined front sight. They'd be learning about sighting in and zeroing
rifles, or Margo didn't know Ann Vinh Mulhaney.
   When Ann noticed that only one of her five students was opening the gun
cases for inspection, while four of the group had their attention directed
elsewhere, she glanced around. Then smiled so brightly Margo's eyes misted a
little.
   "Oh, it's you," Ann laughed. "I thought maybe Marilyn Monro's ghost had
jiggled in or something."
   That statement caused several reddened faces and sudden diligence with as-
yet-unloaded gear. Margo's face had gone terribly hot. Marilyn Monroe, the
twentieth-century sex goddess? That, Margo would never be, but she enjoyed the
compliment just the same. Ann nodded her over. Margo would have loved a long
heart-to-heart with Ann-but now was not the time.
   Oh, well, she thought as she headed resolutely toward them, at least I'll
finally get to see what firearms these `learned' idiots brought along. Making
the best of it, Margo covered the intervening space with a cheery, "Hi, Ann!
Hope things have been fantastic."
   Ann laughed and gave her a swift-hard-hug, then stepped back. She had to
look up a fair ways to find Margo's eyes-and Margo was not even remotely tall.
Ann was just tiny.
   "Yes, they have been. Utterly and completely fantastic. I'm going to have
another kid in about seven months." She patted her belly gently. "So no
wrestling," she chuckled. "Anyway, that's Sven's forte, not mine." Her eyes
crinkled in a fond smile as she studied Margo. "Just look at you, girl. You're
still growing! I thought so, earlier, but the way Malcolm was mauling you, it
was hard to tell."
   Margo's cheeks flushed again, hotter than before. The ring on her finger
tugged downward, it was so heavy. She knew Ann had noticed it the moment she'd
walked into the range.
   "Good!" Ann decided, hands planted on hips in her usual stance. "You look
better with some meat on those bones and some color in your cheeks, you
scrawny little Irish alley cat. One thing's for sure, that baleful green glare
hasn't changed. Not a bit."
   Margo grinned. "How're the wagers going"
   Ann blinked. "Wagers?"
   "About how soon I'll be in your condition."
   "Oh, that wager." Ann's eyes crinkled again. "Hot and heavy betting, both
for and against. Everyone knows how determined you are about your profession,
but everyone also knows that Malcolm Moore is a very, um, how to put it
intense individual when it comes to getting what he wants."
   They grinned at one another. Then Margo noticed the paleontologists, who
stood listening in silence, several of them round-eyed with shock. Aw, rats.
Here I am doing just what I said I wouldn't do.
   Ann, perhaps guessing some of what was happening inside her head, just
touched the back of Margo's hand with her fingertips, bringing her back to the
reality outside Margo's thoughts. Margo blinked. Ann asked gently, "Have you
come to brush up with a lesson? If you did, you'll have to wait a while. Or do
you just want to brush up with a stack of targets and whatever you care to
shoot?"
   Margo nodded. "Thought You'd try a Winchester model 73 first. Malcolms
taking us to Denver, so I thought I might as well tackle period rifles. I'll
try a model 76 Centennial later."
   "just those two?"
   Margo let go a genuine, healthy laugh. "And who taught me to carry only the
right weapon for the job? This is just this morning's practice session.
Tomorrow morning I have a date with handguns of every imaginable design and

manufacture, just so long as they were invented before 1885; then Sven gets a
crack at me before lunch."
   Anne's eyes brightened. ,Oooh, can I come watch? I don't have a class
scheduled..."
   Margo just rolled her eyes. "I can't stop you. Besides, I might need help
crawling out of the gym."
   Ann laughed heartily. "Okay, imp. It's a deal." Ann's eyes sparkled with
anticipation. "You're head's on straight, kid, even if you were stuck in an
uptime college for six months. A college I'm certain does not have a shooting
range."
   "Are you kidding?" It came out sour as early Minnesota apples, still green
and hard as walnuts on the tree. "A shooting range? No way real." That new bit
of uptime slang hadn't filtered down to La-La Land yet, given the startlement
in Ann's eyes.
   "They just outlawed metallic emery boards, for God's sake."
   Ann shook her head, eyes dark with sorrow. "It's been lousy uptime for a
long time. Why do you think we moved our family to Shangri-La Station?" She
shivered at some memory she was unwilling to share, then sighed. "Well, you
might as well get started. Use lane four, if you don't mind. I'm going to
start the class on basic safety before we move to pistol and rifle types. You
know where the keys are, right?"
   Five sets of jaws dropped-again.
   Margo grinned back. "Yep. I even"-she dropped a wicked wink--know where you
hide the pole guns and laser-guided dart guns, never mind the really cool
stuff. Hey, is that Browning Automatic Rifle working again? I really liked
shooting it before it malfunctioned." She considered pride versus humility in
front of this bunch of geeks, and decided on humility-hoping it would be a
lesson to them. "And I'm still utterly mortified that I, uh, caused it to
malfunction last time I used it, then couldn't figure out how to machine a new
part. Is it fixed yet? I did send the money to repair it." She batted pretty
lashes and sounded wistful as a half-drowned kitten.
   Ann just laughed. "Oh, you're impossible as ever, imp Weepy one second,
hell-bound-for-leather the next. Go on and get whatever you need and let me
get back to paying customers." Her smile took any possible sting out of the
words. But she had not answered Margo's question about the B.A.R. Rats!
   Before she left, Margo glanced at the rifles and pistols that had been
quietly laid out on the benches while they spoke. Uh-oh. Thought so. Smart-but
stupid. Typical academicians. You'd think they'd eventually change.
   Margo found the keys right off, then unlocked a largish room built inside
the range itself. Made entirely of steel four inches thick in every dimension,
with a heavy door whose hingepins were on the inside, it contained firearms of
literally every time period from their invention in the 1300s onward. Door
still open, she half heard Ann say lightly to her new students, "Why did I ...
Margo ... keys? Oh, that's only because ... time scout. Still in ... already
very good at her job. Her first scouting adventure ... very dangerous...
unstable gate. But she got everybody out but one ... malaria."
   Margo squirmed--all 'eighty-sixers knew who'd pulled her bacon out of the
fire (literally) on that trip; but she was still young and vain enough to wish
she could've seen the expressions on those stuffy academic faces as it
registered: a woman time scout. She grinned-then suddenly sucked in air as a
horrifying thought sent her belly plummeting groundward.
   Oh, damn! She figured she had about three months before those five idiots
out there blabbed to every uptime newsie in the business that a woman time
scout by the name of Margo Smith was working out of TT-86. She'd be swarmed
over by reporters, particularly the tabloid kind. And they were nearly
impossible to shake off once they got interested in you.
   Now she'd never get any studying done. She abruptly understood her

grandfather's uncompromising, lifelong hatred of news reporters. Well, Margo,
my girl, just make the best of at and maybe you'll build up a reputation big
enough to satisfy even your ego.
   She grinned at herself, having learned quite a few things about Margo Smith
this day she'd never even guessed existed, and plucked a beautiful Winchester
Model 73 .44-40 from the rifle rack, automatically checking to be certain it
wasn't loaded. She laid it carefully aside, muzzle pointed away from the open
door. She found ammo for a Model 76 Centennial in .45-75 Winchester,
remembering vaguely that Ann carried a couple of the rifles in stock. She
discovered a beauty of a lever-action Winchester Model 76 Centennial-clearly
original-which was very similar to the 73, but beefier and in a more powerful
caliber. It, too, was safely unloaded. The Centennial was for serious
shooting. She'd have to remember to ask Ann to reserve them for the Denver
trip.
   The size of the 76 caused Margo to remember Koot van Beek's rifle and that
great, horrid Cape Buffalo. That was a barely scabbed over memory, too. She
hastily snagged the Centennial, along with a modern cleaning kit with brushes
for both rifles. Never, ever again would Margo travel down a gate without the
right weapons close at hand.
   Putting aside the memory, Margo carted all the items to an empty shooting
bench on lane four. Ann glanced up and nodded approvingly, her goggles in one
hand, her ear muffs slid down around her neck, in "lecture mode."
   "Let me know when you're ready to go `hot,' Margo," she called down the
line.
   Margo nodded and curiously studied the beginning of the lesson as she
prepared to practice. It look from here like the paleontologists were giving
Ann a very difficult time.
   One of them-Margo's electronic earmuffs picked up conversations from an
astonishing distance demanded in a voice that would have frozen lava, "We are
not renting and wearing this crap! Why would we possibly need eye and hearing
protection? This is supposed"-the word dripped venom-"to be a trial run for
our field work. We'll have none of this junk downtime! Will we?"
   Margo continued shamelessly eavesdropping-how else did one survive in a
cruel world, particularly when one was studying to become a real scout whose
job was to overhear and remember just such conversations? Ann was clearly
working hard not to shout obscenities in Vietnamese and Gaelic at her
recalcitrant pupils.
   As Margo's first, lamentable lessons had shown, while Ann could instruct
willing students to a high degree of skill, she couldn't instill intelligence.
Result?
   Some customers refused to listen, went downtime improperly armed and/or
trained, and usually came back needing a hospital-or staying downtime in a
long pine box.
   Time Tours, Inc., of course, liked to keep that kind of publicity to a
strict minimum, but the company executives-looking for ever more gate profit-
did nothing about requiring weapons or self-defense training before allowing a
tourist to go downtime. Lessons with the terminal's pro's were strictly on a
voluntary basis.
   Maybe she ought to suggest required classes to Bull Morgan. She snorted.
He'd no doubt tell her it was a tourist's business to get training, not his,
and if they were stupid enough to go downtime without it, they deserved
whatever they got. Besides, Bull Morgan would never have such a rule, because
La-La Land was a place were folks fought, ignored, and thumbed noses at rules,
rather than making new ones.
   At any rate, it looked like Ann could use some help corralling this bunch
of jerks into listening instead of tossing their academic credentials around
like spiked morning stars. She sighed and left everything on her chosen bench,

muzzles pointed downrange, then plunged in.
   "Hi, guys!" Margo called, friendly-like, baiting her hook with a honeyed
voice. Margo smiled sweetly, a dire warning to every person who knew her well,
Ann actually winced-then she swept off shooting glasses and protective
earmuffs and shook out vibrant hair.
   "See these?" She held out the earmuffs, determined to give this her best
effort. "These are hearing protectors. On a firing range, you wear them.
Period. You can lose most of your hearing mighty fast unless you put hearing
protection on before somebody starts target practice."
   "How would you know?"
   One man she couldn't quite see shot the question in her general direction.
   She shrugged. "Because I lost part of my hearing in this ear on a deadly
little street in Whitechapel one bitter cold morning in 1888."
   Silence reigned.
   She didn't add that Malcolm had done the shooting. But the hearing loss,
slight as it was, was genuine.
   She added, "I lost more when an unstable gate opened up and I fell through
it right into The Battle of Orleans. Joan of Arc and some really pissed off
English knights and archers and some-er French nobles were taking a beating
and hating it. Orleans was a really intense battle. Damn near got myself
killed-twice-before I was back safe in the station's infirmary.
   "Then some more of my hearing went bye-bye in South Africa, running from
sixteenth-century Portuguese traders. I got caught in the middle of a
firefight. Some friends of mine who'd figured out I was in trouble had come to
help and I got caught between them and a whole, unwashed mass of murderous
traders who were really riled up. They'd already decided to burn my assistant
and me at the stake."
   Margo managed to hold back the near-instinctive shudders such memories
brought-and in suppressing them, Margo understood her grandfather more than
she'd ever believed possible. It was little wonder he'd turned her down so
rudely in the Down Time Bar & Grill that first day.
   "Believe me, black powder guns are loud. You do want to be able to hear
when you get downtime?" Margo questioned sweetly.
   "As for these," she wiggled the clear, wrap-around shooting glasses between
two fingers, "even a novice should be able to figure out what they're for. I
do take it that nobody wants to go blind?"
   Nobody answered, despite an angry stirring near the back of the group.
Margo shrugged. "They're your eyes and ears. You got replacements lined up
for'em, go right ahead without the safety equipment. But then," she smiled
sweetly again, "I'm wagering you're just the teeniest bit brighter than that.
By the time you've earned a master's, never mind a Ph.D, you've supposedly
learned what's irrelevant and beneath notice from what's not only correct, but
essential. Right?"
   Behind the paleontologists Ann had covered her lips with both hands to hold
in laughter. Tears appeared in her eyes when five heads nodded like
marionettes in sync.
   "Thanks, Margo,, for taking your time to help out. I'm sure these folks
will save their ears from the noise you're about to generate!" Ann added
pointedly. The group sheepishly picked up its safety equipment and began
donning it.
   Margo retrieved her Winchester Model 73-the most popular rifle in the Old
West-from her own shooting bench. She loaded the Model 73 and called out,
"Ann, I'm going hot!" She then lined up her first shot.
   BOOM!
   To her right, all five paleontologists jumped, despite the dampening
qualities of their hearing gear.
   BOOM! A little high and right, she muttered to herself, correcting her

aiming point rather than adjusting the sights, using a method called "Kentucky
windage," where you simply moved the sight picture to the other side of the
target the same distance you missed or until you simply "felt right." The
third BOOM! put the bullet exactly where she wanted it: inside the ten ring.
She finished the magazine, pleased that the only shots outside the nine ring
were those two initial placement shots. Didn't throw a single round! And that,
despite months without even picking up a gun. She continued with her practice,
nonetheless.
   After a while, Margo smiled at her latest target and put the rifle down.
She was tempted to return to the group, if only to see what sort of firearms
they had, but was reluctant to disturb Ann's class any more than she already
had. As if divining her interest, Ann looked up and waved Margo over.
   Upon her arrival, Ann motioned almost imperceptibly for Margo to hold her
own inspection. Margo realized this inspection-and everything that went with
it was, in fact, a lesson Ann was using to judge her improvements, her
judgment. She took a good long look at the neatly arranged firearms. She
confirmed at a glance what she'd suspected earlier.
   "Mmmm ... they do have some nice Winchester Model 94's here, don't they,
Ann? It really is too bad." She glanced over toward the paleontologists.
"You're gonna have to ditch 'em, every last one. Anachronistic as he-heck. For
one thing, the whole feed system on a 94's different from the Model 73 and
76."
   A deep, angry voice behind the knot of grad students demand, "What does
that have to do with anything? Standing right here they look just alike!"
   Hooo, boy. Ivy League and pissed. Not good.
   She shook her head. "Sorry, but no, they don't look alike."
   "Not at all," Ann chimed in, startling Margo at first until she saw the
tiniest bit of a dip from Ann's left eyelid. She felt better immediately.
   "Now," Ann was saying, "where you're going, some folks are going to see
those Model 94's up-close enough to notice."
   "Can't be avoided," Margo added, enjoying the seesaw rhythm as they took
turns. Maybe if I'm desperate for something to do on weekends, l could try my
hand at teaching. I've got pretty good credentials, after all.
   Modest, Margo was not. And finally she could revel in it to her heart's
content, the way cats simply fold their bodies into pretzel-twists around
anything loaded with catnip.
   "Young woman," one of the men began, voice surprisingly deep for the
acceptably trendy cadaver he called a body, "are you questioning my judgment?
I," he went on, arrogant as a New York cabbie, either suggested or chose each
and every one of these firearms myself." He cleared an Ichabod Crane throat
delicately, feigning (and not very well) humility. "NCAA Rifle Team four years
running. Harvard."
   Harvard? Aw, nuts! I'm losing my touch. She'd have bet for sure he was a
Yalie.
   She caught and held his gaze squarely, long enough to let him know she
wasn't impressed, then replied politely, "Well, sir, I'm sure you were
wonderful with a perfectly balanced match rifle-Anscheutz Model 54? Thought
so," as he nodded stiffly.
   Someone behind the tall professor said, "Wow! A real classic!" to which
someone else whispered, "And a college rifle team! Do you have any idea how
scarce those are now?"
   Margo hid a smile as the man's face went red, though humiliating him would
be so easy and so fun, the point was to get the folks to learn. Before the man
could turn and chastise the speakers, Margo said forcefully, "An Anscheutz
Model 54's a great match rifle-but choosing a gun to bet your life on is a
little bit different.
   "No," she revised, "a whole lot different."

   The professor, his pride clearly damaged, opened his mouth to reply. In the
pause, Ann stepped in, a savvy businesswoman smoothing ruffled feathers.
   "You'll have to forgive Margo's abrupt manner, Dr. Reginald-Harding. I do
assure you, all time scouts are usually a bit... direct."
   The professor's scowl lightened. Ann Vinh Mulhaney gave him her most
winning smile, a sure sign that she personally detested him, all the while
coveting as much of his grant money as she could shake loose. "But scouts do
know what they're talking about if they didn't, they wouldn't survive long.
And this one," she nodded toward Margo, "has had the best possible training
available. I taught her firearms and other projectile weapons, Sven Bailey
taught her martial arts and bladed weapons. `Kit' Carson set up her whole
training schedule and did a good bit of the teaching. Then, of course, the
best freelance time guide in the business, taught her what the rest of us
didn't. Like how to really survive downtime in the East End of London, 1888."
   Sounding as if he were sucking lemons, the professor said, "Well then,
would you please explain why our firearms are either anachronistic or
unsuitable?"
   Ooh, bet it hurt your platinum tongue to say that.
   "All right." She could be civil if he could, although it cost her
considerable effort. But she was learning. It was a skill that would doubtless
stand her in very good stead as a scout. It was also, she realized abruptly, a
skill her grandfather had perfected long ago to stay alive and had retained as
a life-long habit, just to protect himself from crowds of awestruck uptimers
gawking and asking him stupid questions. He'd shouted and fumed at her because
he knew what she had yet to learn for herself controlling pride and anger were
utterly critical for a scout, something she hadn't realized before.
   Good grief! These idiots were actually teaching her something!
   "All Right. First, open the actions-Ann will assist you, if necessary-and
check to be sure your rifle is unloaded."
   They went through the drill, she and Ann moving back and forth along the
line, correcting here, demonstrating there. Clearly, La-La Land's expert
firearms instructor was having the time of her life, taking Margo's orders,
for this, too, was a test of everything Margo had learned from her. Good thing
I kept studying at college with those books Kit sent.
   Margo nodded. "Okay, work the action and look down into the top of the
loading mechanism while you do it."
   They obeyed, opening and closing the actions slowly.
   "Notice anything?"
   One of the younger men spoke up first. "The loading ramp flips up, like a
toggle. And there is not so much room in the loading ramp and chamber as with
many rifles."
   "Very good."
   The young man started, looking up in brief astonishment; then grinned
belatedly. "Thanks."
   "Okay, class," Ann took her turn in an astonishingly commanding voice,
"anybody guess why the Model 94's feed system is constructed that way?" It was
clear that only the younger man had much knowledge about guns in general. He
glanced at all the others, finding only blank faces, before clearing his
throat. "It would be a fairly smooth way to bring a cartridge into the
chamber. Not so many moving parts, I think."
   Ann nodded. "Very good." She glanced at Margo, silently saying, "Over to
you."
   Margo drew a deep breath for courage and plunged in feet first, her limited
experiences gripped in both hands like daggers.
   "Yes, you've noticed something very important about the Winchester 94. The
94's feed system does flip like a toggle, or to use an easier analogy, it tips
like a teeter-totter every time you shoot, to bring a new cartridge up into

the chamber. Okay, everybody lay down their rifles and gather 'round me."
   In a moment, she was loosely surrounded by the group. "Now look," she
picked up the Model 73 and proceeded to tip it up so everyone could watch, "at
the difference here." She worked the lever slowly, so they could see the
difference. "On a Model 73 or 76, the feed system just moves straight up and
down. Like an elevator. That's important to all of you for your downtime
research. Anybody care to guess why?"
   Several chewed their lip s. The young woman spoke up. "Because somebody'd
notice the difference while we're getting our gear together in Denver?"
   "Too right. No Old Westerner's going to miss that difference. They pay
attention to guns. All guns. For one thing, guns keep 'em alive, and I haven't
met a man yet who didn't just love tinkering with the toys-or tools-of his
choice."
   Both male grad students went red at the unintended double entendre. She
ignored them as she ignored most boys. "Now, go get your Model 94s and keep
the muzzles pointed toward the ceiling."
   Eventually, they all returned to her side, Model 94s held carefully,
muzzles rigidly pointed toward the ceiling.
   "Okay. Look at the outside of each rifle. This side plate on my Model 73,
for instance, doesn't exist at all on your Model 94s. Again, every Old
Westerner who notices that your rifles don't have a side plate and believe me,
someone, maybe several someone's, will notice! So the second they spot that
little detail, they'll know it's something they've never seen before. And
they'll get mighty curious about it. Curiosity about your group or your gear
is the very last thing you want."
   She smiled coldly and drove home the point like hammering in a wooden
stake.
   "Any Old Westerner seeing these 94s is going to wonder just what in heck
they are and where in heck you got 'em. I think the only other Model 94s in
existence in 1885 were in a workshop in Ogden, Utah, where the Browning
Brothers were just finishing up inventing it. Winchester bought up the rights
like a fish snapping up a fly, because the improvements the Browning Brothers
had made over the Model 73 and the Model 76 were so good.
   "But the Model 94 didn't come out for a while, because Winchester had to
buy manufacturing rights from the Browning Brothers, and they had to play with
the design a little until it was as good as they could make it, then
Winchester had to tool up their factory to accommodate the changes the 94
would require, that sort of thing-all the normal delays between prototype and
commercial release."
   Before she could say anything else-or any of the paleontologists could draw
upon their courage to ask a question-the weapons-range door opened, admitting
a cool draft, Malcolm, and closely following him, Kit Carson.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
   Gasps went up from those who'd seen photographs. Margo just grinned,
ignoring the sound, which set her heart beating so fast that cute young grad
students might have never existed. Malcolm had a breathtaking smile that
turned her insides-and occasionally her very bones-to melted marshmallow.
   "So there you are!" Malcolm exclaimed, relief on his long, craggy , sun-
and-wind scoured face. "I thought maybe you'd come down here to spar with
Sven. We looked. He's miffed."
   Margo said smugly, "I'm saving up for that. If he throws me twice, I'll
fast for a whole day."
   Kit grinned. "I'll make sure you honor that one, my girl."
   She put her tongue out, then kissed Malcolm, just thoroughly enough to set
him on fire, but not quite thoroughly enough to push him over the edge and
carry her out of here. She finally broke the kiss, smiling up into his eyes

with a promise of more to come later, then all but crushed Kit's ribcage. It
startled him, but he didn't let go before she did. He did lower his head to
kiss her hair several times, as though he couldn't believe this was happening.
   When she looked up into his eyes, she saw joy and tremendous pain there.
"I'll make it up," she whispered, "all of it. I'll even tell you my whole
life's story. I should have a long time ago, but I was scared. After class,
okay?"
   Kit just closed his eyes.
   "I'll--yes, please." Then he opened his eyes again, cleared his throat. "I
believe you have a class to teach?"
   She sighed, then commented wryly, "Yeah. Like everything else I do, it
appears to be part of my training."
   Kit and Malcolm nodded approvingly, Kit adding, "A fine lesson for you to
learn-and all on your own, too." Margo wrinkled her nose at him, then turned
back to the class of goggle-eyed scientists.
   Margo took Malcolm's arm, wrapping it possessively around her waist so he
all but surrounded her. Determined to do this right if her tongue shattered
from all the gilding one was supposed to learn to master gracefully, she said,
"This gentleman with his arm around me is Dr. Moore, Freelance Temporal Guide,
sought out by members of the very oldest names and fortunes in the world, men
and women who bear European titles of nobility, Americans of the greatest
industrial and computer families in the nation, prestigious members of the
press and the glittering stars of New Hollywood.
   "They seek Dr. Moore for assistance with private tours away from the main
Time Tours itineraries so they won't have to endure the endless chatter of the
rift-raff who take the same tours. Dr. Moore is also a successful gemstone
speculator," Malcolm squeezed warningly, "a doctor of philosophy in both
anthropology and classics, and, to my greatest happiness, my fiancée."
   A few faint groans reached them, bringing laughter to Malcolm's eyes when
she glanced up.
   Kit, however, was staring at her oddly.
   "And this renowned hero," she said, slipping loose of Malcolm's grip just
long enough to take her grandfather's callused hand, "is the most famous
recluse on Earth. You are deeply privileged to meet one of the original time
scouts who pushed the major gates the first time they began popping open and
closed on a regular, stable schedule. Knowing the danger that he might shadow
himself, he continued pushing gates until the odds were simply too great, then
settled down as owner of one of the world's most prestigious hotels, the New
Edo, right here in TT-86, where he pushed most of the tourist gates Shangri-La
Station possesses. It is, indeed, my intense pleasure to introduce the
legendary Time Scout of Shangri-La Station, Kit Carson." She deliberately left
out the fact that he was her grandfather.
   Round eyes stared back at Kit, with all the grad students looking as though
they might faint in the presence of a living god.
   Kit, moving very close to her, muttered, "Where the hell did you learn to
speak all that flowery bullshit?"
   Margo, eyes flashing, answered in an equally soft whisper, "At that moronic
college you sent me to. Make me take etiquette, will you!"
   Etiquette was another class she'd been forced to take, in place of the math
class she'd needed-badly. Margo had desperately wanted to master her log and
ATLS-Absolute Time Locator System-with greater skill, and that meant plowing
through mathematics. So, when she could not argue, wheedle, or tempt her way
into the class she really needed, above all others, she'd left the registrar's
office in a storming rage, and made other plans, which included buying all the
requisite books for the class she'd been denied and studying them until slow
comprehension dawned for each and every formula or proof the books contained.
   With her greater understanding, she performed the same ritual each night:

she'd finish supper and rush from the cafeteria back to her room, where she
studied until it was nice and dark. If the night sky was clear, as it often
was in winter-she'd grab her ATLS and log and jog down to the courtyard which
four dormitories completely enclosed. Margo then shot one star fix after
another, recording her findings by whispering into her computer log.
   She would then return to her room, ignoring the odd looks from other
students who'd seen her in the courtyard, talking to herself and pointing a
little box at the sky over and over, and the lustful looks of those who didn't
care how crazy she was, just so long as they could get their hands on what was
beneath her designer jeans that fit her derriere like they'd been sewn on.
Margo, completely aware of both types of stare, ignored each equally, regained
her room and checked her calculations very carefully, for each star fix she'd
shot.
   She still wanted that class, but she was getting much better at the
mathematic formulae needed to calculate exactly where you were by shooting a
star fix. And she had learned her accursed "etty-ket." Got a stinking A+ for
it. Some use modern etiquette and oratory is going to be downtime through an
unknown gate.
   Then she realized there was something wrong with her grandfather's
expression. Kit's eyes actually blazed with anger and his sandy eyebrows dove
until his entire forehead was a mass of wrinkles-a few of which she, herself,
had regretfully put there.
   "We'll talk about this later, in private," he muttered. "I want to know
everything there is to know about that place. Everything."
   At least he's not mad at me, margo thought cheerfully. Nobody, not even
Margo, wanted to be on the downside of Kit Carson's temper. She'd been there
all too often to want to find herself there again.
   "And Margo,- Kit added, without a trace of a smile, "do Grandpa a favor,
huh? Cut the etiquette crap and sound like yourself, or I'll drag you over to
the gym and slam the living daylights out of you until you start sounding like
my grandkid again."
   Margo, a little angry, a little relieved, a whole lot aware of how much he
loved her-and the only way he knew to express it most of the time-met his gaze
with a wicked twinkle in her eyes and a dangerous smile on her lips. "Tsk-tsk,
child-beating? Shame on you." Her smile deepened. "As for slamming the living
daylights out of me, you could try."
   Kit's black scowl was part of the way she always remembered him. Before he
could speak, she whispered, "Oh, don't worry, I hate that stuff, too. I'll be
good."
   Kit relaxed visibly, then grinned and ruffled her hair affectionately.
"Okay, fire-eater. Go show'em your stuff. After you finish introductions." As
Margo did not know the names of any of the scientists, she turned to Ann to
help. Surely Ann would know the names of her clients.
   As the introductions progressed, Margo found that Kit could still surprise
her. She told herself she shouldn't have been so startled when Kit greeted
each politely-in whatever language they might happen to speak besides English:
Yiddish with Dr. Rubenstein, honest-to-God Ukrainian with Vasylko, whose eyes
widened until just about all you could see was a vast double pool of blue
under a shock of ice-blond hair. Vasylko stammered out his reply in Ukrainian,
saying something that caused Kit to smile. A greeting in Arabic brought a
flush to Katy's cheeks. Clearly, she remembered enough Arabic to understand
what Kit had just said.
   Then he turned to assess the other Ph.D. paleontologist. "I've admired your
work, Dr. Reginald Harding.
   I saw the American Museum of Natural History after The Accident. What
you've done to raise money to restore the building, never mind repair and
remount the fossil skeletons and other priceless displays approaches the

miraculous. It's a pleasure to meet you at last."
   Both men shook hands, Dr. Reginald-Harding just a little bit awestruck, if
Margo were judging accurately his body language and the stunned look in his
eyes. Kit, evidently noticing the same thing, gave out his world-famous smile.
   Then Kit turned his attention to the remaining graduate student. Adair
MacKinnon just stared at him, whole face slack and increasingly red when Kit
addressed him in Gaelic.
   "No?'' Kit sighed. "Ah, well, your education isn't complete, then, anyway,
is it? You'll have plenty of time to learn it before earning your Ph.D."
   Adair flushed even more and stammered, Always ... always meant to learn it,
'cause I've got to, you know, before I become The MacKinnon. Sometimes ...
never mind."
   Kit nodded understanding of what Adair had left unspoken.
   Introductions completed, Dr. Rubenstein stepped forward immediately,
shaking Kit's hand, then Malcolm's. "Gentlemen, it's an honor, believe me.
You, sir, are known everywhere," this to Kit, "and you, Dr. Moore are a lucky
man. Damned lucky. You both trained this young lady? She's a bit blunt," he
said with a smile, rubbing his chin, "but she knows what she's talking about.
Very, very well. And her, mmm, `forceful' suggestions have all, been to the
point and excellently stated." This time, Samuel Rubenstein smiled at her. "I
can see, now, where your excellent education comes from."
   Perversely, she was peeved. Not good enough on my own, but the minute Kit
Carson strolls in, I'm a sensation. Buddy, you ain't seen nuthin' yet.
Outwardly, she said a bit breezily, "Oh, well, there certainly is that, and
believe me, their tutoring is profoundly educational"-she could feel the snort
Kit held in "but there's a lot of bookwork too. A whole lot. So much, you
never stop learning. Do you, Grandpa?"
   It was the first time she'd ever called him that. He stiffened momentarily,
speechless, while he stared down at her.
   "That's right," he managed. "Even though I'm retired, I'm still learning,
just in case. I've recently tackled an ancient Chinese dialect and Croatian
stripped of all Serbian influences, vocabulary, and so on, to add to my other
languages, and I've been reading and taking notes from a complete history of
the Croatian people, both of which I'll have to transfer to memory
sufficiently for instant recall if I ever decide to risk going down that new
gate at TT-16. Not a tourist gate, not at all; but the research potential is
said to be fabulous." His eyes actually glittered with intense interest.
   The paleontologists were clearly impressed.
   Kit just ruffled his granddaughter's hair, saying everything he wanted to
say with that touch and the look in his eyes.
   Margo cleared her throat, wishing desperately for once that they were alone
and someplace private where they could just talk. She needed to tell him what
had really happened to her mother, Kit's lost daughter the one he hadn't known
he possessed until Margo told him about her, the little she'd been able to
tell him, except her name and that she was dead. Margo cringed at the memory
of that talk by the fishpond on Commons. She'd been so inexperienced, so
uneasy, so afraid of him, she literally hadn't been able to tell him what his
eyes had begged to know.
   This time, she wouldn't be such a coward. And she'd hold him while he cried
over her mother's brutal murder, robbing him of a child he'd never met.
   Whoops, getting too maudlin, Margo. You have a job to do and you can't do
it snuffling goddamned tears, of all things.
   So she said to her somewhat abashed students, "Oh, by the way, all of you
should stop by Connie Logan's Clothes and Stuff, not just for period-
appropriate clothing-she's got the best and you can rent it for much less than
buying it but also be sure to buy a good Old West dictionary, so you won't
sound quite so green.

   Old Western speech is nearly unintelligible to anybody else from anywhere
else. To Old Westerners, anybody who can't speak it is a greenhorn. Learn the
language you'll need to know"
   She'd picked up a little at school, but she'd have to study it like mad
before she and Malcolm went to Denver.
   "But," Adair MacKinnon asked, swallowing hard and sweating, "isn't it just
a dialect of English?"
   "No," Malcolm said quietly. "Unless you can tell me the exact Old West
meanings and pronunciations, without having to think about them-of churn-
twister, cienaga, a Jerusalem undertaker, the word `jewelry' or the phrase
`jewelry chest,' then you'd better hit the library and find yourself a good
Old West-English/ English-Old West dictionary and start memorizing it. You're
going to need it for three months in rough country, away from the more
`civilized' vicinity around Denver."
   Adair stuck to his guns. "I can understand the need to speak like a native,
but why so adamant about it? So-called dudes from the East wouldn't have
spoken it, after all. And just exactly what do `Jerusalem undertaker' or a
perfectly normal word like `jewely really mean?"
   "Yes," Malcolm replied, "dudes don't speak Old West when they arrive.
They're lost in an alien culture, trying to survive and blend in gradually
with what they find. In short, they're intrusive greenhorns, and greenhorns
are considered fair game."
   "Very fair game," Kit added solemnly. "The range wars weren't quite as bad
as depicted in the movies, although they were bad enough, and Dodge City had a
lower per capita murder rate than, say, New York or Washington, D.C. during,
oh, the mid 1990s. But attacks on dudes by a single, experienced man, or a
gang of them, were very common. Even swindlers could make a killing, saying
one thing that meant another altogether, which the dude would find out too
late, once his money or land or horse or whatever he'd risked was long out of
his possession. And having made a legal contract, there was absolutely nothing
the poor sop could do about it. Except maybe hire himself a gun-hand-if he had
enough money left to hunt down the rat and kill him."
   Margo took Kit's hand again, more carefully this time, realizing she was
squeezing it so tightly, his fingernails were turning purple. "Grandpa pushed
the Wild West Gate," she put in, eyes aglow as she gazed up at Kit.
   He harrumphed and muttered, "Lots of time scouts pushed lots of gates.
Nothing heroic in walking through the Wild West Gate, of that I may assure
you. There were other gates that were much harder to step through."
   A subtle reminder of Margo's disastrous mission into Southern Africa. She
flushed, but held tight to his hand.
   Dr. Rubenstein nodded. `The Roman Gate, I expect, was an extremely
difficult one."
   Kit laughed. "Oh, it was easy to get in. Getting out again proved a rather
interesting test of wit and skill."
   And that was how he dismissed one of the most dangerous, nearly lethal
adventures he'd ever encountered. His involuntary fight in the Circus Maximus
was legend the world over.
   "well," Margo muttered, "I, uh, guess I'd better get on with my own
practice and let you take over the class, Ann."
   The diminutive firearms instructor nodded gracious thanks for helping break
the class the way a horsebreaker might soften up and civilize a particularly
unruly horse.
   Kit said very softly, "We'll wait on the benches until you're finished."
   She nodded, holding in another sigh. Another bleeding test ...
   But this time she put up no arguments, no protests, no childish tantrums.
She simply put on her safety.
   Ann, called out, "Line's going hot!" so everyone else donned safety gear-

including Kit and Malcolm-and got busy finishing the other two boxes of .44-
40's, scoring well in toward the center of the black despite her nervousness;
then she switched to the heavier Centennial and did herself proud with three
boxes of almost perfect nines and tens. She did throw a couple of rounds here
and there from sweating palms and aching arms and eyes that burned and
wouldn't focus properly, but even though she was out of practice, her scores
were good and she knew it.
   "Well?" she asked as she handed over the targets.
   The two most important people in her life put their heads together, poring
over the targets, marking each shot outside the nine ring. Finally they looked
up again.
   "Well, frankly," Kit began, "you could use some more practice and work on
your upper arm strength, but pretty damned good for a first try after several
dry months."
   Margo let go her tense fear and abruptly felt like she was floating on
fizzy bubbles that tickled her all the way to the ceiling.
   "Hey," Malcolm called, "come down out of the clouds, will you?"
   She sighed inwardly and allowed the wonderful fizzing bubbles to waft her
gently toward the floor. She blinked and found herself staring into Malcolm's
eyes. "Yeah?" she asked softly.
   He didn't say a word. He just kissed her until those dratted, wonderful
fizzing bubbles came back. When she came up for breath, she was actually
dizzy.
   "Wow! Where'd you learn to do that?"
   Malcolm touched her cheek. "From a certain redheaded imp I know. She's
very, um, motivational."
   Margo blushed to her toes. Malcolm only smiled.
   "Shall I, um, put everything away so we can get the heck out of here?"
   "Y-e-s," Kit drawled, devilment in his eyes, "I think that would be
appropriate. We'll stuff down some dinner, then if it's possible, I think I'd
like to pry you away from Malcolm for a while, so it's just you and me, okay?"
   "Yeah," was all she could manage.
   They helped her clean the rifles, just to speed up the process, then she
put away all her gear and locked up the gear room, returning the keys
carefully where they belonged. That done, Margo Smith hooked arms through both
Malcolms and Kit's. They left the range aware of the still-awestruck gazes
that followed them.
   Once outside, beyond the soundproof glass, they all started laughing like
complete idiots. But it was a healing laughter, as well, washing away
awkwardness and lonely pain and leaving only the new closeness and the utterly
reaffirmed love Margo felt for both of these men. It was a love she felt she
didn't deserve, but was by God going to try to deserve.
   "Last one to the elevator's a goose's egg!" Margo called, sprinting off
like a gazelle.
   Not at all surprisingly, Kit arrived just behind her, his hand covering
hers just as she punched the elevator button. Malcolm wheezed up a moment
later.
   "Out of shape," Kit chided.
   "Hah! Blame that on your insatiable granddaughter."
   Kit just laughed and winked at Margo, who flushed red as a beet. But she
was still laughing. The elevator carried them and their hilarity upward in
efficient silence, until the doors opened again and their laughter spilled out
onto the Commons. They headed for the Epicurean Delight and a dinner that
would certainly be a momentous occasion.
   At least, it would if Kenneth "Kit" Carson had anything to say about it!
CHAPTER TWELVE

   Marcus was on duty in the Down Time Bar & Grill when he strolled in, casual
and cool as a general surveying newly levied troops on the Campus Martius. A
glass slipped from nerveless fingers and shattered on the floor behind the
bar. He glanced Marcus' way, noted him briefly with a flick of disinterested
gaze, then took a seat near the back as though Marcus didn't exist.
   Fear and anger both ripped through him, piercing as the shockwaves of an
unstable gate. The years he'd spent on TT-86 had changed him more than he'd
realized, had eased the harshness of certain memories with the fair treatment
he'd received here, where men like Kit Carson and Skeeter Jackson saw him as a
man, not a possession. He'd come to realize over the years that he was free,
that no one had the right to call him slave, but in that single, blinding
instant when his onetime master's eyes had slid dismissively away from his,
the memory of his slavery had crashed down around him like a cage of steel
bars.
   Marcus stood rooted to the floor, unable to believe he had actually
forgotten that terrifying, familiar, casual dismissal of his very humanity.
What it felt like in his soul to be reminded
   "Hey, Marcus, clean up that mess!"
   The manager, frowning at him.
   Hands shaking uncontrollably, Marcus knelt and swept up broken shards of
the bar glass. When the job was done and the pieces dumped into the trash bin,
Marcus washed and dried hands that refused to hold steady. He drew a deep
breath for courage. He didn't want to cross that short distance of space, but
knew it had to be done. He still owed a terrible sum of money to this man
whose name he'd never actually known, merely calling him Domus, same as any
other slave would address a master. He recalled all too clearly the cold humor
in the man's eyes when he'd first laid eyes on Marcus in that stinking slave
pen.
   He left the relative safety of the space behind the bar and approached the
dim table near the back. His glance flicked up again, studied Marcus with
brutal appraisal, a herdsman judging the health of prize stock. Marcus'
insides flinched.
   "Your order?" he whispered, all voice control gone.
   His one-time master had not changed much during the intervening years. A
little leaner, a little greyer. But the eyes were the same, dark and
glittering and triumphant.
   "Beer. Whiskey chaser."
   Marcus brought the drinks as ordered, trying desperately to still the
jittering of glassware on his small, round tray. Quick eyes noted the dance
and smiled.
   "Very good," he purred. "That will be all."
   Marcus bowed and departed. He felt the dark touch of the man's gaze on him
through the next hour, watching him work as he served drinks, collected bar
tabs and tips, made up sandwiches and snacks for the ebb and flow of
customers, and prayed to all the gods to get him through this ordeal. Why has
he come? pounded behind his eyelids. Why has he not spoken to me again? I have
the gold to repay the debt of my purchase price. I have it ...
   And above all other questions, again and again, Why does he not speak? He
just sits and watches. The man finally finished his beer and left money on the
table, departing without a backward glance. Marcus had to brace himself
against the bar to keep his feet.
   "Marcus?"
   He jumped so badly he nearly went to the floor. The manager braced him with
a hasty arm.
   "You feeling okay? You look sick."
   I am sick! Marcus wanted to cry out. "I-do not feel well, I am sorry..."
   "Hey, you got plenty of sick time coming. Go on home and take some aspirin,

get some rest. I'll call Molly, she could use some overtime pay. If you don't
feel better by tomorrow, call Medical."
   Marcus nodded, numb to his bones. "Thank you." Very carefully, he wiped his
hands on a bar towel. He hung it up with great deliberation, then crept out of
the Down Time Bar & Grill into the brilliance of the Commons. His former
master was nowhere to be seen. What was he to do? The man had said nothing,
left no instructions to meet him, made no arrangements to turn over the notes
Marcus had so carefully compiled over the years. He didn't know what to do. He
didn't even know the man's name, to check the hotel registries. Perhaps he
meant to save the meeting for the privacy of Marcus' little apartment?
   To return to the apartment, he would have to pass Ianira's booth in Little
Agora. What could he tell her, when he knew nothing, himself? Marcus half
hoped he could slip past her without being seen, but Ianira spotted him
straight away. Her lovely eyes widened. The next instant she'd left a customer
and a whole retinue of devotees gaping after her. She flew to his side like an
arrow into his heart.
   "What is it? You're ill ..." She laid a hand against his cheek.
   Marcus, aware that his former master might be anywhere, watching and
assessing and planning, felt himself unbearably torn between the desire to
crush Ianira to him and draw comfort from her strength versus the even fiercer
desire to protect her and their children.
   "He came into the Down Time today," Marcus said a little unsteadily. "The
my old master." Ianira's luminous dark eyes widened; her lips, exactly the
shape of Artemis' divine silver bow fully drawn to strike, parted in shock.
Before she could speak, Marcus added, "Can you-can we afford it if you close
up the booth?"
   Worry furrowed Ianira's brow. "Why?"
   Marcus had to draw an unsteady breath before he could speak. "I want you to
take Artemisia and Gelasia and go someplace safe until I know what he wants.
He said nothing, Ianira, just came in, watched me for an hour, and left
without a word. I was once his slave, Ianira! He still thinks ... will act as
though ... if I cannot protect you and our children, what kind of man can I
be?"
   The look in her eyes wounded him. He forced himself to continue. "And no
downtimer has real rights in this world. I am afraid for you. He could so
easily do terrible harm, make trouble with the uptimers whose laws bind us,
maybe even try to take you for his own-by force!"
   His hand on hers trembled. He would die to protect her and their children.
He was just afraid his onetime owner would move on Ianira before Marcus could
take proper precautions.
   Ianira's glance darted around the brightly lit Common as though searching
for their unseen enemy. Tourists, oblivious of their terror, sauntered past,
laughing and chatting about upcoming adventures downtime. Her retinue of
idiotic followers had left the booth and half surrounded them. Ianira,
glancing at that follow-her-come-what-may crowd, compressed soft, sensuous
lips until nothing remained but a hard, white line.
   "You are right to fear," she whispered, her voice so low even Marcus had a
hard time catching the words. "I feel that someone watches, someone besides
these people," she waved a negligent hand toward her awestruck devotees, "but
I cannot find him. There are so many minds in this place, it confuses the
senses. But he is here, I know it." Marcus knew she had innate gifts he could
barely understand, plus training in ancient ways and rites no man could ever
comprehend. Her glance into his eyes was frightened. "I will stay with friends
in The Found Ones until we know. You are wise, beloved. Take great care." Then
the look in her eyes shifted, hardened. "I loathe him," she whispered
fiercely. "For putting that look in your eyes I hate him as much as I hate my
pig of a husband!"

   Her lips crushed his, all too fleetingly, then she whirled and left him.
The "costume" she wore-no different from the ordinary chitons she'd worn on
the other side of the Philosophers' Gate-swirled in a flutter of soft
draperies and folds. Astonishingly, downtimers from all parts of the Commons,
summoned only the gods knew how, appeared from nowhere and surrounded her,
most forming an impenetrable barricade to keep her acolytes from following.
Others formed a guard and unless Marcus were greatly mistaken, theirs was an
armed guard-to protect the Speaker of the Seven and her offspring. He knew
they would be taking a swift, back-corridor route to the station's School and
Day Care Center to pick up the girls. Then she vanished around a corner in
Residential and was gone.
   Marcus stayed where he was, making sure she was not followed. A few of the
acolytes tried to, but that living wall managed to discourage them-forcefully
for one or two insistent, insolent vidcam operators, then they, too, were gone
around the same corner.
   With The Found Ones, Ianira and their children ought to be safe from the
monster who'd brought him here, who had then left him uptime with nothing but
instructions that made no sense. That "master" had then blithely joined the
line to depart TT-86, leaving Marcus-who was deep in shock from everything he
heard and saw-to fend for himself. He recalled nearly every detail of that
nightmare of a day. No one here had seemed to speak his native tongue.
   Instead, he'd heard smatters of barbaric tongues, so many and spoken so
fast he felt dizzy. He'd recognized none of them. Haphazard stairs that went
nowhere had eventually led him into the arms of the "gods" who ruled this
place. Eventually, he'd met the man named Buddy and after that, a group of men
and women in more or less his same position, who took him in and helped him
adjust through the worst of the transition.
   Marcus was startled from his painful memories by a downtimer named Kynan
Rhys Gower. Marcus knew this man to be a close friend of Kit Carson's. He was
casually closing up Ianira's booth, setting items on the counter inside and
locking the sides down, and fending off Ianira's followers with a helpless
gesture and a convoluted sentence in Welsh that only the gods could probably
decipher. He escaped the crowd, which settled itself around the booth as
though they meant to wait forever. Kynan pushed his wheeled waste bin past
Marcus' chosen place of vigil.
   "Your woman and children are safe, friend," the Welshman murmured, pausing
to pick up some bit of trash near Marcus' feet. He deposited the waste in his
bin and moved on. Marcus closed his eyes, thanking all the gods for that
miracle. Then, straightening his shoulders and drawing in a deep breath,
Marcus headed resolutely for their apartment. His old master would doubtless
seek him there and reveal his orders. What he would do when Marcus repaid him
the price of his purchase and asked him to please take the records Marcus had
compiled and never return ...
   A Roman's reaction, Marcus could have judged without giving the matter a
second thought. But Marcus' one-time master was not Roman. He was an uptimer
with unknown motives, unknown ways of thinking. He had set Marcus a very
specific-if mystifying-task. Would he be willing to give up a source of
information placed so well to gather the details he clearly wanted very badly?
What would he do? What would he say? Marcus could always appeal to Bull Morgan
for help-if it came to such desperate straits. The Station manager would
protect him, if no one else would. The thought of his one-time master facing
down Bull Morgan and a squad of Station Security helped soothe the tremors
ripping through his insides.
   But he was still deeply afraid.
   "Mr. Farley?"
   The man who'd emerged from the Down Time Bar & Grill glanced around,
surprise evident in his dark eyes. "Yes?"

   Skeeter Jackson gave him a brilliant smile and a fake business card.
"Skeeter Jackson, freelance time guide. I heard you were looking for a
downtime adventure, checking out the gates we have here at Shangri-La
Station."
   Farley glanced at his card, then studied him. "I'm gathering information,"
he allowed cautiously.
   Skeeter, maintaining that smile at all cost, wondered if Chuck Farley had
witnessed Skeeter's panic-stricken flight from that double-damned gladiator-or
the newscast which had followed. "If you wouldn't mind a friendly piece of
advice..."
   Farley nodded for him to continue.
   "Time Tours offers some nice packages, but frankly, they'll gouge you for
every extra service they can conjure up. The small outfits that rent the
government-owned gates are a better deal, although the gates don't lead to
quite as interesting time periods. Your best bet is to hire a freelancer.
Then, if you decide on a non-Time-Tours gate, all you do is pay the
government's gate fee plus your guide's fees, plus downtime lodging, meals,
that kind of thing. Much cheaper than a package tour. Of course, it depends on
what you want, doesn't it?"
   Farley's eyes were cool and unpleasantly alert. "Yes."
   "If you do settle on a Time Tours package, you might still consider a
private guide." Drawing on the patter he'd heard Malcolm Moore use so
frequently, he added, "There are some extraordinary experiences the package
deals simply skip over, because they can't herd that many people around and
not be noticed. Hiring a freelancer to go along with you lets you break away
from the main tour group whenever you want. You could," he dredged up an
example he'd researched on the computers, "go down towards Ostia, for
instance, and look at the big Claudian harbor under construction. Magnificent
sight, that harbor, but it isn't on the package tour."
   He smiled again, winningly.
   Farley merely pocketed his card. "Thanks for the advice. I'll consider it."
   Without another word, he simply turned and walked off.
   Skeeter stood rooted, silly grin still pasted on his face. His insides
seethed. Goddammit, I'm losing my touch, Just when I need it most, too. What's
with people this month?
   He had to get access to that guy's money belt.
   Skeeter headed for the library and started checking hotel registries on one
of the computer terminals. Farley had to be staying somewhere. He started with
the less expensive hostelries and worked his way up to the luxury hotels
before he found the entry he sought: Farley, Chuck. Room 3027 Neo Edo. Skeeter
just groaned and leaned his brow against the cool monitor screen. The Neo Edo.
It figured. Kit Carson's hotel.
   Well, he hadn't run out of disguises yet.
   If he could get into the hotel without being recognized, he could get into
Farley's room. And if he could get into the man's room, he could steal
anything in it. If he were lucky, he'd catch the guy during a shower and
simply make off quietly with the money belt around his own waist. He still
couldn't quite believe the guy had turned him down as a freelance guide.
   Swearing softly under his breath, Skeeter headed home to try out one of his
disguises on the employees of the Neo Edo Hotel.
   Goldie Morran found Chuck Farley seated at a table in Wild Bill's, a
saloon-style bar in Frontier Town. He was reading the latest copy of the
Shangri-La Gazette with apparent interest.
   "Mind if a lady joins you?" she purred.
   He glanced up, blinked, then set the paper aside. "Suit yourself"
   The measuring look he gave her and the coolness of his greeting didn't bode
well, but he did signal for a waitress. The rinky-tink jingle of the upright

piano at the back of the room, its player costumed with gartered shirtsleeves
and a battered beaver hat, rose above the sound of laughter, conversation, and
the clink of glasses. The waitress, a saucy downtimer who, if rumor were
correct-had earned more gold flirting with miners than the miners themselves
had earned over an average year's digging, winked at Goldie, one hustler to
another, friendly-like. Goldie smiled.
   "What'll it be?" She rested hands on well-curved hips, while her breasts
all but spilled out of her tight-laced costume. If Chuck Farley were affected
by the sight, it didn't show in anyway Goldie could see. Maybe he preferred
men? Goldie didn't care who he slept with, or why, so long as she obtained
possession of his money.
   "A drink for the lady. I presume," he added sardonically, "that she's
buying, since I didn't invite her."
   Goldie managed to keep smiling, although she'd vastly have preferred
slapping him. "Whiskey Rebecca. Thank you. And yes," she added smoothly, "I am
buying. I did not come here to steal a drink or two off an unwary tourist."
   Some hint of mirth stirred far back in his eyes. "Very well, what did you
come here for?"
   As Rebecca threaded her way back through the crowded bar to fill Goldie's
order, Goldie leaned back in her chair. "I am given to understand you're
looking for something besides the usual tours."
   Farley's smile was thin. "News certainly moves around fast in this place."
   Goldie laughed. "That is too true. Which is why I wanted to talk to you
before someone disreputable tried to swindle you." She handed over her card.
"I have a shop on the Commons. Money-changing, rare coinage, gems, that sort
of thing. My expertise is considerable."
   Farley's thin smile came again, although it didn't touch his dark, watchful
eyes. "I've heard of you, yes. Your reputation precedes you."
   How he meant that, Goldie wasn't quite sure. Nor was she at all sure she
liked the way he continued to watch her, like a waiting lizard.
   "Not knowing what you had in mind, of course," she said, accepting the
whiskey glass Rebecca brought and pointedly dropping money onto the table to
pay for it, "I thought we might chat for a few minutes. Since you didn't seem
interested in any specific tours, I thought perhaps you'd come to Shangri-La
with something else in mind."
   His eyes narrowed slightly. "Such as?"
   "Oh, there are all sorts of reasons people come here," Goldie laughed.
"Some people come just to eat at the Epicurean Delight. Then there's that
Greek prophetess all those wacky uptime bimbos follow around like she was
Christ on Earth." She smiled at the memory of Ianira's hordes. Goldie had made
more than a little profit from them.
   "But I didn't come here to talk about oracles and the fools who believe
them. Occasionally we're visited by the shrewd individual or two who
understands the investment potentials a place like Shangri-La has to offer."
   The corners of Farley's lips twitched. "Really? What sort of investments?"
   Goldie sipped her whiskey. Farley was cool, all right. Too cool by half.
"Well, there are any number of lucrative ventures a man with wit and capital
could turn to his advantage. There are, for instance, the shops that supply
the tourists, restaurants-even the small ones turn a fabulous profit. Captive
audience, you know." She laughed lightly. Chuck Farley allowed a small smile
to touch his lips. "When there are businesses like mine. Capital invested in
rare coins obtained by downtime agents could increase nine, ten times the
initial investment."
   Again, that small, sardonic smile. "I thought the first law of time travel
was, `There will be no profiteering from time.' The ATF has copies of it
posted everywhere, you know."
   Somehow, Goldie received the impression from the mirth far back in those

dark eyes that Chuck Farley didn't give a damn about the first law of time
travel.
   "True," she smiled. "But money exchanged from downtime purchases which is
then invested right here in Shangri-La isn't covered by that law. You're only
in violation if you try to take your profit uptime,
   "So, the possibilities for shrewd investment are limitless for a man with
capital and imagination." She sipped at her whiskey again, still watching him
over the rim of the glass. "Best of all, the money you invest in, say, a
business here on Shangri-La is taxed only at the rate it would be uptime.
Frankly, you can make a killing without ever breaking a single law."
   She smiled politely while he leaned back in his chair and studied her face.
The corners of his lips moved slightly. "You interest me, Goldie Morran. I
like your style. Gutsy, polished, sincere. I'll be in touch later, perhaps."
   He tossed some coins onto the table to pay for his own drink, gathered up
his copy of the Gazette, and left her sitting there, seething. She knocked
back the remaining whiskey and followed him out, but he'd vanished into the
mob milling around the Commons.
   People gawking at the stores, the ramps, the chronometers, the gates, the
waiting areas, the prehistoric beasts picked up from that absurd, unstable
gate into the age of the dinosaurs-that was all she could see every direction
she turned. She compressed her lips, furious that he'd turned her down and
then simply vanished.
   Just what the devil was Farley after, anyway?
   Disgruntled in the extreme, Goldie set out for her shop. She'd gone only a
few strides when she noticed Skeeter Jackson deep in conversation with a
tourist. Drat the man! She was seriously of a mind to march over and tell that
luckless tourist what a cheating fake he was, to spoil whatever profit he
expected to pick up. Why she had ever agreed to this idiotic bet-
   Goldie blinked. Someone was stalking Skeeter. A reddish-haired man in
Western-style clothing that somehow didn't match the way he moved... Her eyes
widened as recognition hit home: the downtimer who'd chased Skeeter before.
Then she noticed the truly wicked blade he was silently drawing from beneath a
set of leather chaps. Goldie drew in her breath sharply.
   For an instant, spite and malice held her silent. Spite, malice, and greed.
If Skeeter were dead, all bets were off and she could stay in La-La land with
no one to fault her. The man crept closer. Goldie's stomach churned at the
look of hatred in the stranger's eyes, etched into his attentive, absorbed
face. Skeeter was Goldie's rival and a scoundrel and probably deserved what he
was about to get more than anyone she knew. But in that instant, she realized
she didn't want to watch him die.
   Not particularly because she cared what happened to Skeeter, but murder was
messy. And bad-very bad-for business. And for a fleeting instant, she also
realized victory by default over a dead man would be about as sweet as vinegar
on her tongue. So she found herself moving across the Commons faster than
she'd moved in years.
   Skeeter and his target were deeply engrossed in conversation near the
waiting area for the Wild West Gate. The man creeping up on him sidestepped
around an ornamental horse trough filled with colorful fish and tensed, ready
for the final lunge. Goldie glanced around, wondering if she could find a
weapon, or someone from Security, even something to use as a diversion.
   Overhead, ten leathery, crow-sized pterodactyls perched in the girders,
eyeing the fish in the horse trough. Skeeter talked on, oblivious to the
closeness of impending death. Ah-ha! Goldie darted over to a vending cart
which sold hats, T-shirts, and other trinkets, and said, "Sorry, gotta borrow
this," to the startled cart owner.
   She snatched up a toy bow and arrow set and nocked the arrow, pulled back
expertly, then let fly. The arrow whizzed true to its mark: the rubber tip

smacked right into the flock of startled pterodactyls. The whole lot of them
took wing with ear-bending screeches and dove straight down. Goldie ducked
under the cart. Skeeter jerked his gaze up and around, and saw the man with
the long knife. His eyes widened.
   Then he took off faster than Goldie had ever seen him run.
   The man with the knife swore in what had to be Latin and bolted after him.
Angry pterodactyls swarmed in his way, screaming like maddened crows mobbing a
jaybird. Leathery wings buffeted the man's face. Claws raked his hair. He
yelled something furious and tried to cut at them with his long knife.
Skeeter's tourist, a pretty redhead, screamed and took refuge behind the horse
trough. Other tourists scattered while those at a safer distance started to
point.
   Someone shouted for Security. Someone else yelled for Pest Control. The man
fighting off the pterodactyls abruptly realized he was attracting attention to
himself. He swore again and took off in the opposite direction Skeeter had
taken-none too soon, as Security arrived hard on his heels.
   "What's going on?"
   The shaken tourist Skeeter had been trying to swindle crawled out from
behind the trough. "A man with a huge knife! He tried to attack the guy I was
talking to-then those things-"she pointed at the pterodactyls still flitting
angrily above their heads "-started diving everywhere and-and I don't know
where he went. I just hid behind this."
   Security officers took the man's description from the shaken tourist while
Goldie slipped quietly away in the confusion. The vendor she'd borrowed the
bow and arrow from just gaped after her. Goldie returned cautiously to her
shop, making sure no one from Security had followed, then locked the door and
sat down to do some very serious thinking. Skeeter Jackson had picked up a
lethal enemy somewhere. Or somewhen. He had changed an enormous sum of money
after that last trip of his through the Porta Romae. Goldie would've bet the
very gold in her teeth that Skeeter's attacker had been swindled downtime and
had somehow come through the gate looking for revenge.
   She shivered slightly behind her glass cases filled with coins, gems, and
other precious items brought uptime by various gullible tourists. Wager or
not, she was glad she'd acted. But there was one thing she intended to find
out, or her name was not Goldie Morran, and that was the identity of the man
who'd come so close to killing Skeeter.
   Yes, finding out who he was and why he was after that wretched little con
artist might just come in very handy. She might not want to see Skeeter
murdered, but she had no qualms at all about seeing him arrested. Tapping her
fingers thoughtfully against the cool glass countertop, Goldie wondered who to
contact about the mystery man's identity. She had all sorts of agents spotted
about the station, willing to do a little spying for her as well as the odd
downtime courier job. Goldie sniffed autocratically and picked up the phone.
   Time was running, but she would find out.
   There were, after all, only so many places in La-La Land a man could hide.
Someone would know. And once she knew, the man chasing him would know. And
when he knew, Skeeter Jackson's days on Shangri-La would be over for good. She
started calling her paid agents all over the station.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
   Marcus made his way home and entered the cramped apartment. It was
echoingly empty. Ianira had packed in haste, leaving most of her own things in
favor of taking the children's necessities. He touched one of her Greek gowns,
breathing in its scent, almost smiled at the sight of prosaic jeans hung
neatly on hangers in her half of their closet. He crushed the heavy fabric
beneath his hands.
   Marcus had known this day would eventually come.

   He just hadn't known it would tear his vitals so mercilessly.
   Marcus swore savagely in a language no other man, woman, or child on TT-86
ever used-with the rare exception of his beloved Ianira, to whom he had taught
a little of it-then found the aspirin in the medicine cabinet. He downed five
tablets to relieve the fierce throbbing in his head and wished bitterly he
could afford strong alcoholic beverages like Kit's special bourbon, brought to
TT-86 from some secret, downtime escapade. But he didn't have the money for
such luxuries.
   He didn't have money for anything.
   Marcus swore again, hating himself for the tremors he couldn't quite
suppress. He'd come to believe in himself as a free man. But the man who had
purchased and brought him here would-sooner or later demand an accounting.
Marcus brought out the notes he had laboriously compiled over years of
bartending and listening to the talk of men and women far gone in their
boasting. He brought out the money he had so carefully stockpiled from the
little metal box at the top of the bedroom closet. He changed out of his
working clothes into a clean pair of blue jeans and a respectable shirt, one
Ianira had surprised him with from a shop in Frontier Town on his last
birthday. He smoothed down the fringe with unsteady fingers and swallowed down
a throat gone dry. His face in the mirror was ashen despite the stubble of
beard along his chin.
   If he tried shaving now, he'd cut himself to ribbons.
   Able to think of nothing else to do to prepare himself, he sank into a
chair facing the door to wait. When the telephone shrilled, Marcus actually
knocked the chair over. He disentangled himself, and made it to the phone
before the answering machine switched on.
   "Hello?"
   "Marcus," that familiar voice said-notably in English, not Latin. "We have
business to discuss. Come to the Neo Edo, Room 3027. Bring your records."
   The line clicked in his ear.
   Marcus swallowed once in the silence. He still didn't even know the man's
name. He swallowed again, against unreasoning fear. Nothing could really
happen to him. And it was Kit's hotel he'd be going to, not some out-of-the-
way corner of the terminal. Kit Carson was a friend. A powerful friend. Marcus
clung to that thought.
   Then he gathered up moneybox, records, and his courage and headed
resolutely toward Kit Carson's world-famous hotel.
   Getting into the Neo Edo was simple.
   There were lots of ways into the luxury hotel besides the main lobby.
Probably more, in fact, than Kit Carson knew existed, unless the previous
owner, the legendary Homako Tani, had left blueprints behind when he'd deeded
the enormous hotel to his long-ago time scouting partner. The Neo Edo's
architect, working under Tani's direct supervision, had put in more
melodramatic secret passageways, hidden entrances, and blind rooms built into
the rocky foundations of the Himalayas themselves than even the gods of the
mountaintops knew.
   Skeeter had tried to pick locks on those doors more than once, slipping in
through one of at least fifteen secret entrances he'd discovered thus far (and
he hadn't even attempted the top three floors of the five-storey hotel yet,
for fear of opening a hinged panel and emerging straight into Kit Carson's
palatial office on the fifth floor. A gilt-and-wood dragon-shaped balcony,
whose "scales" were Imperial Chrysanthemums, snaked completely around the
open, atrium-style upper floor, which boasted bedrooms larger than his
biological parents' entire home floorplan.
   Rumor had it (and Skeeter's sources were pretty reliable) that Kit had
discovered he owned the Neo Edo when a bunch of lawyers he didn't know had
been allowed into La-La Land just long enough to hand-deliver a copy of Homako

Tani's will, a brief letter, and the deed to the hotel.
   Lawyers, however, were barred from conducting any official legal business
(never mind set up a law firm!) in La-La Land by edict of none other than Bull
Morgan. The squat, fire-plug of a station manager, who chewed cigars the way
eight-year-olds chewed bubble gum, had put into place iron-clad rules he bent
only when the "official lawyering" dealt with wills and inheritances.
   In its way, so long as you obeyed the rules (or didn't get caught breaking
them), La-La Land was a sanctuary beyond compare. He grinned. No one-probably
not even Kit knew whether or not the Neo Edo's builder was really dead. Rumor
(and here, even Skeeter's sources were of wildly mixed opinions) ran the gamut
from Homako Taw dying at the hand of Japan's greatest warrior-artist-poet-
swordsmith ever to live, Miyamoto Musashi, to walking up into the ceiling of
the world and ending his last years as Dalai Lama in Tibet (not so far,
actually, from the geographical, if not temporal, site of TT-86).
   The world-famous temple at the roof of the world had finally been
refurbished after tidal waves, earthquakes, famine, disease, and war with
their hated northern neighbors had caused the great, sprawling bastion of
communist socialism to crumble and finally leave Tibet to its prayer wheels,
its solitary temples, its bamboo-munching pandas, and its mountains, where new
snow falling on the great Himalayan peaks blew harshly.
   Whatever the true story, Skeeter simply strolled into the lobby in his
disguise, passed the huge mural of Sunrise over Edo Castle, which was supposed
to be a copy of one that the same Musashi (who might have killed Homako Tani,
for any possible reason, given Musashi"s temper) had painted. Skeeter reached
the elevator and pinged the little lighted circle.
   Moments later, he was on the third floor, stealing toward Charles Farley's
expensive room on a carpet thick and fine as any the kings of Persia might
have ordered woven for their winter pavilions. The subtle pattern of black and
white reminded him of snow leopards, or those elusive creatures of the
Mongolian steppes, the silent white tiger glimpsed through blasts of snow and
wind. Skeeter shivered, recalling his terror when ordered by Yesukai to join a
winter hunt in the sacred mountains of the Yakka clan's homeland. He still
didn't know whether it had been skill or luck that his arrow had brought down
the snow leopard before the huge cat could claw him to death, but he would
take to his grave the scream of his pony, knocked from under him and mortally
wounded before he knew anything was near.
   Skeeter shook off those memories with some irritation and concentrated on
the matter at hand: breaking into Room 3027. First, he listened, ear bent to
the door with a stethoscope to hear what might be taking place beyond the
closed door. He caught the sound of the shower and a man's voice singing
Gilbert and Sullivan off key. Skeeter smiled, carefully slipped the lock while
disabling the alarm with a little tool he'd invented all on his own, and
entered the darkened hotel room.
   Farley sang on, as Skeeter began a methodical hunt of the well-appointed
bedroom. He rifled through the discarded clothing on the bed, searched every
drawer, under the mattresses, in the closet, under every piece of furniture,
even managed to open the room safe, only to find it empty.
   Where? Skeeter fumed.
   He eased the bathroom door open and risked a peek inside.
   Steam hit his face, along with an unpleasant bellow about mausers and
javelins, but there was no sign of a moneybelt draped over the toilet, sink,
or towel rack. Had he worn the damned thing into the shower?
   The song-and the spray of water-came to an abrupt end. Farley's shower was
over. Skeeter cursed under his breath and ran for the hall. He slipped
outside, locked Farley's hotel room door behind him, and leaned against it,
breathing heavily as his heart raced.
   "What are you doing here?" a familiar voice demanded.

   Skeeter yelped an came at least three inches clear of the floor. Belatedly
he recognized Marcus. "Oh, it's only you," he gasped, sagging again into the
door for support. "For a second, I thought Goldie'd set Security on me again."
   Marcus was frowning intensely. "You were attempting to steal from the
room."
   Skeeter planted hands on hips and studied his friend. "I do have a wager to
win," he said quietly, "or had you forgotten that? If I lose, I get tossed off
station."
   "Yes, you and your stupid bet! Why must you cheat and steal from everyone,
Skeeter Jackson?"
   Marcus' anger surprised him. "I don't. I never steal from 'eighty-sixers.
They're family. And I never steal from family."
   Marcus' cheeks had flushed in the soft lighting of the hall. His breathing
went fast and shallow. "Family! When will you learn, Skeeter? You are not a
Mongol! You are an uptimer American, not some unwashed, stinking hordesman!"
   Shock detonated through him. How had Marcus known about that?
   "`A Mongol doesn't steal from his own kind,' " Marcus ranted on, evidently
quoting some conversation Skeeter didn't remember at all. "Pretty morals for a
pretty thief, yes? That is all you are. A thief. I am sick of hearing how the
tourists deserve it. They aren't your enemies! They are only people trying to
enjoy life, then you come and smash it up by thieving and lying and-" His eyes
suddenly widened, then went savagely narrow. ""The money you gave to me. The
bet you made in Rome. You did not win it honestly."
   Skeeter wet his lips, trying to get in a word edgewise.
   "He came to me for help, damn you, because you'd stolen the money for his
new life! Curse you to your Mongolian hell, Skeeter Jackson!"
   Without another word, Marcus turned and strode toward the distant
elevators, passing them and opting for the staircase, instead. The door banged
against the wall in an excess of rage. Skeeter stood rooted to the snowy
carpet, swallowing. Why did he feel like bursting into tears for the first
time since his eighth birthday? Marcus was only a downtimer, after all.
   Yeah, a voice inside him whispered. A downtimer you called friend and were
drunk-or stupid-enough to confide the truth to. Skeeter could lie to any
number of tourists, but he couldn't lie to that voice. He had just watched his
only real friendship shatter and die.
   When the door to Room 3027 opened and Farley stuck his head into the
corridor, Skeeter barely noticed.
   "Hey, you. Have you seen a guy named Marcus, about your size, brown hair?"
   Skeeter stared Farley in the eyes and snarled out yet another lie. "No.
Never heard of him."
   Then he headed for the elevators and the nearest joint that served alcohol.
He wanted to feel numb. And he didn't care how much money it took. He closed
his eyes as the elevator whirred silently toward the Neo Edo's lobby.
   How he was going to regain the friendship he'd managed to shatter into
pieces, Skeeter Jackson had no idea. But he had to try. What was the point of
staying on at TT-86, if he couldn't enjoy himself? And with the memory of
Marcus' cold, angry eyes and that wintery voice sinking into his bones, he
knew he would never enjoy another moment in La-La Land unless he could somehow
restore good faith with Marcus.
   He stumbled out of the elevator, completely alone in a lobby crowded with
tourists, and realized that Marcus' anger was infinitely worse than all those
long-ago baseball games where he'd played his heart out, alone, while a father
too busy to bother stayed home and stole money from customers who didn't need
the expensive junk he sold to any sucker he could pin down longer than five
seconds.
   The comparison hurt.
   Skeeter found that nearest bar, ignoring tattooed Yakuza and wide-eyed

japanese businessmen, and got roaring, nastily drunk. Had his luck gone sour?
Was all this a punishment for screwing over-and thus guaranteeing the loss of-
his only friend? He sat there amongst the curious japanese businessmen and
thugs who stared at the gaijin in "their" bar, and wondered bitterly who he
hated worse: His father? Marcus, for pointing out how much Skeeter had turned
out like him? Or himself, for everything he'd done to end up just like the man
he'd grown up despising?
   He found no answers in the japanese whiskey or the steaming hot sake, which
he consumed in such enormous amounts even the japanese businessmen were
impressed, eventually crowding around to compliment and encourage him. A girl
dressed as a geisha-hell, she might have been one, since time terminals could
afford to pay the outrageous salaries their careers demanded-refilled his cup
again and again, attempted vainly to flirt and draw him out with conversation
and silly games the others played with enthusiasm. Skeeter ignored all of it,
utterly. All he wanted was the numbing effect of the booze.
   So he let them talk, the words washing over him like the cutting winds of
the wide, empty Gobi. There might not be any answers in the whiskey, but
alcohol made the emptiness a little easier to bear.
   Three sheets to the wind (a sailing term, Skeeter had discovered years
earlier when his father had taken them on a short cruise so everyone of any
importance would see his new sloop), Skeeter was just about to give into to
drunken stupor when the phone rang. He snagged the receiver, tripping and
knocking over a chair on the way. "Yeah?"
   "Mr. Jackson? Chuck Farley, here."
   Surprise rooted him to the carpet. "Yes?" he asked cautiously.
   "I've been thinking about your offer the other day. About time guiding. You
had a good point. If you're not engaged, I'd like to hire you."
   Skeeter recovered from his surprise gracefully "Of course. What gate did
you have in mind?"
   "Denver."
   "Denver. Hmm..." He pretended to consult a nonexistent guiding calendar
while pulling himself together. "The best time for Denver's just a tad over
two weeks from now, after the Porta Romae makes a complete tour cycle. Yes,
I'm free for that Denver trip."
   "Wonderful! Meet me in half an hour in Frontier Town. We'll discuss
details. There's a little bar called Happy Jack's ..."
   "Yes, I know it. Half an hour? No problem. I'll be there."
   "Good."
   The line clicked dead. Happy Jack's was a wild place, where anything could
happen. Especially to one particular fat money-belt. Skeeter grinned as he
emerged from his apartment.
   Profit, here I cone!
   Happy Jack's bore an enormous wooden sign over the entrance, of dancing,
dueling cowboys shooting at one another's feet. A large glass window was
painted in bright Frontier Town colors, as well, proclaiming the bar's name in
red, blue, and garish gold. Skeeter pushed open the Hollywood-style saloon
doors and entered the raucous establishment, where a piano player was already
busy pounding out tunes popular in Denver-the lyrics of which would've given
the NAACP a collective fit of apoplexy. Many of those popular old tunes, heard
and bellowed in dance halls and saloons from New York to San Francisco during
the 1880s, were not flattering to the darker races.
   There was a running war between uptime delegations and Frontier Tar owners
over the playing of those songs, but no resolution was in sight. So the
pianists played on, accustoming patrons to what they'd actually hear downtime-
shocking, crude, racist, and all. Skeeter figured it beat having some uptime
type throw a fit in the real downtime Denver, were more modern attitudes
publicly and forcefully expressed would get a tourist into hot water fast.

   Skeeter shook his head. Some folks just didn't get it. Human beings weren't
nice, given half a chance not to be. If crusaders with legitimate gripes
wanted to fix things, getting into legal wrangles with station bar owners
wasn't the way to do it. Couldn't change the past, no matter what you did, and
the bar keepers were just doing their part to acclimatize customers, after
all. Crusaders needed to stay uptime and pour their resources into causes that
might actually do some good: like raising the level of education for uptimers
of all colors and breeds of human being. Same went for those enviro-nuts who
wanted to go downtime and save the environment. Besides, it was plain wrong to
murder a bunch of downtime commercial hunters and loggers for doing what their
time thought perfectly normal.
   For a half-wild, adopted Yakka Mongol, Skeeter just couldn't figure out
what was so horrible about taking a good, long, clear-eyed look at one's past
and facing whatever one found in it. Making up the past to fit whatever idea
some politically correct group wanted to pass off as reality this week seemed
a lot more dangerous to him than facing brutal facts, but then, he was just a
half-wild, adopted Yakka Mongol in his innermost heart. What did he know from
social theory and uptime politics?
   Chuck Farley was there ahead of him, sitting at a table near the front and
sipping whiskey. Skeeter smiled his best and slid into a chair. Above the roar
of piano and human voices, he said, "Evenin' pardner."
   Chuck smiled slowly. "Evenin'. Have a drink with me?"
   "Don't mind if I do."
   Farley signaled the waiter. A moment later, Skeeter was sipping some fine
whiskey. Ahh ... "Now. You wanted to plan a trip to Denver?"
   Farley nodded. "What I really need is an experienced time guide to set up
my trip and show me the ropes before I go through the gate."
   "Well sir, then I'm your man. But my fee is high."
   Farley reached into a coat pocket and extracted a bulging envelope. "Half
of this is yours before we leave, half when we get back."
   "You realize, sir, that tickets to the Denver Gate go quickly; we'll need
to purchase them right away." Skeeter half hoped that Farley would hand over
the money right then.
   Instead, Farley put the envelope back and said, with the air of a man
relieved not to have to bother with petty details, "I'll leave it to you, who
knows the ropes, to make arrangements, then."
   Skeeter grinned philosophically. "Sure thing. Where and when shall we meet
next?" If this envelope was only a fraction of what Farley carried in that
undeclared money belt, Skeeter would soon be a rich man.
   Farley named a spot off the Commons in a quiet corridor near the Epicurean
Delight. "We'll meet there in, say, an hour?" Farley added.
   "I'll be there." Skeeter smiled.
   "I'll be lookin' for you, pardner." Farley lifted his glass. "To
adventure."
   Skeeter clinked glasses and drained his whiskey. "To adventure. See you in
an hour." Perfect, he gloated. Just where I want him. Goldie's gone for good.
   He strolled out of the saloon and headed straight to the nearest money
machine. He regretted having to front the ticket money himself, but he figured
he needed to bait his hook with high-class worms to catch a rich fish. He then
made his way to the Wild West Gate Time Tours ticket booth. "Hi, I'd like two
spots on the Denver trip two weeks from now."
   "Sure, plenty of tickets left." The woman behind the glass-who knew Skeeter
as well as any long-time 'eighty-sixer-frowned and said, "But let's see the
cash, Jackson."
   He grinned, producing it with a flourish. The woman groaned. "Poor sucker.
I pity him-or her. All right, here are your tickets."
   She stamped generic tickets for the correct departure date and handed them

over. "Don't forget to tell your rube he'll need his time card with him," she
added sarcastically.
   Clearly, she didn't expect Skeeter's supposed victim to make it anywhere
near the Wild West Gate. Skeeter cheerfully blew her a kiss, then headed for
the assignation with Farley behind the Delight. He whistled as he walked,
tickets in his pockets, along with a little remaining cash of his own to buy
supper with. He chuckled midwhistle. After he got possession of that money-
belt, the little bit of his own money he carried would be insignificant by
comparison.
   Dinner at the Delight would be a welcome change from frozen soy patties
with "seared-in" so-called grill patterns to look like beef After the diet
he'd grown accustomed to as a boy, they made him want to gag, but they kept
body and soul together and just now, with the wager on, he couldn't afford
luxuries like real beef in his freezer.
   The corridor behind the Delight was long and deserted at the moment. Bins
and chutes leading to composting rooms and incinerators in the bowels of the
station lined the walls. Skeeter propped his back and the sole of one foot
against the wall, whistling still, and waited. A sound off to his left
distracted him. He glanced down that way-
   Pain exploded through the back of his skull. He went down, knowing he was
hurt, and felt his face connect with a monstrously hard floor. Then a cloth
soaked in foul-smelling liquid covered his nose and mouth. He struggled
briefly, cursing his stupidity and carelessness, but slid inexorably into a
black fog even as hands searched his pockets.
   Then the darkness closed over him and left him inert against the floor.
   When he regained his senses, slowly, with a taste like the Gobi on his
tongue and a sandstorm pounding the insides of his head, Skeeter groaned
softly, then wished he hadn't. Drugged ... He struggled to sit up and nearly
retched, but made it to a sitting position propped more or less against the
wall. Fumbling hands searched, but the tickets and all of his money were
missing. Had Farley rolled him? Or some opportunist amateur new to the
station? Or just as likely-one of Goldie's agents?
   He cursed under his breath, winced, and gingerly touched his throbbing head
He couldn't exactly report this mugging to Bull Morgan, now could he? "Hi, I
was about to scam this uptimer when somebody jumped me with a sap and a
chloroformed rag ... ."
   No, he wouldn't be talking to the Station Manager or anyone else about this
one. Skeeter managed to gain his feet, then slid dizzily back to the floor and
spent several miserable minutes bringing up the contents of his stomach. He
was still coughing and wishing for a glass of water to rinse his mouth when
hasty footsteps ran lightly his way.
   "Skeeter?" a female voice said anxiously.
   He looked up, wondering who she was. He didn't remember seeing her before.
   "Skeeter, you are ill! Oh, Ianira will be so upset! Here, let me help you."
   Her accent pegged her as a downtimer, probably Greek. Legs so wobbly he
could barely stand unaided, he let her guide him through the back corridors to
his own apartment, where she levered him expertly into the shower, stripped
him down, and sluiced lukewarm water over his shivering body to clean up the
mess. He leaned against the tiles, groaning, and pressed gingerly at the
swelling on the back of his head.
   Whoever she was, she reappeared with a towel and helped him out of the
shower, dried him expertly, and got him into a comfortable robe, then assisted
him across the short stretch of floor to his bed. He couldn't have made the
walk unaided. She disappeared again, returning with a glass of liquid.
   "Here. Sip this. It will settle your stomach and ease the pain in your
head."
   He sipped. It didn't taste as bad as he'd expected. Skeeter finished the

glassful, then groaned softly and leaned back into the pillows. She pulled the
covers up over him, switched off the lights, and settled into a nearby chair
to watch over him.
   "Hey," Skeeter mumbled, "thanks."
   "Sleep," she urged. "You have been hurt. Sleep will heal."
   Unable to argue with either her logic or the heaviness stealing across him,
Skeeter closed his eyes and slept.
   Marcus found Lupus Mortiferus in Urbs Romae, skulking near the entrance to
the Epicurean Delight. The gladiator's eyes widened when Marcus charged right
toward his place of concealment. He thrust his hand into the box of money he'd
so carefully saved up and yanked out a fistful of coins from a bag that
matched the amount Skeeter had given him.
   "Here. This is yours."
   Lupus took the wad of heavy pouch without comment, just staring at him. He
glanced down at the money, then back at Marcus. "What has happened?"
   Marcus laughed, a bitter sound that widened Lupus' eyes. "I have discovered
an ugly truth, friend. I am a very great fool. The man who stole from you gave
me that money. I thought he had won it fairly, betting at the Circus. Why I
thought that, when he has never done an honest day's work in his life ... "
   Lupus caught him by the shirt. "Who is he? Where is he?"
   For just an instant, Marcus almost answered. Then he jerked loose. "Where?"
The laughter was even more bitter than before. "I don't know. And I don't
care. Probably out trying to steal from someone else gullible enough to call
him friend. As to who he is ... I have given hospitality. My woman and my
children are in hiding and now I do not have enough money to repay the debt of
my purchase price to the man who brought me here. And thief and scoundrel
though he may be, I have called him friend. You mean to kill him. You will
have to discover him yourself, Wolf."
   Goldie's network of contacts paid off. Specifically, a brilliant, impudent
downtimer aged about fifteen, known to everyone in La-La Land as simply
"Julius" had been the one to hit paydirt. Goldie sat down on a bench in
Victoria Station, where the Britannia Gate would be cycling soon. According to
Julius, all she had to do was wait. People strolled past three and four times
as they explored the brilliantly decorated Holiday La-La Land-and Victoria
Station had pulled out the stops in the annual competition, hoping to regain
respect again after that enormous raptor of some sort had crashed through and
fallen five stories, only to land with smashing force on cobblestones,
wrought-iron benches, even smashing over a dainty street lamp with etched
glass in its multiple panes. She hoped they took the prize money with a
thousand points between them and their nearest competitor.
   Goldie shook off too many memories and watched intently the tourists taking
in the exuberant display, complete with a Victorian kid-sized railroad that
began at Victoria Station and quickly picked up steam to circle the entire,
lavishly decorated Commons. Many parents had vidcams with them to record
junior or their darling little miss, eyes aglow and their laughter sparkling
like Christmas bells.
   Goldie snorted under her breath. Truth was, she hated children as much as
she hated that tinkle-winkle noise of thinly silver-plated brass bells.
   Goldie shrugged. She couldn't help being cynical. She'd seen it all before,
year in and year out, as relatively poor uptimers with their big families took
advantage of the special "one-cycle-pass" tickets to step through Primary and
absorb as much of the holiday spirit as possible in the Wonderland of La-La
Land before the Primary cycled again. But she'd put up a few requisite lights
and bows around her shop and counted it time wasted. And speaking of time
wasted...
   Where was Skeeter's Nemesis?
   Ordering herself to remain patient and seem the very picture of innocence,

she sat regally on her bench in Victoria station, watching the crowds surge
past, many pausing to take pictures of overhead decorations. Goldie noted they
were tattered a bit in places by the prehistoric birds and pterosaurs that
tended to roost in the girders.
   One camera-bedecked geek got more than he had bargained for. An offering
from one of the leather-winger screechers above splattered hideous across
camera lens and body, the photographer's , the eye not on the eyepiece, both
cheeks, mouth and chin, never mind the mess running down into his hair.
Laughter, most of it sympathetic, with the delighted, devilish kind coming
from the kids in their mothers' tow, broke out across Victoria Station.
   Goldie, chuckling along with everyone else, almost missed him. A pair of
cow-chaps caught her attention. Her field of visual acuity narrowed as she
looked this man over. Someone staying in the Wild West section, out to see the
rest of the station's gilt offerings. Oddly enough, he wasn't laughing with
the rest. Then he turned and Goldie looked straight into his face. Ahh ...
yes, that was him, all right. The dark scowl, the shock of short-cut reddish
hair, the play of muscles as he moved, all confirmed the identity of the man
with the knife. Just where he was sleeping was not immediately obvious; he
looked tired, like a man who hasn't eaten enough in the past few days, and
somehow frustrated. She didn't know his name yet-but this very much the worse-
for-wear gladiator was going to solve all of Goldie's problems and rid Time
Terminal 86 of that weasel Skeeter Jackson forever.
   With a wave of her hand, Goldie signaled. Two very large, very muscular
downtimers in her employ casually moved in, then grasped the astonished
gladiator's arms-pinning them behind him (probably a career record for sudden,
brutal defeat)-then steered him over to Goldie. A moment later, a young lad
slid across the cobblestones on in-line skates, sending showers of sparks as
he moved on the sides of his wheels rather than the bottoms. He did an
impressive sliding stop on the bench rail, earning admiring looks from uptime
kids on a tighter leash.
   Born showman, Goldie thought. It was a very good thing that he'd ended up
adopted by that downtimer couple Goldie'd run into. The pair had been running
from taxes they couldn't pay and, in their terrified flight from slavers,
accidentally ran straight through the Porta Romae into La-La Land. They'd had
coins she'd been able to "help" them with.
   "That him?" he asked.
   "Yes," Goldie said, ginger-honey in her voice. `Would you please tell him
that all I want is to talk to him about what he wants most. Tell him if he
will make a promise not to run, I will deliver his enemy into his hands."
   Young Julius spoke, his Latin pure and flawless, in a quiet, dignified
manner that would have pleased even Claudius himself. (Goldie suspected
Imperial Blood in him, because he hadn't been left on the city's heap of dung
to be taken into adoption or, far more often-slavery, but had been exposed,
instead, outside the gates of the Imperial palace, with a little placard
around his neck that read, "So all shall know, this is Julius, son of a
concubine who has died in childbirth. It is fit that her issue die also.")
Goldie watched the gladiator's face as Julius translated her offer. His
expression changed drastically in the space of five seconds. First,
incredulity, closely followed by suspicious disbelief, then his glance darted
this way and that, searching for nonexistent station security squads, from
that to puzzlement, and finally very cautious acceptance of the truly odd
situation in which fate had placed him.
   "Please, Julius, ask our guest to sit beside me."
   Julius didn't particularly get along well with the plebeian parents who'd
raised him he found them clinging and mindless-but he thanked all the gods for
having landed them here. He absorbed more in one day in La-La Land than he'd
ever learned from his adoptive parents. They didn't want to adjust (Jupiter

forgive them if they attempted something new and radical, like flipping on a
lightswitch rather than filling the apartment with smoke from candles and
lanterns scattered here and there, too dim to see much of anything except
shadows dancing on the wall).
   Goldie Morran drew him out of deep thought. "Julius, would you be so kind
as to explain to this man the location of the enemy he seeks?"
   Julius grinned. Then turned to the big man beside him and started speaking
rapidly in Latin.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
   Marcus turned on his heel and stalked away, leaving the gladiator to gape
after him. He was aware that Lupus tried to follow, so he dodged through
Victoria Station, only half aware when Julius' Lost and Found Gang hijacked
Lupus Mortiferus' for Goldie Morran, of all people. By the time he returned to
the Neo Edo, Skeeter had abandoned his attempt at theft and had long since
gone. Marcus took the stairs, pounding angrily so the noise echoed up and down
the stairwell, an emerged on the third floor, his meticulously kept records
and depleted money box tucked under one arm.
   "Curse him!" Marcus spat to the empty corridor.
   He pounded on the door to room 3027 with a closed fist and wondered what he
would say to the man whose debt he could not now pay. The door opened with
alacrity. Marcus swallowed hard and faced down the man who'd bought him out of
a filthy, stinking slave pen and brought him, fainting with terror, to La-La
Land.
   "Marcus," the man said with a tiny smile. "Come in."
   He didn't want to go into that room.
   But he stepped across the threshold, fingers white around the metal money
box, And waited. The click of the door closing reached him, then a tinkle of
ice against glass came in the silence. Liquid splashed.
   Marcus recognized the label. His one-time master had a taste for expensive
liquor. He did not, Marcus noted, offer a second glass to him. Cold and angry,
Marcus waited while the man sipped and studied him.
   "You've changed." The Latin rolled off his tongue as neatly as it had that
day in Rome.
   "That is your doing," Marcus replied in English.
   One brow rose toward a greying hairline. "Oh?"
   Marcus shrugged in that Gallic gesture which had survived the centuries.
"You brought me here. I have listened and learned. I know the laws which
forbid slavery and the laws which forbid you to bring men like me into this
world."
   Dark eyes narrowed.
   "I owe you money," Marcus went on doggedly, "for repayment of the coin you
spent for my purchase. But your slave I am not. This is La-La Lang. Not Rome."
   He dropped the record books on the bed. "There are the notes you sought.
Men who traveled with the zipper jockeys to the brothels of Greece and Rome.
Men who returned with the art you seek. Men who did business with Robert Li
when they returned and men who did not."
   He thrust out the money box. "Here is most of what I owe you. In another
few seven-days, I will have earned the rest. If you would tell me your name,"
he allowed sarcasm to creep into his voice, "I will have it sent to you
uptime."
   His former master stood very still for a very long time, just watching him.
Then, slowly, he accepted the money box and set it aside, unopened. "We'll
discuss this later, Marcus. As for my name," a brief smile touched mobile lips
without reaching dark, watchful eyes, "it's Chuck. Chuck Farley. At least," he
chuckled hollowly, "it is today. Tomorrow..." He shrugged. "Let's see those
records of yours, shall we?"

   He held out a hand for them.
   Marcus, torn between the desire to stand his ground and the hope that his
one-time master understood and would reasonable about the arrangements for the
rest of the money, hesitated. Then slowly picked up the record books and
handed them over.
   "Ahh ..." Chuck Farley settled into a chair and flipped on a light, sipping
whiskey and poring over Marcus' notations, making occasional comments that
meant nothing to Marcus. "Very interesting. Hmm, now I wonder-of course." And
he laughed, darkly. Marcus fought a shiver. Farley read through each book
before glancing up again. "You've done very well, Marcus. I am impressed by
your eye for detail and the thoroughness of your notes." He gestured with the
glass toward the ledger books. Ice cubes tinkled like bones against the glass.
"Now, as for the other matter, let's just see how much you have left to pay
off, shall we?"
   He opened the money box at last and counted out everything Marcus owned-and
almost every bit of what Ianira had earned. They'd kept back just enough to
buy food for the children.
   Farley whistled softly. "You managed to save all this while keeping a roof
over your head on the terminal? I'm impressed again." His glance was full of
smiles this time. Marcus repressed a shiver. "Here." He shoved the metal box
aside and found another glass, poured whiskey for them both, this time. "We'll
celebrate, shall we? Your emancipation. Yes, we'll drink to your emancipation.
You should be able to earn the balance in no time."
   Marcus accepted the glass automatically. In truth, he felt a little numb,
unsure what to think or believe.
   "In fact, you could discharge the rest of that debt in one little job,
tonight."
   Whiskey untouched, Marcus just waited. Farley smiled. "Drink. This is a
celebration."
   He drank. The whiskey burned his throat. He managed just barely-not to
cough. Whiskey, of any kind, was not something his palate was accustomed to,
despite the amount of it he dispensed to others in the course of a week.
   Chuck Farley-or whoever he really was-was speaking. He tried to pay full
attention, despite the heat and disconcerting dizziness spreading rapidly
through him.
   "Now. I'm heading through the Porta Romae tonight to do some art
collecting. I have quite a bit of baggage with me and I don't want to leave it
behind. Things always manage to get stolen from luggage left in the care of a
hotel." His smile sent a shiver down Marcus' overheated back. "Hmm ... I'll
tell you what we'll do. Act as my porter tonight, help me get all that baggage
to the inn, and we'll call the debt even. I know downtimers work as porters
all the time. I'd save myself a good bit of money, if you agree, and you'd be
out of debt." His eyes twinkled, but darkly, like black diamonds.
   Farley was smiling, now, while the whiskey sank into Marcus' veins. Farley
refilled his glass. "Drink up, Marcus! We're celebrating, remember?"
   He drank, feeling the burning heat sink into his belly and spread like
dizzy fire through his whole body. His head whirled. Return to Rome? The very
thought terrified him so badly his hand, unsteady around the glass, sloshed
expensive liquor on to even more expensive carpet. He drank just to empty the
full glass and spare Kit Carson's cleaning bill.
   Actually return to Rome? But it would be a quick, simple way to discharge
the remainder of his debt.
   Carry a few bags through the Porta Romae, then return free of debt to the
woman he loved and the children they had made together. It sounded so simple.
Farley was smiling and chatting easily, now, refilling his glass, urging him
to sit down, drawing him out about the men in his dry, factual notes. Marcus
found himself talking about them, about the sexual art they had smuggled

through for rich, uptime collectors greedy for rare, explicitly sexual items
in pottery, stone, and ivory. Frankly, Marcus didn't understand the fuss. He'd
grown up with so much of it around him, it was like walking past Connie
Logan's and seeing the familiar figure in wildly mismatched clothes she was
trying on for fit.
   With Farley drawing him out, he talked and drank and through a haze of
whiskey, heard himself agree to the bargain over his debt. Porter for a trip
to Roma for complete freedom of debt. His honor was satisfied. But he couldn't
help wondering if he'd made a bargain with the gods of the underworld
themselves.
   "Good! Very good." Farley glanced at his watch. "Just another hour, or so,
and the gate will be cycling. We'd better get into costume, eh? I'll expect
you back here in, say, fifteen minutes?"
   Marcus found himself nodding dumbly, then stumbled into the hall and made
his unsteady way down and down still farther to his empty apartment. He still
had the tunic and sandals of his first days on the station, tucked away in a
box at the back of the closet. They felt alien against his skin. He left the
fringed shirt Ianira had given him sprawled across the bed, along with a note
in an unsteady hand, leaving word of where he was going and why, then-garbed
as a Roman of the poorest, most abused classes returned resolutely to the Neo
Edo.
   In an hour, he would be free of all debt and obligation to the man calling
himself Chuck Farley. He knocked on the door to Room 3027 and quietly
collected the man's bags, following silently to the brightly lit Commons and
the crowded waiting area surrounding the great Porta Romae.
   "Wait here," Farley told him. "I have some money to exchange."
   Marcus just nodded, standing guard over the bags as told. He wondered where
Ianira was, wished he could tell her everything was turning out fine, after
all, then noticed that Farley disappeared in the direction of Goldie Morran's
shop. He considered warning the man against her, then shrugged. Farley clearly
knew what he was doing. Exhausted, head still befuddled from the whiskey he'd
swallowed, Marcus simply waited for Farley's return and the end of the coming
ordeal.
   Chuck Farley wasn't his real name, but it was admirably suited to his line
of work-and sense of humor. Chuck was close enough.
   He hid a smile, looking forward to the little scene about to unfold.
Passing through the Urbs Romae section of the terminal, he paused to change
clothing in a men's room, slipping into a custom-made harness arrangement
under uptime clothes and stuffing his Roman disguise of tunic and toga into a
shoulder satchel, then sought out the shop of that appalling, purple-haired
gargoyle of a money changer. He entered as quietly as an owl on the hunt for a
particularly delectable mouse.
   The gargoyle glanced up from another customer. Goldie beamed at him. Chuck
smiled politely back and waited, laughing inside already.
   Ah, what joy it was, setting up someone who thought themselves a pro ....
She finished hastily with the other customer, all but shoving him out the door
in her greed.
   "Mr. Farley, what a lovely surprise! Have you reconsidered?"
   Chuck allowed himself a small smile. "Not precisely." He reached into the
satchel holding his Roman garments and extracted from a side pocket the bait.
"I wanted to discuss this with you." He rubbed the back of his neck as though
self-conscious. "I was told you were the expert on such things." With well-
practiced deference, he handed over a faded newspaper clipping.
   Eyes glancing curiously from his face to the bit of paper, Goldie Morran
scanned what he'd handed her. Avarice gleamed for a lovely instant. Hook,
line, and sinker.
   "Well, that is most interesting," Goldie Morran said with a slight clearing

of her throat. "This is legitimate?"
   "I assure you, it is. I'm something of an amateur historian and I was
tracing some of my family's history. I came across this in my uptime
researches into the Gold Rush in Colorado. Imagine my surprise." It came out
droll enough to cause Goldie to laugh. He smiled and gestured to the newspaper
clipping. "There I am, preserved for posterity, standing over the gold mine I
discovered, while some primitive cameraman takes my photograph for the folks
back home." He chuckled. "So, you see, I have this opportunity-destiny?-and
all I require to fulfill it is a grubstake to purchase the blasted bit of
ground."
   "Ahh ..." Goldie smiled and beckoned him to a comfortable seat on the
customer side of her counter. "You'll be wanting to exchange uptime currency
for American currency of the proper type for the Wild West Gate, then?"
   "Exactly. I'll need a lot of money downtime to buy the camping gear, mining
equipment, horses, and so on, to develop the mine quickly and make me seem
legitimate. And you understand I don't want to exchange such a large sum of
money officially-the ATF is suspicious, you know."
   Goldie chuckled unexpectedly. "No wonder you weren't interested in any of
my suggested investments. You had your own nicely arranged. Very clever, Mr.
Farley." She wagged a talon at him. "How much did you have in mind to
exchange?"
   "A hundred thousand."
   Goldie Morran's eyes widened.
   "I did bring the cash," he added with a small smile.
   "All right. A hundred thousand. I'll see what I have. There will, of
course, be a small transaction fee included in the exchange rate."
   "Oh yes, I quite understand," Farley reassured her.
   She walked down the counter and opened up a locked drawer. She returned
with a large wad- of oversized bank notes and a handful of gold and silver
coins.
   He then dutifully unbuckled the money belt under his uptime clothing and
counted out a hundred thousand-dollar bills. Goldie's eyes gleamed. She
swiftly counted the money he handed to her, and pushed the unwieldy pile of
downtimer money to him.
   The exchange completed, Goldie smiled. "You realize sir, that you'll also
need a good quantity of gold nuggets to take into the assayer's office as
proof of your strike, in order to stake a proper claim."
   Chuck looked taken aback. "I hadn't realized that. But I was told I'd need
at least this much money to buy the new gear in 1885 because of the high
prices during the gold rush. And this is all I have."
   Goldie nodded, reminding Chuck of a cathedral downspout he'd once seen,
come to full and hideous life. "Well, maybe I can help you. As it happens, I
have a good bit of my own assets in the form of gold.
   I'll give you the gold you need to substantiate your claim if you cut me in
for a percentage of your strike. Say about fifty percent?"
   Farley looked eager, then less so when she named the percentage. "Well,
that seems a bit steep. How about twenty percent? After all, I did find it."
   "Yes, but without my gold, you'll have to spend a lot of back-breaking,
sweaty work just to rush into town to make your claim before the gate closes.
Then you'll have to get back to your mine, wasting time that could be devoted
to getting more gold out of the ground."
   "True enough. Hmm, how about fifty percent and you agree to exchange my
share of the gold dust I bring back without charging your usual fee?"
   "Done, sir."
   She dove into back room and after a short time came back with a rolling
cart on which were piled small sacks with odd lumps sticking through the
cloth. She pulled out a set of scales and calibrated weights from a shelf

underneath the counter, and sat down.
   "Now, mostly what I have is dust, but there are a few nuggets," she said
with a smile. "This should be enough to convince the assayer about your
strike." She set up the scales carefully, filling one side with brass weights
designated in troy ounces. She opened a sack and tipped gold into the other
pan until the scale read level. "At the current rates of exchange, that's a
hundred dollars."
   She was lying-it was actually more like thirty-five. Chuck said
diffidently, "Er, isn't that a bit light?"
   "Oops, sorry, these are the ones I reserve for the zipper jockeys. Let me
get the real ones." She opened a drawer behind her, and pulled out another set
of counterweights, and continued measuring out hundredweight's until she'd
finished with the pile. It was a big pile.
   "You probably think it's odd that I happen to keep this much gold around.
But I went through the big crash after the Accident, and I don't trust banks,
not anymore."
   Chuck rubbed the side of his nose and murmured sympathetically. "My dear
lady, you are a life saver. A fortune saver," he added with a small laugh.
"But I still have one problem." He gestured to the bags of dust and nuggets
laid out across the top of the counter. "I can't very well go walking through
the Wild West Gate with that in plain sight. I've got to look like someone
who's been in the field for months, accumulating it. Do you have a period-
style leather satchel, perhaps, that I could carry everything in?"
   Goldie smiled in what she probably considered her most winsome manner. "I
have just the thing. A set of saddlebags brought uptime by one of my agents,
for you, no charge. I'll just go and get them."
   She vanished into the back of her shop yet again.
   Chuck was tempted to steal back his bills, just lying there on the counter,
but he didn't want to risk being arrested when he came back. His fake ID was
good but why take unnecessary chances? Besides, getting caught by his boss for
his little extracurricular activities on TT-86 would be bad for his health.
Permanently.
   He and Goldie concluded their business with a handshake, and Farley headed
for the nearest public restroom to ditch his clothes, settle the heavy bags of
gold into his carrying harness, and don his toga for the Roman gate. He
rejoined Marcus, who waited quietly with his luggage. He smiled at the younger
man, then headed up the ramp with the other tourists.
   By the time Goldie discovered the scam and reported it, he'd be long gone.
Chuck laughed aloud, softly, drawing a curious look from the slave he'd
purchased all those years ago. Yes, he'd have given a great deal to see the
look on her face under all that purple hair. Amateurs. Still chuckling, he
slid his time card with its fake identification into the reader, had his
departure time and date duly logged, and gestured to Marcus. The young man
hoisted the baggage and followed silently through the gaping portal in the
concrete wall of Time Terminal Eighty-Six.
   Unable to leave his apartment, he felt so ill, Skeeter-in looking for ways
to make some illegal profit during his convalescence, hit quite suddenly on
the answer. Something Marcus had once said brought new inspiration when
Skeeter needed it most. He was still hung over and hurting, a particularly
nasty throb where Farley had struck the back of his skull. Or whoever it had
been. He was also, however, running out of time. So he quietly bought up a
supply of small glass bottles, corks, and paper labels from various
outfitters, ordering them over the computer and asking to have them delivered
immediately to his apartment. When everything arrived, Skeeter got busy,
diligently gluing handwritten labels onto each filled, corked bottle of
tapwater, tinged just slightly with a drop of ink. The longer he counted the
potential profits to be had in the patent medicine business, the more cheerful

he grew, despite headache and hangover from too much alcohol combined with too
much chloroform. Each label exclaimed in gorgeous, "antique" script (Skeeter
could, among other odd skills, forge just about any signature he'd ever seen):
MIRACLE WATER-DIRECT FROM DOWNTIME IMPORTER! FAMOUS SPRINGS OF CAUTERETS! OWN
A BOTTLE OF MYSTIC HISTORY FROM GALLIA COMATA, AD 47! A THOUSAND PASSIONATE
NIGHTS GUARANTEED WITH ANCIENT WORLD'S MOST SOUGHT-AFTER LOVE POTION
   He hadn't spent much and the uptime tourist crowd was just as gullible as
any nineteenth-century Iowa farmer. The descendants of twentieth-century new
ager crystal mystics, in particular, ought to be "medicine show" pushovers. As
Ianira Cassondra's little booth on the Commons had proved, they'd buy anything
even moderately wacky-particularly if he hinted that the stuff had not only
been bottled in Gallia Comata, but that the water from the famous spring
actually bubbled up from the sacred rivers of lost Atlantis. He pasted another
label, wondering how much he could get per bottle? Ten? Twenty? Fifty? Shucks,
some fools might go as high as a hundred.
   Gingerly humming a little ditty Yesukai the Valiant's aged mother had
taught him, the tune warlike and lighthearted, Skeeter was as happy as any
exiled Yakka tribesman in a lot of pain could be. He had several bottles left
to label when someone buzzed his doorbell frantically. Curious, he peered
through the peephole.
   "Huh?" Skeeter opened to the door to find Ianira Cassondra outside his
apartment, literally wringing her hands in the folds of a pretty, Ionic-style
chiton. "Ianira! What are you doing here?"
   He ushered her in, shocked by the tears sparkling on pale cheeks and ashen
lips. The door clicked softly behind him, the latch catching, but he was so
distracted he didn't bother with the deadbolt. Ianira had clutched at his arm.
   "Please, you must help him!"
   "Who? Ianira, what's happened?"
   "Skeeter, he's going with that terrible man, and I don't trust him, and
it's your fault he's going at all-"
   "Whoa, slow down. Now. Who's going where?"
   "Marcus! To Rome!" The words were torn from her.
   Skeeter blinked. "Rome? Marcus is going to Rome? That's crazy. Marcus would
never go back to Rome."
   Her nails dug painfully into his arm. "His cursed master came back! You
know his pride, his determination to pay that man his purchase cost, to be
free of the debt!"
   Skeeter nodded, wondering what on earth had happened. "He should've had
plenty, I'd think. I mean, I know the new baby was expensive, and all, and
what with little Artemisia getting so sick from the fever that idiot tourist
brought back they had to quarantine her, but there's that bet money I gave
him-"
   "That's just it!" she cried. Her nails drew blood. "He found out how you
got it and gave it back!"
   "He ... gave it back?" Skeeter's voice hit a squeak. "You mean ... he just
gave it back?" Then: "Oh, shit, that means he knows how to find that maniac
that's been-"
   "Yes, yes," Ianira said impatiently, "Lupus had been staying with us,
because he needed help and we didn't know it was you who had stolen the money
he needed to start a new life away from the blood and the killing!" Harsh
accusation rasped along Skeeter's nerves. After that fight with Marcus, this
new accusation felt like Ianira had just dumped a whole shaker of salt into an
open wound.
   "Okay, I really screwed up with that gladiator. I've known that a while,
Ianira, and I'm sorrier than you know. But, what does that have to do with
Marcus going to Rome?"
   Ianira gave out a strangled sound like a sob. "How can you be so blind?

That man came back, the one who bought him. Marcus didn't have quite enough
money to pay him back. Not after all the medical bills. So Marcus agreed to
carry his luggage to Rome to finish paying off the debt."
   Skeeter relaxed. "Is that all? He'll be back, then, in a couple of weeks,
free and clear."
   "No, he won't!" Petite little Ianira, snarling like an enraged wolverine,
backed Skeeter into a corner. He'd seen that look in a woman's eyes before-
more than once and usually when Yesukai's new bride had vented her temper on
some hapless victim in her imprisoning bridal yurt.
   "Can't you see it, idiot?" Ianira demanded, raising the fine hairs on his
neck and arms. "He's made Marcus keep records of certain people who come and
go. The man who calls himself Farley, a name which does not match the soul-
darkness in his eyes, steals things, downtime. Expensive things. Artwork. Some
of it sexual and very rare. Once they're in Rome, Marcus will be just another
expendable bit of profit to be auctioned off! That horrible Farley man has
tricked him. I can feel it-and I was trained in such arts nearly three
thousand years before you were born!"
   A touch of coldness settled in Skeeter's belly. Chuck Farley was Marcus'
old master? That put a whole, new-and utterly terrifying--wrinkle on the
situation. After his own experience with Chuck Farley, Ianira had to be right.
Hell, Ianira was never wrong. The lump on the back of his head still ached,
making rational thought nearly impossible. Torn by helplessness, he asked
quietly, "What do you want me to do? I can't afford the price of a ticket to
Rome."
   Dark eyes flashed rage. "You mean you can't and still save enough to win
your horrible wager!"
   Skeeter groaned. That damnable wager, again. "Ianira, the man kidnapping
Marcus robbed me, of almost everything I had left. And Brian Hendrickson is
holding every red cent of what I've accumulated for that stupid wager."
   "So steal it back. Before it's too late! There are still a few minutes
before the Porta Romae opens! Marcus is in line, Skeeter, looking confused and
scared, just standing there guarding that miserable man's luggage." Her nails
dug even deeper into his arm. Skeeter winced.
   "I've got The Found Ones out there, but we don't have the money between us,
and he won't listen to them if he can't pay off that debt. Please, Skeeter, he
is your friend. Help him!
   "I-" He stopped. He didn't have many resources at the moment and if he were
going to stop Marcus from stepping through the Porta Romae, he'd have to come
up with some fast cash to pay off Farley before the gate opened. "Oh, hell!"
   He switched on his computer and searched out the listing he needed, then
picked up the telephone and dialed. The elderly Nally Mundy answered a bit
testily.
   "Yes, yes, hello?"
   "Dr. Mundy? It's Skeeter Jackson. I-I know you're going to think this is a
scam, because of that damned wager I made with Goldie, but a friend of mine,
Marcus, the bartender from Rome, he's in trouble and I need money to keep him
from doing something stupid. Dangerous and stupid. If-if you still want to do
that interview with me about Yesukai and the Khan's boyhood," he swallowed
hard, "I'll do it. I swear. And Ianira Cassondra's here to witness it."
   A long silence at the other end ticked away precious seconds. "Put her on
the phone, Skeeter."
   Ianira took the instrument and spoke rapidly to the elderly historian--in
Archaic Greek. Then she handed the telephone back to Skeeter.
   "Very well, young rascal. I should probably be committed to an asylum for
such folly, but I'll authorize the transfer. You can pick up the money from a
cash machine in five minutes. If you cheat me on this one, Skeeter Jackson, I
swear to you I will make certain. you get tossed off this station into the

highest security uptime prison I can land you in!"
   Skeeter winced. He'd pledged his word-and besides, the elderly and utterly
harmless Dr. Nally Mundy was an 'eighty-sixer. "Thank you, Dr. Mundy. You
don't know what this means."
   If he could just get to the Porta Romae departure line with that money in
time ...
   The door imploded.
   Skeeter swung around, shocked, even as Ianira gasped with fright. Lupus
Mortiferus stood in the shattered remains of his door, face flushed with
murderous anger.
   "Now," he growled in Latin, "now we will settle accounts!"
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
   The unnatural quiet, broken at regular intervals by a high, beeping sound,
convinced Goldie she was neither in her shop nor her apartment. Confused,
disoriented, she turned her head- and found an IV bottle hanging near her head
and a heart monitor beeping softly beside her. The slight movement tugged at
monitor leads placed at seeming random about her torso. Then Rachel Eisenstein
came into her frame of view and smiled.
   "You're awake. How do you feel?"
   "I-I'm not sure. What am I doing in the infirmary'
   "You don't remember?"
   Goldie frowned, but nothing came back to explain this.
   "You collapsed in the library. Brian thought you were dead, started
hollering for help." Rachel smiled. "I was afraid you'd had a heart seizure or
a stroke, but it seems you simply fainted for some reason."
   Fainted? Why in the world would she have...
   Memory returned, shocking and brutal. Farley had conned her. There was no
such mine-the article had been a fake.
   Rachel uttered a little cry and fumbled for something, then injected it
into Goldie's IV lead. The room stopped spinning as drowsiness tucked itself
around her awareness like a woolly blanket, but memory remained, harsh and
inescapable.
   Rachel had found a chair. "Goldie?"
   She managed to look up.
   "Goldie, what is it? What happened?"
   She started to laugh, high-pitched and semi-hysterical. Laughter gave way
to hiccuping sobs as the reality of her loss sank in. Nearly her entire life's
savings, gone. All of it, except for a few coins and the odd gem or three.
And, thank God, her precious parakeets, which were safe at her apartment.
She'd have to raise cash to live on by selling what little was left-except for
her beautiful birds, which she'd sell only after she'd sold everything else
she possessed-including her soul. She found herself blurting it all out
between sobs, mortified yet strangely comforted when Rachel eased her up and
put both arms around her, letting her cry it out. By the time she'd told it
all, Goldie realized that whatever Rachel had slipped into that IV line was
more potent than she'd realized. Drained of tears and energy, the drug took
hold with triumphant strength. The last thing she was aware of was Rachel's
hand on hers, comforting. Then she was asleep, face still wet with tears she
hadn't shed in many, many years.
   Skeeter barely had time to think, Aw, nuts ...
   Then the enraged gladiator dove at him. Skeeter lunged across the bed,
scattering labelled and corked bottles as he went. He ducked as the gladiator
threw something. The mirror above his dresser shattered. Skeeter scooped up a
couple of water bottles and hurled them back in the gladiator's general
direction. He heard a meaty smack and a roar of pain and anger, but didn't
wait to see what damage he'd done. He scrambled for the door, shoving Ianira

aside as gently as he could. She shrieked behind him and he heard a loud curse
in Latin, then he was around the corner and running hard.
   Damn.!
   Lupus Mortiferus' voice roared out behind him. The chase was still on. A
swift glance over one shoulder revealed the gladiator, shirt dark and wet with
inkstained water, face contorted with murderous fury, gaining ground. Skeeter
put on a burst of speed and skidded around a corner into the corridor leading
toward Commons. He caught his stride and shot into the midst of a packed crowd
gathered to watch gate departures. He slithered between tourists and 'eighty-
sixers who'd gathered to watch the usual antics of a gate departure unfold.
   Cries of dismay and anger in his wake told Skeeter Lupus was still back
there, dogged as a cursed snow leopard after its favorite prey. Skeeter
vaulted over a cafe table in Victoria Station, startling screams from the
diners and scattering glassware and lunches in several directions. A bull's
roar and more screams accompanied the crash of the whole table. Skeeter raced
and dodged through Victoria station, whipping around iron lamp posts, jumping
park benches whether they were occupied or not, flinging himself past gaping
tourists and residents while his mind raced in several directions at the same
time.
   He had to save Marcus. To do that, he had to get that money and stop Farley
from taking Marcus through the gate. To get the money, he'd have to stop
running. That meant Lupus the Murderous back there would chop him into minced
Skeeter. He skidded into Urbs Romae, splashed straight through a shallow
goldfish pond scattering a flock of Ichthyomises with a flapping of wings and
shrill, toothy screams of protest and risked a glance back.
   Lupus was still coming, inexorable as a Mongolian sandstorm.
   Skeeter passed a cash machine without time to stop.
   Shit! Now what? Maybe he could sprint around the waiting area, double back
somehow, grab the money, and snatch Marcus? Even as the thought formed, the
klaxon for a gate departure sounded.
   "Your attention, please-"
   Skeeter ignored the loudspeakers and concentrated on the crowd waiting to
step downtime to Rome. Maybe if he just burst up to the pair of them and
offered an IOU? Yeah, right. Cash deal or nothing, buddy. Your credit's no
good. It was a bitter pill to swallow. The line had already started to move up
the long ramp as returning tourists exited the gate. Skeeter caught sight of
Marcus, but was too winded to call out. He and Farley were near the front of
the line, almost to the portal already.
   With no time to stop for cash, no breath to call out anything-much less the
deal he'd made with Dr. Mundy-Skeeter did the only thing he could do. He
jumped the roped-off waiting area's steel fence, caught a ramp girder, swung
himself up and around, and landed on his feet next to a Time Tours guide so
shocked she actually screamed. More screams behind him told Skeeter that
Lupus, curse him, was still back there. He put on a burst of speed, clattering
up the steel meshwork ramp, trying to catch up to Marcus before he could step
through the portal.
   "Marcus! Wait!"
   His heart plummeted to his toenails.
   Just ahead of him, Farley and Marcus vanished into the distortion of the
open gate. Skeeter would've sworn in a court of law that Farley had bodily
dragged Marcus through after hearing Skeeter's desperate shout.
   Skeeter had two choices. He could jump off this platform and elude Lupus
yet again, leading him another merry chase through the station, or he could
crash the gate and find a way to get Marcus back through. Time Tours, Inc. was
going to fine him something dreadful.
   Skeeter drew a deep breath and threw himself bodily through the portal. He
landed in the familiar wine shop, momentum hurtling him past shocked tourists.

Skeeter crashed into a rack of stacked amphorae and knocked the whole thing
over. Wine, like foaming seawater against rocks, spread out in rushing waves
across the entire floor. Tourists screamed and tried to dive out of the way.
He couldn't see Farley anywhere in the confusion.
   "Marcus!"
   No familiar voice answered. He grabbed the nearest guide he spotted and
gasped out, "Farley! Where'd Farley go with Marcus.
   The man shook his head. "They just left, in the first group. For the inn."
   Skeeter laughed semi-hysterically. "If Farley ends up at the inn, I'll eat
your shoes."
   He was just about to dodge into the street when, a heavy hand closed on his
shoulder. Someone spun him around with brutal force. Screams of panic rose all
around. Lupus Mortiferus' visage loomed enormous in Skeeter's vision. He had
just enough time to think, "Oh, shit-"before a massive fist and darkness
crashed down.
   Sights and smells overwhelmed Marcus from both past and present the moment
the door to the wine shop's warehouse opened onto the street. A tremble hit
his knees. Farley glanced around.
   "Stop dawdling," he said irritably in Latin.
   Marcus clutched the man's luggage with sweating hands and followed the rest
of the group toward the Time Tours inn on the far side of the Aventine Hill
from the great Circus. They headed down the Via Appia toward the hulking
edifice of stone bleachers, rising in tiers to the arches high overhead. When
the rest of the group turned left to skirt the Aventine, Farley surprised him
by heading the other way, toward the Capitoline Hill.
   "Mr. Farley-"
   "Be quiet and follow me!" Farley snapped.
   Marcus glanced once at the tour group disappearing into the crowd. Then,
hesitantly, he followed Farley. He'd given his word. And he needed to clear
this debt. But the longer they walked, passing the Capitoline Hill and moving
through the great Forum, where the rostrum towered with its glittering
trophies of war, the battering rams of ships taken in battle, the greater grew
Marcus' sense of wrongness.
   "Mr. Farley, where are you going?" he asked in English as they left behind
the Forum.
   "To a place I've arranged," Farley answered carelessly.
   "What place?"
   Farley glanced over his shoulder. "You ask too many questions," he said,
eyes narrowed.
   Marcus stopped dead in the street, setting down the man's bags. "I believe
I'm entitled."
   Farley's mouth twitched at one corner. "You? Entitled?" He seemed to think
this outrageously funny. "Hand me that bag. That one."
   Marcus stooped without thinking, handing it over automatically. Farley
opened it
   And the next thing Marcus knew, his face had slammed into a brick wall and
Farleys fist into his left kidney. He gasped in agony and felt his knees begin
to go. Farley held him up with a fist twisted through his tunic. The next
moment, Marcus' hands were manacled in iron chains.
   "Now listen, boy," Farley hissed in his ear, "you're not in La-La Land any
longer. This is Rome. And I am your master. I paid good, goddamned gold for
you and I intend to do with you as I see fit. Is that clear?"
   Marcus tried to struggle, knowing even as he did that any fight was
hopeless. Farley put him on the ground with another punch to his kidney. He
groaned and lay still at the man's feet.
   "Get up."
   Marcus fought to catch his breath.

   "I said get up, slave!"
   Marcus glared up at him through a mane of fallen hair across his eyes.
"Bastard!"
   "Get up, slave, or l'll have you branded as a runaway"
   Marcus blanched. The letter F burnt into his cheek ... He struggled and
lurched, but finally made it to his feet. Curious onlookers shrugged and
returned to their business. Farley fastened a long rope to Marcus' chains,
then signaled to a couple of idle fellows at a wine stall, their sedan chair
leaning against the wall.
   "You, there! Is your chair for hire?"
   "It is, noble sir," the broader of the two said eagerly, setting aside a
chipped earthenware mug of wine. "You have merely to tell us your
destination."
   In a daze of disbelief and growing terror, Marcus watched Chuck Farley
climb into the sedan chair and accept his luggage, which he balanced on his
lap. The porters struggled and grunted to get him airborne and settled onto
their shoulders. "Come here, slave!" Farley snapped. "I don't want you getting
tangled up in traffic and causing me to fall!"
   Marcus stumbled behind the sedan chair, wrists weighted by the heavy cuffs.
Chains clanked with a sound of buried nightmare. He remembered being chained
... chained and worse. Ianira! he cried silently. What have I done, beloved?
If opportunity had presented itself, he would cheerfully have plunged a dagger
through Chuck Farley's black heart. But he knew opportunity would not present
itself.
   The porters carried Farley to an imposing villa, where one of them pounded
on the door. A slave chained to the interior wall of the entryway opened the
door and bowed low, asking their business.
   "Tell your master the man he was told to expect has arrived," Farley said,
his Latin flawless. "With the goods, as promised."
   The slave bowed and passed word to someone deeper in the house. A moment
later, the porters had set down their burden, sweating and gasping for breath
as though they'd just carried five men, rather than one. Farley paid them and
sent them away with a wave of his hand. Then he turned to Marcus, an
unpleasant smile lighting his eyes.
   "This way, if you please, young Marcus. You are about to meet your new
owner."
   He wanted to run. Everything in him shouted the need. But in broad
daylight, with hundreds of Romans to take up the cry "Runaway!" trying to bolt
now was tantamount to suicide. He swallowed down a dry throat. Farley jerked
him off balance with the rope, dragging him forward into the villa. He said in
an ugly whisper, "You'll have to work a few years to pay off this debt, boy."
   Marcus felt sick-sick and trapped. He knew in his soul that no man had the
right to own him, but that was in a world two thousand years away. Here, now,
to gain his freedom and satisfy the law and his sense of honor, he would have
to obtain his purchase price, somehow. Or compromise the values he'd come to
believe in so highly and simply run.
   It was even money at the moment which he would choose.
   Then he was stumbling into the presence of a wealthy, wealthy man. Marcus
actually went down, catching himself on hands and knees. Gods ... He had seen
this man many times, at public functions, on the Rostrum, in the law courts.
Farley was selling him to ...
   "Farlus, welcome! Come in, come in."
   "Your hospitality is gracious, Lucius Honorius Galba. Congratulations, by
the way, on your election to curule aedileship."
   Tremors set in, chattering his teeth. Lucius Honorius Galba had been
elected curule aedile? As powerful as his hated first master had been, Galba
was a thousand times more so. Escape this man? Impossible. Galba glanced down

at him.
   "This?' the man said, disdain dripping from his voice. "This cowering fool
is the valuable scribe you offered for my collection?"
   Farley jerked on the rope. "Get up, slave." He said to Galba, "He didn't
wish to be sold from my household. And he doubtless knows your illustrious
reputation very well." The smile Farley gave Marcus was cool as a lizard's. "I
assure you, he knows his job well. I purchased him some years back when the
estate of one of the plebeian. aediles was being disposed of due to the man's
death. As to the terror, his desire to make a good impression has left him
shaking like a virgin."
   Galba chuckled. "Come, boy, there's nothing to fear. I'm a fair man. Get
up. I have need of a new scribe and your master, here, has offered a fine
trade, a very fine trade. Come, let's see a demonstration of your skills."
   Marcus, hands trembling as Farley unlocked the chains, wet his lips, then
took the stylus and wax tablet handed him.
   "Now," Galba said with a slight smile, "let's see if you can take this down
properly."
   The stylus jittered against the soft wax, but he did his best to take the
dictation, which ranged from a partial letter to a business partner to
household accounts to cargoes and trade sums earned at interest. Galba nodded
approvingly over the result.
   "Not bad," he allowed, "for a man trembling in terror. Not bad at all. In
what capacity did you serve your plebeian aedile, boy?"
   Marcus' voice shook as badly as the rest of him. "I kept records ... of the
races, at the Circus, the inventories of the wild beasts for the bestiary
hunts, and the records of gladiators who won victories and those who did not
... ."
   Memory closed in, harsh and immediate despite the time elapsed since those
days. He heard Galba say,
   I do believe you've brought me a boy who'll settle in nicely. Very well.
The bargain is agreed upon."
   They retired to a small room off the atrium and its splashing fountain.
Chuck Farley and his new master bent over papers, signing their names and
exchanging coins for Marcus' life. A moment later, his new owner had called
for the steward of his house.
   "See to it the new boy is made comfortable, but confined. I want to be
certain he doesn't run at the first opportunity. Now, about the pieces you
wanted in trade..."
   Dismissed entirely from the man's awareness, Marcus stumbled dazedly
between a burly steward and another thickset man who guided him toward the
back of the house. The room they put him in was small and windowless, lit with
a lamp dangling from the ceiling. A shout from the steward brought a collared
slave girl running with a tray of food and rink. Marcus had to hold back a
semi-hysterical laugh. If they thought he could possibly eat now without being
sick.. .
   They left him and the untouched meal alone in his cell, locking the door
from the outside. Marcus sank onto the only piece of furniture, a bed, and
closed his hands into the thin mattress until his fingers ached. The blur of
the alcohol Farley had plied him with was beginning to wear off, leaving him
colder with every passing moment. Light from the oil lamp gleamed against the
sweat on his arms. He felt like screaming, cursing, battering down the door
with the bed .... Instead, with as much calm as he could dredge up from the
depths of his soul, Marcus forced himself to eat and drink what he'd been
given.
   He would need to keep up his strength.
   Marcus was aware that it would be ridiculously easy, in a few weeks' time,
to simply slip away and run for the Time Tours wine shop on the Via Appia.

Everything in him screamed to do just that. Everything except his honor.
   And that honor-the only bit of his parents, his family, his whole village
and the proud tribe of the Taurusates, kinsmen to the great Aquitani
themselves, left to him-demanded he repay the debt of coin his new "master"
had paid for him. Somehow, someday, he would find his way back through the
Porta Romae and hold Ianira in his arms again. It would take years of work to
repay his purchase price and he had no guarantee that beautiful Ianira would
wait. Perhaps he could send a message, somehow, with a Time Tours employee?
How, he didn't have the faintest idea. But he would. And he would get back to
her, somehow. Or die trying.
   Kit Carson was on his way to a business luncheon he'd rather have avoided-
he hated the monthly business meeting of TT-86 hoteliers-which was scheduled
to take place at the Neo Edo's expensive and excellent restaurant this month.
'Eighty-sixers and tourists alike appreciated Kit's kitchen. But these stupid
monthly meetings, where everyone talked, no one did anything, and Kit
invariably sat through, silently fuming ... he'd accomplish nothing except the
loss in revenue to the Neo Edo from a group of men and women more interested
in the delicacies of his kitchen than they were in Guild business.
   Thank God the meetings rotated from one hotel to another, so Kit didn't
suffer too often. He was nearly to the doorway of the Kaiko no Kemushi, the
Silkworm Caterpillar--any form of bug, particularly caterpillars, elicited
greater disgust from japanese than even cockroaches did for Americans, so most
of his japanese customers found the restaurant's name hysterically funny Then
it happened. The miracle he'd been hoping would rescue him from this
interminable luncheon.
   His skull began to buzz in the old, familiar way, but he was
constitutionally certain that no gate was due to open today. He grinned
suddenly, transforming in a blink from serious businessman to imp of mischief
ready for some fun.
   "Unstable gate!" he crowed, racing into the Commons, even as warning
klaxons blared. What would it be this time? Another peek into the late
Mesozoic? No, the buzzing of his skull bones wasn't intense enough for a gate
that big. The eerie, nonsound told him that this would be a smallish gate,
open for who knew how long? Would it cycle several times, then vanish, or set
up a steady, long-term pattern? Where? Kit wondered, having seen everything
from giant pterodactyls to murderous Welsh bowmen stumble through unstable
gates.
   Kit arrived a few instants earlier than Pest Control, with their innocuous
grey uniforms and staunch faces, discontinuity detectors sweeping the whole
area. They also carried rifles, shotguns, and capture nets to be ready for
whatever roared through. Mike Benson and several of his security men raced up
next, followed by a puffing Bull Morgan. Mike looked terrible-eyes bloodshot,
bags under them so dark a purple they looked nearly black, jawline unshaven.
Bull looked sharply at his Chief of Security as well, then snapped out, "Any
ideas?"
   Pest Control's chief, Sue Fritchey, always had a quiet, almost demure air
about her-and it often fooled people. Sue was twice as strong and at least
four times as smart as she generally looked. Kit chuckled silently. There she
stood, looking exactly like a carbon copy of all the other Pest Control
agents. You'd never guess to look at her that she held doctorates in
biological/ ecological sciences, nematological/entomological sciences, had
large- and small-animal veterinary and zoo degrees, and a paleontological
science Ph.D to boot: in both flora and fauna. With a master's in virology
thrown in for good measure.
   Sue Fritchey was very good at her job.
   A shimmering in the air opened ten feet above Time Tours' Porta Romae gate
platform-and about four feet to one side of it. The air shimmered through a

whole doppler range of colors and indescribable motion, then the dark, ever-
shifting edges of an unstable gate slid open. Little yellow-brown things fell
through it, all the way to the concrete floor below, where they smacked with a
bone-cracking sound. A flood followed them, a tidal wave. Kit widened his eyes
when he realized what it was. He laughed aloud. "Lemmings!"
   Pest Control tried desperately to stem the flow at the gate, using nets to
capture and toss back as many as possible while leaning dangerously far over
the rail of Porta Romae's gate platform. For every batch of five or six they
caught and hurled back, twelve or fifteen more got through, falling messily to
their deaths on the now enormous pile of silent, brown-fin-red bodies.
Tourists, aghast at the slaughter, were demanding that Pest Control do
something, it was cruel, inhuman
   Kit interrupted a group of five women dressed in the latest Paris haute
couture, all of them badgering Sue while she tried to direct one group at the
gate, tried to get another squad into position from a different angle, and put
a third squad to work shoveling the bodies into large bags.
   "'Scuse me, ladies," he smiled engagingly, "I couldn't help overhearing
you."
   They turned as one, then lost breath and color in the same moment as they
recognized him. Kit hid a grin. Sometimes world-famous reputations weren't
such a curse, after all.
   "Mr.-Mr. Carson?"
   He bowed. "As I said, I couldn't help but overhear, your conversation." He
drew them adroitly away from Sue Fritchey a few steps at a time and was
rewarded with Sue's preoccupied smile. "Are you ladies by any chance
acquainted with the behavior patterns of the ordinary lemming?"
   They shook their heads in time, well-practiced marionettes.
   "Ah ... let me help you understand. Lemmings are rodents. Some live on the
Arctic tundra, where predators generally keep their populations in check. But
they also live in cold, alpine climates like you'd find in, say, the northern
tip of Norway. Without sufficient predators our sweet little rodents breed out
of control, until they've destroyed their environment, not to mention their
food supply" Five sets of eyes went round. "When that happens--and it does to
many a herd of lemmings, I assure you-then something in their genes or maybe
in their brain structure kicks in and causes them to leave their environment,
sometimes by the thousands. You see, that unknown signal is a warning that
their population has become too large for the land to sustain it. It's as
unstable as that gate up there."
   He pointed, and waited for five sets of shocked eyes to return to him. "So
they leave. Now, the herds that live in very rocky country, with lots of
cliffs, have the perfect suicide mechanism built right into their habitat.
Some of those cliffs drop into deep, jagged valleys. Some shadow a deep,
narrow bay. One full of water," he added, not sure that their collective IQ's
were above those of alive lemming. "And you know what those cute little
buggers do? They run straight for those cliffs, almost as though they knew,
wanted, to throw themselves and their pups over the edge. Those," he pointed
to the avalanche of small rodents still falling through the gate, "have jumped
off a cliff somewhere. They'd be dead already, even if the gate hadn't opened
ten feet over the station floor. You can't change history-or the deep genetics
of certain species. Fool about with their genetic structure, get rid of the
signal-if you could-that triggers the suicidal migrations, and pretty soon
you'd be hip deep in starving lemmings. And there wouldn't be anything green
left for thousands of square miles."
   Round eyes stared at him from pale, pinched faces. He tipped an imaginary
hat and left, humming a delighted tune under his breath. He gave out a short,
humorless bark of laughter, wondering what those five would say when they went
back uptime?

   He then joined the crew sweeping bodies into containers supplied by
shopkeepers and other willing 'eighty-sixers. Kit found himself scooping warm,
still little bodies into an ornate brass wastebasket that could only have come
from the Epicurean. Delight. Kit grinned, then got to business filling it. He
sighed. It was a shame; lemmings were so darned... cute. But their biology and
behaviors were as they were, which meant that on this particular day and time
in La-La Land, Kit Carson was shoveling up hundreds of dead rodents, same as
everybody else on volunteer duty. Really, anything was better than attending
pointless meetings!
   Of all people, Goldie Morran appeared in the crowd, sniffing disdainfully
but eyeing all those lemmings with speculation. What in God's name was she up
to now? Hadn't she been in the infirmary recently? Didn't take her long to
recover. I sometimes think Goldie's too mean to die. She turned on a stilt
heel and sought out Sue Fritchey, who listened intently for a moment, then
nodded impatiently and shook Goldie's hand. The look on Goldie's face as she
tried to figure out where to wipe her hand, covered now with blood and lemming
hair, was priceless. Then, when she leaned over an intent newsie's vidcammer
and cleaned her hand thoroughly while asking him sweet-voiced questions to
distract him from the motions she was making against his back, it was almost
too much to bear.
   In fact, when one film crew caught it on camera, Kit did laugh-but softly
enough Goldie couldn't possibly hear him.
   Whatever she'd wanted, she'd clearly gotten, as she left with a contented
smile on her face. Kit worked his way toward Sue.
   "What'd Goldie want?"
   "Hmm? Oh, hi, Kit. She wanted the skins. Said she'd pay a downtimer to skin
'em and tan the skins for her, then maybe the big sternbergi might take a
fancy to lemming meat. God, I hope so. Have you got any idea what it's going
to smell like, all through the station, if we have to incinerate these little
beasts?"
   Kit shuddered. "Yeah. I got a real good idea."
   She glanced sharply at him. "Oh, damn, I'm sorry, Kit. I was distracted ...
forgot all about that witch's burning you were forced to watch ... ."
   He forced a shrug. "Thanks. I appreciate the apology, but that's one of 'em
I sometimes still wake up screaming over. And it's the smell that lingers with
you, like a spirit as malicious as the goddamned inquisitors who ordered the
burnings in the first place." He cleared his throat and pointed his gaze into
the far distance. "Sue, one of those so-called witches was a little girl,
curly red-blond hair, couldn't have been above two years old, screaming for
her mommy-who was burning on the stake right next to her."
   Sue had squeezed shut her eyes. "I will never, ever again complain about my
job, Kit Carson."
   Kit thumped her on the shoulder. "Go ahead and complain away. Makes me feel
good to hear other people's problems. Not my own."
   Sue swallowed hard, then managed a shaky smile. "Okay, Kit, one helluva big
job complaint, comin' at you. Why the hell are you just standing there in that
bloody three-piece suit? Pick up a goddamned shovel and start shovelin'!"
   Kit laughed, hugged her, then swung his own shovel like a baton, whistling
as he returned to work.
   At last Pest Control hummers with attached sidecars for hauling whatever
needed hauling, pulled up. The cleanup crew dumped their loads into the
hoppers. Kit did the same, then turned back for more.
   Fortunately, the unstable gate closed before the entire herd of several
thousand fell into TT-86, but a final lemming, halfway through as the gate
closed shut, was sucked back with an almost startled look in its button-black
eyes, the inexorable shutting of the gate sending the animal back into its own
time-and a probable fall with its fellows off whatever cliff they'd found.

Judging from the size of the piled little bodies, at least a quarter of that
herd had ended up on the floor. It took hours of back-breaking work to get
them all into hoppers, never mind cleaning bloodstains from the floor. The
newsies from uptime covered the whole event, not only for the on-station
television network but for the hope of a potential scoop by getting the video
through Primary first.
   They tried, without success, to interview him where he knelt hip deep at
one edge of the miniature mountain, blood all over his expensive three-piece
suit and previously immaculate white silk shirt. Despite his absolute,
categorical refusals-"I'm busy, can't you see? Talk to someone else."-they
hovered around him like hornets, vidcams whirring with the sound of hornets'
wings.
   Ignoring the newsies as best he could, he continued shoveling bodies into
the Pest Control hoppers: While most of the lemmings had landed on concrete,
several hundred had splattered against expensive, exquisite mosaics funded by
the Urbs Romae merchants and built by a downtimer artisan who had designed and
placed mosaics in his native time. Now the beautiful, tiled pictures of
grapevines, gods and goddesses, even the portraits of Imperial family members
done with astonishing accuracy from memory, had not only to be cleaned, but
cleaned with painstaking care to get the blood out of the grout between
colored tiles no larger than Kit's pinkie fingernail.
   A voice he'd know anywhere growled, "Goddamn mess."
   He glanced up into Bull Morgan's face. "Yes, it is."
   "Those tiles under there cracked?"
   Kit used his hated necktie to scrub away enough blood and intestines to
see. " 'Fraid so. Some cracked, some shattered to bits. Damn."
   Bull echoed him. Then he shouted, "Sue!"
   Sue Fritchey slewed around, then began walking toward him. When she
arrived, covered in even more blood than Kit, Bull said, "Show her, Kit."
   He pointed out the damage done to the mosaic. Sue groaned. Already news was
spreading to the Urbs Romae shopkeepers, hoteliers, and restaurateurs, mostly
thanks to newsies who rushed at them to "get their reactions on record." Bull
narrowed his eyes. "Sue, when the worst of this mess is gone, get your people
to digitally map each damaged mosaic. Station Manager's office will foot the
bill for any repairs. Spread the news to 'em and fast, before they start
mobbing your people." Sue hurried off to spread the word and instruct her
crews to spread it farther-the faster, the better.
   Bull grinned abruptly, looking very much like a fireplug riveted to living
human arms, legs, and head. Kit, his shoulders aching almost worse than his
knees, took in Bull's grin and muttered, "Want to share the joke? I could use
a laugh. Goddamned newsies crawling across me like flies ..." He shivered.
Bull's laugh only deepened as he thumped the taller, slighter man's back.
"Never heard of Kit Carson giving in to a newsie."
   "And you won't, either," Kit muttered, "unless they doctor the tapes, in
which case I can sue. And lose my fortune, my reputation, and my case, all in
one fell swoop."
   "Yeah," Bull said through narrowed eyes as he watched them pestering anyone
they could for a story. "Can't win a case against a newsie, that's for
goddamned sure. Gotta think up a reason to toss 'em all up Primary and keep
any more from coming in."
   Kit's full, blazing grin was seen so rarely, even the stolid Bull Morgan
blinked. "And what, exactly, are you thinking, Kenneth Carson?"
   "Oh, nothing too mischievous. I was just thinking you might want to plant a
little bug in someone's ear, you know, just a hint about courageous newsies
coming to the rescue in a Station Crisis. Get their flunkies to film 'em
scooping up busted-open lemmings. Ought to be good for, what, fifteen points
on the Nielsons just for the gore content alone?"

   Bull Morgan slowly pulled a cigar from one pocket and lit it, sucking until
it created clouds of obnoxious bluegrey smoke. His eyes crinkled. "Yeah," he
said around the cigar, starting to smile. "Yeah, that's a good, solid idea you
got there, Kit. Keep 'em out of our crews' hair, away from the shopowners,
'til they've had their fill and leave to shower someplace where the water's
endless and hot enough to wash away the blood, the stink, and their own puke."
   Kit chuckled. "You, Bull Morgan, are a wicked judge of human character."
   "Hell, Kit, thought you'd figured it out by now: all human character is
wicked. Just varies in degree is all."
   Leaving Kit to ponder that odd, un-Bull-like bit of philosophy, Bull Morgan
waded through the slop and bent to murmur into the ear of the nearest newsie.
She looked startled, then delighted. Soon, every newsie in the place was down
on hands and knees, scooping up dead rodents alongside the Pest Control crews
and 'eighty-sixers who'd seen, done, and been through everything. Or at least
enough to know that a mountain of dead lemmings wasn't exactly a dire crisis,
just a massive pain in the butt.
   True to Bull's prediction-Kit was glad he hadn't wagered-the newsies didn't
last long. They retreated to their hotel rooms with their vidcams and flunkies
and were not seen again until much later that evening, when La-La Land's very
own in-house TV network ran various tapes and commentaries. Kit didn't bother
to watch the broadcast. If it contained anything truly terrible, friends of
his would let him know-and probably hand him a recorded copy or six.
   Once the dead lemmings had all been carted away, and the blood scrubbed
away with toothbrushes and ammonia, Pest Control filmed every cracked or
shattered tile in every single mosaic affected. Bull's generous offer settled
several upset merchants. Sly cuss, their station manager. He had to be, or
he'd watch La-La Land's artificial world crumble apart like dry cake left
outside too long in brittle, harsh sunlight, slowly turning to dust.
   Yeah, Bull Morgan was just the right man for the job, a man who found the
law useful in how far it could occasionally be bent to save a friend. He
chuckled aloud, drawing startled stares from the Pest Control crews still
filming damaged mosaics. He didn't care. This would make a great story, full
of places for artistic embellishment-and Kit Carson knew he could spin a very
good yarn. He laughed again, anticipating the reactions of his granddaughter
and his closest friend, soon-to-be his grandson-in-law.
   He grinned like a fool and didn't care about that, either. For the first
time in years, Kit Carson realized he was genuinely happy. The last of the
hummer-trains groaned into motion, then Kit glanced down at himself. His
three-piece suit from the same designer who'd fashioned clothes for that
idiotic quintet of rich, empty-headed women-was soaked in blood and thick with
yellow-brown fur. And the smell was even worse. No wonder Bull had smiled. He
sighed. Maybe the suit and silk shirt could be salvaged.
   Kit returned to the Neo Edo, managed to sneak past the still-in-progress
hoteliers' meeting, and took the elevator to his office. He didn't feel like
going home and he did feel like putting on the kimono left in the office for
the sole purpose of comfort during work. There was a shower, too, hidden away
behind a screen that had once been the pride of some ancient Edo nobleman's
house.
   He stripped, showered, toweled off, then found the kimono. Ahh ... much
better. He left the suit on the shower floor, unwilling to touch it; this
kimono had cost him a small fortune. More, actually, than the suit. He
telephoned the front desk for a runner and soon heard the breathless knock of
one of his employees.
   "C'mon in, it's not locked!"
   "Sir?" the wide-eyed runner gasped, trying to appear that he was not
staring, awestruck, at Kit's office.
   Kit chuckled and said, "Come on in. Stare all you like. It is a bit

different for an office."
   The boy, a downtimer Kit had rescued and employed, stepped into the office.
   The boy's gaze drank in Kit's eclectic office, with its wall of television
screens, some of which played tapes of views uptime and some of which showed
views of various parts of the Neo Edo and the Commons. The sand-and-stone
garden, with its artificial skylight, drew his attention so powerfully, he
actually bumped right into Kit, who had paused at the edge of the screen
hiding his bathroom.
   The boy reddened clear down into the neckline of his green-and-gold Neo Edo
tunic. "Oh, sir, please forgive me-"
   Before the apology could turn into an avalanche thick as those lemmings,
Kit smiled and said, "It is rather impressive, isn't it? I remember the first
time I saw it, after Homako Tani vanished and left this white elephant on my
hands. I think I dropped my teeth clear onto the floor."
   A hesitant smile passed over the boy's face, revealing as clearly as though
his face were made of mountainstream water, rather than flesh and blood, how
unsure he was that he might be taking liberties.
   "Through here," Kit smiled. "I, er, rather made a mess of that suit
scooping up dead lemmings."
   The boy brightened. "I heard about that, sir. Were there really millions
and millions of 'em?"
   Kit laughed. "No, but sometimes it seemed like it. There were probably at
least two or three thousand, though."
   The boy had gone round-eyed with wonder. "That many? That's a big number,
isn't it, sir?"
   Kit reminded himself to be sure this youngster was included in orientation
and education sessions he held at the Neo Edo for downtimer employees and
their families. Many had profited enough from the lessons to leave the Neo Edo
and drudgery work behind forever, finding or even making better jobs for
themselves. Kit prided himself that none of his downtimer employees, current
or former-had walked through a gate and shadowed him- or herself, vanishing
forever the moment they crossed to the other side.
   The boy took the ruined suit and promised he'd take it to the best
drycleaner in the station-there were only two-then bowed and ran for the
elevator.
   Kit chuckled, then sighed and decided he might as well tackle the four
stacks of triple-damned government paperwork every shop owner on TT-86 was
required to file weekly. Sometimes, he pondered as he sat down and began on
the first tedious document, Kit wondered if Bull Morgan was seen so rarely
because he had locked himself into his office to cope with his mountains of
paperwork.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
   The pain in Skeeter's head registered first. The next sensation to impinge
on his awareness was his nakedness. Except for a cloth at his loins, he'd been
stripped clean as a Mongolian sky. He blinked and stirred. That's when he
discovered the chains. Skeeter moaned softly, head throbbing savagely, then
blinked and focused once again on his wrists. Iron manacles and a short length
of chain bound them together. A circlet of iron around his throat caught his
adam's apple when he swallowed nausea and fear. Further exploration revealed
chains and manacles around his ankles, hobbling him and locking him to an iron
ring in a stone wall.
   He was alone in a dim, tiny stone cell, iron bars forming a sort of door-
cum-fourth wall. Beyond, he could hear distant voices: shouts, cries of pain,
screams of terror, pleas for mercy. He managed to sit up. The unmistakable
snarl of caged cats-big cats, somewhere nearby brought a shiver to his naked
back. He'd seen snow leopards and Mongolian tigers during Yesukai's famous

hunt drives. He didn't care to go one-on-one with anything feline that even
remotely approached that size. The claws and teeth would be far too sharp and
his death would be far too slow ...
   Despite the iron ring around his throat, Skeeter gagged and voided the
contents of his belly onto the cold stone floor.
   Footsteps approached. his cell with a clatter of hobnailed boots. Skeeter
looked up, still feeling sick and dull of mind, and gradually focused on two
men grinning in at him. One of them he'd never seen in his life. The other was
Lupus Mortiferus. The fear and nausea in his belly turned to sour ice.
   "Hello, odds maker," Lupus smiled. "Feeling comfortable?"
   Skeeter didn't bother to answer.
   "This," Lupus gestured to the other man, a thickset individual with arms
big around as Skeeter's thighs, "is your lanista." My trainer? "Thieves are
condemned men, you know, but you will have a chance." Lupus' eyes twinkled as
though this were hilariously funny. "If you survive, you will remain the
property of the Emperor and fight for his glory" At least, that's what Skeeter
thought he'd said. His Latin wasn't very good. "You and I," Lupus laughed,
"will meet again, thief."
   That's what I'm afraid of, he groaned silently.
   Lupus strode off, a wicked chuckle echoing off stone walls.
   The other man smiled coldly and unlocked the door.
   Skeeter wanted to fight, to break free and run
   But not only was he chained and hobbled, the lanista who unlocked his
chains from the wall dragged him around as though he were a mere babe to be
dandled in one hand. Skeeter held back a groan of pain and allowed the man to
drag him through a confusing maze of corridors. Then, past a set of heavy,
iron-bound doors, bright sunlight blinded him. He blinked, overwhelmed by
harsh light, the odd clack of what sounded like two-by-fours smashing
together, and the screams of wounded men. He balked instinctively and received
a terrible buffet to the side of his aching head.
   Reeling, Skeeter found himself dragged forward into the middle of a
practice session on a sandy floor.
   High iron fences and armed soldiers surrounded the area. Gladiators in
armor, wielding wooden swords, practiced what looked like set-piece moves, as
carefully choreographed as a ballet, while "trainers" called out moves to
them. Other men were engaged in calisthenics, jumping low hurdles, wrestling,
practicing hand springs and tucked rolls, hacking at straw men or thick wooden
posts. Still others sighted along javelins and hurled their weapons at..."
   Skeeter stumbled as a mortal scream tore the air.
   A slave tied to a post at the far edge of the practice ground sagged, a
javelin embedded in his bowels. A nearby soldier grunted, stalked over, and
yanked the weapon out again, then slit the suffering man's throat with a neat
slice from a dagger. Skeeter had seen such casual cruelty before, many times,
in Yesukai's camp, but that had been a long time ago. He'd grown more
civilized than he'd thought during the intervening years.
   Skeeter's lanista dragged him past and thrust him into the group doing
calisthenics. He was unchained and forcibly prodded into movement with the tip
of a long spear. Sweating, head spinning uselessly, Skeeter did what he was
forced to do, vaulting low hurdles awkwardly and going through the motions of
the calisthenics. Then he was handed a dull-edged wooden sword and a shield
and found himself facing his trainer. He swallowed again, dizzy and terrified.
   "Shield up!" the man shouted-and lunged with a short wooden sword.
   Skeeter's reaction time, dulled by pain and shock, was slow. The wooden
sword caught him in the gut, doubling him over with a retching pain. His
trainer waited until he'd caught his breath, then dragged him up again and
shouted, "Shield up!"
   This time, Skeeter managed to drag his arm up to catch the blow across the

wooden shield. The smack and force of the blow drove him to his knees.
   "Thrust!"
   Over the next two miserable, wretched weeks, his trainer beat the drills
into him, until he could at least follow the instructions. He learned the
various methods of fighting, tried to use the various types of weapons
different classes of gladiators used. His lanista spent a great deal of time
grumbling, while Lupus Mortiferus stalked the training-arena like a god and
laughed at him, besting every opponent sent against him with lazy ease.
   Disheartened, bruised, Skeeter slept in chains, too exhausted to move once
allowed to collapse on his hard bed. He ate the gruel he was given as fast as
he could shovel it in. It tasted faintly of beer; barley gone a little too far
toward fermentation, perhaps? Occasionally Lupus Mortiferus would visit his
cell, grinning and taunting him from beyond the iron bars of his cage. Skeeter
returned his gaze steadily and coldly, while his insides quaked with deeper
terror than he had ever known, deeper even than his terror at falling through
the unstable gate into Yesukai the Valiant's life.
   Each night as he drifted into bruised sleep, Skeeter dredged up from memory
everything Yesukai had ever taught him, every trick and dirty move he'd ever
learned on the plains of Mongolia. Then it occurred to him that perhaps he was
reviewing the wrong memories. And he thought of his time on the broken, filthy
streets of depraved New York, where a boy, even a grown man, could find
himself fatally trapped before he knew anything had gone wrong. Certain areas
of New York were said to be as deadly as the ancient Roman gladiatorial
combats. Looked like he was about to find out.
   At the moment, Skeeter would take the concrete-and-glass canyons of New
York, even the washed-out ruins of New Orleans, over this. He just prayed he
had time to come up with some sort of escape plan before Lupus Mortiferus
killed him in the arena. Given the diligence of the guards, he didn't hold out
much hope.
   "QUIET!"
   Brian Hendrickson had sufficient command presence to be heard-and obeyed-
when he wanted The babble in the library sliced off like a dagger cut. He
glared at Goldie Morran, whose nostrils flared unpleasantly as she breathed
hard. Ianira Cassondra, clutching her pretty little children close, glared at
Goldie, hatred and possibly even murder in her dark, ancient eyes. This had to
be defused, and fast.
   "Goldie,- he said, speaking as gently as possible, considering her recent
release from the infirmary-and the reasons for it, "I know as well as you do
the terms of the bet. The most cash at the end of a month. But this evidence
about Skeeter's disappearance. complicates matters. Considerably."
   He glanced at Ianira. "You will swear by all you hold sacred," he asked her
gently--in archaic Greek-"that Skeeter Jackson was trying to rescue Marcus
when he crashed the Porta Romae?"
   "I swear it," she hissed out, with another murderous glance at Goldie.
   "Do you have any way to prove that?"
   "Dr. Mundy! I spoke with him on the telephone! He arranged for Skeeter to
pick up money to pay that man Farley. He will speak the truth for me! And my
`acolytes' were following me. Someone must have taped it!"
   "All right." He glanced across the growing crowd, many of them the loons
who followed Ianira wherever she went. "Any of you catch on vid Skeeter
Jackson crashing the Porta Romae?"
   One timid, mousy little man near the back cleared his throat five times,
casting awestruck, terrified glances at Ianira, then managed, "I-I did
   Brian nodded. "Cue it up, would you, while I place a call?"
   The loon began fiddling with his camera as Brian picked up the telephone
behind the library counter, placidly ignoring the crowd which grew by fives
and tens as word of the argument over the wager's terms spread through La-La

Land. The telephone was answered testily by Nally Mundy.
   "I'm in the middle of a session, here, so if you'd please call back-"
   "Dr. Mundy, Brian Hendrickson here."
   "Oh. Yes, Brian? what is it?"
   "Ianira Cassondra tells me you offered Skeeter Jackson money to help Marcus
the bartender pay off a debt.
   A long silence at the other end of the line caused Brian to sigh. Skeeter
had ripped off the old man, after all, and vanished downtime
   "Yes, I did. But he never picked up the money. Odd, you know. Heard about
that ruckus at the gate. I'd say Ianira's telling the truth. If Skeeter'd had
time, he'd have picked up that money and something tells me young Marcus would
still be with us. Don't trust that dratted Jackson much, blast him, but he
didn't take the money. If I could just get one decent session taped with that
boy, the mysteries about Temujin that we could solve-"
   "Yes, I know," Brian hastened to interrupt. "You've been very helpful, Dr.
Mundy. I know you're busy, so I'll let you get back to your session."
   The historian hurrumphed into the phone, which then clicked dead. Brian
cradled the receiver. "Well. Have you cued up that camera?"
   The little man pushed his way through the crowd and handed over the camera,
then knelt and kissed the hem of Ianira's gown. "May my humble camera bring
you comfort and victory Lady."
   Brian watched the whole thing unfold, from Lupus Mortiferus kicking down
Skeeter's door to Skeeter's desperate lunge up onto the ramp, the hoarse cry
he'd uttered for Marcus to wait, the man with Marcus bodily snatching him
through-and, finally, Skeeter vanishing through the gate after them. He
clicked off the camera thoughtfully, wondering what in the world had possessed
Skeeter to such altruistic rashness. Then he roused himself slightly and
handed the camera to Ianira, who returned it to the man at her feet. He
uttered a tiny cry and pressed lips to her hand, then snatched the camera and
scuttled more than a yard away before rising to his feet again, face alight as
though he really had touched the hand of Deity.
   Odd bunch of folks, Ianira's followers.
   Brian cleared his throat. "It seems Ianira is telling the truth. Nally
Mundy and that videotape prove it, beyond any question in my mind." When he
glanced up, he wasn't surprised to find a crowd of nearly a hundred 'eighty-
sixers; pressed as close to the reference desk as they could get, with more
peering in through the door.
   "Well. As I said, this unexpected gesture of altruism by Skeeter changes
everything. I'm afraid, Goldie, I can't declare you winner by default on the
grounds that Skeeter will be gone for at least two weeks downtime. Your wager
stipulated a month, true, but that doesn't mean the month has to run straight
through, uninterrupted. I declare this wager on hold until Skeeter returns. If
he returns."
   Ianira blanched and blinked back sudden tears. She clutched her children
more closely to her breast. Alerted by their mother's sudden fear,
communicated in that mysterious way between mothers and their offspring, the
two little girls began to whimper.
   Goldie sniffed. "If he returns, indeed. That maniac who's been chasing him
has probably carved out his entrails by now. And it would serve him right!"
   A tiny sound broke from Ianira's throat.
   Brian caught Goldie's eye. "In the interim, you are hereby barred from
scamming, scheming, or accumulating any stolen funds toward this bet. I
wouldn't dream of interfering with legitimate business, particularly
considering your recent loss, but in the interest of fairness, I would suggest
placing an impartial witness with you at all times until Skeeter's return."
   Goldie let out a sound like an enraged parrot and turned purple. "A guard!
You'd set a guard on me? Damn you, Brian

   "Oh, shut up, Goldie," he said tiredly. "You agreed to this idiotic wager
and dragged me into refereeing it. Now live by my decisions or default in
favor of Skeeter."
   She opened and closed her mouth several times, although no sound emerged,
then she compressed white lips. "Very well!"
   "That's decided, then. Now. Goldie, I have it on good authority you've been
selling lemming-fur cloaks down near the Viking Gate."
   "And if I have?" Her chin came a several notches.
   "Calling them blond mink, I think it was?"
   "It seemed appropriate." Her eyes, were dark and watchful as a vulture's.
   "Yes. Well, that constitutes a scam. All proceeds you've earned up to now
and haven't logged in yet, you will hand over in the next fifteen minutes. Oh,
and bring along the cloaks. You can sell 'em to your heart's content -- after
this wager is officially over."
   "Curse you," Goldie hissed. "And what am I supposed to live on?"
   "You got into this, Goldie. You're going to have to get yourself out of it.
That's it, then, folks. Now, if you all would kindly get the hell out of my
library so I can get on with my work?"
   Chuckles in the crowd drifted to him, then people began ambling out the
door. Brian saw money exchanging hands as multiple, impromptu bets on the
outcome of his decision were settled. Brian sighed. What a mess. Then, before
the fellow could leave, Brian high-signed Kynan Rhys Gower, who hovered near
the edge of the crowd.
   "Kynan,- he said gently in the man's native Welsh, "I know your integrity
is beyond question and I am also aware," he allowed himself a small smile,
"that Goldie Morran cannot possibly bribe you. Would you agree to stay with
her during the next two weeks, watching to be sure she does not cheat, until
the Porta Romae cycles again?"
   Kynan's wind-tanned cheeks crinkled into a broad, twinkle-eyed grin. "It
would be my honor, should my liege lord give his permission."
   Somewhere in the dispersing crowd, Kit Carson's famous laugh rang out. "Not
only my permission, Kynan, I'll make up all lost wages from your sweeping
job."
   Goldie just glowered.
   Ianira smiled grimly ."Thank you, kyrie Hendrickson. We downtimers have few
friends. It is good to know there are honest people here who will champion our
cause." She gave Kynan Rhys Gower a swift smile of thanks, then vanished into
the dispersing crowd.
   Kynan grinned at Goldie, eyes alight with savage mirth.
   She said something profoundly unladylike and stalked out of the library.
Kynan followed at his ease, winking at Brian on the way out. Brian suppressed
a grin of smug satisfaction. With Kynan on the job, Goldie'd stay honest for
the next two weeks. She wouldn't have a choice. And if Brian were any judge of
solidarity in the downtimer underground community, more than Kynan's pair of
eyes would be watching that purplehaired harpy through the days to come.
   He allowed himself a soft, wicked chuckle, then waved off the rest of the
crowd and got back to work.
   After seeing Hendrickson, Ianira went to the top.
   Bull Morgan saw himself as a fair man. Tough, God alone knew he had to be,
to do this job-but fair. So when Ianira Cassondra walked into his office with
her two daughters, he knew he was in serious trouble. There was only one thing
she could possibly want from him. He wasn't wrong.
   "Mr. Morgan," Ianira said in her beautiful, oddly accented English, which
was neither quite Greek nor quite Turkish, but something far more ancient, "I
appeal to you for help. Please. The father of my daughters has been taken
away. The man who took him has broken the law before, by bringing him here,
and now he breaks it again by taking him away. Please, is there nothing you

can do to help me find the father of my children?"
   Tears trembled on thick, black lashes.
   Bull Morgan swore silently and steeled himself. "Ianira, there is nothing I
would like more than to find Marcus. Please believe that. But I can't." The
tears spilled over, even as her mouth tightened into a thin line of anger.
"Let me try to explain. First of all, Marcus went downtime with him willingly.
Second, you and Marcus are downtimers. The uptime government can't make up its
mind what to do about people like you, so it's a confused mess as to what I
can and can't do. Besides, this Farley bastard was smooth. There really isn't
anything I can pin on him."
   "So you will do nothing to find Marcus!"
   "I can't," he said quietly. "I have a very small security staff. We're not
authorized to go downtime to rescue people who are from downtime."
   "But you have told us we cannot go back, even if we wanted to, to live
downtime in the places of our births! How can you permit Marcus to return
permanently to Rome, when your own law says he cannot?"
   Bull groaned inwardly. "That's station policy, yes. I'm doing my best to
interpret the law. Downtimers can work as porters through the gates, so long
as they return. But, Ianira, there just isn't anyway I can enforce that." Even
as he said it, he knew it would have terrible repercussions in the downtimer
underground community he knew existed on his station. "If I could," he said as
gently as possible, "the next time the gate cycles I'd send in a division of
Marines to find him. But the reality is, I can't even send down one security
man. Our budget is so tight, I can't afford to lose the man-hours of even one
security guard for two entire weeks-with no guarantee he or she could even
find Marcus."
   More tears spilled over, silently. But her head remained high and her eyes
flashed dangerous defiance. "So I am just supposed to sit and wait to see if I
must put on widow's weeds and weep the death of my children's father aloud?"
   Bull shook his head slowly. "The only thing I can do is talk to some of the
guides, some of the scouts. They like Marcus. If I can persuade some of them
to go downtime to Rome, I can get the necessary paperwork approved quickly.
It's the best I can do, and I can't promise that another man will do as I
ask."
   To Bull's surprise, Ianira nodded slowly. "No one can ever speak for the
behavior of another. Only for one's self can you speak, and even then, do we
not lie to ourselves far more often than we lie to others?"
   "You'd make a damn fine psychological therapist, Ianira. You should talk to
Rachel therapist, about training with her."
   Ianira's laugh was brittle as shale. "I am a Priestess of Artemis, trained
at the great Temple of Ephesus where my mother's sister was High Priestess. I
do not need more training!"
   Without another word, Ianira Cassondra gathered up her beautiful little
girls, both of whom looked scared, and swept out of his office like a primal
force, siphoning away every erg of his willpower to continue going through the
motions of his job.
   It was a long, long time before Bull Morgan answered his phone or moved a
single sheet of paper on his desk from the "to do" to the "done" stack.
   If he'd been able, he'd have gone downtime himself. But he'd told her
nothing except the naked, brutal truth. Manager of the time terminal he might
be, but there was absolutely nothing he could do to help her, except call a
few guides and scouts who were currently in and ask them for a favor they
wouldn't be too wild about granting.
   Bull sighed mightily, dislodging several sheets of paper from the "to do"
stack, which landed on the floor beside his massive desk. He ignored them
completely and reached for the telephone. If he were going to make those
calls, he'd better start making them, before Ianira did something stupidly

desperate.
   As the phone rang on the other end of the line, Ianira Cassondra's ancient,
bottomless eyes haunted him like a whiff of perfume diffused through his
entire awareness, inescapable and unutterably damning.
   "Yeah?" a surly voice on the other end of the line said.
   Bull sighed again, dislodging more papers, and said, "Bull Morgan here.
I've got a favor to ask..."
   Malcolm nudged his fiancée. "Margo, that young woman over there. By the
exit ramp?"
   They were waiting, along with half Shangri-La station for the cycling of
the Porta Romae. After Skeeter and Marcus had both disappeared downtime,
Malcolm had canceled their reservations for the Wild West Gate, to wait and
see if a rescue would need to be mounted.
   "Yes," Margo stood on tiptoe to see over taller heads. "Isn't that the
woman you introduced me to at the Delight? The Enchantress?"
   "Yes. Ianira Cassondra. She'll be waiting to see."
   He didn't have to tell Margo what-or rather who-Ianira was waiting to see.
News of Marcus' disappearance downtime with a con man so slick he'd fooled
even Goldie Morran was still the talk of the station-particularly since
Skeeter Jackson had crashed the gate going after the young bartender.
   "I think perhaps," Malcolm murmured, "we ought to get a little closer. Just
in case."
   Margo glanced up, swallowed once, then just nodded. She'd grown up a very
great deal in the past few months. Her hand closed tightly around his, tacit
admission that she understood just how close she'd come to losing him forever.
   Several downtimers were standing close to Ianira but gave way with surprise
when Malcolm edged through, his hand still tightly gripping Margo's.
   "Hello, Ianira," he said quietly.
   She flashed a stricken look into his eyes. "Hello, Malcolm. And Margo. It
is good of you to wait with me."
   He tried to smile reassuringly "What else are friends for?"
   Just then the klaxon sounded, drowning out further conversation as the Gate
departure was announced from blaring loudspeakers the length of Commons. The
message repeated in three other languages. The line of tourists stirred
expectantly, while porters gathered up baggage, fathers snagged unruly sons
they'd paid a ransom in extra fare to take downtime, and mothers gripped
daughters' hands tightly, admonishing them to be quiet and behave. Elegantly
gowned women whose appearance and carriage would have screamed money in any
society sipped at the last of their wine and tossed paper cups into trash cans
in the fenced-off waiting area.
   Always the same, Malcolm mused, the rich ones who've been before, the
families who've scraped and saved for the family vacation of a lifetime, the
millionaires out for a sightseeing jaunt, the zipper jockeys ready to go
brothel hopping. Always the same, yet always different, with new wrinkles and
near-disasters each time.
   Then the gate dilated slowly, causing a painful sensation in the bones of
his skull as the sound that was not a sound resonated harshly at subsonic
level through the station. Gate Six rumbled open, then disgorged the
inevitable staggering, pallid tourists, exhausted guides, chattering women
comparing their shopping sprees in the bazaars and markets of Rome, and the
teenaged kids who'd drunk too much and were that peculiar shade unique to a
boy about to puke.
   But there was no Marcus. And no Skeeter. Ianira scanned the departing
tourists frantically, but they simply weren't there. She did hiss at one
point. "Him!" she said viciously. "That's him!"
   "You're sure?" Malcolm asked quietly.
   The man Ianira pointed toward looked nothing like the man who'd gone

downtime as Chuck Farley. Lightly bearded, beard and hair a different color
from Farley's, even his eyes were a different shade. Contact lenses, no doubt.
Malcolm wondered just how many pairs he owned, as well as how many bottles of
hair dye and glue-on beards to match?
   "I swear it by Artemis! That is the man who took Marcus to Rome with him.
Now I know why his face has always remained hidden to me: he changes his face
every few weeks!"
   That was good enough for Malcolm. Several of the downtimers near Ianira
began to mutter, most of the mutters having to do with violent, slow deaths in
the bowels of the terminal.
   "No," he said aloud, cutting across bloodthirsty plans. "Let me take care
of him. I understand how creatures like him think."
   "Yeah, leave it to us," Margo said darkly, watching the man who'd once been
Charles Farley slide a time card through the reader and step off the ramp. She
wondered just how many timecards, under how many names, the snake owned.
"We'll take care of him, all right." Her eyes flashed that Irish-alleycat
glare that did such deadly things to Malcolm's insides.
   Malcolm drew a quick, steadying breath. "Everyone spread out, discreetly
mind, and follow him. When we've established where he's staying, we'll watch
him, day and night. Ianira, you can identify him better than the rest of us,
even through the disguises. How long can you hold up, watching?"
   Her eyes met his. "As long as it takes."
   He didn't pretend to know the ways of her ancient training. She might be
able to stay awake for days, for all he knew. The fakirs of the Far East could
do some amazing things. And if Farley's next destination were somewhere beyond
the Philosophers' Gate? Malcolm was a good guide through Athens, but Ianira
had spent the bulk of her young life in the fabled city of Ephesus, across the
Aegean Sea on the once beautiful coast that the Balkan Wars had pounded into
rubble over the decades. He wasn't even sure if the archeological ruins still
existed.
   Ephesus ...
   Malcolm really would have to get away on a little vacation of his own, to
satisfy his scholarly itch. Purchase a ticket to Athens, arrange downtime
transportation on a sailing vessel, and then ... Ephesus, in all her ancient
tragedy and glory. See the city of Artemis, whose magnificent temple, finally
pulled down by Christian zealots. Its magnificent porphyry pillars had been
transported away to be built into the Haghia Sophia.
   He shook himself slightly, to find a faintly puzzled line between Ianira's
dark brows. "You point him out and we'll take our vengeance, never you fear
that, Ianira. I am not fond of people who sell my friends into slavery"
   She nodded and strode away purposefully in the wake of Charles Farley.
   Malcolm found Margo looking up at him with a glow in her eyes akin to hero-
worship. He quite suddenly felt eleven feet tall and more than capable of
taking on the dragon, St. George, and his horse. "Let's go," he said a bit
gruffly.
   Margo, clearly as moved by what they'd just witnessed as Malcolm, simply
nodded.
   As it turned out, following Farley was easier than either of them had
expected. He took a modest room in the Time Tripper, then went downstairs to
breakfast in the hotel restaurant. This new version of Farley was far quieter
than the last. Once he returned to his room, he didn't leave it again,
ordering tickets (Margo batted eyelashes and smiled at the Time Tours clerks
until she got his new alias and destination) over the phone, eating only
through room service-delivered by a downtimer--doing only God knew what up
there by himself until the Wild West Gate departure was announced.
   Malcolm and Margo repurchased tickets through Malcolm's computer, then
scrambled into their "Wild West" duds well in advance of departure. Although

the tour was full, Bull Morgan had pulled some strings at Time Tours to let
Malcolm and Margo be added to the group. A few hours later, dandied up for
what was to have been a celebratory vacation for their engagement, Margo and
Malcolm found themselves appointed as the posse, stepping through the Wild
West portal, along with the group of predust-coated paleontologists carrying
their assorted arsenal (they'd delayed departure to get in more practice with
their firearms, one of them had explained diffidently to Margo) in correct
period holsters ... and Chuck Farley, still with blond hair and beard.
   Once through the portal, the trick was not to be spotted following him.
Denver of 1885 spread out in all its nouveau riche splendor against the
backdrop of snow-capped Rockies. The better streets were bricked; many were
dirt. Chuck hired a horse at the livery stable, hired a second as pack animal,
and tied his baggage to it, trotting away with a clatter, not even bothering
to glance back.
   Cocksure bastard, Malcolm thought darkly as he paid for hacks for himself
and Margo. Spreading out her riding skirt gracefully across the leathers, she
gathered up the reins, gave a curt nod, and sent her mount down the street at
a brisk trot, riding sidesaddle as though she'd been born in one. Malcolm
followed, his heart soaring at the sight of her-and positively burning with
fierce, primitive joy when he caught sight of Chuck Farley and his pack animal
ahead.
   He caught up with Margo. "Not too fast, dearest. We must not let the
blighter catch on to us."
   She nodded. "Quite right. Forgive me." She flashed him a brilliant smile.
"In my zeal, I forgot myself."
   He wanted to crush her against him and kiss those laughing lips-
   But there was work waiting to be done.
   What sort of work would depend entirely upon Mr. Farley's activities over
the next few days.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
   The day he returned to the great Circus was the most terrifying day of
Skeeter Jackson's life. He came in a cage, like one of the big cats trapped so
close to his iron box on the long barge. Their snarls of rage beat through
him, making. him wonder how long it had been since they'd been fed anything
except prods from sharpened stakes and taunts from their keepers. Skeeter knew
very much how they must feel.
   Some of the gladiators on shore walked around freely, some of them still
under armed guard, not yet dressed for combat or given the weapons with which
they would slaughter one another. Those not under guard were free men who'd
taken up the insane game of life or death and glory; those guarded were
valuable slave gladiators who'd earned grand reputations and were proud of
their skills--not condemned criminals awaiting a mockery of a fair chance at
survival.
   The previous night, though he wasn't sure where they'd actually been, he
and the other prisoner-gladiators had been paraded into some kind of public
banquet hall and feted, given anything they cared to eat-or could hold down.
More than a few men said goodbye to family members, clearly expecting never to
see them again. Skeeter didn't have even that. All he had were Yesukai's
lessons to get him through a last meal under the eyes of jeering, laughing,
betting Romans.
   Now, with the sun high in the sky, and the races at the Circus, which took
place in the mornings, just about to end, it was time for the next part of the
show. Skeeter's barge halted and the cages were hauled one by one onto shore
near the back of the great Circus itself, where the starting gates of the
races were. Inside, the crowd was cheering so loudly it startled the raging
cats-leopards, lions, sleek cheetahs--into even greater frenzy. Caged

antelopes bleated their terror and hurled themselves against narrowly spaced
iron bars, unable to escape.
   Some of the other prisoners near Skeeter's cage, also doomed to the arena,
were crying for mercy to such men as passed, none of whom listened. Skeeter
wanted to do a little crying of his own, but he didn't see the good it would
do. Yesukai the Valiant had taught him endurance, tenacity. He called on those
lessons now with everything in him and managed-just barely-to remain silent.
But he could not stop the shakes quite so easily.
   Far down the line, some slave with a stack of wax tablets was busy making
his way past each cage, jotting down contents or checking off his list,
something like that. Inventory clerk, Skeeter thought with a sudden, near-
uncontrollable desire to laugh insanely. Those infuriatingly thorough,
meticulous Romans. Keeping their records right down to the last doomed
prisoner and bleating antelope.
   But when the slave got close enough to hear his voice asking questions of
each caged gladiator, such as his name and fighting style, Skeeter gave a
sudden start and grabbed the bars, straining to see. He knew that voice! He
knew ... but didn't quite believe it until he came face to face with Marcus
through the bars of his filthy cage.
   Marcus went deathly white in a single instant.
   "Marcus, I"
   "Skeeter, what.."
   They began, and halted again, simultaneously.
   Marcus went to one knee, to be on the same level as Skeeter. His eyes were
dark with emotion. "Skeeter!" He swallowed hard, consulted his tablets as
though confirming the nightmare, then slowly met Skeeter's eyes. "They have
paired you with the Death Wolf." His voice broke a little as he said it.
   "Yeah. I know." Skeeter managed a sickly version of his old smile. "Nothing
like justice, huh? I'm just -I never meant for this"-he gestured to Marcus'
collar-"to happen. Never, ever. You ..." He couldn't finish it. Couldn't say,
"You were the only friend I ever had." The enormity of his loss was just now
opening inside his mind.
   "I am sorry," Marcus whispered. "My master... I will be on the balustrade
above the stalls, watching the fighting. I ..." He swallowed hard, tapped the
wax tablets he carried. "I have to record who wins."
   Skeeter tried, and failed, a bright smile. "Yeah. Well. Maybe I'll surprise
everyone, huh? At least you can run away, get to the gate next time it opens."
   Marcus was shaking his head, 'eighty-sixer fashion rather than Roman. "No.
I have an enormous debt to repay. I know, here," he touched his breast, "that
no man has the right to hold me slave. But I must repay the money, Skeeter.
The honor of the Taurusates is all I have left, now."
   There were tears in his eyes as he said it.
   "Taurusates? That your real name?"
   Marcus started to laugh, ended up crying. "No," he choked out. "My tribe's
name. We ... we were both betrayed, you know. The moneychanger, Goldie? With
the hair of purple? The one against you in the great wager." His voice came
out bitter, brittle as the hot sun beating down on them both. The stink of
terrified men and the reeking musk of enraged lions engulfed their awareness.
   Skeeter narrowed his eyes, trying to drive present reality out of existence
at least for the moment. Sweet memories of Time Terminal Eighty-Six were
almost too much. "Yeah, Goldie Morran,- he managed. " What about her?"
   "She told ... she told Lupus about you. How to find you. This I heard her
do, right before I returned to the Neo Edo to give Farley what I owed him. As
much as I could of it, anyway."
   Skeeter winced, writhing inside as he recalled the tears and bitter
accusation in Ianira's voice. "So she told him, did she? Too bad I won't get a
chance to throttle that old witch by the throat."

   Marcus shrugged, very Gallic. "She will not be doing so very well, either.
Farley stole a great deal of gold from her, just before we left. He laughed as
he told me of it, after my sale. I ... I asked him how he had brought so much
gold through Primary. He said he took it from Goldie."
   Despite the genuine calamity to Goldie Morran, Skeeter found himself
laughing a little too shrilly, even as tears formed in his eyes, tears of
helplessness, rage, terror. "So he got her, too, eh?" Marcus' dark eyes
widened. "Christ. Both of us. What a couple of suckers we were. So goddamned
sure-"
   He glance through the bars at Marcus. "I don't suppose you'd believe me,
anyway, if I told you I was trying to stop you from going through the Porta
Romae?" Marcus' eyes widened even further. "That's when Lupus crashed the Gate
behind me and cracked me across the head."
   Marcus' tightly pressed lips came adrift. "But...why?"
   "I'd ... I'd arranged to borrow some money, see, do some sessions with Dr.
Mundy, to pay Farley the rest of what you owed him."
   The look in Marcus' eyes told Skeeter he should've taken pity and kept his
mouth shut. Skeeter cleared his throat roughly. "You'd better get on with your
job," he said, "before your master gets pissed off and thinks you're loafing."
   Marcus swallowed. "I had thought, until the moment I saw you in that cage,
that I hated you, Skeeter. But now ..." He trailed off helplessly. "May the
gods fight on your side."
   He made a hasty mark on his wax tablet and hurried on to the next cage, and
the one beyond it, until he was out of sight and hearing. Skeeter slumped
against the bars, feeling the throb of hurt inside him turn slowly to bitter
rage. Goldie Morran, curse her, had sent him to this. Skeeter deserved to be
punished, that much he could at least admit, but to just sell him out, knowing
he'd be murdered, in order to win that accursed wager ...
   Skeeter owed Marcus, owed him his freedom, his family, a debt he needed to
absolve himself of before he met the gods of the high Mongolian mountains,
where the bite of ice in the sharp winds could kill a man in minutes. "If I
get out of this alive," he vowed, "I'll get you back to Ianira and your kids.
Somehow. And when I do..." He thought blackly of Goldie Morran. "When I do,
I'll wring that scrawny old buzzard's jeweled neck!"
   Rage sustained him through the exhibition before the start of the real
games. Paired off with Lupus, whose laughing eyes and grinning mouth told of
supreme confidence, Skeeter went through the motions he'd been beaten into
learning, doing the whole, maddening drill in slow motion to the cheering
encouragement of the crowd. Lupus' shield, Skeeter noted as he studied his
adversary's every move, every potential weakness, was decorated with an odd,
painted motif a coiled serpent inside a circle of feathers painted a lurid
shade of green, like First Officer Spock had bled all over them. Realizing
that he was thinking about a television show some fifty years old, Skeeter
gave a short bark of laughter that caused shock to detonate in Lupus' eyes for
just a second.
   Good! Skeeter thought savagely. Keep the bastard off balance, maybe you'll
live through this yet.
   Some of the men near him were literally gibbering with terror. Skeeter
should have been shaking, too, with fear of what Lupus was about to do to him.
But all Skeeter felt was a cold, dark rage at what Goldie had done. A Yakka
Mongol knew only too well that death would come sooner or later, pleasantly or
in agony, which was why he lived life to the fullest every day he still
breathed; but what Goldie had done, had deliberately set in motion. That could
not be forgiven. He prayed to gods he thought he'd forgotten the names of, sky
gods and mountain spirits and the demons which drove the great, black storms
of sand across the valleys and open plains, and waited to match weapons for
real with Lupus Mortiferus.

   Lupus just might have a surprise or two in store.
   While even in 1885 Denver was a fair sized city, with many stately
buildings in brick and stone, most of the streets were dirt. Puffs of dust
from their horses' hooves rose behind them as Malcolm set out with Margo on
Chuck Farley's trail. Fortunately, that same dust made trailing him very easy.
He left town completely, heading out to a spot that would one day become, if
Malcolm were correct, a public park in the twenty-first century. He and Margo
slowed their horses, which blew quietly as they slipped into the cover of a
grove of trees, and watched Chuck dismount. He was whistling cheerfully. The
sound carried on the slight breeze, straight toward them. The backdrop of the
snowclad Rockies was breathtaking and the air was so clean, it smelt of bright
sunshine and clear wind.
   Malcolm glanced at Margo and smiled. Clearly she was entranced by the
setting, the chase, the whole deadly game they played. Although she rode
sidesaddle, a Winchester lever-action Model 76 Centennial rode in a saddle
scabbard, and her skirts concealed a beauty of a revolver, one of the Colt .41
Double Actions. This time, Malcolm had no qualms at all about her ability to
use-with deadly accuracy-any weapon she was forced to bring to bear. Out in
the clearing, Chuck had begun to dig with a heavy spade unloaded from his pack
horse. If he caught sight of them, they might well have to fight it out. But
Malcolm, glancing at his own firearms, hoped it didn't come to that.
   At least Margo had set those idiotic paleontologists straight. They were
now properly armed with rifles and pistols that would arouse no one's
curiosity.
   Malcolm grinned. What a way to begin their first adventure together as
Smith and Moore, time guides, soon to be Moore and Moore, time scouts. He
edged his horse just far enough toward hers to catch her hand and squeeze it.
She glanced up, startled, then grinned and squeezed back. Malcolm quietly
unstrapped the leather satchel holding his computerized log and ATLS, opened
the flap, and slipped out a digitizing video camera attached to the log. He
turned it on and was gratified when Margo copied his action efficiently,
setting up her own digitizing camera and training it on Chuck, still busy
digging. The images both cameras captured would feed directly into their
individual logs, an could be used as legal evidence, along with the sworn
affidavits, in most any uptime court of law.
   Chuck's hole was getting larger by the minute. What was he burying, a crate
the size of a steamer trunk? Malcolm narrowed his eyes. From the looks of the
luggage tied to that pack horse's back, if he intended to bury it all, he'd
need a big hole.
   Chuck finally laid the heavy spade aside and straightened his back,
grumbling audibly. Whatever he was burying, he was going to a great deal of
personal trouble about it. Antiquities smuggler was Malcolms private bet with
himself. It was the only reasonable explanation he could devise for a man who
went downtime with a vast sum of money, and returned with a great deal of
clearly precious luggage.
   What, Malcolm mused, had he brought back? Manuscripts? The way Chuck
grunted when he unstrapped one case quashed that idea. That box was heavy.
Chuck set it on the ground beside his deep hole, then unpacked several other
cases. Then he sat down and opened them one by one. Apparently he had been too
careful to examine them while in TT-86.
   "Mother-fucking-" Chuck's curse was loud and startling. He was glaring into
the first box, which he'd angled enough that Malcolm and both cameras could
see its interior-and complete lack of contents. "Goddamned gold must've been
used for something else later in history. Shit! After the trouble I went
through to get those pieces ..." He muttered something under his breath, then
tossed the case aside. "Just like what happened with those goddamned jewels of
Isabella's. How was I supposed to know those rocks would end up in her

collection, never mind Chris Columbus' greedy Italian hands? Damn. Wonder if
any of it managed to come through the goddamned Porta Romae intact?"
   Malcolm held back a chuckle at the look of glee on Margo's face. She was
absolutely intent on her work, recording Chuck's every move, every savage
curse, every case he opened. Another foul expletive cut through the air. "-
gold inlay vanished!" He held up a piece that Malcolm at first couldn't
identify. Then the shape took on abrupt, crystal-clear meaning. It was an
ivory dildo, complete with testes, which were evidently missing a detailed
inlay of some sort. Malcolm zoomed in on the piece and thought, Yes, l do
believe there was supposed to be golden "hair" on that thing, and inlay for
the veins along the shaft. Good Lord, what's he done, robbed or bribed every
brothel in Rome?
   A quick glance at Margo showed him flaming cheeks and even a pinkened
throat, but she was still recording as steadily as any pro. Good girl! Chuck
laid the dildo back in is velvet-lined case and examined the rest of the
contents. All of them were sexual in nature, although not all of them were
actual sex toys. Each new case brought to light exquisite statuary in marble,
ivory, bronze, even-Chuck gloated through the digitizing camera lens-a few
surviving golden pieces. A delicate little silver statue of Aphrodite in
flagrante delicto with one of her lovers came to light, followed by a marble
statue of Hermes with a very erect-and removable-phallus.
   Very carefully, Chuck re-covered his treasures in their lined cases,
dragged out a small, battered notebook and made a few notations in it, then
bagged each case in waterproof plastic which he then heat-sealed with a handy
little battery operated gadget. He then gently laid them in the deep hole he'd
dug, clearly planning to return uptime and reclaim his treasures without
having to pay ATF taxes on them. It was a nice little scam. Those pieces would
bring a fortune on the black market-even if they hadn't been commissioned by
some uptime collector. Chuck filled in his hole again and tamped the dirt
down, then carefully replaced the sod he'd cut out and tamped it down, too,
pouring water from two entire canteens over it to ensure that it wouldn't die
and turn brown, sticking out like a neon sign saying "Somebody buried
something here!"
   Chuck then pulled out an ATLS, surprising Malcolm considerably, and shot
geographic coordinates using lines of magnetism, the position of certain
mountain peaks in relation to his treasure trove, and so forth. He'd have
gotten a better reading at night, when he could shoot a complete scan, with
star-fixes to be completely sure of his location, but Malcolm decided he'd get
an accurate enough reading to find his little treasure with minimum difficulty
once he'd returned uptime.
   Having taken his ATLS reading, Chuck stowed the instrument generally used
only by trained time scouts in its leather bag on the pack horse-which now had
a much lighter burden-and started whistling again. He mounted his saddle
horse, glanced back at the watered sod, and said quite distinctly, "Not a bad
haul. Not bad at all. Boss is going to be pissed as hell about the lost
pieces, but that's the risk you take in this business." He chuckled. "Ah,
well. I should've known better than to buy that whole lot from one source.
Rotten little Egyptian. Too bad I won't be able to zip back down to Rome and
settle the score." With that, he clucked to his horses and set off at a brisk
trot toward town.
   Malcolm waited until he'd been out of sight for a full fifteen minutes,
then signaled Margo to wait. She thinned her lips, clearly seething at the
restriction, but this time she stayed put with no arguments. She was learning.
Good. Malcolm walked his horse around the clearing several times, but Chuck
showed no sign of returning. He filmed a close-up of the tamped down, wet sod,
then signaled Margo to join him. She did, grinning like the evil little imp
she was.

   "Okay," she said, fairly bursting with excitement, "what do we do? We've
got him dead to rights-but how do we catch him?"
   Malcolm chuckled. "We notify the uptime authorities the moment Primary
opens to stake out this spot. He'll 'show up to dig up his booty one nice
quiet night and they'll nail him. Meanwhile.. ." He turned off his camera,
stowed his log, and said, "Keep filming, would you, Margo? I'm going to leave
a nasty little surprise for our dear friend Chuck Farley, or whatever his real
name might be. Let's see, now..." He sorted through his saddlebags until he
found a short-handled camp spade he'd planned to use on a jaunt he'd wanted to
take Margo on out into the countryside.
   Instead of camping, they had something much more enjoyable lying ahead of
them. Malcolm chuckled, carefully laid Chuck's wet sod aside, then began to
dig. He uncovered every single plastic-wrapped case, then filled in the hole
with rocks while Margo recorded the whole thing. "What I intend to do," he
said, puffing for breath as he heaved the final rock into place, "is return
these antiquities to the ... proper authorities. There." He tamped dirt down
around the rocks until the entire hole had been filled, then settled the sod
back in place, watering it from his own canteen.
   Then he glanced into Margo's digitizing camera. "I am Malcolm Moore,
freelance time guide, working out of Time Terminal Eighty-Six. I hereby do
solemnly swear that a man known to me as Charles `Chuck' Farley acquired the
antiquities in these bags, which we recorded him commenting upon as he buried
them; that said Chuck Farley should be apprehended by uptime authorities for
antiquities fraud; for violation of the prime law of time travel; for tax
evasion on objects of immense artistic and historical/archaeological value;
and potentially for kidnapping, as two residents of TT-86 are missing as a
result of his actions.
   "I also hereby solemnly swear that as soon as the Wild West Gate reopens, I
will turn over each and every antiquity recorded here to the proper,
designated representative of IFARTS on TT-86 for cataloging, copying, and
return to its point of origin. I freely agree to serve as a witness at any
deposition or trial should the man calling himself Charles Farley be
apprehended."
   He signaled to Margo to hand him her camera. She passed it over and he
settled her face in the viewfinder. Her normally vivacious countenance was
unusually stern as she repeated approximately the same statement Malcolm had
just made, adding only-but significantly: " ... and should be charged for
murder or manslaughter, should one Skeeter Jackson be determined to have died
in an attempt to stop Chuck Farley's intended plans, an attempt witnessed by
several hundred individuals in Time Terminal Eighty-Six and recorded by one of
the tourists. This can also be corroborated by Time Tours, Inc., as Mr.
Jackson `crashed' the gate in a desperate bid to stop the kidnapping of a TT-
86 resident. Should Mr. Jackson's deceased remains be discovered downtime, I
strongly urge whatever court may hear this testimony to charge the man known
to us as Charles Farley with murder, manslaughter, or whatever charge the
prosecution may deem appropriate under the circumstances. Chuck Farley is an
evil, ruthless man who will stop at nothing to gain what he wants and if
caught should be denied bail and punished accordingly"
   Malcolm was nodding silently, pleased that she'd thought of those finishing
touches. Jackson was no friend, but his action at the Porta Romae two week
previously had elevated him in Malcolm's estimation by several notches of
respect. Malcolm just hoped that whatever was happening downtime in Rome,
Skeeter and Marcus would make it back to La-La Land safely.
   Malcolm thought of Ianira and those two beautiful little girls and silently
told himself that going after Farley in person and calling him out to a duel
here and now in Denver would not only be suicidal, it would put Margo in
desperate danger, as well. Nevertheless, his hands itched to line up Farley's

bearded face in the sights of the Colt single-action army revolver strapped to
his waist and squeeze off as many shots as it held.
   Malcolm did not like losing friends. If Marcus and Skeeter didn't return by
the next cycling of the Porta Romae, Malcolm would be ready to go through the
other direction and hunt for them. Rome was a big city, but Malcolm had his
sources and so did Time Tours, Inc. Losing two 'eighty-sixers--even if one
were a downtimer and the other a gate crashing con man and thief-would
definitely not be good for their public image or their business. Malcolm would
personally make them see that, if necessary.
   Malcolm smiled grimly. Oh, yes, there would eventually be a reckoning with
Mr. Chuck Farley, if Malcolm had to go uptime and hunt him down, himself. He
just hoped Skeeter Jackson and Marcus were still alive and able to testify
when that reckoning finally came.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
   The sun beat down fierce as any Mongolian desert sky, and the sand
underfoot was hot enough that Skeeter could feel it through the thin leather
soles of his shoes-sandals that were mostly straps. Heat radiated off the
arena sands, boiled off the embossed plaques of the great bronze turning
posts, blinded the eye with tier after tier of stone and wooden seats and
marble temples built right into the stadium itself. Sound roared down,
assaulting his ears until his head ached, with the heart-freezing beat of a
hundred thousand voices screaming in one solid mass nearly a mile long on each
side.
   Skeeter swallowed, briefly closed his eyes, and thought, If Ianira's right,
then I could use a little help here, Artemis.- And Athene, Ianira says you
even, beat the God of War in battle once. I sure could use some assistance. He
even prayed to the Mongolian sky and thunder gods, as well as the singular
Trinity of the Methodist church to which his mother had dragged him as a small
boy. When it came to prayer, Skeeter wasn't too particular at just this moment
Who answered, so long as They helped him get out of this fight alive. He
wondered how many other prayers were winging their way heavenward with his.
   He counted the pairs: twenty men, fighting in ten pairs, all at the same
time. Two pairs of essedarii would be fighting from chariots drawn by a couple
of horses each. A pair of laqueatores would fight one another with throwing
slings-he'd seen what they could do during practice and was glad he wasn't
fighting one of them. Two pairs of myrmillones in their weird, Gaulish helmets
with the fish soldered on top would slash and stab it out with swords. Two
retiarii were paired off against their traditional pursuers, the heavily
shielded secutores with their massive, visored helmets, shields, and short
swords. A duo of mounted andabates brought a dull, burning anger to Skeeter's
gut. Mounted, he could've held his own for at least a little while, by running
his horse in circles around the gladiator until Lupus fell down from
exhaustion, if nothing else. But he didn't have a horse. The last two pairs
were armed the same way he and Lupus were: the underdogs with nets and
tridents, like the retaarii, with lassos as backup weapons, while they faced
seasoned champions who fought nearly naked-but with a wicked sword in each
hand.
   As a group, they marched stolidly out across the burning arena sands to the
Imperial Box, while the slam and whap of the starting-gate boxes being closed
up reached his ears. A deep water moat at least ten feet across separated the
fighters from the crowd, not to mention an iron fence tall and solid enough to
keep an elephant from breaking through it. A few massive dents which even
blacksmiths hadn't quite been able to unkink caused Skeeter to wonder if
injured elephants had tried an escape through that fence.
   The only hiding place anywhere out here was up on the spine, a collection
of long, rectangular pedestals between the racing turns, on which stood

statues of various deities, winged Victories that Skeeter hoped were smiling
on him today, and an enormous Egyptian obelisk right in the center.
   Skeeter's lanista prodded him. The gladiators were bowing to the Emperor.
They shouted as one, "We who are about to die..."
   Skeeter stumbled over the words, more because his Latin just wasn't very
good than from a shaking voice. Besides, he didn't feel like saluting the
Roman emperor.
   Claudius was sitting up there like a deformed god, gazing coldly down on
them like they were insects about to provide some trifling amusement. As a
displaced Mongolian bogda, that made Skeeter mad. For five years, l was a god,
too, dammit. I was lonely as hell, but I'm just as good as you are, Imperator
Claudius.
   Anger was far better than fear. He fed it, cunningly, as a fox fed his
craftiness to catch unsuspecting the prey that thought itself safe. The
champion of a hundred or more victories, Rome's wildly popular Death Wolf,
bowed low and received the adulation of tens of thousands of voices: "Lupus!
Lupus! Lupus!"
   Skeeter glanced at his trainer who held a whip in one hand and a red-hot
branding iron in the other, to encourage him if necessary. He laughed aloud,
visibly disconcerting the man, then turned his back. He wouldn't need that
sort of encouragement. A swift glance at Rome's Death Wolf showed him a
grinning, overconfident champion already counting his victory. Skeeter knew he
should've been scared to his bones. But the knowledge that Marcus was standing
somewhere to his left, watching helplessly because both of them had been
betrayed, burned away fear as effectively as the Mongolian desert sun.
   The Emperor raised his hand, then dropped it. A monstrous roar beat at him-
then he was dancing aside, away from Lupus' flashing double swords. He
narrowed his eyes against the glare, wishing for a pair of sunglasses, a suit
of chainmail made from titanium links, and an MP-5 submachinegun with about
fifty spare magazines of ammo, and began the fight for his life.
   The roar of the crowd faded from his awareness. Skeeter's whole
concentration narrowed to Lupus Mortiferus and his flashing swords and
grinning face. He danced this way and that, feinting and falling back, getting
the champion's rhythms down, then made his first net cast. Lupus lunged aside
barely in time. The crowd's roar penetrated his concentration even as he
danced backward, away from those deadly blades and reeled in the net by the
attached string. He held the heavy trident out to block thrusts or slashes and
allowed his mind to race ahead with ideas.
   The great spine of the Circus wasn't solid. It had gaps in it, wide enough
for a man to duck into-or through. Skeeter ducked. Lupus swore hideously, his
bulk too large to follow. He ran around the long distance of the spine to
catch him on the other side. Skeeter simply ran back the other way. The
crowd's roar turned to howls of laughter. Lupus' face, when Skeeter glimpsed
it, was almost the color of pickled beets. The gladiator, veins in neck and
throat standing out in clear relief, charged back down the long wall of the
spine.
   Gee, maybe hell have a stroke and I'll win by default.
   No such luck, though. Lupus scrambled through sideways this time, grunting
and cursing at him as he scraped belly and back on rough stone. Skeeter dodged
out into the open, where he most profoundly did not want to be, but avoided a
deadly sword thrust aimed at his side. Shouts and cries from the stands
indicated that someone had gone down. Skeeter's peripheral vision showed him
one of the netmen down, left arm upraised in supplication. The crowd was
roaring, thumbs turned up . The Emperor copied their motion, jerking his thumb
upward from gut to throat.
   The secutore who'd hacked his opponent's leg out from under him plunged the
sword through his fallen opponent's chest. The crowd roared its approval.

Skeeter ran, Lupus chasing him, and dodged around behind one of the racing
chariots, drawing curses from its driver as well as from Lupus. Skeeter caught
the harness of one of the horses and hung on, letting the horse save his
strength while Lupus fought to get past the encumbering chariot. Down where
the dead gladiator lay, a man raced out from the starting stalls and smote the
poor bastard a skull-cracking blow from an enormous hammer, then dragged the
body away.
   Okay. Thumbs -up means you're a gonner and if the guy you re fighting
doesn't do it properly, they'll finish you off. Good things to know, Skeeter,
my boy.
   He let go of the chariot horse's harness and darted between a pair of
circling horsemen, ducking under one horse's belly. The startled animal
screamed and reared, blocking Lupus' way. The crowd roared its approval with
cheers and laughter. Sweat dripped into his eyes, along with a pall of dust
stirred up from the speeding, circling chariots and horsemen-forcing him to
blink tears from his eyes. Not near as bad as a rip-snorting Gobi sandstorm,
though, Skeeter decided. He was quite abruptly very glad Yesukai the Valiant
had made him go on that hunt so many years previously.
   If I can take a snow leopard with a bow, I can take this bastard.
   Maybe.
   If I'm really damned careful.
   When Lupus closed, Skeeter dove for the ground, rolling under the stabbing
swords, and came up with a fistful of sand and a net, both of which he flung
at the cursing gladiator. Lupus snarled, swiping at his eyes with the backs of
his hands while fighting blindly to free one entangled leg. Skeeter hauled-
hard. Lupus went down-harder. The crowd surged to its collective feet,
screaming its bloodlust. Lupus hacked at the net, managing to free himself
before Skeeter could close with the lethal trident.
   Shit! Goddammit, I don't really want to kill this cretin., but what am I
supposed to do? Ask him to dance? Skeeter skipped back out of range while
Lupus fought to clear sand from his eyes. Skeeter unwound the lasso from his
waist. He formed a hasty loop and swung it easily. A lasso, he knew how to
use. Skeeter grinned, a taut, fang-bearing grin. During his brutal training
he'd deliberately fumbled the lasso exercises, same as he'd tossed the net
with awkward casts. They'd thought it a monstrously funny joke, sending him
out with the weapons he'd done poorest with.
   Bless you, Yesukai, wherever you are, for teaching me a sneaky trick or
two.
   The crowd roared again, three times in rapid succession as gladiators fell
to their opponents and died. The next one was spared and limped bravely from
the sands while Skeeter ducked and dodged and felt his own strength ebbing
under the cruel sun and Lupus' inexorable stalk.
   Gotta do something spectacular, Skeeter, or it's shish, kabob a la Skeeter
as the main course.
   A charioteer went down, dragged behind his spooked horses. The crowd
screamed its decision and the other charioteer sued, stabbing his opponent to
death on the run before collecting his prize and leaving the arena under armed
escort.
   Okay, so even if you win, a bunch of soldiers are waiting to haul your butt
back to barracks. Another good thing to know.
   A slice of fire along his ribs sent the breath rushing out of him in a
hiss. He brought up the trident, cursing his momentary lapse of attention, and
managed to entangle the bloody sword in the prongs. He gave a heave and a
twist and the sword snapped off halfway down. Lupus snarled and lunged forward
while the crowd went mad, on its feet and screaming. The cut along his ribs
burned like a thousand ant bites. If it'd been a slashing blow instead of a
stabbing one, he'd be on his back in the sand, bleeding to death from the deep

wound.
   Skeeter stumbled away, too tired to dance lightly on his feet any longer.
Lupus grinned and closed in for the kill. Skeeter, unable to think of anything
else, began to sing, his voice hoarse with pain and fatigue. Lupus' eyes
widened. Skeeter sang on, a wild, hair-raising Yakka Mongolian war song, while
the crowd nearest them fell silent, as disbelieving as Lupus. Skeeter pressed
the slight advantage and whirled the lasso expertly. It settled over Lupus'
body and slid down to the knees. Skeeter jerked. Lupus went down with a
startled yell.
   Skeeter couldn't understand individual words in the immense wall of sound
that beat down across him, but he gathered the general gist of it was, "Skewer
his belly with the trident, you fool!"
   Skeeter didn't. Lupus hadn't asked for quarter, but Skeeter wasn't about to
take the man's life unless ordered to do so. And maybe not even then. What
happened to a gladiator who refused the express orders of crowd and Emperor?
That maniac with the hammer probably crushes your skull or something. While
Skeeter was thinking such happy thoughts, Lupus hacked at the rope binding his
legs. It gave way with a snap, leaving Skeeter with half the length of the
original lasso. He took to his heels, fashioning another knot and threading it
as he ran--and then it happened.
   The answer to all those prayers he'd sent heavenward.
   A mounted andabate, mortally wounded by his opponent, toppled to the sand.
While the crowd was cheering and the victor was collecting his prize and the
hammer-happy executioner was making damned sure the poor sap was dead, the
loose horse ran within lassoing distance. Skeeter flipped the rope expertly
and tightened it down. The poor horse reared once, half-heartedly, more
confused than ornery. Skeeter ran toward it, leaping into the saddle with old
skill he'd never quite forgotten. There were no stirrups, as there had been on
Mongolian ponies, but the saddle was a good one and the horse, after one
snort, settled down and responded to the hastily gathered reins.
   Skeeter whirled the animal's head around and caught a glimpse of Lupus
gaping up at him. Skeeter laughed aloud, started his war song again, and
charged, trident lowered like a medieval jousting lance. Lupus hurled himself
out of the way, barely missing the horse's thundering hooves. The crowd went
maniacal. Even the Emperor had straightened in his chair, leaning forward
intently.
   Wonder if this is afoul or just something they didn't expect?
   Skeeter worked Lupus in circles, harried him with the tip of the long
trident, tripping him up and letting him rise again, just to let his opponent-
and the crowd-know he was toying with a doomed -victim. Skeeter's blood sang
in his veins. This was living! Driving your opponent back against the wall,
looking him in the eye and seeing nothing but shock and dawning terror ... .
   Lupus tried to bring up the single remaining blade he carried, but Skeeter
caught it in the prongs of the trident and ripped it out of his grasp. A
collective gasp went up from the crowd. Unarmed, Lupus snarled up at him, then
grabbed the trident. For a few seconds, no more although it seemed like
minutes-they played tug-of-war, Skeeter skillfully backing and turning his
mount with legs and reins. Lupus was forced to follow, putting all his weight
into the effort of wresting the trident loose.
   Skeeter glanced along the barrier wall of the long spine and felt his heart
leap with wicked joy. A long, long hunting spear from an earlier fight had
tumbled to the sand at the foot of some enormous, golden goddess in a chariot
drawn by lions. Skeeter grinned, and let go of the trident. Lupus staggered
backwards and fell, wounding himself inadvertently as he went down, the weight
of the trident's barbs cutting one arm and drawing blood on his bare chest.
   Under a solid wall of noise from a hundred thousand human throats, Skeeter
licked his mount into a startled gallop and leaned forward and down, his head

mere inches from the wall of the spine. A miscalculation at this speed would
be death-then he closed his hand around the hunting spear, clutching it
solidly in one hand. He whirled his mount around, bringing the long shaft up
and around even as he regained his seat in the saddle. Then he charged, spear
held like a medieval lance.
   Lupus parried awkwardly with the trident, a weapon he was clearly not
accustomed to using. Skeeter raced past at full speed, passed the turning post
at the far end of the straightaway, then whirled and sent his horse leaping
over a tiny shrine on a circular pedestal set right down on the track. Another
gasp went up from the crowd. If that was sacrilege, sorry about that, whoever
you're dedicated to.
   Whoever it was, they didn't seem to mind.
   The crowd started chanting what sounded at first like "mercy," then
resolved into a single word: "Murcia! Murcia! Murcia!"
   Skeeter had no idea who or what Murcia was. The only thing of immediate
concern to him was the stumbling figure of Lupus Mortiferus ahead, trying to
bring the trident around, its tines aimed low this time, to catch his horse.
Skeeter windmilled the spear in his grasp, letting it slide butt-first until
he gripped it near the lethal tip. At the last second, he jerked his mount's
head, sweeping past just out of range of the trident. The solid butt-end of
the spear clanged against Lupus' head with such force that it lifted the
gladiator off the sands, bent in his helmet, and hurled him at least four feet
across the arena floor.
   Skeeter whirled his mount for another charge, but there was no need. Lupus
didn't stir on the sands. He was-thank all gods-still breathing, but he was
clearly down, and out for the count. The crowd had gone absolutely mad, waving
colored handkerchiefs, screaming words he couldn't begin to translate,
throwing flowers, even coins, through the high fence and across the wide gap
of water. Skeeter drew another wild burst of enthusiasm when he dipped from
one side to another, scooping up anything that gleamed silver or gold in the
sands.
   He ended in front of the Emperor, sitting his mount easily, breathing
quickly and lightly against the fire in his side where Lupus' sword had grazed
him. The Emperor met his gaze for long moments. Skeeter, who had met without
flinching the gaze of the man who'd sired Genghis Khan, stared right back at
Claudius, neither of them speaking. The Emperor glanced at the crowd, at the
fallen champion, then back to the crowd. Then, with a swift gesture, he drove
his, thumb down, sparing a brave man's life with a single movement.
   Skeeter would've sagged with relief and exhaustion had he not faced a yet
worse challenge: escaping the Circus alive. He had absolutely no intention of
being hauled back to that training camp in chains. The Emperor was beckoning
him forward. Skeeter moved his horse closer. A slave ran from the Emperor's
box and hurled a laurel crown and a heavy sack down to him. Skeeter caught
them, felt the bulge of coins inside, knew the prize was a really big one and
felt the skin of his face stretching into a savage grin as he donned his
honest-to-God victory crown.
   All he had to do now was figure out a way to: One, escape the soldiers who
were even now galloping toward him from the starting stalls-which had already
been shut behind them; Two, figure a way over that high iron fence; Three,
somehow rescue Marcus from his so-called master; and Four, hide out until the
Porta Romae cycled again.
   After what he'd just been through, his impudent mind whispered, Piece of
cake. The rest of him, aware how close it had been, resumed intense prayers to
Anyone who'd listen. Even the mysterious Murcia, with his or her little shrine
down in the track itself, next to a scraggly little tree growing from the
hardpacked sand.
   He caught a thrown handkerchief, which landed on the sands nearly at his

horse's hooves, with the tip of his spear and brought it up, snapping bravely
in the wind of his horse's canter as he rode toward the soldiers, carrying
that handkerchief like the pennon of victory it was. He tucked the coins he'd
scooped from the sand into the quilted, chain-studded sleeve that protected
his net arm, shoved the money pouch's leather thong into his waistband, and
sent his horse flying past the soldiers in a sweeping victory lap of the
Circus. The crowd was on its feet, hurling money at him which he scooped up as
best he could on the gallop, aiming for golden gleams in the sand. And as he
rode, Skeeter looked for a way-any way-out of this pit of sand and death. He
rounded the far turn, mounted soldiers riding easily behind him, and headed
down the long sweep of the straightaway toward the starting stalls, with their
wooden doors, metal grills set above into marble, and above that, the open
balustrade where officials stood, having doubtless watched with delight the
show he'd put on saving his skin.
   He measured the height critically, glanced at the long spear in his hand,
studied the looming marble wall he and his horse thundered toward-and made the
only decision he could. He'd mounted horses that way dozens of times, learning
to do what the older boys and warriors could do, earning their grudging
respect as he mastered skill after skill. He'd never scaled a fifteen-foot
wall off the back of a horse, but with the horse's momentum and the long axis
of the spear...
   It was his only hope. He headed his mount for the starting gates at a
rushing gallop, aiming between the tall, semihuman stones that stood on round
stone bases between each starting stall. When he was certain the horse wasn't
going to shy on him, he stood up in the saddle, drawing a gasp and thunderous
roar from the crowd. Skeeter narrowed his eyes, timing it, timing it-and
planted the butt of the spear solidly on the pavement in front of the starting
stalls. Momentum from the galloping horse and the long arm of the spear helped
as he leaped and swung his body up, higher and higher as he twisted like an
Olympic pole vaulter, up past the heads of the statues, up past the grillwork
on the stalls, up and up past the marble facade of the balustrade...
   Then he was over the top, rolling like a cat across an incredibly hard
stone floor. His laurel crown, loose around his head, fluttered back down to
the arena sands. Shocked officials simply stood rooted, staring open-mouthed
at him as he continued the roll and came to his feet, weaponless but free of
the suddenly astonished soldiers in the arena below. Then his eyes met the
stunned gaze of his one-time friend.
   Marcus, standing behind a richly dressed man who was gaping at Skeeter,
ignored everything, even his "master," to stare, jaw slack, even hands slack
as he completely failed to write down the winner of this particular bout.
Obviously, he still couldn't believe it. What had Marcus told him? Honor was
all he had left of his tribe? Skeeter's throat closed. The money in the pouch
still tucked through his belt seemed to burn him, saying, l will win your
wager. Cut your losses and run, fool!
   Instead, he hurled the heavy prize pouch at Marcus' master. It thumped off
his chest and fell to the marble floor with a solid chink of gold. "I'm buying
and you're selling," Skeeter snarled in bad Latin. Then, in English, "All
debts paid in full, pal. Now run like hell!"
   Without bothering to see if Marcus followed, Skeeter did just that,
bursting down the stairs to the street level before the soldiers down there
could recover their wits enough to ride him down. Every stride hurt him, hurt
his ribs, hurt with the knowledge that he'd lost his wager for sure
   "This way!" Marcus' voice yelled behind him.
   A hand grabbed his iron collar and forcibly jerked him into a narrow
alleyway that wound down around the Aventine Hill away from the Circus. The
roar from the great arena was deafening, even at this distance.
   "We've got to get you out of that gladiator's getup or we're lost!" Marcus

yelled practically in his ear.
   Skeeter just nodded. The next man they came to, Skeeter simply tackled and
stripped, top to toe. The fellow protested loudly until Marcus, showing a
ruthlessness Skeeter had never witnessed, simply kicked him in the head until
he passed out.
   "Hurry!" Marcus urged, scanning the street for any sign of pursuit.
   Skeeter wriggled out of his protective sleeve, forming a bag of it with
knots at both ends to hold his coins, then skinned into tunic and perniciously
awkward toga while Marcus dragged the unconscious man into an alleyway. "Hey,
Marcus, know where we might find a blacksmith's shop?"
   Marcus laughed, a little shrilly. "Follow me."
   Skeeter grinned. "Lead the way."
   The blacksmith was close, tucked between a potter's stand and a bakery.
Before the blacksmith knew what was up, Skeeter had grabbed a dagger, a sword
and a belt, and cutting tools, then he and Marcus were off and running again,
dodging into twisting alleyways until Marcus pulled him into a rutted little
snaking pathway between tall wooden tenements.
   "Here! Give me the cutting tools! Bend your head!"
   Skeeter did as he was told, even as he strapped the swordbelt on and hid
the sleeve full of money in the awkward folds of his badly draped toga. The
lock on his collar snapped.
   Skeeter grabbed the tools. "You next."
   "But-I can't pass for a citizen!"
   "Then pass for a freedman!"
   "But I have no freedman's cap or-"
   "Shut up and turn around! We'll get one! Or would you rather get caught by
whoever's been sent after us?"
   "The Praetorian Guard?" Marcus shuddered and bent his head. Skeeter went to
work on the lock holding his friend's collar in place. The lock gave with a
screech, then broke. Marcus jerked the collar loose with a low snarl.
   "I have been keeping track of the days. The Porta Romae cycled last night."
   Skeeter swore. "Then we hide out for two weeks and make our getaway next
cycle. Broad daylight'll work to our benefit, anyway. More chances for a
diversion to get you back through."
   Marcus paused, dark eyes blazing with unspoken emotion.
   "Don't mention it. All in the package deal. One combat, two escapes. C'mon,
let's make tracks before those guards figure out which alleyway we dodged
down.
   They waylaid a hapless freedman by simply racing past him and snatching off
his peaked cap. They rounded two corners and Marcus jammed it onto his own
head.
   "Hope he didn't have head lice," Marcus grumbled.
   Skeeter laughed aloud. "Rachel Eisenstein will disinfect you nicely, if he
did. And I don't think Ianira would give a damn even if Rachel didn't
disinfect you. Okay, one more block, down that little alley, then we slow down
to a nice leisurely walk, a citizen and his freedman out for a stroll ... ."
   About ten minutes later, mounted Praetorian guardsmen tore past them,
searching the crowds for a fleeing gladiator and his collared companion.
Marcus waited until they were out of sight to sigh in heartfelt relief.
Skeeter grinned. "See? Told you it'd be a piece of cake." He didn't mention
that his knees were a little weak and his insides shook like gelatin in a
blender.
   Marcus glared at him. "You did not say any such thing, Skeeter Jackson!"
   His grin widened. "No. But I thought it, to give myself the nerve to try
pole-vaulting out. And look at us, now; we're alive and we're free. Let's keep
it that way, if it's all right by you."
   Dark emotion bubbled up in Marcus' eyes again. "It is very much all right

by me."
   "Good. I think I see an inn up ahead. Know anything about it?"
   Marcus peered through the crowd. "No. But this is a good part of town. It
should be safe enough and serve food worth eating."
   "Sounds good to me." He chuckled. "Nothing like that proverbial purloined
letter."
   "The what?"
   "A story I read once. Sherlock Holmes. Best place to hide something is
right out in the open, where nobody expects to find it."
   Marcus laughed, not from mirth but from sheer amazement.
   "Skeeter Jackson, you astonish me more and more the longer I know you."
   Skeeter rubbed the side of his nose, feeling heat creep into his face.
"Yeah, well, I've had an interesting sorta life. I'd about ten times rather
have a great wife and a couple of kids, right about now. Hell, I'd settle for
a friend." Marcus cast a glance in his direction, but didn't speak. Skeeter
felt the silence like a punch to his gut. He dragged in a deep breath, even
that hurting, and muttered, "Okay, here we go. Your Latin's better than mine
and something tells me rich guys don't do the dickering."
   Marcus smiled. "You learn quickly. Keep closed your mouth and no one will
be the wiser."
   Skeeter grinned, then dutifully closed his mouth, shook loose some coins,
and handed several of the silver ones over. "That be enough?"
   "I'd say so. Now hush and let me play the hero this time."
   They stepped into the cool quiet of the inn and met the bright smile of the
proprietor. Marcus launched into Latin too rapid to follow, but it got
results. They were taken to a private room and shortly were feasting on
chilled wine, roasted duckling, and a pot of boiled beef and cabbage. Skeeter
ate until he couldn't hold another bite.
   "Gawd, that was heavenly.
   Marcus wiped his mouth and nodded. "Much better than wheat gruel." He
paused, then added awkwardly, "If-if you will take that tunic off, Skeeter, I
will wash and bandage your injuries."
   Skeeter didn't argue. His wounds stung and burned every time he moved in
his stolen garments of wool. Marcus tore up some of the bedding and laved the
long slice with clean water, then wound strips of cotton around Skeeter's
torso. "There. That should keep the blood from seeping out and giving you
away." He cautiously dabbed at the stains on the side of the tunic, which the
long toga had hidden. Most of them came out with the application of cold
water. Marcus finished that chore and hung up the tunic to dry, then cleared
his throat. "If you will give me the sword, I will stand guard. You are
exhausted, Skeeter. Sleep. Anyone looking for you will have to kill me."
   Skeeter held his gaze for a moment and realized Marcus meant it. He didn't
know what to say. Maybe ... just maybe ... all those prayers he'd uttered back
at the start of the fighting had given him back not only his life, but a
chance at winning back the friendship he'd so thoughtlessly shattered?
   Because he couldn't have spoken to save his half-wild soul, Skeeter sank
back on the denuded mattress without a single word and was asleep before
Marcus had finished setting aside the dishes from their meal. His final
thought was, if I do have a second chance, don't let me screw it up. Please.
   Then all was silence and peaceful sleep while Marcus stood guard over him,
placing his life between Skeeter and the door.
   Goldie Morran spent an unhappy two weeks, waiting with the rest of TT-86
for word of Skeeter Jackson. As she'd discovered already, she didn't want
Skeeter dead. Kicked off the station had seemed like a grand idea, but now ...
all she could do was wonder what he was up to downtime. Rescuing Marcus? She
snorted. Goldie really couldn't credit that, Dr. Mundy and vidcam evidence
notwithstanding. A person could always interpret a bit of evidence ten

different ways from Sunday. Besides, Skeeter was too much like Goldie to spend
his time rescuing a worthless slave when he could be scamming so much gold
downtime, she'd never catch up. Of course, Brian might disallow it, on the
grounds that the wager was on hold. Or, she shuddered delicately behind her
cold, glass-top counters-that dratted librarian might just decide that since
Skeeter would have had no way of knowing the wager was on hold, his earnings
would count.
   Curse the boy!
   She was theoretically ahead, with more than half the bet's term left to
run. If Skeeter returned.
   What if Skeeter never returned? Some people thought Goldie was a heartless
sociopath. She wasn't although she put out considerable effort to seem that
way. So if Skeeter Jackson, never mind that nice kid who tended bar at the
Down Time never came back, she'd have their fates on her conscience.
   And backstabbing cheat that she knew herself to be, that was something she
knew she couldn't live with. Please, she whispered silently, bring them back.
l miss that obnoxious little bastard. She was discovering she actually missed
watching that boy con tourists out of cash, cameras, wristwatches, wallets,
and anything else he could lift to turn a buck. She even missed the arguments
over whiskey and beer at the Down Time while tourists who wandered in watched,
goggle eyed .... I miss them. Bring them back, please. Whatever I felt before,
l never meant for this to happen.
   Goldie didn't realize she was crying until the tears dripped with a soft
splash onto her glass counter. When she sniffed and looked around to find a
handkerchief, she found a young Asian woman she'd never laid eyes on standing
in front of her counter. The girl offered a clean, beautifully embroidered
handkerchief.
   "Here, Miss Mon-an, you are hurting. You have much to be sorry for, but we
understand."
   Without another word, she slipped out of Goldie's shop, moving with the
unobtrusive grace of a girl trained in one of the finest geisha houses in
Japan. Goldie stared at the embroidered handkerchief, stared at the doorway,
then very slowly dried her face and blew her nose. It wasn't easy, facing the
fact that if those two boys didn't return, it would be largely her fault.
   "All I ask," Goldie muttered, blowing her nose miserably again, "is a
chance to tell that miserable, thieving, no-good cheat that I'm sorry-to his
face."
   A tiny whisper at the back of her mind warned her to be wary of what one
asked the gods for, lest they grant it.
   Just where was Skeeter Jackson? And what the living hell was he doing down
there in ancient Rome? Playing hero? Or playing the cad? She hoped she'd have
the chance to find out which.
   Goldie sniffed one last time and wadded up the exquisite handkerchief until
her hand hurt.
   "Come back, damn you!"
   Only the chill of her glass cases, filled with cold, rare coins, cool,
smooth miniature sculptures in precious stones, and the frozen glitter of a
few scattered jewels on shivering velvet heard.
CHAPTER NINETEEN
   For the remainder of their stay in Denver, the man calling himself Chuck
Farley spent his time visiting one cathouse after another. Margo wrinkled her
nose as they watched quietly in the darkness while he entered yet another
establishment of ill repute.
   "I hope he catches something really nasty!"
   "He might, at that," Malcolm muttered. "He's doubtless been inoculated,
because smallpox is still rampant in these parts, but he might catch a social

disease and be put into quarantine. Dr. Eisenstein could either heal it or
recommend permanent quarantine. Uptime, too; Rachel Eisenstein takes her job
very seriously, she does. She wants to ensure diseases like that don't get
passed on to anyone in the real world." A bitter chuckle issued near her ear.
"He would certainly deserve it. But it's more likely he's gathering additional
inventory.
   "To make up for the pieces that didn't come through the gate with him?"
   "Exactly."
   Margo flounced as only Margo could do while standing perfectly still. Her
dress rustled like wind through aspens at her movement. "He's disgusting," she
muttered under her breath. "And he doesn't look or act rich enough to keep
those for himself. Wonder who his uptime buyer is?"
   Malcolm stared at her with considerable surprise. He hadn't expected her to
pick up on that part of it so fast. But there were uptime billionaires who
paid agents to loot the past for their collections. A tiny number of the
agents moving downtime then uptime again had been caught, their stolen
antiquities confiscated and turned over to IFARTS for evaluation and return
downtime. Disgusting was far too mild a word for the kind of man who'd pay
others to take the risks, do the legwork-the dirty, often lethal work. The
payoff from the actual client would, of course, be only a fraction of what the
antiquities were worth, but enough to keep them busily moving back and forth
time and again, to steal even more artwork.
   Malcolm realized from Margo's look, she'd like to do murder when Farley
exited the house. And with the gun concealed in her fur muff, she probably
could have drilled him through whichever eye she chose. As though following
his thoughts, she glared at the cathouse Farley had entered. He half expected
a Margo-style explosion or an outright attack murderous with pent-up emotion,
but all she said was, "Creeps."
   The deep silence of the late Denver night was shattered abruptly by the
rumbling, squeaking, and groaning Conestoga wagons-along line of them, which
began forming up nose-to-tail on a long, dirt road that led southeastward out
of town. "Malcolm," she whispered, "is that what I think it is? A real,
honest-to-goodness wagon train?"
   With the ease of long practice, Malcolm shifted into his Denver persona.
   "Yeah, I s'pect so, ma'am. Lots of prairie schooners in that train."
   Malcolm's uncanny ability to mimic local languages, even dialects, always
amazed Margo. It was his way of reminding Margo that she, too, would have to
master the knack.
   "But I thought all the wagon trains were a thing of the past? I mean, I
read somewhere that the whole continent had been settled by 1885 or so."
   Malcolm shook his head. "Nope. With book learnin' you has to go deep to
ferret out truth. Lemme 'splain somethin', ma'am. This here city o' Denver
weren't nothin' more'n paper plans, laid out nice and neat, back in '59. Then
along comes the Pikes Peak rush, over what?'
   Margo's brow furrowed delightfully Then her whole face lit with an
incandescent glow. "Gold! The 59 Gold Rush."
   Malcolm chuckled. "Very good. 'Cept nobody could find any. Miners called it
the biggest humbug in all history, they did, and left in disgust. But the
experienced men, now, the ones who'd sluiced and dug out the big Georgia and
California motherlode, they stayed on. Saw the same signs, they did, same as
the signs they'd noticed before. So they stayed on and come late '59 and into
'60, made the really big strikes. Caused another rush, of course," he chuckle.
   "Yes, but what's that got to do with that?" She pointed toward the wagons.
   "W-e-e-l-l-l, that's another story, now, ain't it? There's still odd bits
and pieces o' land rattling around this big country, pieces that're still
unclaimed for homesteadin'." He lowered his voice to a nearly inaudible
murmur. He whispered into her ear, "In fact, four times as many acres were

homesteaded after 1890 than before it, but you'd never guess it from period
attitudes about land. It borders on sacredness." Then at a slightly higher
volume and a more discreet distance, he said, "Take careful note 'o what those
wagons is carryin'. And what they ain't."
   Another lesson, even during the very serious duty of watching for sluglike
Farley? Malcolm Moore was always so sure of himself, yet so gentle compared to
the men in her old life. She studied each wagon in turn, trying to ignore
weird shadows thrown against the canvas tops as those departing checked over
their equipment. She saw the usual rifles and pistols, bandoliers and boxes of
ammunition to hunt game for the table, dozens of tools whose use Margo could
only guess at, and a few rough-hewn bits of furniture.
   "No women's things," Margo said abruptly. "No trunks for clothing or
quilts, no butter churns, no barrels of padded china from back East. And no
children. Those men aren't married. No farming equipment either, and no
livestock except the oxen and horses pulling those wagons. Not even a single
laying hen-and you can hear them clucking a fair distance away. And believe
me, they cluck loud when they're upset. Do you hear any chickens?"
   Malcolm shook his head solemnly.
   "No, me neither."
   "Very nice, indeed," Malcolm purred. "You've a good eye-and ear-for detail.
Now just keep up with the bookwork and you'll make one damned fine time
scout."
   Margo's fierce blush was, thank God, hidden by the dark night.
   "Those," Malcolm continued very quietly, "are hardened frontiersmen, always
on the move. They follow the remnants of the buffalo herds for their hides,
which are commanding good prices again, now that there are so few buffalo
left. They follow hints and whispers of gold found on this creek or that. Or
they work for hire as ranch hands, even drovers, although that profession is
just about as extinct as the poor buffalo. Now that bunch," he turned Margo's
head toward the front wagon in the caravan, "is bound for the Indian
Territory, or my name isn't Malcolm Moore."
   "Indian Territory?" Margo echoed.
   "Later renamed several things, but Oklahoma was generally mixed in there
somewhere. Right now men are streaming in by the hundreds to support David
Payne, a cutthroat frontiersman leading a band of even more violent
frontiersman in a war against the Indians given that land, even against the
Federal Government."
   "Your accent's slipping,"
   "Right you are, ma'am, and thank you it is for the reminder."
   "So," Margo concentrated, her brow deeply furrowed as she thought it
through, "these men are going to stir up Indian tribes by taking part of their
land illegally?"
   "Yep. Worse trouble'n anybody thought they'd stir up. But the whole
country's clamorin' to kick out the `savages' and open up Oklahoma for
`decent' folk to settle."
   Margo shivered, watching these men pack away their clothes, excess weapons,
and whatever they considered valuable enough to take along. The rest, they
abandoned along the road, in bundles and boxes, for anyone to salvage. "The
more I learn about history, the more savage I find it was. These men are going
out to murder as many Indians as they can get into their goddamned sights,
aren't they?"
   "My dear lady, you shock me! Such language!"
   Gentle reprimand, steel-hard warning behind it. Ladies of quality did not
curse like sailors in 1885, not even in the frontier. Of course, barmaids and
whores could be expected to say anything and everything ... but Margo did most
emphatically not wish to be associated with them.
   Not Minnesota prudishness this time-she'd lost a lot of that on a beach in

Southeastern Africa-but a cold, calculated decision in the direction of
survival. Time scouts, as her grandfather Kit Carson put it, had to be bloody
careful anywhere downtime. Especially if scouting an unknown gate. Shaking
inside her frontier, multibutton, impossible-to-fasten boots (until Malcolm,
shaking with silent laughter, handed her a button hook and explained its use)
Margo recalled her formidable but lonely grandfather, a man who'd stepped
through a gate to rescue her, not knowing if he'd survive the trip to the
other side; then glared at the men in those murder-wagons, at the ones
standing outside in little knots, smoking some kind of foul-smelling cigars,
their boasts of killing no-account Indians like it was some insane game where
they tallied score by the number of people they butchered.
   Not that she thought the Indians shoved into that Oklahoma Reservation to
be the peaceful, nature revering, squeaky clean role-models the TV ads and
movies made them out to be. She'd read with a clinical, removed-from-the-
dreadful-scenes detachment as her only defense against descriptions of
massacres perpetrated by desperate and enraged young warriors, young men with
their blood up, refusing to give up either tribal or manly pride. Pride! How
much trouble that one little word had caused the world ... That was new-these
insights and connections she'd begun making about all kinds of subjects, to
the everlasting astonishment of her professors and the steady rise of her GPA.
   She slitted her eyes slightly against the sting of windborne cigar smoke,
thinking it all through as carefully and thoroughly as possible-as Kit and
Malcolm had jointly taught her to do. No, the Native American tribes hadn't
been peaceful nature lovers at all, even before the coming of Europeans;
before that momentous date, they'd made war on one another in just as savage a
fashion as they later made war against the pale invaders of their continent.
But what the American government had later done to these people was hideous,
unforgivable. margo liked getting her facts strait, more and more so the
longer she was in college, delving through books she had once abhorred, so she
could understand the real message behind admittedly biased writing on Native
American Indians--contemporary accounts by trappers, traders, settlers,
mountain men-as well as modern scholarly research-hero-worship crap about
people who-according to several archaeological site-analyses written by the
archaeologists themselves, tossed their meal scraps right out of the teepee's
front door for weeks, maybe even months on end (at least, that was true of
some of the plains tribes, well before the arrival of the European); people
who thought nothing of making their immediate surroundings a latrine/cesspit
and thought their women attractive in hair dressed in bear-grease applied six
months previously. Margo shuddered delicately.
   Ultimately, what she had found were two differing stories of two very
different peoples, each savage in their own way. Who was to say which was
worse? Warriors taking scalps as trophies of victory or men who calmly plotted
the obliteration of entire tribes. She finally managed to choke out, "Will
they give a damn about shooting women and children, too?" And this time,
notably, she received no scolding for her anachronistic manners.
   After a look of pain passed through Malcolm's expressive eyes, he said very
quietly, "W e-e-l-l-l, not really. Least, not everywhere. But yeah, ma'am, it
happens, here 'n there, all across the whole land. They say the first known
record of biological warfare was takin' a load of blankets from a smallpox
victim still aboard ship and delib'retly handin' 'em over to a tribe of six-
foot Indians down in Florida, men who could put a long, heavy arrow through a
mans leg, his horse, and mebbe catch his other leg on the way out again."
   Margo nodded silently, letting him know she'd read about that already.
"Now, these men," he nodded toward the wagoneers, "they're a tough bunch o'
claim-jumping cutthroats with one aim in mind. They'll settle down in parts of
the Oklahoma Reservation that don't no one tribe actually own, massacre a
bunch from one tribe, just so's another would go on the warpath. Not just for

revenge for a fellow tribe. Hell, the poor bastards just figure they re next,
anyway, and who wants to be shot in bed, like a fat, lazy cow waitin to be
milked?
   "It's been gettin' so bad, Fed'ral troopers have done come in to stop it
all and toss the Boomers, as they style themselves, out o' Indian land. But
shucks, there's always ten, twelve men waiting to replace every corpse or
kickin', cursing Boomer tossed out or arrested. That's decent farmland,
compared to what was left everywhere else at a cheap price. What them men
wanted was decent, cheap land to homestead. And the only place left to get it
was in Indian land, see? Hell, ma'am, and 'scuse the language, but some o'
them Boomers mean to have as much as they can beg, borrow, or steal by
murderin' whoever's already there that ain't got a white hide. It's a dirty,
rotten land-grab of a business, played like some damned child's game, only a
long-sight bloodier."
   "And there's nothing we can do to stop it?
   A sigh gusted past her ear. "Nope. Not a goddamned, helpless thing. History
cain't be changed. One of the first rules of time travel, and you should know
'em all by heart now."
   Margo's sigh echoed Malcolms. "Rule One: Thou shalt not profit from history
nor willfully bring any biological specimens-including downtimer human beings-
into a time terminal. Rule Two: Do not attempt to-change history-you can't,
but you can get killed trying it." She halted the rendition of `The Rules" to
glare at the wagons. "Too bad. I'm a pretty good shot, these days."
   Malcolm, who'd witnessed her performance in the "Lesson for a Few Rattled
Paleontologists," silently agreed. "Quite a good one, in fact, at least with
modern cartridge guns and most of the black-powder stuff. But we're not here
to stop Indian wars. We're here to track Chuck Farley's movements and discover
what disguise he'll wear back uptime to the station. Believe me, if it would
do any good, Margo, I'd shoot every one of those mother's sons and leave 'em
to bleed into the dirt.
   "But, Margo," and he placed warm hands on her shoulders, which tingled at
the contact through thin cotton calico, "that wouldn't stop the massacres of
hundred of millions of innocents since the beginning of human existence, now,
would it?" Margo shook her head, trying to hide the grief in her eyes, none
too successfully given the look on Malcolm's face. "We can't, Margo. We simply
cannot change it. Something will always go wrong, leaving you in the delicate
position of run like hell or be painfully shot/stabbed/
sliced/burned/scalped/or done in through other, even more gruesome methods.
Can you really imagine me just popping in to visit the Pope and saying, `Hey,
I'm an angel of death. God's really pissed over your little crusade against
the heretics in France. Ever hear of a thing called Black Death? It's the
prize your butchers have earned for themselves.' Or maybe I could wait a few
years, let Temujin grow up a good bit, then show up at his yurt one fine
evening and change his mind about slaughtering half the population of Asia and
Europe." He snorted. "Rotten as he is, if you ever get the chance, ask Skeeter
Jackson sometime about that."
   Margo blinked, surprised. "Skeeter? He spent time with Temujin?" Then, as
no answer was forthcoming, she swallowed a little too hard. "I know nothing
important can be changed. It's just so ... hard." She thought about a certain,
terrible fight with this man who wanted to spend the rest of his life with
her, thought about a dingy London street that bordered the true, deadly slums
where her ignorance had nearly gotten them both killed, and fought a lump in
her throat.
   "Malcolm?- Her voice was whispery and unsteady as she reached for his hand
in the darkness. The security of his strong hand wrapping around hers gave her
courage again.
   "Yes?" he asked, quite seriously.

   "Why is it that whenever I go downtime with you, thinking it'll be a
special treat, I end up seeing so much misery?"
   Malcolm didn't speak for quite a while. Then he said, "It's just like that
bloody wretched day in London, isn't it?"
   Margo nodded. "Yes. But only worse, because some of these people have no
hope. That's what's going to give me nightmares."
   Malcolm squeezed her hand gently. "It's a rare scout who doesn't suffer
damned terrifying nightmares." Margo, recalling those her grandfather had
suffered, simply murmured agreement. "And," he said more gently than before,
"it's a very rare man or woman who sees past the glitter and romance to the
scalded hands of Chinese coolies washing clothing for others.
   "It takes ... I don't know ... heart, something truly alive inside, to
possess the wit and courage to grieve for victims of the world's great
migrations, to see the scars of rejection in their eyes and hearts. A Chinese,
an Indian, a Brit, all of them see the world through vastly different eyes. Do
they see the same things? Mere facets of the whole? Or something else
entirely? Classic case of the blind men and the elephant." He sighed. "I don't
have the answers to that, Margo. But finding them out ... together ... is as
good a lifetime's work as any I can think of."
   Margo squeezed his hand, glad of the deep shadows. She didn't want him to
discover the tears on her face. She swallowed hard to avoid snuffling the mess
in her nose and sinuses.
   "How do they manage to make this" she gestured around them "-so confounding
dull in school when it's so absorbingly human, so marvelously, tragically
interwoven, it makes me ache and want to cheer at the same time?"
   Malcolm's only answer was a long, desperate kiss that somehow conveyed the
fear that he would lose her to someone else, someone who outshone him, had
more money than he did, or an estate and noble lineage longer than many a
champion horse's, to a man who was younger and more attractive than he was, or
had ever hoped to be. In answer, she crushed herself against him, returning
the kiss with such fervor, holding him so tightly that for a moment she
thought he meant to join with her right then and there. But being British in
his soul, a tumble in the weeds along a dirty Denver roadside was not seemly-
and it was her reputation he so carefully guarded.
   "Oh, Malcolm," she sighed against his lips, "my beloved, my silly, insecure
Malcolm. Do you honestly think any other man could take the place of a certain
person I know who sold eel pies and green glop along the streets of
Whitechapel, saving my idiotic life in the process? I almost got us both
killed because I hadn't studied enough, hadn't learned my shooting lessons
properly, not to mention my sense of when to strike and when to just give 'em
what they want. I nearly got us both killed!" She crushed him close. "Don't
ever let me go, Malcolm! Whatever my role downtime as a scout turns out to be,
even if it's a skinny boy-"
   "Hey, you're not skinny!"
   Appreciative hands ran across curves until Margo flushed in the darkness.
"It's all these wretched underthings and bustles and gewgaws that make me look
fat. Playing the role of a young boy is much more comfortable. No bustles, no
corset stays, no drawers, no layers of camisoles and underskirts and no final
dress which I have to be literally wedged and cinched into just to avoid being
called a loose woman-and pursued as such."
   "Mmm... sounds like romantic illusion number twenty-seven hitting the
ground and shattering into zillions of pieces."
   "That's not funny!"
   "I didn't mean it to be. It's just that being a guide is tough enough.
Tackling the job of scout ... that's scary, Margo. I almost panic when I think
about watching you leave me, maybe never to return and I'll never know why or
how you vanished from my life-"

   "Then come with me."
   Malcolm stiffened at her side, then covered her entire face in kisses,
paying sweet attention to wet eyelashes and tender, trembling lips. "I've
prayed you would ask me that. Yes, I'll go, when and wherever it is. I'll go."
   During the clench and flurry of kisses and hasty promises on both sides,
Margo's eyes widened.
   "Malcolm! It's Farley! Looks like you were right. New inventory."
   Malcolm said something truly creative and extremely filthy, giving the lie
to those brave words earlier about their mission being to follow Farley
everywhere. He swore once more beneath his breath, then turned slightly in her
arms as Farley left the brothel with a heavy leather satchel which bulged in
odd places.
   "You don't suppose he'll try to add it to the hole he's already dug and
discover our tampering?"
   Malcolm chuckled. "Nope. If we'd attempted to change history, something
would have stopped us from carting off that prize of erotic loot. He'll make a
second treasure hole, all right, near the first. We'll mark its position, then
leave it for the uptime authorities as incriminating evidence in his arrest."
   Margo grinned. "Malcolm Moore, have I ever said, `I love you'? Your evil
genius is beyond compare."
   "Huh," Malcolm muttered, "just a few tricks and pointers I picked up from
your grandfather."
   She nuzzled his arm. "I like that. Hey, if we're going to follow that lout,
we'd better get moving!"
   They mounted up, Malcolm giving her a leg up, not because she needed it,
but because it was what just about any man in this time period would have
done. Cautiously they followed the lone rider into the darkness while shadows
raced across a three-quarter moon, bringing with it the taste of ice and
waist-deep snow in the high mountains above Denver on a chilly night sometime
late in 1885.
   It was a good night to be alive. If they hadn't been stalking a criminal to
his hoard, Margo would have burst into exuberant song. Instead, she held
rigidly quiet, as did the remarkable man at her side, both of them intent on
the figure ahead, bathed in the faltering light of a cloud-cocooned moon.
   Neither the Praetorian Guard nor the city's watch patrol found them.
Skeeter's and Marcus' disguises were good-and no Roman would think to look for
an escaped gladiator in the fine tunic and toga of a citizen, with his
freedman accompanying him. But, just as a precaution, they changed inns often,
paying for each night's lodging and meals with the dwindling amount of money
Skeeter had picked up from the arena sands.
   Late one night, the only time they risked speaking English, Marcus asked in
a troubled voice, "Skeeter?"
   "Mmm?"
   "When you gave over your winnings to pay the debt I owed," his voice
faltered a little, "all you had left was the coins you plucked from the sands.
I have nothing. Do we have enough money to survive until the gate opens
again?"
   "Fair question," Skeeter answered. "I've been worrying about that a little,
myself"
   "May I make a suggestion?"
   "Hey, it's me. Skeeter. You're not a slave, Marcus. If you wanna talk, I'll
listen. If I'm bored, I'll probably fall asleep. Hell, I might, anyway. I'm
bushed and my back and arm muscles are screaming bloody murder."
   Marcus was silent for a moment. "That leap you made. I've never seen a
thing like that, ever."
   Skeeter snorted. "Obviously you've never seen a tape of the Summer Olympic
Games. It was just a pole vault, after all. A little higher than most pole

vaulters are used to, maybe, but then I had the added advantage of my horse's
height. So enough. Wipe that worshipful look off your face and tell me what's
on your mind."
   "I-at the Neo Edo-what I said-"
   Very quietly, Skeeter muttered, "I deserved every word, too. So don't go
feeling bad about that, Marcus. God, I was stupid and selfish to fool you, to
force you into a position where you had to decide between honor and your
family." For a moment, neither man spoke. Then Skeeter continued, "Your
village, the one in France, the men there must've taken honor very seriously
if an eight-year-old boy who grew into a man as a Roman slave still puts honor
ahead of everything."
   Marcus took a long time answering. "I was wrong about that, Skeeter. Since
the moment Farley tricked me back here and sold me to the arena master, I have
discovered that such honor is cold and empty compared with protecting those of
your own blood I have hurt Ianira terribly, and my children ..."
   It took a moment to realize that Marcus was crying. "Hey. Hey, listen to
me, Marcus. We all make mistakes. Even me."
   That brought a watery snort of near-laughter.
   "Point is, when you fall flat on your backside or put a new dent in your
nose from smashing it into the ground, you learn something. From whatever
stupid thing you've done wrong this time, file away the lesson learned as a
warning against the same mistake, then just keep on going. I'd never have
survived in Yesukai's camp if I hadn't been able to learn from the
multibejillion mistakes I made there. You know, it's funny. I came to feel
like that murderous old Yakka Mongol was more of a father to me than my real
one. Did I ever tell you he made me Temujin's uncle? Believe me, that's a
helluva responsibility and honor in Mongol society: uncle to the Khan's first-
born son. And you know, he was a decent little kid, toddling about the yurt,
curling up to sleep against his mother, maybe begging "Uncle Bogda" to play
with him. When I think what he went through as a teenager, what all that did
to him, made him into, I sometimes just want to sit down and bawl, 'cause I
can't change it."
   Marcus' silence puzzled Skeeter. Then, "There is much hurt inside you,
Skeeter, a very great much. One day you must let it out or you will never heal
yourself."
   "Hey, I thought Ianira was the mind-reading wizard of the family?"
   Marcus' laugh was thin but genuine this time. "Amongst my people-my family-
there were certain ... talents that passed from generation to generation."
   "Oh, God, please don't say you're psychic."
   "No," Marcus said, the smile in his voice clear even to Skeeter. "But ...
you have never asked me about my family."
   "Thought that was a bit too private, friend."
   An indrawn hiss of breath was followed by Marcus' shaking voice. "You can
still call me friend? After what I have done to you, can I still be your
friend?"
   "I dunno. Can you? I got no problem with it."
   Dark silence passed. "Yes," Marcus said quietly. "Perhaps I am mad to say
it, knowing what you are, but after what you sacrificed to wrench me out of
slavery ... I seldom know what to think about you any longer, Skeeter. You
steal from good, ordinary people to make your living, yet you give part of
your stolen money to The Found Ones to help us stay active-"
   "How'd you find that out?" Skeeter demanded, voice breathless.
   Marcus laughed quietly. "You are so certain of your privacy, Skeeter. The
Found Ones have many ways to find out things we desperately need to know. In
one such search, it became clear to us where some of the money was coming
from."
   "Oh." Then, "Well, I hope my goddamned ill-gotten gains helped." He turned

on the hard bed and groaned as aching muscles sharply called attention to
themselves from his shoulders to his thighs and from his biceps down to his
wrists.
   A stirring of the darkness gave him scant warning. Then, when hands touched
his naked shoulder in the darkness, panic hit. "Marcus, what are you doing?"
The other man was kneading his sore shoulders as though they were bread dough.
   "I am doing what I was trained to do from boyhood. To give my master
soothing back- or shoulder- or foot and-leg rubs when he requested them. Just
lie still, Skeeter. I'll work through your tunic cloth, since you do not have
the mindset-that is the right word? of a Roman. Your privacy is a dark shroud
you pull about yourself. That is your choice; every man needs his privacy
intact."
   A certain darkness in Marcus' voice connected quite abruptly with other
things he'd said on occasion, leaving the truth about Marcus' boyhood lit by a
scathing spotlight. He knew; but he found he had to confirm it to believe it.
"Marcus?"
   "Yes, Skeeter? What is wrong? I have hurt your shoulder?"
   "No. No, that's fine. Feels like maybe I'll be able to move it tomorrow
after all."
   "It would be better with liniment, but we have no coin to buy it."
   "Marcus, would you please shut up? I have something really important to
ask. You don't have to answer; but I have to ask it. Your old master, the one
before that bastard Farley dragged you through the Porta Romae ... when you
gave him rubdowns like this, did he request--order--other things as well?"
   The sudden stillness of the hands on his shoulder and the utter silence,
broken only by rattling breaths, gave Skeeter all the answer he needed.
   Surprisingly enough, Marcus answered anyway, in a whisper torn from a proud
man's soul, leaving it filled with nothing but pain and fear. "Yes. Yes, he
did, Skeeter. He was ... not the first."
   Skeeter blurted out, "He wasn't? Then who the hell did rape you first?"
   Marcus' stilled hands on his shoulder flinched badly. "A man. I never knew
his name. It was on the slave ship. He was the first."
   It hit Skeeter harder than most, for he'd seen prisoners of the Mongols
buggered before being split open from throat to genitals and left to bleed
out. "My God, Marcus! How can you even bear to touch another person? To father
children, to give my aching muscles the rubbing they need. I mean, the rubbing
they want?"
   He said simply, "Because for whatever foolish reason, I have come to trust
you again, Skeeter. My life is literally in your hands. If we are caught, they
will take you back to the gladiatorial school. You have become famous in the
Circus, so you are valuable. I am only a scribe. I've grown too old for the
other, thank all gods and goddesses, but even as a scribe, I am worth little
compared to you. If we are caught, our faces will be branded with the F of a
fugitive. That's all that will happen to me, if I'm lucky. My so-called master
could well cripple me to keep me from running again, or turn me over to the
state for execution, or sell me to the bestiary masters, to be torn apart by
ravening wild animals." He drew a deep breath. "So, I stay with you, Skeeter,
as my only hope of survival until the gate opens. And ... I wish to ease your
pain because you are my friend, and you acquired that pain saving me from the
arena master's ownership. I knew that was wrong, but not another man in Rome
would have questioned it, never mind defended me."
   "Hey, I wasn't just helping you. As I recall, I had some pretty selfish
reasons to get the hell out of that arena, too, you know."
   "Yes, but..." He gave up with a sigh, and said instead, "What I said at the
Neo Edo, Skeeter ... I had no right to say it. Any of it. The truth of what
happened between you and Lupus Mortiferus I will never know, for I was not
present, and I know now the kind of professional killer he is. So ... who am I

to judge?"
   "Huh." Skeeter remained silent a moment. "Well, just to set the record
straight," he couldn't keep a bitter hoarseness from creeping into his voice
as, for once, he told the gods' own truth about what he had done, "I swindled
and pickpocketed every bit of the money I brought back from that profitable
little trip. Right down to the little copper asses and their fractions."
   Marcus was silent a long time, kneading muscles along Skeeter's back until
they felt like pudding.
   "There are many ways of growing up, Skeeter, and I have no right to judge
when I, of all people, know your truth-the way you were brought up. Your
childhood, Skeeter, was far worse than mine."
   "Huh? How the hell do you figure that-?"
   Marcus wasn't listening. He gave out a little, wan laugh just this side of
anguish. "Believe me, Skeeter, when I say mine was hell. But yours was far
worse. I was every kind of fool for judging you so cruelly."
   "The hell you were." Silence fell between them, both of them stilled to the
point that the sound of an unknown voice outside their hideaway would have
drawn indrawn, ragged screams from them both. Skeeter finally broke the
silence with a sigh. "No judging, huh? Is that how your Found Ones operate
their business?"
   "First," Marcus dug into a muscle under Skeeter's shoulder blade with
enough force to wring a yelp of pain from him, "we are not a `business.' We
are a survival necessity for those of us ripped from time and left stranded at
TT-86. We serve as what Buddy would call a `support group.' And we have to
accommodate the religious and political beliefs of many, many differing times
and nations and kinds of men and women. It is not easy to be a leader of that
group."
   "And you are?"
   "Mere" Honest shock filled his voice. "Great Gods, no! I am neither
talented nor patient enough for such demands." A brief pause. "I did say that
the right way, did I not? It is `either/or' and `neither/nor' is it not.
   Skeeter knew far better than to chuckle. Marcus was a man with little but
battered pride left and Skeeter didn't want to make more mistakes than he felt
he already had. "Yes," he said quietly, "you got it right, Marcus. But if
you're not a leader, who is? You've adapted better than almost anyone else,
you're smart and driven to improve yourself-"
   "Skeeter! Please ... it is some other man you must be speaking of, not I"
He drew a deep breath and let it out. "It is Ianira who leads us, with a few
others who take responsibility for certain tasks. Things like making sure no
downtimer goes hungry." He chuckled, then, clearly over his embarrassment. "Do
you have any idea how long it took to convince Kynan Rhys Gower that we were
not devil-worshippers damned for all time? Yet now he comes to our meetings
and speaks up with ideas that are good."
   "Humph. I didn't know you were that organized, or even if you were
organized, but I figured you needed help. I gamble away most of my money,
anyway, you know, a habit I picked up in Yesukai's yurt, so I just take some
out first and send it to you, so I can tell myself I'd done something decent
as judged by this world."
   His voice caught slightly on the word. Surprising himself immensely, he
found himself saying, "Do you have any idea how my two worlds tug at me? Some
days ... some days they come near to ripping me apart. In my most secret
heart, I still yearn for the honor of riding on raids as a Yakka warrior. But
I lived in the squalor and deadly dangers under which they live, Marcus-lived
in it for five years. It is a perilous life, usually brutally short; yet I
still want it. And another part of me is pulled the other way, into the now in
which I was born. The now where I hated my father so much for not caring, that
I became an accomplished thief and swindler by the age of eight. In that same

heart, I know Yesukai would have been proud of me, these past years. But here
I am tolerated only because I don't steal from 'eighty-sixers. They don't seem
ever to understand they're the only family I have left." It was Skeeter's turn
to suffer hot, stinging eyes. "What you said, about my lying to myself? Maybe
you were right. I just don't know, any more."
   Marcus said nothing, just moved magical hands down his spine, kneading
burning muscles as he went. "Those were harsh words, I know," Marcus finally
said, "and I am sorry I said them the way I did. But I worry about you,
Skeeter. If you are caught often enough, Bull Morgan will have you sent uptime
for trial and I would lose a friend ... and not merely a dear friend, but also
a Lost One."
   Skeeter, puzzled, stopped feeling sorry for himself long enough to ask,
"Lost one? That's silly, when you know my apartment number, my phone number-"
   "No, Skeeter, you do not understand. A Lost One is a downtimer in need of
help, but from fear or terror of being discovered, disguises himself or hides
until starvation drives him to action. Until we find them, we cannot help.
They are lost to us, to the whole universe, until they make themselves known.
And even then, it may take weeks, months, sometimes years before such a one
trusts us enough to become a Found One.
   "You remember, Skeeter, the Welshman I spoke of, Kynan Rhys Gower? He was
such a one. Weeks it took to convince him we were not after his soul.
Fortunately, one of us was a Christian-an early Christian, true, who had come
through the Porta Romae-but he managed to convince Kynan that it would be
safe, no, that it would be God's will-to join us." Marcus sighed. "It always
brings great pain to know there is a Lost One amongst us and be unable to
reach him, through word or action."
   Vast astonishment like light pouring into his soul, drove away the vestiges
of lingering self-pity. "Are you talking about one, Marcus?"
   The answer was very soft in the darkness. "Who else?"
   It was too much to take in that fast, all at once. Retreat was literally
the only course he could take in that moment. "Huh. Well, thanks for the
backrub, anyway. I don't think I could move now if I had to. Felt good,
Marcus. I'm glad you're my friend again. It gets awful lonely when a man loses
his only friend."
   And with that statement, he drifted to sleep.
   Marcus sat up in his own bedding for a long time, gazing blindly in the
direction of Skeeter's sleeping breaths. At least he is willing to become a
friend again. Marcus was struck with such pain he could scarcely breathe. The
words, " ... only friend" kept battering at him. He didn't know quite how, but
if they did manage to get back through the Porta Romae, Marcus would do
everything in his power to give Skeeter more than one friend in the world. He
swallowed hard, recalling the terms of the wager with Goldie Morran.
   They might step through to find Goldie declared the winner in the face of
Skeeter's long absence. To go through what Skeeter had gone through already
and then be thrown off the station, bag and baggage ... it was simply not to
be borne. Should that happen, Marcus and the other downtimers would make very
certain that Goldie lost her entire business and was driven, bankrupted, back
uptime to the world Marcus would never know first-hand. Somehow, the Council
of Found Ones (a very great many of whom were capable of very long-lived blood
wars, indeed) would find a way.
   Marcus smiled bitterly in the darkness. Very few uptimers took any
downtimer seriously. Tourists considered them unmannered savages with just
brains enough to carry luggage through the time gates. Uptimers didn't even
seem to mind that more than a few had vanished through shadowing themselves
because no one had thought to warn them of the danger. Time Tours, Inc. took
great measures to protect their customers, but no measures at all to protect
the men who hauled baggage for them.

   Such uptimers were in for a rude shock, very soon, if Marcus had anything
to say about it.
   If he and Skeeter got back safely through the gate.
   If...
   Well, he told himself prosaically, there is not a thing you can do stuck in
this inn, waiting for the Porta Romae to cycle. Better get some sleep while
you can. Tomorrow may find us in the hands of the slave-catchers, or worse,
the Praetorian Guard. He shivered involuntarily, having heard the tales of
what happened to runaways caught by the elite Praetorians. Marcus settled down
in his hard bedding-far superior, of course, to the slave cots he'd grown re-
accustomed to, but a miserable bed, indeed, compared to the wonderful one in
his apartment on TT-86, where Ianira waited with no word of his fate.
   Marcus drifted into sleep planning his reunion with his family and plotting
either Skeeter's salvation or Goldie's ruin.
   One or the other would come to pass as surely as the sun rose and set on a
blazing hot Roman day or a crisp and lovely one in Gaul.
   One or the other ...
   Marcus finally slept.
   When the Wild West Gate dilated open at the back of a Time Tours livery
stable, Malcolm and Margo stumbled under the weight of their luggage. Both had
managed to get digitized video of Farley burying his Denver haul on their
scouting logs. Farley had, as predicted, chosen a site just a few yards away
from the original site they'd already dug up and camouflaged. They shot more
video with their scout logs when Farley emerged from his hotel sporting blond
hair going grey at the temples, a different nose, and an enormous moustache
which matched the color of his hair. He carried with him almost no baggage at
all.
   If they hadn't been tailing him for a week, neither would have known him.
This guy was good. Too good. A whole lot of uptime money had to be paying for
a professional of this caliber. Farley stepped through the Wild West Gate
ahead of them, a new man (doubtless with new ID forged to perfection in New
York, right down to the retinal scans and med records). Fortunately for
Malcolm and Margo, he did not suspect a thing was amiss, even though Malcolm
staggered under the weight of the fortune in antiquities they had so carefully
unearthed. Margo was having an even worse time. She stumbled and staggered
like a teenager who'd drunk one too many beers. Margo was stone cold sober,
but even her luggage was enormously heavy, despite the fact that Malcolm had
packed the heaviest items in his own bags.
   Mike Benson, Chief of Station Security, was nearby, scrutinizing returning
tourists when they emerged, clearly watching for any signs of illegal
activities. Someone must've tipped him off. Goldie? Couldn't have been
Skeeter-he'd been gone nearly a month, now. When Benson caught sight of them,
his eyes widened, then narrowed again into angry slits.
   "Mike!" Malcolm hissed, aware that Farley was still near enough to hear.
"Need your help! Official help."
   Benson, whose biggest excitement came when an unstable gate broke open
inside the station, or when kids left behind with the station's babysitter got
loose and went on a rampage, clearly recognized An Important Event about to
unfold. His expression moved through vast, sudden relief to deep curiosity and
a cold anger that built in his eyes. He motioned curtly for Kit Carson, who'd
come to see his granddaughter and almost son-in-law return. Kit was looking
puzzled, as well, and murmured in Mike's ear. The relief on Kit's face was
actually comical. Both men waited until they'd descended the ramp all the way,
passing their timecards through the automatic reader at the bottom of the
ramp, to be updated in a Time Tours effort to keep its customers from
shadowing themselves.
   "What is it?" Benson asked quietly.

   "See that guy up there, greying blond hair, protruding nose, huge
moustache?"
   Benson squinted through the crowd. "Yeah, I've got him. What's so special
about him?"
   Kit put in quietly, "If I'm not mistaken we've just seen Chuck Farley in a
new face."
   Benson glanced sharply at Kit, eyes a bit wide, then nodded abruptly.
"Yeah, I expect you're right."
   Kit laughed quietly, puzzled eyes still studying their massively heavy
luggage. "Mike, you should know by now, I am always right." He let that sink
in, then forestalled any outburst by adding, "Unless I'm wrong, of course.
That's actually happened, oh, eight or nine times, and most of them"-he
tickled Margo's chin "were over this little fire-eater."
   Margo blushed to the roots of her hair.
   Malcolm broke through their levity with a low-voiced, "Mike, I really think
you should have someone tail him until Primary cycles, but not so close that
he bolts the second he's gone through."
   Mike nodded. "My men are very, very good. Most of 'em got dumped on the
street after The Accident when the DEA was torn down and its employees let go.
They're good, Malcolm."
   He nodded his trusting acquiescence. "I've got this plan, you see, Mike, to
catch a member of that gang of notorious `antiquities acquisition
specialists.' A really slick one. We'd appreciate your escort to the IFARTS
office. We'll tell you the entire story there."
   Kit put in wistfully, "I know this is police business, but could I come,
too? After all, my only relative is involved."
   Mike Benson snorted. "Kit Carson, you could wheedle your way into
Buckingham Palace."
   Kit laughed. "I already have, Mike. Long story" His eyes twinkled.
   "Oh, you're impossible. Suit yourself. Hell, you probably know almost as
much about antiquities as Robert Li does."
   With that, Benson plucked off his belt the in-station radio unit all TT-86
security wore and efficiently set up the undercover tail.
   "There. Now lets go find Li, shall we?"
   They started toward Robert Li's antiquities shop, which also served as the
IFARTS office in La-La Land. Every station had an IFARTS facility, staffed by
at least one thoroughly trained expert, and sometimes more than one for the
really big stations with twenty or thirty active gates. Since carbon dating
was now useless, experts had to be relied upon to judge fake from genuine, to
assign an approximate date as well as detailed descriptions, photos, the whole
bit. Mike noticed Margo's red-faced struggle with her baggage only a few feet
closer to their goal. Evidently, so did Kit, because before Mike could call
for a baggage cart, Kit took the heaviest bag, earning a dazzling smile from
his granddaughter. .
   Mike sighed, jealous of Malcolm Moore because he'd found her first and
because Kit had asked him to help train her. Given the looks that passed
between the two lovebirds, each was as smitten with the other just as surely
as Goliath had been smitten by little David. He shook his head over mixed
metaphors and quietly herded them toward the IFARTS office.
   They were approximately a third of the way there when Kit changed the
suitcase to his other hand--again. "Thundering-" Kit cut off the oath
midsentence, shaking out his cramped hand. "What the living hell is in this
thing? Solid gold?"
   Margo grinned up at him. "Yep. Mostly. Our Mr. Farley had expensive if
disgusting taste in collectibles."
   Mike gave her a long, measuring look, but all she did was wink at him.
Damn. that lucky bastard, Moore. That one smile had seriously interfered with

the transfer of oxygen-laden blood from his brain to a spot somewhat
considerably lower. Grumbling, he grabbed one of Malcolm's bags to hide it,
and actually staggered under the weight.
   "Warned you," Malcolm laughed. "You're not gonna believe what that rat
buried. And we even left the other motherlode intact, so uptime authorities
can nail him digging it back up."
   "That's ... great ... can we just ... get a move on, please?"
   In minutes, he was as red-faced as they were. Margo laughed, Kit chuckled,
and Malcolm gave him that irritating smirk-smile that was uniquely his own.
From necessity, they stopped chatting and speeded up. Thank God. He wasn't as
young as he'd once been and the strain was telling in his heart-rate, painful
spasms in arms, shoulders, and bone-deep pain down his back from an old
gunshot wound sustained while still working as a cop. This had better be worth
it, Moore, or you're going to find yourself in deep, deep trouble whenever I'm
around.
   But when they opened the cases and spread the contents (except dirty
clothes) across Robert Li's counter, Li gave out a strangled sound like a cat
in orgasm, Kit Carson's eyes widened until his whole face was little more than
luminous, shocked eyes, and Mike Benson forgave Malcolm with a low whistle. He
glanced from one glittering figurine to the next, openmouthed, unable to
believe he had a chance to catch an international thief of this magnitude.
   Malcolm explained their whole story, recording it on his guide/scout's log,
then sighed and added, "He was really angry that some of the pieces had
vanished, obviously because the gold on them or in them was destined for
something important. He made quite a haul in Denver's cathouses, too, and
buried that a few yards from the hole he'd dug for these." He gestured
carelessly at what amounted to an entire room's worth of display cases in some
museum that didn't mind putting erotic devices of antiquity on display.
   "Well," Robert Li rubbed his hands in anticipation, "shall we begin?"
   It took several hours, with Kit occasionally arguing over a date for some
weird little piece made of gold or wood where gold inlay hadn't survived
stepping through the Porta Romae. Malcolm drew up a stool and watched quietly.
Margo leaned against the counter, chin resting on elbows, drinking in every
word, every date assigned. She was charming, leaning there like that, still in
her Denver getup, so absorbed in the cataloging he doubted she would hear her
own name if he said it.
   One by one the pieces were examined, determined genuine, and carefully
packed away. Occasionally a piece wrung groans and exclamations from Robert
Li, and a few times, even from Kit.
   "My God, Kit, look at this! It's a solid gold herm, you won't believe the
detailing! Look, there, at the back end. The face and attributes of Hermes
himself, and look at the expression on his face!"
   Kit took what looked like a slightly-larger-than-life-size phallus, turned
it carefully in reverent hands, and held it up to the light. The beautiful art
on what should have been the flat "base" was muttered over in tones of
ecstasy. "I've read of pieces like this," Kit said with a low moan in his
voice, "but to hold one ..."
   "Know what you mean," Robert said softly.
   "The detailing is incredible. Lost wax?"
   "Possibly Or mold and the mold lines rubbed out."
   Kit held it up to the bright light again. "No, I don't think so. That would
leave marks and I don't see anything like that."
   "Lost wax would leave similar marks," Robert mused. "How the hell did they
do it?"
   Surprisingly, Margo spoke up. "Well, maybe it's a real man's, uh, you know,
dipped in gold after it had been severed."
   All three men stares at her. Then Robert Li managed a strangled-sounding

reply. "That's, uh, not a bad guess, Margo," he started, breaking off to cough
and get his voice back under control, "particularly considering the detailed
veins, ridges, and foreskin, but a phallus dipped in gold wouldn't be nearly
as heavy as this. It's solid metal."
   "A copy of the original palladium of Athens perhaps?" Malcolm offered
quietly. "I doubt Farley could wrest away the real one. After the Romans stole
it, it was used in annual secret rituals which only the Pontifex Maximus was
allowed to attend. But a copy, perhaps, carved from an ingot?"
   "Carved from an ingot?" Robert echoed. Then, sudden realization hit. "Yes,
that must be how it was done. Carve it from a solid piece, polish out any tool
marks left over ... my God, it must have taken a master artisan months to
craft this!"
   Kit was nodding agreement. He said, grinning slightly, "Sometimes we forget
your doctorates, Malcolm."
   He bowed slightly in acknowledgement of the compliment. Then said a bit
smugly, "Apology accepted. And coming from you, Kit, any apology on
professional matters is an honor to hold forever."
   Kit flushed. "Huh. Ever since you got engaged, you've gone soft-headed and
sentimental."
   Malcolm just grinned, neither defending himself nor admitting guilt.
   "Oh, you're impossible." Kit ignored him in favor of Robert Li. "Bob, do
you have that phallus logged in?"
   "Yes. And the next piece is ..." He simply stopped talking. His gaze was
riveted to an exquisite little jade figurine.
   Margo gasped. "Why, that's Kali-Ma, dancing on her dying consort, Shiva!
But they're deities of India. However did that little statue end up in Rome?
And without breaking any of those delicate little pieces off?" The hands, the
feet, the nearly translucent crown, were so fragile light poured through them
as though the solid stone had gone transparent.
   Kit said slowly, -There were some unsuccessful forays into India. An
officer might have plundered it, wrapped it carefully, carried it on his
person. Then again, by the time of Claudius there were some trade routes open
to the East. Or a slave artisan might have carved it from memory. We'll
probably never know."
   With reverent hands, Robert Li lifted the little multiarmed, multilegged
dancer. "Flawless," he whispered. "Absolutely flawless." A low moan of
pleasure escaped him as he turned it around and around in his hands, absorbing
details with his dark, quick eyes, caressing it with trembling fingertips.
"But why would a man who collected those," he gestured toward the small hoard
of sexual implements, representations, and brothel art, "want this?"
   Margo cleared her throat. "Well, the dance of Kai-Ma and Shiva is sexual in
nature. Very much so. They dance the dance of life, meant to regenerate the
entire universe each year. Shiva has to die, so his blood will fertilize Kali-
Ma, impregnating her so she can give birth to his reincarnated self, plus all
the grain crops, the fruits of the earth, the birds and game animals, the
deadly snakes that could kill a man within three dizzy steps ..." She trailed
off, suddenly uncertain under the stares of all three men, each of whom was
qualified at least five times more than she was.
   Kit spoke first. "Margo, I see you have been hitting the books hard." He
shook his head. He leaned across the corner of the cabinet and ruffled her
hair playfully. "You done good, kid. Real good."
   Margo's delighted grin brightened the room.
   Robert Li smiled, too, then entered the Kali-Ma/Shiva statue into his
computer, carefully wrapped it up, and with a sigh-moved to the next piece.
CHAPTER TWENTY
   Dawn of Gate Day left Marcus and Skeeter in a tense sweat. They intended to

remain in hiding until nearly ten-thirty that morning, since this was to be a
daylight opening. No games, though, which meant Lupus Mortiferus-a man very
much smarter than he looked would be there in the crowds on the Via Appia.
   "We'll have to watch out for him. He's got his life back," Skeeter groaned,
"but I made a fool of him in sight of practically all Rome. Not to mention the
Imperator, Claudius. He's going to want blood, and the more he gets, the more
his reputation will be soothed. If that happens, blend in with the tourists,
offer to carry baggage, anything just get through that gate!"
   "Without you?" Marcus asked in a low voice: "Without the man who has
brought me safely this far? No, Skeeter, I cannot in good conscience leave you
behind to die."
   "You ever see Lupus play with his victims?"
   Marcus' shudder was his answer.
   "You break in, try to stop him from killing me, he'll tear you apart like
kindling."
   "So we must avoid his notice. Go through carefully, perhaps in disguise?"
   Skeeter considered that. "Not a bad idea. With a quick expedition, I could
acquire just the right costume for you. At the market," he added, seeing the
stricken look on Marcus' face. "Now.. . I'm going to be a little trickier,
since I don't have any of my makeup kit with me.,,
   "Well, we could always ask the innkeeper to send for a barber. With a close
shave and a few changes in costume, you could pass for an Egyptian merchant."
   "Close shave, hmm. Just how close are we talking about?"
   Marcus' face burned. "Well, Skeeter, you would need to, um, buy an Egyptian
robe and neck collar-no Egyptian would be seen in public without one-and then,
um ..."
   "Yes?" Skeeter, having guessed the reason for the barber and the stalling
tactics. He just wanted it confirmed, so no misunderstandings loused up their
chances.
   Resignation darkening his eyes, Marcus met Skeeter's gaze. "You would need
to shave your head bald."
   "Bald," Skeeter echoed aloud, his guess confirmed, while to himself he
thought, Poor Marcus. He thinks I'll be shocked. He never saw me in Mongolia,
thank all the gods of the air. "Very well, I'll go and fetch what we need and
when I come back, you can ask the innkeeper to send in a barber."
   Marcus hesitated. "Can we afford this?"
   Skeeter snorted. "We can't afford not to. Besides, I thought you knew.
Several gold aurii were amongst the coins I scooped out of the sand on my
victory lap. Quite a few silver denarii and sestercii, too. We can't afford to
waste it, but these purchases are necessary."
   Marcus nodded. Skeeter rose to his feet and squeezed Marcus' shoulder.
"Lock the door, Marcus. If it won't lock, push a couple of chests in front of
it, and pray Lupus doesn't trace us here. When I come back, if I say, The
weather's going to change,' you'll know I'm being held hostage to catch the
other runaway. Get out through that little back window, if you can."
   Marcus glanced at it, nodded. He could probably squeeze through. He was no
longer as thin as he'd been as a slave, but the time spent in the arena
master's household had taken a few pounds off his frame. He could still taste
the gruel that had been his only meal for so much of his life. "And if you are
alone?"
   "I won't say the code words." With that, Skeeter departed, leaving Marcus
to move furniture around with deep, scraping sounds and more than a few
grunts.
   Skeeter was genuinely in his element at the market place, an enormously
long colonnaded building which sat right behind the wharves and warehouses
along the river's edge, busy with the cargoes from ships that had sailed from
gods-only-knew what part of the empire, only to unload at Ostia's deep-water

harbor and send their goods upriver on heavy, shallow-water barges. It was
just like a mall. He recalled it fondly from the trip here with the
unfortunate Agnes. The roofed-over portico ensured a wild babble of voices
rising to a roar in the market itself, crowded with slave running errands for
their masters, merchants looking over goods with resale-and profit in mind,
and everywhere the haggling, shouting, ear-bending roar of voices engaged in
bargaining with merchants for a better price.
   Skeeter ignored the cacophony. He'd lived in New York, after all, mostly on
the streets for several years; by comparison, the market seemed almost quiet:
no sirens screaming in the distance, no semi trailer truck horns blaring at
smaller cars to get out of the way, not even the screech and roar of taxicabs
dodging through the perpetual traffic with the nimble, reckless grace of a
gazelle with a leopard snarling hungrily at. its heels.
   Intent on his errand, the displayed goods he shouldered his way past did
nothing to attract attention to himself. A glance here and there showed fine
cloth, imported wines, bulging sacks of wheat for making bread (the staple of
a poor man's diet), delicately hand-blown glass vases, baskets, cups, even
glass amphorae which rested in wrought-iron tripod stands.
   Skeeter dragged his attention back to concentrating on his job. He figured
Lupus was going to be skulking around the Via Appia wineshop, so he should be
perfectly safe here in his disguise as a toga-wrapped citizen, but he wanted
to take no chances whatsoever. It took some time to find what he wanted, not
only for his own disguise, but one for Marcus, too. He hoped Marcus didn't
mind losing his hair, as well. Frustrated, he skillfully lifted a couple of
heavy money purses from distracted Roman men and continued shoving his way
through the throng of eager shoppers snapping up the goods that every
conquered province was required to send to the capitol. Skeeter looked
wistfully at some of the more primitive pieces, reminded of the time spent in
a yurt and wanting them, just to remember. But he wasn't here for souvenirs.
   He finally discovered what he wanted: a whole booth devoted to Egyptian
wares, all of it dreadfully expensive. Good thing I lifted those extra money
pouches and dumped them into mine. He bargained with the shopkeeper in his
slowly improving Latin, fighting to bring down the prices. He succeeded on two
exquisite linen robes, the. pleats sewn down and neatly pressed where they
weren't sewn. The shopkeeper moaned, "You have robbed me, Roman," and put on a
mournful face that neither of them believed for a single second.
   Skeeter said, "Wrap them."
   The shopkeeper bowed and did as told.
   "What else may I offer to interest your Eminence? Collars? Rings? Ear-
bobs?"
   Skeeter, who did not have pierced ears-and even if he had, the hole in his
earlobes wouldn't be nearly large enough to wear those earrings-declined the
latter with an air of distaste, then perused the collars and rings.
   "How much?" he pointed to two collars and several rings.
   "Ah, a man of perfect, exquisite taste. For you, only ten thousand
sestercii."
   "Who is the robber now?" Skeeter demanded, carefully choosing his words
from his limited Latin vocabulary.
   The bargaining began in earnest, delighting Skeeter, who had spent five
years watching-and occasionally taking part in haggling over the price of a
pony, a bauble for Yesukai's wife, a strong, new bow. He talked the shopkeeper
down by seven thousand, --quite an accomplishment. Glowing inside with pride,
Skeeter maintained a polite smile for the shopkeeper, instructing him with the
simple words, "Wrap them."
   The shopkeeper, who seemed nearly in tears, conjured by who knew what
method-wrapped the new items, put them with the parcels containing the robes,
and added a small basket for nothing, so Skeeter could carry his purchases.

Should've haggled even lower, Skeeter realized, glaring at that innocent
basket. Despite the mournful face, Skeeter caught the satisfied gleam in the
back of the trader's eyes. Skeeter gestured and his purchases were carefully
piled into the basket. Skeeter hefted it, moving and watching carefully lest
some pickpocket steal one of his parcels, then left the shopping district.
   He returned cautiously to the cramped upper room of the inn where they'd
taken refuge, tang great care to ensure he was not followed, then finally
knocked on the door. "Marcus, it's me. Shopping's done."
   Inside, Marcus waited for the code phrase. When it was not forthcoming,
Skeeter heard the scrape of heavy furniture. Then the door opened, barely wide
enough for Skeeter to peel himself and his purchases through the slit. He
shoved the door closed again and said with a relieved smile. "Did it. Not a
tail, not a hint of pursuit."
   Marcus was shoving the furniture back into place. "While you were gone, I
slipped downstairs and told the innkeeper that my patron was in need of a
haircut and shave and could he please send a barber up. The man should be here
momentarily."
   "If that's the case," Skeeter mused thoughtfully, "this room has got to
look normal." He started shoving furniture away from the door, returning each
piece to its correct place. Marcus, eyes dark with fear, did the same. Not
five minutes later, a knock on the door startled Marcus to his feet.
   "Easy. It'll be the barber."
   Marcus swallowed, nodded, and went to the door like a man on his way to the
executioner. It was the barber. Marcus actually had to lean against the
doorjamb to keep his knees from shaking.
   "I was told to come," the barber said uncertainly.
   "Yes," Marcus said in a good, steady voice, "my patron wishes a haircut."
He gestured toward Skeeter, seated regally in one of the better chairs.
   "Patron, eh?" the barber asked, glancing from Marcus' peaked, freedman's
cap to Skeeter. "Looks like you didn't take that cap too seriously, if you ask
me."
   Marcus' face burned at the insinuation, but then the barber was moving
toward Skeeter. Marcus managed to shut the door.
   "Better if we had sunlight," the barber complained.
   "Lamplight will do," Skeeter said shortly. "Marcus, explain what I want."
   "My patron wishes you to shave his head."
   The barber's eyes widened. "Shave it? All of it?"
   Skeeter nodded solemnly. "And Marcus' hair must come off, as well."
   Behind the barber, Marcus' eyes widened and he put involuntary hands to his
longish brown hair.
   "But why?" the barber stammered.
   "Vermin picked up accidentally."
   Marcus, picking up on the cue, added, "I believe we have found most of them
and their filthy egg sacs, but to be safe, the patron wants you to shave our
heads."
   The barber nodded, then, in perfect understanding. "Let me get my things."
   In a very short time, neither of them recognized themselves in the polished
bronze mirror the barber held up. Nearly bald, the barber having carefully
scraped away most of the stubble left over, Skeeter nodded and paid the man.
The barber bowed, murmured, "I thank you for the business," then left the
room.
   "Unless I miss my guess," Skeeter said quietly, while unconsciously running
one hand across his bare pate, "we have about half an hour to reach the gate.
Here." He tossed a couple of parcels to Marcus, who caught them with a numb,
clumsy motion.
   Skeeter ripped open his own, glanced up, and said impatiently, "Come on. We
haven't much time."

   Marcus opened the packages slowly, then gasped. "Skeeter! This ... this
must have cost you thousands. How could you pay for such things?" He shucked
out of his rough tunic and freedman's cap and slipped on the exquisite robe.
   "Lifted a couple of heavy purses. And don't give me that look. Our
goddamned lives are at stake."
   Marcus only shook his head, regretfully. He slipped on the collar and
glittering rings, set with precious gems. Skeeter was already dressed in
similar getup when he finished.
   "Ready?" Skeeter asked with a grin for the way they looked.
   Marcus managed a snort of laughter. "No. But I will come with you, anyway.
I want to be rid of Rome forever."
   Skeeter nodded and opened the door.
   Stepping through it was harder, this time, with his head bare and
vulnerable, and wearing enough jewelry to look like a New York drag queen.
Marcus closed the door softly behind them, then caught up at the bottom of the
staircase. "Let's go," he said roughly.
   Skeeter nodded sharply, and led the way to the Via Appia, eyes alert for
any sign of Lupus Mortiferus in shadowed streets no bigger than alleyways, in
the dark. interiors of wine shops, in the crowd pushing its way past the vast
facade of the great Circus. He repressed a shiver, and found the Time Tours
wine shop. Men, women, and a fair number of children converged slowly on the
shop. Street urchins, their faces filthy, their hollow eyes screaming their
hunger, lined both sides of the great road, begging for a few small copper
coins from Romans and rich Greeks and Egyptians and others Skeeter didn't
recognize. A rich litter carried by sweating slaves approached from the side
away from the Circus.
   Skeeter narrowed his eyes; then smiled, a chilled, savage smile that caused
Marcus, standing courageously straight and alert at his side, to shiver.
   "What is it?" Marcus asked in Latin.
   Skeeter shook his head, the movement feeling strange without hair to shift
about around his ears. "We wait. It is almost time."
   The street urchins continued begging in pitiful tones. Some had lost limbs,
or were or pretended to be crippled, to increase the sense of pity in those
who might give them coins. Skeeter averted his face, judging the timing of the
approaching litter. Just as it neared the wine shop, the familiar sound-that-
was-not-a-sound began buzzing inside his bald skull.
   Now!
   Skeeter tossed an entire handful of glittering, gold coins into the center
of the street. Begging children scrambled for them, creating a mass of limbs
that was impassable. The slaves bearing the litter were caught dead in the
center of the miniature storm. The litter swayed dangerously. One slave lost
his footing and the litter crashed to the street, accompanied by a high,
feminine scream.
   "Move!" Skeeter snarled. He dodged around the confusion, Marcus at his
heels, and dove into the Time Tours wine shop. He cold-cocked the guard at the
sound-proofed door, then yanked it open and ran inside, a juggernaut that no
one in the room could stop. He was aware of Marcus at his heels. New arrivals
were already pushing their way into the shop, creating confusion, but Skeeter
plowed right through them, as well. Cries of protest rose behind him, some of.
them from Time Tours guides, then he glanced around, making sure of Marcus,
grabbed him by the arm just to be sure, and dove headfirst through the gate.
The sensation of falling was genuine: the moment his body hurtled through the
portal, he fell flat on the steel grid and rolled violently into the solid
railing with leftover momentum.
   Marcus slammed into him in much the same manner.
   Sirens were already sounding. Skeeter didn't care.
   "we did it!"

   Then he gulped. He'd have an awful fine to pay, crashing the monumentally
expensive Porta Romae twice, plus Marcus' fine, which Skeeter had already
decided was his own responsibility to pay for having let him down so badly
earlier.
   "C'mon," Skeeter said more quietly. "Might as well go down and confess to
Mike Benson and take our punishment, 'fore they come and slap us in
handcuffs."
   Marcus' eyes showed fear for just a moment fear, Skeeter realized, that was
focused on him, not for his own sake-then he nodded and pushed himself
painfully up while Skeeter grabbed for the railing and hauled himself to his
own feet. In the crowd below, Mike Benson stood out like an angry beacon.
Security men were converging on all the ramps. Skeeter sighed, then started
down the one closest to Benson. Marcus followed silently.
   The return of Marcus and Skeeter was a nine-day wonder, even for TT-86,
which always had something exotically strange to gossip about. But their
return, together-that was something unheard of in the station's annals. An
uptimer crashing a gate, remaining missing for a whole month, then crashing
the gate again, with the missing downtimer? It was a thing to twist and turn
and talk and argue over endlessly, late into the station's night and on into
the early morning hours, the passage of time hardly noticed under the eternal
glow of the Commons' lights. Everyone wondered-and laid bets on how long
Marcus and Skeeter would be quarantined in one of Mike Benson's unpleasant
cells.
   Many another wager was laid on how soon Benson would kick Skeeter's
backside through Primary into the waiting arms of prison guards.
   The 'eighty-sixers waited, laid their bets, and talked the subject to death
with one theory after another to explain the inexplicable why.
   And just outside Benson's office door, a gathering of silent downtimers,
including Ianira Cassondra and her beautiful little daughters, sat blocking
the door, waiting for news or sitting in protest, nobody was quite certain.
Many an 'eighty-sixer had been shocked that the downtimers, previously
regarded as nonentities, had managed to organize themselves enough to hold a
silent but well-orchestrated "sit-in" vigil that Gandhi himself would've been
proud to claim.
   More than a few bets were wagered on that, alone.
   Inside Benson's interrogation room, an exhausted, pain-riddled Skeeter
Jackson went through the whole story again, aching from the cut in his side,
bruises sustained in the arena and their flight from the Circus, even from
rough scrapes and tiny, stinging nicks along his scalp. Bronze razors were not
particularly kind to the skin. Skeeter was so tired, he wasn't even certain
how many times Benson had forced him to repeat his story. A bunch, anyway.
Hours and hours of it. His body cried out for sleep: healing, heavenly sleep.
How long he'd been here, he didn't know, but Skeeter's bleary vision spotted
the strain in Benson's bloodshot eyes, on his sagging cheek muscles. He, too,
was clearly fighting sleep.
   Marcus, defiant to the last, had submitted under protest to the drugged-
interrogation method Benson felt necessary to get at the truth. Skeeter, as an
uptimer, was safe from such tactics, but Marcus had no such protection, no
rights to keep the needles out of his arms. He, too, repeated his story again
and again, including his re-enslavement, his discovery of Skeeter amongst the
caged men and beasts he was inventorying, then the rest of it, which matched
Skeeter's so closely, that despite the grueling hours of interrogation,
Skeeter knew Benson had not a shred of a discrepancy. When his final, drug-
induced, mumble story ended, Marcus collapsed, boneless and silent, across the
table, perhaps into a coma or a fetal withdrawal to escape this unexpected
torture instead of the joyful celebration of homecoming they'd both longed
for.

   Skeeter managed through a slurred, furred tongue, to get out the question,
"What now? Hot boiling g goddamned oil?" He would cheerfully have killed
Benson if he'd been able to move. But he knew if he tried to stand up, he'd
crash to the floor.
   "Lookit him." Skeeter more or less nodded toward Marcus, who still lay
collapsed across the interrogation table, oblivious to everything-including
Skeeter's continued suffering.
   "Gonna kill us both, Benson, to get your goddamned truth out of us? You'd
like killing me, wouldn't you? Wouldn't you, Benson?"
   An odd flicker ran through Mike Benson's exhausted eyes.
   "Before this," he, too, gestured awkwardly toward Marcus' inert figure, "I
... I just dunno. You're a thieving rat. Put a lot of rats like you in jail,
while I still wore a City badge. Nothin' but scum of the earth, those
bastards." He sat and looked unblinkingly at Skeeter. "But this.. ." He
gestured toward Marcus. "This changes the whole thing, doesn't it?"
   "Does it?" Skeeter asked, exhaustion causing his voice to quiver. "Aren't I
still just a thieving rat, Benson? Can't have it both goddamned ways. Either
I'm worthless scoundrel or I finally managed to do something decent-something
you're ripping to fucking shreds."
   Mike Benson scrubbed his face and eyes with both hands. "Not thinkin'
straight," he muttered, to which Skeeter added a silent, snarled Amen, you
stinking pig. Benson said through his hands, "Yeah. It does make a difference,
Jackson. To me, anyway. Can't figure why you did it, what was in it for you,
but your story's consistent and airtight with his." He nodded toward Marcus.
   Benson sat back in his chair, letting both hands fall to his lap. "All
right, Skeeter. You can go now. Your pal, too. I'll, uh, speak to Time Tours
about the fines for crashing the gate, seeing as how it really was a mission
of mercy."
   Skeeter just looked at him. Benson's face flushed. He refused to meet
Skeeter's eyes. "Can't promise anything, you realize; it's their gate and
Granville Baxter ... well, Bax is under tremendous pressure during the holiday
season and Time Tours has laid down some new rules he's going to have to
enforce, despite the fact they're just not enforceable." He sighed, evidently
gathering from Skeeter's closed, set expression that Skeeter didn't give a
damn what Bax's management problems were.
   "Anyway, Skeeter, I can be pretty persuasive. And so can Bull-and I expect
he will be very persuasive when I make my report." Again, Skeeter simply
blinked and looked at him. Does he honestly think this bullshit makes up for
the last God-knows-how-many hours?
   "Huh," was all he could find to say. Short, derisive, and abrasive.
   Benson had the good grace to flush. He looked away and muttered, "Need help
getting home?"
   Skeeter desperately wanted to grab Benson's shirt collar and shout, "No,
you stinking bully!" Pride alone demanded it. But his strength was shot and he
knew it. And there was poor Marcus to consider. "Yeah," he finally muttered.
"Yeah, I could use some help." He continued without a hint of a smile anywhere
in him. "Don't think I could walk across this room on my own, thanks to your
hospitality."
   Benson flushed again, darker this time. He dropped his eyes to his own
hands, knotted on his side of the tabletop.
   "Marcus is gonna need help, too." Skeeter jerked a thumb at his friend then
dropped his arm abruptly, shaking all over. "I could cheerfully murder you,
Benson, over what you did to him. He sure as hell didn't deserve needles and
drugs and hours of questioning."
   Benson was staring at him oddly, as though he wasn't quite sure what he was
seeing, then he finally nodded. "All right, Jackson. Some of my men will drive
you. If," he added dully, "we can get a hummer in through that bunch of

protesters out there."
   Skeeter drew a blank. "Protesters?"
   Benson said slowly, "Downtimers, all of 'em, organized in a sit-in protest.
They're blocking the goddamned door twelve deep."
   Skeeter didn't know what to think until Benson added, "His, uh, wife and
kids are out there, center stage. If looks could kill, I'd be a stone statue
right now.,,
   A hollow emptiness in Skeeter's belly froze his breath into ice. A welcome
home for Marcus. But not for me.
   Never for the stinkin' rat of a thief. He tried to shrug it off, knowing
what they must think of him after betraying their faith, as it were, by
causing Marcus to step through that portal with Chuck Farley Skeeter wondered
absently, thoughts drifting, what had become of that rat. Prob'ly never know.
   Mike Benson prodded the still-unconscious Marcus' shoulder with astonishing
gentleness, considering what he'd just put the young bartender through.
Slowly, Marcus swam toward the surface, moving small bits of himself one at a
time. He finally opened his eyes. The sight of Benson stooping over him
brought a terrible flinch, both in body and eyes.
   "It's all right, Marcus," Benson said quietly-and in pretty damned good
Latin. "I believe your story. Both your stories. You can go home, now. I have
a hummer and driver on the way to take you there. But I'd better warn you,
just so the shock won't kill you, there's a bunch of downtimers outside,
blocking the door, waiting for news, I guess, and what else, I can't guess.
Your family's in the crowd, right near the door.
   Marcus sat up straighter. "Ianira?" he choked out. "My daughters?"
   Benson nodded. Marcus surged to his feet, swayed badly, shrugged off
Benson's hand, which the Chief Security Officer had held out in an offering to
help, then finally steadied. "I will go to my family, now. Thank you for my
freedom," he said, irony heavy in his voice. Skeeter and Benson both knew who
was genuinely responsible for that.
   He made it to the door, then vanished into the corridor, back stiff, knees
a bit unsteady.
   Well, hell. If he can, l can. A straight back was agony to maintain, a fact
he hid from Benson with a light, "Thanks for my freedom, too." Benson lobed
uncomfortable. Then it was over and he finally managed to stand completely
straight. The pain in his body was bearable. Maybe. Benson said nothing as
Skeeter limped his way out, teary-eyed from a stab of knife-hot, pinched
nerves down his sciatic channel.
   The pain stabbed all the way to his left foot. But he made it to the door,
too, moving woodenly. By the time he gained the outer door, he was gasping,
gulping for breath. His vision kept going dark, fading in again to show him
the way out, then straying dizzily back into darkness.
   When he opened the door, he glimpsed Ianira and Marcus clutched together,
their daughters holding tight to Marcus' unsteady legs. Neither of them even
noticed him. Skeeter felt abruptly empty, defeated. All he had left were a few
of the coins he'd scraped from the arena sands. Benson hadn't searched either
of them, it being clear through the semitransparent Egyptian linen that
neither of them carried anything. So it wasn't really Benson's fault, because
he didn't know about Skeeter's injuries, but when he stumbled in a drugged
haze against one of the downtimers fading back into whatever they called home
or job, the jostle was too much. Overbalanced, Skeeter tried to compensate,
but exhausted, bruised, fire stinging along his ribcage, and a pain like torn
muscles down his side from that pole vault, rendered him abruptly helpless.
Not a single, abused muscle in his back and legs obeyed is commands.
   He went down hard. As complete darkness settled over him, he realized the
downtimers would simply leave him here, after what he'd done to Marcus,
involving him in that gods-cursed scam of Farley's. Promising himself to hunt

down Farley and kill him, Skeeter's face connected with a cold, rock-hard
cement floor. The settling darkness became complete in that instant and he
knew nothing more.
   Skeeter woke slowly, with bits of his body making themselves known by
varying degrees of screamin pain. The headache alone thundered through his
skull like a Gobi lightning storm. He lay very still, trying to breathe around
the pair, hoping it would lessen just a bit if he remained perfectly frozen in
place.
   It didn't work.
   Gradually, Skeeter realized he was not lying face first on the Commons'
concrete floor. Someone probably Benson's gang-had moved him. He thought
bitterly, Probably didn't want the tourists to see a passed-out con. man
apparently drunk out of his mind on the Commons floor. Bad for business.
   For a moment, he wondered if Benson had put him in one of the private
detention cells of La-La Land's little jail. Then, startling him beyond all
measure, came the incongruity of a child's voice. Mike Benson does not lock up
children. Not one that young. He moved his head slightly on the pillow to hear
better and gasped at the pain in his neck and the sensation of a hairless
skull sliding across the pillowcase. He dealt with those startling facts each
in turn, finally recalling the reasons.
   The child's voice spoke again. He couldn't understand the kid's words; but
they flowed like music. A female voice answered in the same liquid language.
Skeeter blinked. He knew that voice. Deep, throaty, as beautiful as its owner.
What am I doing in Ianira Cassondra's apartment?
   Not that he minded, so long as Marcus didn't
   Where's Marcus?
   He strained to hear, but didn't catch a single syllable of Marcus' voice.
Then he strained to remember, but Mike Benson's interrogation blended into
one, long stream of ruthless, sleepless, pain-filled questions. He vaguely
remembered being told he could go, vaguely recalled collapsing outside
Benson's office ... but he did not remember what had become of Marcus.
   Somehow, that was intolerable. He tried to swing his legs over the edge of
the bed, shove covers aside, and get up. He really tried. Instead, he got
about halfway between horizontal and vertical, blacked out, and fell back with
a faint cry of pain, which exploded through the whole of him like an electric
shock prod wired to his insides and left set on full charge-one whose
existence he'd completely forgotten. The next thing of which he was clearly
aware was a soft touch on his brow, a hot towel that brought ecstasy when it
soothed the throbbing behind his eyes, and a murmuring voice he'd last heard
raised in desperation, begging help from him.
   Skeeter?" Her voice came like rich, deep bell tones. "Don't worry, Skeeter,
you're safe now. Marcus has gone to fetch Dr. Eisenstein for you."
   Skeeter was really glad the wet towel on his brow leaked water down his
face, because quite suddenly his eyes filled and spilled over, completely out
of his control. No one but Yesukai had ever treated him so kindly. As though
she had divined the source of his greatest pain-and maybe she had, at that;
everyone called her the Enchantress-she touched his face in various places,
featherlight, drying tears on his cheeks, pressing against places he'd never
realized would feel so.. . so warm, so comforting.
   "It is all right to weep out the pain, Skeeter. A man can go only so long
alone, untouched, unloved. You miss your fierce Khan, I know that, but you
cannot go back, Skeeter." Her words tore something inside him, something he'd
realized but not acknowledged for a long, long time. "From here," she
murmured, still touching his face gently, "the road unwinds in only one of two
directions for you, Skeeter Jackson. Either you will remain on the road you
have been traveling all your life and your loneliness will destroy you, or you
may choose the other road, into the light. It is a choice neither I nor Marcus

can make for you. Only you can decide such a profound question. But we will be
travelling beside you, trying to help and support as best we can, whatever
road you choose."
   He fought a thickening in his throat.
   "Oh, Skeeter, Cherished One, you risked everything, even life's blood in
the test of the gods' arena, to save Marcus."
   Then, when the deep emotions her words evoked wrenched him impossibly in
too many directions, she massaged his temples and crooned a song, or perhaps
an ancient incantation, while he turned his head as far away from her as he
could and cried as he hadn't since the age of eight. The words she'd whispered
kept reverberating through his whole being: Cherished One ....
   Then Marcus' worried voice rang out and a moment later, Rachel Eisenstein
bent over him, ignoring his tears or taking them as a reaction to pain. She
turned him with clinical, gentle expertise, examining the damage front and
back, the scars of the lash across ribs and spine, the muscles strained and
knotted from shoulder to shank from that tremendous vault from his horse's
back, the slash across his side.
   He was eased back down and covered warmly. "Skeeter? Can you hear me? It's
Rachel."
   Rather than nodding, he managed to croak past the tightness in his throat.
"Yeah." It was a sound of defeat and even he knew it. He hoped Ianira and
Marcus understood. He was simply too exhausted, in too much pain to struggle
any longer.
   "Skeeter, I need to take you to the infirmary. Nothing that won't mend, but
there's more of it than I like to see in one patient. Do you understand,
Skeeter?"
   Again, the thick-throated, "Yeah. "
   He closed his eyes, praying Ianira would understand his need to escape for
just a little while the intense, soul-cracking emotions she'd roused with so
few words. That portion of himself needed healing, too. Maybe he'd go see Dr.
Mundy, after all, tell him everything, get all the secrets and the pain and
the memories of good times and terrifying ones out of his system.
   Someone removed the cooling towel from his brow, then Ianira's voice came
low and velvety: "Remember, we will always be here, ready to help."
   Then the metallic clanging of a gurney came to his ears and he was lifted
and slid with professional gentleness by two orderlies. He only bit his lip
once during the entire process. Then the gurney was moving and he thought he
heard the sound of a woman weeping, but he wasn't sure of much in this state.
   They slid him neatly into the miniature ambulance used on station and moved
away with lights flashing, evidently taking back ways down, since their speed
didn't slow for the throng of holiday party-goers jamming the station just
now. In the cramped quarters of the little ambulance, Rachel Eisenstein deftly
lashed his gurney to tie-downs on the ambulance wall. Then, before he knew it,
she'd threaded an IV into his arm. "Dehydration," she explained, "plus a mild
painkiller. You need it."
   That's for goddamned sure. But he had no voice left to say it.
   Then, almost conversationally, she added, "Spoke to Mike Benson earlier
today." Skeeter pricked up his attention. "Let him have it between the eyes, I
did." She chuckled. "Should've seen the expression on his face. By the time I
was done, I do believe he understood clearly that when injured people fall
through a gate regardless of who they are-they are to be brought directly to
me, not abused for nearly a whole day in a sham investigation."
   She touched his brow. "You can mop up the floor with him as soon as you're
back on your feet with all your muscles working properly again."
   Skeeter tried to smile, grateful she understood. "Promise?" he croaked
hoarsely.
   "Promise."

   He might spend time behind bars, but by all the gods, he had a score to
settle with Mr. Michael Benson.
   "Easy, now. We're nearly there. Just hang on, Skeeter. Soon you'll be
asleep again, mending faster than you realize." When he furrowed his brow,
worried about money, she correctly guessed the cause. "Don't worry about the
bill, Skeeter. Someone's already agreed to pay it. "
   "Who?" he croaked through his still-tight voice.
   Rachel chuckled and tickled his nose. "Kit Carson."
   Skeeter's eyes widened. "Kit? But.. . but why?"
   Rachel laughed warmly this time. "Who ever understands why Kit does any of
the things he does? He's an original. Like you."
   Then the back doors opened and his gurney was untied, slid backwards, and
the wheels lowered. Skeeter closed his eyes against the dizziness of the
moving ceiling overhead and pondered Rachel's revelation. Why would Kit
Carson, of all people, agree to pay for Skeeter's medical bills? He couldn't
understand it. Still didn't when they injected something incredibly potent
into his IV's heplock. The room swam in dizzy circles for just a second or
two, then darkness closed around him.
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
   When Skeeter, aware of a new inner strength, coldcocked and then mopped up
the floor with Mike Benson, the big cop didn't even press charges. "Rotten
bastard," Skeeter growled. "Bad enough you tortured me for hours-I might
actually have deserved it, given my reputation" another punch sent Benson
reeling into the wall, whereupon he slid comically to the floor like a wrung
out cartoon, "-but no, you had to do the same thing to Marcus, who's never
done a goddamned thing wrong in his life. This one's for Marcus." And he
slammed the flat of his hand against Benson's nose, with just enough force to
break it, but not enough to drive a sliver of bone fatally back into the
brain. Blood poured in streams. His eyes lost all focus. He was still sitting
there, unable to move so much as one arm, as Skeeter stormed through the
astonished crowd of onlookers.
   He'd found the Security Chief near Primary, which was due to cycle soon.
Montgomery Wilkes, with his red hair, black uniform, and steel-cold eyes,
routinely prowled the whole area. When Wilkes deliberately put himself in
Skeeter's way, growling out, "You are under arrest, you filthy little rat," a
collective gasp went up.
   Skeeter said dangerously, "No way, Herr Hitler. Way outside your
jurisdiction."
   "Nothing's outside my jurisdiction. And people like you are a danger to
peace in our time. And I'm the one who's going to take you off the streets."
When Wilkes actually grabbed Skeeter by the arm, he slammed his other fist
into Monty's solar plexus. Monty doubled over with a gasp of shock, letting go
of Skeeter's arm to hold his middle. Skeeter, coldly enraged, took advantage
of Wilkes' doubled-up condition and added a nice chop to the back of his neck.
Skeeter then kicked him to the floor. That felt good. Wilkes had been begging
it for years. He said loudly enough for Wilkes to hear, "Look, I haven't
broken any of your laws. And you just assaulted me. Just remember, I'm hell
and gone outside your jurisdiction, Nazi. Or do you really want to spend
another couple of weeks in Mike Benson's lockup?"
   Wilkes, too winded to reply, glared coldly up at him, eyes promising
retaliation.
   Skeeter gave out a harsh bark of laughter that startled Wilkes into
widening his eyes. "Forget it, Monty You do and I'll press charges so serious,
you'll end rotting in a cell forever. l grew up as a living god in the yurt of
Genghis Khan. I could kill you in so many different ways, not even your lurid
imagination could come up with all of 'em. So take some advice. Go hassle

taxes out of honest tourists who can't or won't fight back."
   He spat, the wad of saliva landing right next to Monty's chin. The head ATF
agent didn't bat so much as an eyelash. "Face it, Wilkes. You're no better
than I am. You've just got a badge to hide behind when you swindle people and
pocket the stuff you skim off the top, before it's ever recorded where
government accountants might find it. So cut the Mr.-Up-holding-Law-and-Order-
Good-Guy crap. I ain't buyin' it and I ain't scared of you or any of your
underhanded tricks. Got that, Monty?"
   Monty looked cold and pale on the floor. He nodded stiffly, his face nearly
cracking with the movement. Skeeter had him dead-to-rights and they both knew
it.
   "Good. You leave me the hell alone and I'll leave you the hell alone."
   God, that felt good.
   When he stalked away, anger palpably radiating from him, everyone got out
of his way. Even ATF agents. It reminded Skeeter of that Charlton Heston
movie, where the sea had peeled back for the Israelites to flee Pharaoh's
wrath.
   So far, so good. Two thrashings down, one yelling match to come. Next stop:
Kit Carson's office.
   He shoved impatiently past the Neo Edo's front desk, grabbed an elevator,
pressed the unmarked button, and rose swiftly upward into Kit's private
domain. When he stormed into the office, not bothering to remove his shoes,
Kit's brows knotted above a deeply disproving frown. Skeeter didn't care. He
knew Kit would put him down in about two seconds if he started anything
physical, so he gritted his teeth, leaned his palms on the enormous desk, and
said, "All, right, Carson. Let's hear it. Why?"
   Kit hadn't moved. The stillness scared Skeeter, despite his momentum and
the fire in his blood.
   "Sit down, Skeeter." It was not an invitation. It was an order and a fairly
forceful one at that.
   Skeeter sat.
   Kit finally moved, back slightly in his chair and observing Skeeter closely
for several silent moments. His clothes were disarranged slightly from the
knock-down, drag-out with Benson and his knuckles were a scraped-up mess from
bringing Monty the Monster down a peg or two. Kit finally pointed to the wall-
sized rank of monitors to Skeeter's right. He turned cautiously, wondering why
Kit wanted him to look at them, then understood in a single flash of
understanding. One of the screens showed live feed directly from a security
camera at Primary. He. saw Mike Benson staggering to his feet, still bleeding,
with the help of two of his men. The sway in his knees warmed Skeeter's heart.
Yesukai would have approved: honor avenged.
   "That, Skeeter, was quite a performance." Kit's voice came out dry as a
Mongolian sandstorm.
   "I wasn't performing," Skeeter growled. "And you haven't answered me yet."
He ignored the monitors and glared at Kit, whose abrupt bark of laughter
startled him so deeply he almost forgot why he'd come up here. "Do you have
any idea," Kit said, actually wiping tears, "how long I've wanted someone to
put that overbearing ass on the floor so hard his brains rattled? Of course,
this is going to start another round of battle between ATF and Station
Management. Oh, don't look so scared, boy. I just got off the phone with Bull
Morgan, who was laughing so hard he just about couldn't talk." That world-
famous grin came and went. "No need to worry about charges being pressed or
getting thrown off station. Both of those idiots got what they richly
deserved."
   Word traveled fast in La-La Land. Skeeter sighed. "Okay. So everybody's
cheering my fight of honor. Big deal. But you still haven't answered my
question."

   Kit studied him some more. Then rose and walked barefooted except for black
tabi socks to a sumptuous bar. He chose an ancient-looking bottle, handled it
with the greatest reverence, and found two shot glasses. He poured carefully,
not wasting a drop, then put the bottle cautiously back into the depths of the
bar. Skeeter realized he was being granted some special privilege and didn't
know why.
   Kit returned and set a shot glass in front of him then resumed his chair.
His brown eyes were steady as they met Skeeter's. "Marcus is a friend," he
said softly. "I couldn't go after him, which damn near broke my heart. I've
watched that boy grow from a terrified slave into a strong and self-confident
young man. I've offered him jobs dozens of times, but he always shakes his
head and says he prefers friendship over charity."
   Kit paused a moment, shot glass steady in his hand. "You and I haven't had
much love for one another over the years, Skeeter. The way you make your
living, what you tried to do to my granddaughter ..." He shook his head.
"Believe me, I understand all too well the fear behind your eyes, Skeeter
Jackson. But four weeks ago you did something so out of character, it shook me
up. Badly. You tried to save Marcus from that bastard Farley, or whatever his
real name is. Word is, you suffered some pretty rough treatment downtime
before both of you escaped."
   Skeeter felt heat in his cheeks. He shrugged. "Gladiator school wasn't so
bad, if you didn't piss off the slave master enough for him to rake your hide
with the whip. And I beat Lupus, hands down, in the Circus. No big deal."
   Kit said quietly, "Yes, very big deal. Remember, I've fought for my life in
that arena, too." Skeeter had forgotten in his anger. "So far as I can tell,
that fight was an important first in your life. First time you put somebody
else's life ahead of your own."
   Skeeter felt uncomfortable again.
   Kit lifted his glass. Clumsily, Skeeter took hold of his.
   "To honor," Kit said quietly.
   Skeeter's throat closed. An 'eighty-sixer had finally understood. He gulped
the bourbon, astonished by the smooth flavor of it. Where, he wondered, had
Kit acquired it? And why share it with Skeeter?
   Kit set his shot glass upside-down on the desk; Skeeter did the same.
   "I offered to pay the hospital bill," Kit finally said, "because you
acquired those injuries in a desperate fight to get Marcus back where he
belonged-with his wife and children. And I know exactly how much money you
don't have."
   "There's the wager money Brian's holding-hey, what about that wager Do you
know anything?
   A smile came and went. "Goldie screamed and kicked for a whole week when
Brian put the wager on hold until you returned. It's still on hold until you
officially visit Brian in the library."
   Skeeter thought that one out. The wager seemed almost irrelevant, now. But
he could use the money Brian was holding. He did rather enjoy the mental image
of Goldie purple-faced enraged. Then he sighed and startled himself,
admitting, "Wish I'd never made that goddamned wager."
   Kit nodded slowly. "Good. That's one of the reasons for the bourbon." He
chuckled. "It's illegal, you know. Brought a few bottles back with me from a
scouting trip."
   Skeeter couldn't believe it. Not only was the Kit Carson speaking to him
man-to-man, but he'd shared a chink in his squeaky clean honor, shared it
knowing it made him vulnerable.
   He rose slowly to leave. "Thanks, Kit. More than you know. And thanks for
the `vodka,' too. It was bracing and I needed that." It was the only way
Skeeter knew to tell Kit he would keep his mouth shut about the wonderful,
illegal bourbon.

   Kit's lips twitched and a wicked gleam touched his eyes, but he said only,
"Any time. I think Brian's waiting for you."
   Skeeter nodded, headed for the door, then turned and said, "Sorry about the
shoes. Won't happen again." Provided, that was, if Skeeter were ever invited
back to Kit's sanctuary, which he deemed improbable at best. He closed the
door, stood in the corridor for a moment, a little unsure just what he felt,
then he sighed, found the elevator, and left the Neo Edo, heading toward the
library. The few coins left from his victory lap jangled in his pocket. If the
wager was still on, he was still in very hot water. Any tiny bit of coin he
could scrape up would help.
   When he entered the library, Brian Hendrickson looked up and said in his
impossible accent, "Ah, heard you were up and about again. Glad to see rumor
true, for once. I've been waiting, you know, for a month."
   Skeeter, his mind and blood cooled by the time spent in Kit's office,
pulled the coins out of his pocket and set them on the counter.
   "Mmm ... very, very nice. And a gold aura amongst the lot." Brian looked
up. "However did you come into possession of these?"
   Skeeter wanted to tell him they'd come from the purses he'd stolen; but
that wasn't the truth. He'd spent every last copper uncia of that money
getting Marcus and him through the gate. All that remained were a few coins
from the arena sands. So he said, very quietly, "I snatched them from the sand
when the crowd. at the Circus Maximus started throwing coins to me on my
victory lap. I'd, uh, beaten the favorite champion in Rome, and, uh, things
got pretty wild for a few minutes."
   Curiously, "Did you kill him?"
   "No," Skeeter bit out. "But I beat the hell out of him and Claudius spared
him."
   Brian Hendrickson gazed at nothing for a moment. `That," he said, "would
have been something to witness. Claudius spared very few" Then he shook
himself slightly an a mournful look appeared on his face. "I'm afraid these
cannot count toward your wager, Skeeter. You earned them honestly."
   He'd half expected that answer, anyway, so he just nodded and scooped up
the coins.
   "Going to exchange them somewhere"
   "No." They represented a pivotal moment in his life, when-for just a few
minutes-the crowd really had treated him as the god Yesukai the Valiant had
once called him. He stuffed the coins back into his pocket. Some god. All the
years he'd spent fooling himself into thinking that what he did was correct
was simply time wasted from his life, on delusions and fantasies that kept him
from seeing what he was and where he was inevitably headed with genuine
clarity. Thank God for Marcus. Without him, Skeeter might never have woken up.
   "Thanks, Brian."
   He stalked out of the library, unsure what to do next, or where to go.
Surprisingly, he ended up at Dr. Mundy's door. A few minutes later, relaxed in
a deep, easy-on-the-back chair with the whir of a tape recorder in the
background, Skeeter started spilling all of it out, every single thing he
could recall about Yesukai, Temujin, and the yurt he'd lived in as bogda and
then as uncle of the Khan's firstborn son. Then, under Dr. Mundy's gentle
persuasion, he let out the rest of it, as well. When he'd finished, he knew
the hurt and fear weren't gone, but much of it now inhabited that whirring
strand of metallic recording tape rather than Skeeter's belly and nightmares.
   He refused the usual payment, startling Mundy into stutters, then left
quietly and closed the door on that part of his life forever.
   Margo and Malcolm got word from Primary just about the time Skeeter Jackson
was punching Mike Benson into the ground. A sealed letter with official
letterhead and stamps arrived for them.
   "Open it!" Margo demanded.

   "Patience," Malcolm laughed.
   "You know I haven't got any!"
   "Ah, yet another lesson to explore."
   The Irish alley-cat glare, at least, had not changed since she'd begun
college. Malcolm carefully slit the envelope with his pocketknife, replaced
the little folder in his pocket, then slid out a crisp, official reply.
   "Re: William Hunter, a.k.a. Charles Farley. Above was apprehended while
digging up an illegal hoard of downtime artwork from Denver. Your recordings
were most helpful in getting his cooperation and should serve very nicely at
trial. I know you're wondering, and ordinarily I wouldn't commit words to
paper before a trial, but you are, after all, on TT-86, many, many years in
`our' past. He was, indeed an agent, collecting unusual pieces of art from the
past and returning with them to his employer." Malcolm's eyes bugged when he
saw that employer's world-famous name.
   "We'll have a separate trial for him, of course. Seems he and another rich
gentleman, on whom we have not a shred of evidence beyond Mr. Hunter's
statements, had several years ago engaged in a little wager as to which of
them could smuggle uptime for their private collections the most, ah,
aforementioned artwork We've already seized one collection and will be turning
it over to an IFARTS office as soon as the trials are completed. No one
expects either trial to be long. I thought you should know, as you went far
beyond the extra mile, and citizens, not law enforcement, at that-to bring
this temporal criminal to justice. Good luck to you and thank you most
sincerely for your incalculable help in cracking this illegal wager wide
open."
   The signature block caused even Margo's eyes to pop. "Wow! The actual
justice Minister, not one of his flunkies!"
   Malcolm chortled and folded up the slip of paper, sliding it back into the
envelope. "I'd like to have seen old Chuckie's face when they caught him with
the goods. He'll get life for the illegal trafficking alone and probably a
death sentence for the people he killed along the way." He sighed slightly. "I
always did fancy happy endings," he mused, smiling down at Margo.
   She leaned up and kissed him, not caring who was watching, then breathed
against his mouth, "Let's go make a few copies, eh? Give one to what's left of
Benson's carcass, another to Bull Morgan, maybe even one to that horrid
Montgomery Wilkes. Tax evasion is, after all, in his jurisdiction."
   Malcolm laughed hard enough to draw stares, then brushed a kiss across her
lips. "Sounds good to me, fire-eater."
   "Huh. Fire-eater. You just wait until I get you alone, you prudish, staid
old Brit, you."
   They set out toward Bull Morgan's aerie of an office, grinning like a
couple of Cheshire Cats.
   Wandering aimlessly, Skeeter finally ended up inside the Down Time Bar &
Grill, where-of all people, Marcus was on duty at the bar. He flushed and
nearly walked out again, but Marcus was pouring his favorite brew and saying,
"Skeeter, have a beer with me, eh?"
   He halted, then turned. "No money, Marcus."
   "So what?" Marcus said a shade too seriously. He came around the end of the
bar, handed Skeeter a foaming mug, then sat down with his own. They drank in
silence for a few minutes, popping peanuts in between sips and longer pulls at
the beer.
   "Been wanting to thank you," Marcus said quietly.
   "Huh. Been wanting to do the same."
   Another long silence reigned, filled with peanuts and beer.
   "Just returning the favor," Marcus said at last. "Isn't nearly enough, but
it's a start."
   "Now look here, Marcus, I'm not going to put up with any more of your honor

is sacred bullshi-"
   Goldie Morran appeared at the entrance.
   Marcus winked once at Skeeter and resumed his place behind the bar. Goldie
walked over and, to Skeeter's dismay, took a chair at his table. "Marcus, good
to see you back," she, said, with every evidence of sincerity. He just nodded
his thanks. "Would you get me a tall bourbon with a touch of soda, please?"
   Back in his bartender role, Marcus made the drink to Goldie's
specifications, then delivered it on a tray with another beer for Skeeter.
   "Well," Goldie said. "You have been through it, haven't you? I didn't
expect you to survive."
   Skeeter narrowed his eyes. "Not survive?" he asked, his tone low and
dangerous. "Five years in the yurt of Genghis Khan's father, and you didn't
think I'd survive?"
   Goldie's eyes widened innocently; then, for some reason, the mask shattered
and fell away, leaving her old, tired, and oddly vulnerable. She snatched at
her drink the way Skeeter had snatched at that hunting spear in the stinking
sands of the Circus.
   He wondered which of them would say it first.
   Before either of them could summon up the nerve, Mike Benson-both eyes
blacked, limping a little, entered the bar a bit gingerly and sat down very
carefully at their table. He looked from one to the other, then said, "Got a
copy of a communique from the Minister of justice today." Skeeter's belly
hollowed. "I, uh, just wanted to ask for the record if either of you had run
into a professional antiquities thief by the name of William Hunter during
these last few weeks? He's one of the best in the world. Steals ancient
pornography for an uptime collector as part of a wager with another collector.
Oh, by the way, one of his aliases was Farley. Chuck Farley."
   Skeeter and Goldie exchanged glances. Neither of them spoke.
   "Well, do let me know if either of you've seen the bastard. They'll be
needing witnesses for the trial next month."
   With that, Benson left them.
   Goldie glanced at her drink, then at Skeeter. "Professional, huh? Guess we
were a couple of damned amateurs, compared to that."
   "Yeah." Skeeter pulled at his beer while Goldie gulped numbing bourbon.
"Funny, isn't it? We were trying to win our stupid little wager and he cleaned
us both out to win his boss's wager. Feel a little like a heel, you know?"
   Very quietly, Goldie said, "Yes, I know" She stared into her drink for
several seconds, then met his gaze, her eyes troubled and dark. "I, uh, I
thought I really needed to apologize. I told that gladiator where to find
you."
   Skeeter snorted. "Thanks, Goldie. But I already knew."
   Goldie's eyes widened.
   "Marcus told me, right before I went into the arena to fight Lupus
Mortiferus."
   Goldie paled. "I never meant things to go so far."
   "Me, neither," Skeeter muttered. "You should feel what I feel every time I
move my back and shoulders.
   Got a bottle of pain pills this big." He measured the length and diameter
of the prescription bottle. "Not to mention the antibiotics, the muscle
relaxants, and whatever it is Rachel shoots into my butt every few hours. Feel
like a goddamned pincushion. One that's been run over by all twelve racing
chariots in a match."
   Goldie cleared her throat. "I don't suppose ..." She stopped, visibly
searching for the right words and the courage to say them. "That stupid wager
of ours" She gulped a little bourbon for bravery. " I think we ought to call
it off, seeing as how it's done nothing but hurt a lot of people." Her eyes
flickered to Marcus, then back. "Some of them good people."

   Skeeter just nodded. "Terms accepted, Goldie."
   They shook hands on it, with Marcus a silent witness.
   "Suppose we ought to go tell Brian," Skeeter muttered.
   "Yes. Let's do that, shall we, before I run out of bourbon courage."
   Skeeter slid his chair back and took Goldie's chair, assisting her up. She
shot a startled glance into his face, then fumbled for money.
   "Goldie," Marcus called from the bar, "forget it. You're money's no good
for that one."
   She stared at the young former slave for a long time. Then turned abruptly
and headed for the door.
   "Thanks, Marcus," Skeeter said.
   "Any time, friend."
   Skeeter followed Goldie out into Urbs Romae where workmen were busy
patching broken mosaics. They stepped past as carefully as possible, then
headed for the library.
   Word traveled far faster than they did. Telephones, word-of-mouth, however
it happened, the alchemy proved itself once again, because by the time they
reached Brian Hendrickson's desk, an enormous crowd of 'eighty-sixers and
newsies holding their vidcams aloft and trying to shove closer, all but filled
the library. Goldie faltered. Skeeter muttered, "Hey, it's only 'eighty-sixers
and some lousy newsies. Isn't like you're facing a champion gladiator or
anything."
   The color came back into her face, two bright, hot spots of it on her
cheekbones. She strode into the crowd, muttering imperiously, "Get out of the
way, clod. Move over, idiot."
   Skeeter grinned to himself and followed her through the path she plowed.
When he caught sight of Kit Carson, Kit's grin and wink shook him badly enough
he stumbled a couple of steps. But he was glad Kit was there, on his side for
once.
   Then, too soon, they both faced Brian Hendrickson. Voice flat, Goldie said,
"We're calling off the bet, Brian."
   A complete hush fell as every eye and vidcam lens focused on Skeeter. He
shrugged. "Yeah. Stupid wager in the first place. We're calling it quits."
   A wave of sound rolled over them as minor wagers were paid off, vidcam
reporters talked into their microphones, and everyone pondered the reason.
Skeeter didn't care. He signed the paper Brian shoved at him, watched while
Goldie signed it, too, then collected his earnings, stuffed them into every
pocket he possessed, borrowed an envelope from Brian to hold the arena coins,
then moved woodenly through the crowd, holding mute as questions were hurled
in his direction. Let Goldie cope with it, he thought emptily. I don't want
any part of it.
   A fair percentage of the crowd followed him up to Commons and down its
length, whispering wagers as to what he'd do next. He ignored the mob,
including at least two persistent newsies, and stalked through Castletown,
Frontier Town, and into Urbs Romae.
   The only warning he received was the flash of light on a sharp metal blade.
Then Lupus Mortiferus--how the hell did he slip though the gate again?-
charged, sword and dagger in classic killing position. Skeeter did the only
thing he could do, while unarmed. He turned, shot through the startled crowd,
and ran. The coins and bills in his pockets slowed him down, but not by much.
Lupus remained behind him, running flat out, but the gladiator wasn't gaining.
At least, not yet. A quick over-the-shoulder glance showed Lupus and,
incongruously, two newsies in hot pursuit, vidcams capturing every bit of the
lethal race.
   Skeeter cursed them, catskinned over a railing, and howled at the pain
which made itself abruptly known all over again-then charged up a ramp,
shouting at tourists to get out of the way. Startled women lunged for children

or shop doorways as Skeeter pelted past. His shirt pockets were lighter by a
fair percentage, having dumped money to the floor while in the middle of that
catskinning move. Damn. He kept running, aware from the screams that Lupus was
still back there. Doesn't this guy ever give up? Then he had to admit, C`mon
Skeeter, you robbed him then humiliated him in front of the Imperator himself,
never mind all his fans. Either you outrun him, or he's gonna chop you into
deli-sized slices of Skeeter And you'd deserve it.
   With Lupus and both panting newsies in pursuit, Skeeter whipped around a
corner, grabbed an overhead girder, and swung himself up and around, then
dropped to the catwalk the moment Lupus and the confused newsies rounded the
corner. He sped back the way he'd come, hearing a roar of rage far behind. The
next roar was much closer. Skeeter knew he was getting winded, and cramps the
length of his body slowed him even further. He dropped to the Commons floor
and headed for Residential, hoping to lose the man in the maze of corridors
and elevators. Maybe, if he were lucky, he could grab an elevator for the gym
and find a weapon. Preferably one of those fully automatic machine guns Ann
kept in her little office, with a full belt of ammo in it.
   Lupus charged down the corridor, shouting. obscenities at him in Latin and
gaining ground. Winded, aching from wrenched muscles that hadn't quite healed
yet from the arena, Skeeter didn't notice it at first. Then, as he fell
against an elevator door and frantically pressed the button, a shimmer
dopplered wildly and a gate opened up between him and the enraged gladiator.
The gate's edges pulsed raggedly in the typical configuration of a very
unstable gate. It grew, shrank to a pinhole, then engulfed the entire hallway.
Through the intense vibration of his skullbones, Skeeter thought he heard a
startled yell. He peered hard at the pulsing, black opening, wondering if
anyone had ever studied the back side of a gate, or could see what was on the
other side.
   Before he could make out any details, the gate shuddered closed. Skeeter
slid to the floor, panting, when he realized there was no sign of Lupus, just
two gaping newsies. One of the stammered, "D-did you see what I think I saw?"
   "I think I did. Our vidcams should've caught it."
   They exchanged glances, ignored Skeeter completely, and dashed down the
corridor the other way. Wearily, Skeeter found a stubby pencil in one pocket,
and pushed himself to trembling legs, marking out the gate's position and size
as best he could, dragging the pencil down walls and across the floor, with
arrows pointing toward the ceiling, since he couldn't reach it.
   Unstable gates were nothing to mess with. Whenever possible, their location
and duration were logged. He'd call Bull Morgan as soon as he got home.
Exhausted, he dug for keys that the slave master must've taken away from him
at least a month ago, then remembered that Lupus had shattered his door a long
time ago. He hadn't needed a key since his return. Eventually, he might even
have enough money to have the door fixed. He stumbled in the direction of his
apartment and found it exactly as he'd left it earlier in the day. The bottles
of water he'd planned to sell as a con he'd already shoved angrily into the
wastebasket. Skeeter hunted a little desperately for the pill bottle he'd
described to Goldie. He shook out two tablets, reconsidered, and shook a third
into his palm.
   He swallowed them dry, then tumbled into bed. By some odd chance, he'd left
his small television on this morning. The television, even his apartment still
looked and felt alien. He was about to shut it off by remote when a newsflash
came on, showing Skeeter running from Lupus, with a breathless commentary on
the longstanding feud. Skeeter grunted and reached again for the remote. Then
froze, hand in midair.
   "This, as you can see, is a blowup of what our vidcam lenses picked up
through the unstable gate. Rumor is, it has already started a heated debate
among onstation scholars." Skeeter stared at the screen as Lupus, larger than

life, plunged into the gate with a startled yell, then stumbled on a stone
step. One of a huge number of stone steps, leading to the crest of a flat-
topped pyramid. Lupus, grasping sword and knife, was staring down at an
enormous crowd of featherclad Indians. They were prostrate on the ground.
   "Clearly," the voiceover said as Lupus just swayed there, stupefied, "this
will begin an intense scholarly debate over the legendary origins of the god-
like Viracocha, who came to Central America wearing a pale skin, taught the
people a great deal of knowledge they didn't possess, then vanished across the
ocean to the west, vowing to return. Speculation about the classic legend
should fuel debate for years to come. Whatever the truth, this tape represents
a scholarly as well as journalistic victory in the search for knowledge of our
past."
   Skeeter finished the motion he'd started with the remote and turned off the
television with a deep sigh. He was almost sorry Lupus had suffered such a
fate. He knew in his bones the shock of dissonance caused by plunging
accidentally through an unstable gate, with no way home again. But in his
inner soul, he was even gladder that he was still alive. Still selfish, aren't
we, Skeeter? He realized sadly he probably always would be. But the
painkillers had already begun to hit his system, so that he couldn't quite
raise enough anxiety to worry about it now. Within moments, he drowsed into
blissful oblivion.
   "Marcus?"
   Her voice came drowsily in the darkness. He'd been lying quietly, wrapped
up in the miracle of holding her again and wondering if the gods would bless
them with a son this time.
   "Yes, beloved?"
   Ianira's tiny movement told her how the endearment, new to his lips, had
startled and pleased her. "Oh, Marcus," she breathed huskily into his ear,
"what would I have done if-"
   He placed gentle fingertips across her lips. "Let us not tempt the Fates,
beloved. It did not happen. Let us not speak of it again."
   Her arms tightened around his ribcage and for a moment she buried her face
in his shoulder. A marvel of sensation, of need ... but she wanted to discuss
something, so he willed it back, ran his fingers through her silken black hair
and murmured, "You had something to say?"
   She turned just enough to kiss his wrist, then sighed and said, "Yes. That
telephone call you were so angry about earlier?"
   Marcus felt the chuckle build deep inside. "Not angry, love. Impatient."
   His reward was another brush of her lips across his. Then she settled back
into his arms, wrapped around him as warmly and contentedly as any cat. He'd
had a kitten, as a child, tamed from the wild as the only survivor of its
litter. Perhaps they should ask permission to get a kitten for their children?
It would be a delightful surprise
   "Marcus, you haven't heard a word I've said!"
   "I'm sorry, beloved. I was just thinking of asking the Station Manager for
permission to get a kitten. For the girls."
   It was Ianira's turn to chuckle. "Always my romantic dreamer. I would never
have you be otherwise.
   "What were you saying, beloved?" Strange, how the endearment he'd never
been able to say before now came so easily to his lips.
   "The phone call. It was Council business. They were taking votes over the
phone, to move as quickly as possible."
   Marcus turned his head slightly. "What could possibly be so urgent?"
   She said very softly, "Skeeter."
   Ahh...
   "He is no longer Lost. He must therefore be given the chance to become
Found."

   Marcus nodded. "And your answer?"
   "Yes, of course. Who do you think started the round of calls in the first
place?"
   Marcus laughed, softly enough not to waken their sleeping children, then
turned until Ianira was beneath him, both arms still wrapped around him. This
time, he could not hold back the love in him. Ianira cried out softly, moaned
his name and sought his mouth. Marcus moved slowly, dreamily, thinking of
kittens and sons and the miracle of this moment in whatever time Fate gave
them together.
EPILOGUE
   Skeeter was dreaming again. He'd dreamed often, these last few weeks, all
of them terrible and strange, so at first he felt no great alarm, only a
frisson of fear and a great deal of resignation as to what horrors his
unconscious mind would put him through this time.
   The dream began with dark figures, faces masked in black, bodies sheathed
in black, hair covered with black, sinister figures which touched and lifted
him, began to wind strips of black around his feet and lower legs so tightly
he couldn't move even his toes. Then he realized he wasn't sleeping anymore.
He began to fight was subdued thoroughly and expertly. Sweat started along his
back and chest and face as the black strips rose higher, covering thighs,
hips, lower belly, like some monstrous black mummy casing. But they wouldn't
get his arms. He had to have his aims free, to struggle, to plant a fist in
someone's face before his strength ran out.
   He fought savagely. He thought he heard a faint curse from one of the
figures holding him and fought even harder. But his other fights, never mind
that final run from Lupus, had taken nearly everything left in him.
Eventually, his strength began to wane. And then, before he could react, an
unknown person grabbed his shaved head and bent his head back until the pain
was so deep all he could do was blink tears down an open mouth and fight for
air through the strain on his windpipe.
   When they let him go, black wrappings swathed arms, chest, and neck. He
could not move.
   Coming slightly out of shock, Skeeter thought to use the other major skill
he possessed: language. "Hey," Skeeter began, "look, whoever you are-not that
I care, really, that's your business-but what're you doing? With me, I mean?
Kidnapping's illegal on TT-86." At least, he thought it was. He hadn't ever
gotten around to actually reading the rulebook they'd given him at Primary.
"Look, have a heart. You can see I'm helpless, here. What could it possibly
hurt to just tell me?"
   Then, terrified as a new set of wrappings dug into his brow, covered his
head and brow, wound around his eyes in one gauze-thin layer after another,
Skeeter fought a whimper that had been building since childhood. "Please," he
said while his mouth, at least, was still free, "what harm have I done to you?
Just tell me, please, and I'll make it up to you, I swear it --"
   His eyesight disappeared completely, both eyes covered in layer after layer
of thin black cloth until there was no light. He struggled again, far too
late. He could not move anything beneath the wrappings more than a quarter
inch. Genuinely terrified now, a onetime Mongol battling claustrophobia, his
breath came in ragged gasps. They left his nose clear-small comfort, then
forcibly closed his jaw over a thick gag and tightly wrapped his mouth closed
until the loudest sound he could utter was a faint, muffled, "Mmmmf" which
even he had difficulty hearing. Getting enough air through his nose to fuel
the mindless terror ripping through him proved futile. As he was lifted and
carried toward his shattered apartment door, Skeeter blacked out.
   He came to in ragged bits and pieces, aware of movement, of jostling as
those carrying him grew tired and rearranged his weight in their grasp. He saw

no light whatsoever and could catch no scent that might tell him where he was.
He drifted out of consciousness again, then faded back into it, pondering this
time who had him? ATF? Benson's men, intent on wresting whatever "unofficial"
confessions they could beat and starve out of him? Or maybe Goldie Morran's
henchmen, hired to do only the gods knew what kill him, cripple him, send him
uptime as luggage through Primary ... Despite her capitulation on the bet, she
must still hate him with all her greedy, cold little heart. Or perhaps it was
simply a tourist with a taste for revenge, who'd hired enough men to do this,
maybe dump him down the garbage incinerator ... .
   A chill shook him inside the wrappings. Burned alive, like so many captives
over the centuries. He'd heard the crazy stories about Kit's grandkid and that
crazy Welsh bowman, both of whom had nearly been burned alive. His skin
crawled already, anticipating the suffocating heat and the flames searing him
while he writhed inside his black bindings and screamed himself to death.
   He finally was set down on a cold, hard surface, unable to move. Someone
unfastened the wrappings from his eyes, allowing him sight. At first, he
thought he must've gone blind during that semiconscious trip, for whatever
room he'd been brought to was black-dark. Then he noticed specks of light as
his eyes adjusted. Candles. Candles? He blinked a few times, clearing his eyes
of dried tears and grit, and noticed shimmering golden draperies which formed
a quiet, snug little room filled with candles-hundreds of 'em-and with warmth
beyond any possible heat those candles could've given off and ... he felt a
fool for saying it even to himself... welcome.
   Some welcome, Skeeter, wrapped up tight so's you can't move, in black mummy
bandages.
   He noticed a dais, then, low and right in front of him. It was wide enough
to hold seven people comfortably. Currently six stood on it, with a gap in the
center for someone unknown. The six were men of various builds and heights,
robed in black, faces masked in black, but unmistakably male. The ones who
brought me here, then. A shuffling of many feet and the sound of dozens of
lungs in the utter silence told Skeeter that a crowd had gathered to witness
... what?
   He shivered inside his imprisoning layers of cloth and looked up. He'd
never gone lower in the terminal than the basement where the gym and weapons
ranges were, having a Mongol's fear of tightly closed-in places. This must be
the level beneath the basement, nothing but steam pipes, sewage drains,
electrical conduits, and computer cables strung everywhere, festooning the
girdered ceiling like the web of a very large and completely insane spider.
   Skeeter shuddered again.
   He didn't much like spiders.
   Being caught in one's web was even worse.
   At just that moment, the golden draperies stirred behind the dais,
admitting darkness in the guise of a slim figure also robed and masked in
black. Looks like it's showtime. Skeeter swallowed hard around the thick wad
of cloth in his mouth. The gag forced every sound he tried to make shrivel and
die in a parched throat. He gazed up at the seven robed figures, aware of
dozens of figures still crowding into the already claustrophobic little space.
   It's a court, Skeeter realized with a tremor. It's a court and they're the
judges and prob'ly the jury, too.
   Probability that he'd be sentenced without defense was decidedly high-but
for what crime? And what would that sentence be? Skeeter had come through so
much over the past few days, he couldn't credit the evidence of his eyes:
robed, silent judges, a rack of what looked like knives and instruments of
torture just visible at the edge of his restricted gaze, a neat, terrifying
coil of rope, just the right diameter and heft for hanging a man.
   Skeeter, claustrophobic twice over, struggled in vain while the back of his
brain whispered that any one of those ducts, pipes, and concrete supports

overhead would make a great platform for a hangman's rope. And even if he
hadn't been gagged, who would've heard him screaming, anyway, down in the
bowels of the terminal where concrete met native Himalayan rock and merged
with it?
   Well, Skeeter'd survived a bloodbath, giving the spectators their money's
worth; he'd won the damned laurel crown and the money prize fair and square.
He'd even managed to rescue Marcus, alive and uninjured, except for the
desperation in his dark eyes that spoke eloquently of how much his one-time
friend wanted simply to go home and forget everything that had happened.
   Skeeter hadn't expected elaborate thanks from the former slave and he
certainly couldn't blame Marcus for wanting to forget those few weeks when
circumstance and his stubborn, Gallic pride had forced him to pick up the
burden of slavery again. True to his expectations, Marcus had not offered an
elaborate, embarrassing demonstration of gratitude. A couple of beers; but no
elaborate show of gratitude. Yes, Skeeter had predicted that and it had come
true.
   A little bitterly, Skeeter wished he possessed a quarter of his former
friend's character.
   But in of all his long musings over Marcus' eventual reaction, Skeeter had
not predicted this. Not in his wildest, most terrifying nightmares.
   Before he was ready, a deep, male voice began speaking in a language so
archaic Skeeter didn't understand a single syllable. When the robed judge had
made his statement and retired to his place, another stepped forward. At least
he spoke English. Sort of, anyway.
   "I will speak the words of our most learned colleague, Chenzira Umi, a
scribe of pharaohnic Egypt, in English to you, for that is our common language
now, necessary for survival; then will I add my own thoughts for your
consideration."
   Skeeter didn't recognize either of those voices; his tummy did inverted
spins like a dying aircraft.
   "Chenzira Umi speaks against this man, who is nothing more than a common
thief and cutpurse. He should have both hands cut off to end his career of
thievery and blasphemous conduct such as we might expect of a worshiper of Set
himself, the dark one who murders even our very Lord, wise and all-knowing
Osiris. These are the words of Chenzira Umi."
   Beneath his wrappings, Skeeter had turned whiter than his bindings were
black. Cut off his hands? Who were these people? And what gave them the
bloody, arrogant gall to pass such judgment on him? He was far from perfect, a
scoundrel since earliest childhood, but that did not justify such torture! Did
it? Well, the guy is from Egypt and people from the Middle East have funny
ideas about crime and punishment. And there are six more to go. Surely reason
would prevail?
   He wasn't so sure when the man who'd done the translating said in a
scathing, late-Elizabethan-sounding voice, "If it were my choice, I'd say hang
him, then draw and quarter the whoreson on yon wall, for the children to see
as an example before he bled out and died."
   Skeeter closed his eyes, queasy to his soul and losing hope fast.
   One by one, the five male members spoke. Another one for violent
retribution. One for mercy, because he'd never stolen from them, whoever the
hell they were, although Skeeter was beginning to form a pretty good guess.
Then, surprisingly, another vote for mercy for the sake of the children
Skeeter had saved over the years with his large donations. Skeeter narrowed
his eyes. How's he know I've been donating, never mind why? Dimly, Marcus'
voice came back to him, explaining how The Found Ones had known about his
gifts of money for a long time. Based on that alone, Skeeter knew he ought to
know the man, but the voice was completely strange to him. Maybe they wore
voice synthesizers under those masks? The sixth vote was also, astonishingly,

for mercy, leaving the vote at a tie.
   Then the seventh, small-statured person stepped forward.
   Skeeter knew her voice in an instant. He stared, aghast that she could be a
part of such a bloodthirsty organization, but there she stood, her voice as
clear as ancient temple bells.
   Ianira Cassondra's voice, issuing from the black mask, said, "The voting of
the Council of Seven stands at three against, three for. Should I vote either
way... well, either decision's outcome would be obvious, would it not? I will
not, cannot break a tie in this vote. As head of this Council, I may vote to
create a tie, for some things must be considered very cautiously. But I may
not cast the deciding vote. All of us having given reasons for our vote, I
will speak as a special witness, then we will poll the Committee members
again, lest any have changed their minds, hearing others' testimony."
   Skeeter felt like what's-his-name, that ancient Greek guy the Athenian city
fathers had forced to drink poison. Ianira herself had spoken of it to him one
time over dessert in the apartment she and Marcus shared, when Skeeter himself
was the guest of honor. So fare the fortunes of men, Skeeter thought bitterly,
when seven wolves and a sheep decide what's for lunch. Perfect democracy:
everybody got to vote. Even the lunch.
   He wondered if this crowd would even bother asking this lunch before they
devoured it, metaphorically speaking?
   Ianira Cassondra's voice, so soft she might have been whispering her
children to sleep, yet so well projected Skeeter was certain even the back row
of listeners could hear her perfectly, began to speak. Must've tricked up that
little trick in that big temple of hers. He waited for the betrayal to come.
   It didn't. Instead, disbelieving, Skeeter listened while she wove a thread
that became the yarn of a great tale of evil and danger, with Skeeter caught
at the center of it, Skeeter who had, indeed, donated large sums of his
earnings to them, donations which had saved many a child's life-and many an
adult's, as well.
   Then, as he was beginning to squirm with embarrassment, she launched
hypnotically into the tale of Skeeter's run for life-Marcus' life-all the way
from the back of Residential to the Porta Romae gate, already open with
tourists filing through, while he dodged a man determined to kill him. How
Skeeter had at last been forced to crash the Porta Romae to try and save his
friend from the evil clutches of the man who'd planned all along to kidnap and
sell Marcus back into slavery.
   A craning, strained glance backwards showed Skeeter a roomful of people
leaning forward, intent on her every word.
   Damn, I'II bet she was impressive in that temple.
   In her flowing robes and flowing hair and that voice ...
   Many a man would've thought she was whatever equivalent to angel he knew.
   Ianira's magic voice then softened in horror at the fate of each man: one
sold to the master of the games and ordered to keep track of inventory-men and
beasts. Beside that, she wove the story of the other man, kidnapped and sold
to be a gladiator, hardly able to communicate with his captors, beaten and
tortured into learning the art of butchering others to stay alive, when his
own presence in Rome spoke eloquently of the fact that he could be no killer,
that he had come here because he had promised to save Marcus, whatever it
took. In trying to keep that promise, he had lost his freedom and was slated
to die in the arena on the end of a grand champion's sword.
   By this time, there were murmurs in the back rows, murmurs that sounded
angry. Skeeter didn't dare hope that note of anger was for him and the foul
treatment he'd received.
   "And then," Ianira Cassondra cried out, raising both arms in a graceful,
possibly symbolic motion, "our Skeeter defeated the champion and refused to
kill his opponent! The Caesar-"she pronounced it Kai-sar "gave him both laurel

crown and purse as rightfully his. Aware that only more slavery awaited him,
victory and prize notwithstanding; aware also that he had not yet freed his
friend, who stood with his evil master on the great balustrade above the
starting boxes for the races, Skeeter did what only a man with the smiles of
the gods at his back could possibly have done."
   She deliberately stretched out the tense silence.
   Then, all but whispering, as if in holy awe herself, "He galloped his horse
for the starting- ate wall. Leapt to his feet on the galloping horse's back---
- " a number of people, men from the sound of it, gasped in shock "then dug
the butt of his spear into the blood drenched sand and spun himself up and
over the balustrade. While every guard on the balustrade gawked just to see
him there, instead of fifteen feet down in the arena, Skeeter tossed the heavy
purse that was his well earned prize to Marcus' new master as payment for his
friend's freedom."
   Somewhere behind them, a ragged cheer broke out. Skeeter began to pray with
the tiniest smidgen of hope that he might yet live through this.
   "And then?" Ianira's voice demanded of her audience. `When our resourceful
Skeeter arranged for them to impersonate more highly placed persons than they
were, to throw off the slave trackers after them. They hid. They changed
disguises and hiding places, again and again. And when gate time came for the
Porta Romae, Skeeter caused a great diversion so that he and Marcus could win
through to the time gate and come safely home.
   "Now," and her voice turned abruptly hard as diamond and angry as a
rattlesnake stirred up in the rocks, "I ask you, members of The Found Ones,
what was his reward for this? A monstrous fine from that evil group calling
itself Time Tours whose employees use us badly and care not a bit for our
health, our dependents left behind should we die, our very lives squandered
like spare change without anyone ever warning us of the dangers! They actually
had the gall to fine him! Both directions! And what followed that?
Imprisonment by Station Security-during which he was starved, beaten,
humiliated!
   "I ask!" she cried, sweeping off her mask, shaking out her hair, revealing
her face, alight now with startling holiness-it was the only way Skeeter could
find to describe the light that seemed to flow outward from her-"I ask you,
each of you, is this any fair way to treat a man who has risked his very life,
not once, but many times, for one of us?"
   The roar echoed in the confined space like a Mongolian thunderstorm trapped
in the confines of a canyon deep in the high, sharp mountains.
   Very, very slowly, Ianira allowed her head to fall forward as though
infinitely wearied by the gruesome story of treachery, courage, and betrayal
she'd just been forced to reveal. When her head rose again, the mask was back
in place. Symbolic, then, Skeeter realized. But of what?
   Voice carefully neutral again, Ianira said, "He has the qualifications. All
of you know already the story of this man's childhood, lost in a time not his
own. He has faced all that we have faced-and worse. Yet he has survived,
prospered, remained generous in his heart to those in greater need than he. I
now ask for a new and final poll of the Seven. Do we Punish? Or Accept?"
   One by one the answers came to Skeeter's sweating ears.
   In thick-accented English came the single word, "Punish," from the ever-
condemning voice of the Egyptian.
   A pause ensued. The man who had previously translated the Egyptian's longer
speech said very quietly, "Accept."
   The next man refused to be swayed, which, if Skeeter were reading the body
language under the robe correctly, deeply irritated Ianira Cassondra.
   Down the line it went, skipping over Ianira: "Punish." "Accept." "Accept."
"Accept."
   Skeeter wasn't certain he'd heard-or counted-correctly. Was that really

four versus two? Now what? Ianira stepped forward, the final member of the
Seven to cast her vote. Skeeter waited to hear her confirm what he thought
he'd just heard. "The vote stands at four to accept, two to punish. As there
is no chance for a tie, I may cast my vote freely." She looked down at
Skeeter, lying helpless on the concrete floor at her feet. "I cannot deny that
Skeeter Jackson is a scoundrel, a thief, and a man who charms people out of
their money and belongings, to his own benefit.
   "Yet I must also repeat that he has saved the lives of many in this very
room through donations he thought anonymous. And then, on nothing more than a
promise, this scoundrel and thief risked his life to save a downtimer, a
member of The Found Ones. I admit difficulty in putting aside personal
feelings, for Marcus is the father of my children, but this is a thing in
which I was trained at the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus. to look beyond
personal feelings to the heart of the truth.
   "And that is why, peering as we have into this man's heart, his soul,
judging him by his actions-all his actions-I must vote to Accept."
   Another thunderous roar went up while Skeeter stared, wide-eyed, at Ianira.
He still didn't quite believe it. Ianira approached from the dais, a sharp
knife in her hands. Skeeter swallowed hard.
   "Do not fear, beloved friend." She cut loose the clinging, confining gauze
wrappings, freeing him to stand up and beat his thighs with equally leaden
arms to restore circulation. Then he was swept away, buffeted, occasionally
kissed-and the kissers were not always female-his back pounded until he was
certain the well-wishers would leave bruises the size of dinner plates. He
wasn't precisely sure just what the vote to Accept meant.
   Apparently Ianira sensed this, as she sensed so much else out of thin air,
for she called a halt to the merrymaking and restored order to The Found Ones'
chamber.
   "Skeeter Jackson, please approach the dais."
   He did so slowly, filing down a sudden double line of grinning Found Ones,
curiosity and uncertainty wavering within him still. He hated not knowing
precisely what was about to unfold. He wondered what he should do when he got
there? Show respect, his mind told him, somewhat dry with disgust that he
hadn't thought of it sooner. So when he arrived, he went down on one knee and
kissed the hem of her robe. When he dared glance up, her mask was gone and she
was actually blushing-furiously.
   Regaining her composure quickly, however, she said to him, "There are
things we must explain to you, Skeeter Jackson, for although you are now one
of us, it is through accident only. Born an uptimer, you spent formative years
of your life downtime, with a group of men as harsh as the summer's noonday
sun on the marble steps at Ephesus. You have suffered, lived, and learned from
every misfortune you have encountered. You might have become a creature like
the gems dealer, Goldie Morran, who has no true heart anywhere in her.
   "But you did not. You gave to others, not once but many times. Your ...
misadventure ... down the Porta Romae only cinched your right to hold this
honor, Skeeter Jackson. From this day until the end of your life and beyond,
you shall be known as a Found One, for although you have been Lost all your
life and took great pains to hide it, Marcus was able to discover the truth.
You are one of us," she swept the room with one arm, taking in what must have
been more than a hundred women, men, and children of all ages, dozens of
societies and time periods-some having come through a tourist gate, more
through an unstable one.
   "You are one of us, Skeeter Jackson, and we are now your Family."
   And then, as people filed past, many giving him gifts of welcome-plain,
simple gifts made to be cherished over a lifetime: a flower, a handmade
handkerchief bearing an embroidered logo which must stand for The Found Ones,
a box of food, a new pair of bluejeans----it happened. Skeeter Jackson began

to cry. It started as a tickle at the back of his throat. Worked its way up to
a tight throat, then to wetness welling up in his eyes. Before he knew it, he
was crying so hard, each indrawn breath shook his slender frame. Eventually he
found himself alone on the dais with Ianira and Marcus and the many, many
gifts left for him.
   "Why?" Marcus asked quietly.
   Ianira rolled her eyes. "Men," she said tiredly. "It is so obvious, Marcus.
He has a family now."
   Skeeter nodded vehemently, still unable to speak. He had a real Clan again!
One that accepted him on his own terms, knowing his worst faults, yet took him
in anyway and made something of him more than an outcast kid shivering in the
Mongolian nights and trying desperately not to waken Yesukai the Valiant, lest
he waken the man's formidable temper-and worse punishments.
   "I swear," he whispered, voice still choked with tears, "I swear to you,
Ianira, Marcus, I will never betray your faith. I have a Clan again. And I
never break faith with the people who are of my Clan. There ... there were
times I believed I was not worthy of finding another to accept me, other than
one I adopted from necessity's sake."
   "The 'eighty-sixers?' Marcus asked.
   Skeeter nodded. "Not that I'll start stealing from them now. I did adopt
them, after all. And ... and it sounds crazy, but ... I don't know what to do.
I haven't any skills worthy of The Found Ones."
   Ianira and Marcus exchanged glances, obviously having given this careful
thought. Then Ianira bent close and murmured in his ear. "We have a few ideas
you might find ... intriguing." She then proceeded to describe three of them,
just to tantalize his imagination.
   Skeeter started; then grinned and began to laugh like a newly freed imp.
Not only would he be useful, it sounded like fun!
   "Lady," he shook her hand formally, "you just got yourself a twenty-four-
carat deal!"
   He had difficulty, still, imagining himself an honest man. But what the
hell? Ianira's ideas were fabulous.
   An entire new life stretched out before him.
   All he had to do was grasp it.
   "Yeah," he repeated slowly, to himself, "a genuine twenty-four-carat deal."
   That said, he dried his face with the heels of his hands and let Marcus and
Ianira carry some of his gifts while he carried the lion's share. They
escorted him away from the dim-lit Council Chamber (blowing out candles as
they went) up to the bright lights and holiday cheer of Commons.
   Skeeter Jackson stopped and just looked. Today, for the first time in his
life, all he saw were happy people making merry during the happiest time of
year. "Say, how about we dump these things at my apartment and go celebrate
somewhere out there?"
   Marcus and Ianira exchanged glances, then smiled.
   That was exactly what they did.

