NAKED EMPIRE - Terry Goodkind 
 
 
CHAPTER1 
 
 
 You knew they were there, didn't you?" Kahlan 
asked in a hushed tone as she leaned closer. 
   Against the darkening sky, she could just make 
out the shapes of three black-tipped races taking 
to wing, beginning their nightly hunt. That was why 
he'd stopped. That was what he'd been watching as 
the rest of them waited in uneasy silence. 
   "Yes," Richard said. He gestured over his 
shoulder without turning to look. "There are two 
more, back there." 
   Kahlan briefly scanned the dark jumble of rock, 
but she didn't see any others. 
   Lightly grasping the silver pommel with two 
fingers, Richard lifted his sword a few inches, 
checking that it was clear in its scabbard. A last 
fleeting glimmer of amber light played across his 
golden cape as he let the sword drop back in place. 
In the gathering gloom of dusk, his familiar tall, 
powerful contour seemed as if it were no more than 
an apparition made of shadows. 
   Just then, two more of the huge birds shot by 
right overhead. One, wings stretched wide, let out 
a piercing scream as it banked into a tight gliding 
turn, circling once in assessment of the five 
people below before stroking its powerful wings to 
catch its departing comrades in their swift journey 
west. 
This night they would find ample food. 
   Kahlan expected that as Richard watched them he 
was thinking of the half brother that until just 
recently he hadn't known existed. That brother now 
lay a hard day's travel to the west in a place so 
naked to the burning sun that few people ever 
ventured there. Fewer still ever returned. The 

searing heat, though, had not been the worst of it. 
   Beyond those desolate lowlands, the dying light 
silhouetted a remote rim of mountains, making them 
look as if they had been charred black by the 
furnace of the underworld itself. As dark as those 
mountains, as implacable, as perilous, the flight 
of five pursued the departing light. 
   Jennsen, standing to the far side of Richard, 
watched in astonishment. "What in the world ... ?" 
"Black-tipped races," Richard said. 
   Jennsen mulled over the unfamiliar name. "I've 
often watched hawks and falcons and such," she said 
at last, "but I've never seen any birds of prey 
that hunt at night, other than owls---and these 
aren't owls." 
   As Richard watched the races, he idly gathered 
small pebbles from the crumbling jut of rock beside 
him, rattling them in a loose fist. "I'd never seen 
them before, either, until I came down here. People 
we've spoken with say they began appearing only in 
the last year or two, depending on who's telling 
the story. Everyone agrees, though, that they never 
saw the races before then." 
"Last couple of years ..." Jennsen wondered aloud. 
   Almost against her will, Kahlan found herself 
recalling the stories they'd heard, the rumors, the 
whispered assertions. 
   Richard cast the pebbles back down the hardpan 
trail. "I believe they're related to falcons." 
   Jennsen finally crouched to comfort her brown 
goat, Betty, pressing up against her skirts. "They 
can't be falcons." Betty's little white twins, 
usually either capering, suckling, or sleeping, now 
huddled mute beneath their mother's round belly. 
"They're too big to be falcons— they're bigger than 
hawks, bigger than golden eagles. No falcon is that 
big." 
   Richard finally withdrew his glare from the 
birds and bent to help console the trembling twins. 
One, eager for reassurance, anxiously peered up at 

him, licking out its little pink tongue before 
deciding to rest a tiny black hoof in his palm. 
With a thumb, Richard stroked the kids spindly 
white-haired leg. 
A smile softened his features as well as his voice. 
"Are you saying you choose not to see what you've 
just seen, then?"   
     Jennsen smoothed Betty's drooping ears. "I 
guess the hair standing on end at the back of my 
neck must believe what I saw."       
     Richard rested his forearm across his knee as 
he glanced toward    the grim horizon. "The races 
have sleek bodies with round heads and long pointed 
wings similar to all the falcons I've seen. Their 
tails often fan out when they soar but otherwise 
are narrow in flight."       
      Jennsen nodded, seeming to recognize his 
description of relevant attributes. To Kahlan, a 
bird was a bird. These, though, with red streaks on 
their chests and crimson at the base of their 
flight feathers, she had come to recognize. 
   They're fast, powerful, and aggressive," Richard 
added. "I saw one easily chase down a prairie 
falcon and snatch it out of midair in its taons."  
   Jennsen looked to be struck speechless by such 
an account.  Richard had grown up in the vast 
forests of Westland and had gone on to be a woods 
guide. He knew a great deal about the outdoors and 
about animals. Such an upbringing seemed exotic to 
Kahlan, who had grown up in a palace in the 
Midlands. She loved learning about nature from 
Richard, loved sharing his excitement over the 
wonders of the world, of life. Of course, he had 
long since come to be more than a woods guide. It 
seemed a lifetime ago when she'd first met him in 
those woods of his, but in fact it had only been 
little more than two and a half years. 
  Now they were a long way from Richard's simple 
boyhood home or Kahlan's grand childhood haunts. 
Had they a choice, they would choose to be in 

either place, or just about anywhere else, other 
than where they were. But at least they were 
together. 
   After all she and Richard had been through—the 
dangers, the anguish,the heartache of losing 
friends and loved ones—Kahlan jealously savored 
every moment with him, even if it was in the heart 
of enemy territory.  
In addition to only just finding out that he had a 
half brother, they had also learned that Richard 
had a half sister: Jennsen. From what they had 
gathered since they'd met her the day before, she, 
too, had grown up in the woods. It was heartwarming 
to see her simple and sincere joy at having 
discovered a close relation with whom she had much 
in common. Only her fascination with her new big 
brother exceeded Jennsen's wide-eyed curiosity 
about Kahlan and her mysterious upbringing in the 
Confessors' Palace in the far-off city of 
Aydindril. 
   Jennsen had had a different mother than Richard, 
but the same brutal tyrant, Darken Rahl, had 
fathered them both. Jennsen was younger, just past 
twenty, with sky blue eyes and ringlets of red hair 
down onto her shoulders. She had inherited some of 
Darken Rahl's cruelly perfect features, but her 
maternal heritage and guileless nature altered them 
into bewitching femininity. While Richard's raptor 
gaze attested to his Rahl paternity, his 
countenance, and his bearing, so manifest in his 
gray eyes, were uniquely his own. 
   "I've seen falcons rip apart small animals," 
Jennsen said. "I don't believe I much like thinking 
about a falcon that big, much less five of them 
together." 
Her goat, Betty, looked to share the sentiment. 
   "We take turns standing watch at night," Kahlan 
said, answering Jennsen's unspoken fear. While that 
was hardly the only reason, it was enough. 
   In the eerie silence, withering waves of heat 

rose from the lifeless rock all around. It had been 
an arduous day's journey out from the center of the 
valley wasteland and across the surrounding flat 
plain, but none of them complained about the brutal 
pace. The torturous heat, though, had left Kahlan 
with a pounding headache. While she was dead tired, 
she knew that in recent days Richard had gotten far 
less sleep than any of the rest of them. She could 
read that exhaustion in his eyes, if not in his 
stride. 
   Kahlan realized, then, what it was that had her 
nerves so on edge: it was the silence. There were 
no yips of coyotes, no howls of distant wolves, no 
flutter of bats, no rustle of a raccoon, no soft 
scramble of a vole—not even the buzz and chirp of 
insects. In the past, when all those things went 
silent it had meant potential danger. Here, it was 
dead silent because nothing lived in this place, no 
coyotes or wolves or bats or mice or even bugs. Few 
living things ever trespassed this barren land. 
Here, the night was as soundless as the stars. 
   Despite the heat, the oppressive silence ran a 
chill shiver up through Kahlan's shoulders. 
   She peered off once more at the races barely 
still visible against the violet blush of the 
western sky. They, too, would not stay long in this 
wasteland where they did not belong. 
  "Kind of unnerving to encounter such a menacing 
creature when you never even knew such a thing 
existed," Jennsen said. She used her sleeve to wipe 
sweat from her brow as she changed the subject. 
"I've heard it said that a bird of prey wheeling 
over you at the beginning of a journey is a 
warning." 
   Cara, until then content to remain silent, 
leaned in past Kahlan. "Just let me get close 
enough and I'll pluck their wretched feathers." 
Long blond hair, pulled back into the traditional 
single braid of her profession, framed Cara's 
heated expression. "We'll see how much of an omen 

they are, then." 
   Cara's glare turned as dark as the races 
whenever she saw the huge birds. Being swathed from 
head to foot in a protective layer of gauzy black 
cloth, as were all of them except Richard, only 
added to her intimidating presence. When Richard 
had unexpectedly inherited rule, he had been 
further surprised to discover that Cara and her 
sister Mord-Sith were part of the legacy. 
   Richard returned the little white kid to its 
watchful mother and stood, hooking his thumbs 
behind his multilayered leather belt. At each 
wrist, wide, leather-padded silver bands bearing 
linked rings and strange symbols seemed to gather 
and reflect what little light remained. "I once had 
a hawk circle over me at the beginning of a 
journey." 
   "And what happened?" Jennsen asked, earnestly, 
as if his pronouncement might settle once and for 
all the old superstition. 
Richard's smile widened into a grin. "I ended up 
marrying Kahlan." 
   Cara folded her arms. "That only proves it was a 
warning for the Mother Confessor, not you, Lord 
Rahl." 
   Richard's arm gently encircled Kahlan's waist. 
She smiled with him as she leaned against his 
embrace in answer to the wordless gesture. That 
that journey had eventually brought them to be 
husband and wife seemed more astonishing than 
anything she would ever have dared dream. Women 
like her—Confessors—dared not dream of love. 
Because of Richard, she had dared and had gained 
it. 
   Kahlan shuddered to think of the terrible times 
she had feared he was dead, or worse. There had 
been so many times she had ached to be with him, to 
simply feel his warm touch, or to even be granted 
the mercy of knowing he was safe. 
   Jennsen glanced at Richard and Kahlan to see 

that neither took Cara's admonition as anything but 
fond heckling. Kahlan supposed that to a stranger, 
especially one from the land of D'Hara, as was 
Jennsen, Cara's gibes at Richard would defy reason; 
guards did not bait their masters, especially when 
their master was the Lord Rahl, the master of 
D'Hara. 
   Protecting the Lord Rahl with their lives had 
always been the blind duty of the Mord-Sith. In a 
perverse way, Cara's irreverence toward Richard was 
a celebration of her freedom, paid in homage to the 
one who had granted it. 
   By free choice, the Mord-Sith had decided to be 
Richard's closest protectors. They had given 
Richard no say in the matter. They often paid 
little heed to his orders unless they deemed them 
important enough; they were, after all, now free to 
pursue what was important to them, and what the 
Mord-Sith considered important above all else was 
keeping Richard safe. 
   Over time, Cara, their ever-present bodyguard, 
had gradually become like family. Now that family 
had unexpectedly grown. 
   Jennsen, for her part, was awestruck to find 
herself welcomed. From what they had so far 
learned, Jennsen had grown up in hiding, always 
fearful that the former Lord Rahl, her father, 
would finally find her and murder her as he 
murdered any other ungifted offspring he found. 
   Richard signaled to Tom and Friedrich, back with 
the wagon and horses, that they would stop for the 
night. Tom lifted an arm in acknowledgment and then 
set to unhitching his team. 
   No longer able to see the races in the dark void 
of the western sky, Jennsen turned back to Richard. 
"I take it their feathers are tipped in black." 
Before Richard had a chance to answer, Cara spoke 
in a silken voice that was pure menace. "They look 
like death itself drips from the tips of their 
feathers—like the Keeper of the underworld has been 

using their wicked quills to write death warrants." 
   Cara loathed seeing those birds anywhere near 
Richard or Kahlan. Kahlan shared the sentiment. 
   Jennsen's gaze fled Cara's heated expression. 
She redirected her suspicion to Richard. 
"Are they causing you ... some kind of trouble?" 
   Kahlan pressed a fist to her abdomen, against 
the ache of dread stirred by the question. 
   Richard appraised Jennsen's troubled eyes. "The 
races are tracking us." 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2 
 
 
 
 
Jennsen frowned. "What?" 
   Richard gestured between Kahlan and himself. 
"The races, they're tracking us." 
   "You mean they followed you out into this 
wasteland and they're watching you, waiting to see 
if you'll die of thirst or something so they can 
pick your bones clean." 
   Richard slowly shook his head. "No, I mean 
they're following us, keeping track of where we 
are." 
"I don't understand how you can possibly know—" 
   "We know," Cara snapped. Her shapely form was as 
spare, as sleek, as aggressive-looking as the races 
themselves and, swathed in the black garb of the 
nomadic people who sometimes traveled the outer 
fringes of the vast desert, just as sinister-
looking. 
   With the back of his hand against her shoulder, 
Richard gently eased Cara back as he went on. "We 
were looking into it when Friedrich found us and 
told us about you." 
   Jennsen glanced over at the two men back with 

the wagon. The sharp sliver of moon floating above 
the black drape of distant mountains provided just 
enough light for Kahlan to see that Tom was working 
at removing the trace chains from his big draft 
horses while Friedrich unsaddled the others. 
   Jennsen's gaze returned to search Richard's 
eyes. "What have you been able to find out, so 
far?" 
   "We never had a chance to really find out much 
of anything. Oba, our surprise half brother lying 
dead back there, kind of diverted our attention 
when he tried to kill us." Richard unhooked a 
waterskin from his belt. "But the races are still 
watching us." 
   He handed Kahlan his waterskin, since she had 
left hers hanging on her saddle. It had been hours 
since they had last stopped. She was tired from 
riding and weary from walking when they had needed 
to rest the horses. 
   Kahlan lifted the waterskin to her lips only to 
be reacquainted with how bad hot water tasted. At 
least they had water. Without water, death came 
quickly in the unrelenting heat of the seemingly 
endless, barren expanse around the forsaken place 
called the Pillars of Creation. 
   Jennsen slipped the strap of her waterskin off 
her shoulder before hesitantly starting again. "I 
know it's easy to misconstrue things. Look at how I 
was tricked into thinking you wanted to kill me 
just like Darken Rahl had. I really believed it, 
and there were so many things that seemed to me to 
prove it, but I had it all wrong. I guess I was 
just so afraid it was true, I believed it." 
   Richard and Kahlan both knew it hadn't been 
Jennsen's doing—she had merely been a means for 
others to get at Richard—but it had squandered 
precious time. 
   Jennsen took a long drink. Still grimacing at 
the taste of the water, she lifted the waterskin 
toward the empty desert behind them. "I mean, there 

isn't much alive out here—it might actually be that 
the races are hungry and are simply waiting to see 
if you die out here and, because they do keep 
watching and waiting, you've begun to think it's 
more." she gave Richard a demure glance, bolstered 
by a smile, as if hoping to-cloak the admonishment 
as a suggestion. "Maybe that's all it really is." 
   "They aren't waiting to see if we die out here," 
Kahlan said, wanting to end the discussion so they 
could eat and Richard could get some sleep. "They 
were watching us before we had to come here. 
They've been watching us since we were back in the 
forests to the northeast. Vow, let's have some 
supper and—" 
   "But why? That's not the way birds behave. Why 
would they do that?" 
   "I think they're keeping track of us for 
someone," Richard said. "More precisely, I think 
someone is using them to hunt us." 
   Kahlan had known various people in the Midlands, 
from simple people living in the wilds to nobles 
living in great cities, who hunted with falcons. 
This, though, was different. Even if she didn't 
fully understand Richard's meaning, much less the 
reasons for his conviction, she knew he hadn't 
meant it in the traditional sense. 
   With abrupt realization, Jennsen paused in the 
middle of another drink. "That's why you've started 
scattering pebbles along the windblown places in 
the trail." 
   Richard smiled in confirmation. He took his 
waterskin when Kahlan handed it back. Cara frowned 
up at him as he took a long drink. 
"You've been throwing pebbles along the trail? 
Why?" 
   Jennsen eagerly answered in his place. "The open 
rock gets blown clean by the wind. He's been making 
sure that if anyone tries to sneak up on us in the 
dark, the pebbles strewn across those open patches 
will crunch underfoot and alert us." 

Cara wrinkled a questioning brow at Richard. 
"Really?" 
   He shrugged as he passed her his waterskin so 
that she wouldn't have to dig hers out from beneath 
her desert garb. "Just a little extra precaution in 
case anyone is close, and careless. Sometimes 
people don't expect the simple things and that 
catches them up." 
   "But not you," Jennsen said, hooking the strap 
of her waterskin back over her shoulder. "You think 
of even the simple things." 
   Richard chuckled softly. "If you think I don't 
make mistakes, Jennsen, you're wrong. While it's 
dangerous to assume that those who wish you harm 
are stupid, it can't hurt to spread out a little 
gravel just in case someone thinks they can sneak 
across windswept rock in the dark without being 
heard." . 
   Any trace of amusement faded as Richard stared 
off toward the western horizon where stars had yet 
to appear. "But I fear that pebbles strewn along 
the ground won't do any good for eyes watching from 
a dark sky." He turned back to Jennsen, 
brightening, as if remembering he had been speaking 
to her. "Still, everyone makes mistakes." 
   Cara wiped droplets of water from her sly smile 
as she handed Rich-ard back his waterskin. "Lord 
Rahl is always making mistakes, espe-cially simple 
ones. That's why he needs me around." 
   "Is that right, little miss perfect?" Richard 
chided as he snatched the waterskin from her hand. 
"Maybe if you weren't 'helping' keep me out of 
trouble, we wouldn't have black-tipped races 
shadowing us." 
   "What else could I do?" Cara blurted out. "I was 
trying to help—to protect you both." Her smile had 
withered. "I'm sorry, Lord Rahl." 
   Richard sighed. "I know," he admitted as he 
reassuringly squeezed her shoulder. "We'll figure 
it out." 

   Richard turned back to Jennsen. "Everyone makes 
mistakes. How a person deals with their mistakes is 
a mark of their character." 
    Jennsen nodded as she thought it over. "My 
mother was always afraid of making a mistake that 
would get us killed. She used to do 
things like you did, in case my father's men were 
trying to sneak up on us. We always lived in 
forests, though, so it was dry twigs, rather 
than pebbles, that she often scattered around us." 
   Jennsen pulled on a ringlet of her hair as she 
stared off into dark memories. "It was raining the 
night they came. If those men stepped on twigs, she 
wouldn't have been able to hear it." She ran 
trembling fingers over the silver hilt of the knife 
at her belt. "They were big, and they surprised 
her, but still, she got one of them before they 
..." 
   Darken Rahl had wanted Jennsen dead because she 
had been born ungifted. Any ruler of that bloodline 
killed offspring such as she. Rich-ard and Kahlan 
believed that a person's life was their own to 
live, and that birth did not qualify that right. 
   Jennsen's haunted eyes turned up to Richard. 
"She got one of them before they killed her." 
   With one arm, Richard pulled Jennsen into a 
tender embrace. They all understood such terrible 
loss. The man who had lovingly raised 
Richard had been killed by Darken Rahl himself. 
Darken Rahl had orderd the murders of all of 
Kahlan's sister Confessors The men who killed 
Jennsen's mother, though, were men from the 
Imperial Order sent to trick her, to murder in 
order to make her believe it was Richard who was 
after her. 
Kahlan felt a forlorn wave of helplessness at all 
they faced. She knew what it was to be alone, 
afraid, and overwhelmed by powerful men filled with 
blind faith and the lust for blood, men devoutly 
believing that mankind's salvation required 

slaughter. 
   "I'd give anything for her to know that it 
wasn't you who sent those men." Jennsen's soft 
voice held the dejected sum of what it was to have 
suffered such a loss, to have no solution to the 
crushing solitude it left in its wake. "I wish my 
mother could have known the truth, known what you 
two are really like." 
   "She's with the good spirits and finally at 
peace," Kahlan whispered in sympathy, even if she 
now had reason to question the enduring validity of 
such things. 
   Jennsen nodded as she swiped her fingers across 
her cheek. "What mistake did you make, Cara?" she 
finally asked. 
   Rather than be angered by the question, and 
perhaps because it had been asked in innocent 
empathy, Cara answered with quiet candor. "It has 
to do with that little problem we mentioned 
before." 
"You mean it's about the thing you want me to 
touch?" 
   By the light of the moon's narrow crescent, 
Kahlan could see Cara's scowl return. "And the 
sooner the better." 
   Richard rubbed his fingertips across his brow. 
"I'm not sure about that." 
Kahlan, too, thought that Cara's notion was too 
simplistic. 
Cara threw her arms up. "But Lord Rahl, we can't 
just leave it—" 
   "Let's get camp set up before it's pitch dark," 
Richard said in quiet command. "What we need right 
now is food and sleep." 
   For once, Cara saw the sense in his orders and 
didn't object. When he had earlier been out 
scouting alone, she had confided in Kahlan that she 
was worried at how weary Richard looked and had 
suggested that, since there were enough other 
people, they shouldn't wake him for a turn at watch 

that night. 
   "I'll check the area," Cara said, "and make sure 
there aren't any more of those birds sitting on a 
rock watching us with those black eyes of theirs." 
   Jennsen peered around as if fearing that a 
black-tipped race might swoop in out of the 
darkness. 
   Richard countermanded Cara's plans with a 
dismissive shake of his head. "They're gone for 
now." 
   "You said they were tracking you." Jennsen 
stroked Betty's neck when the goat nudged her, 
seeking comfort. The twins were still hiding under 
their mother's round belly. "I never saw them 
before now. They weren't around yesterday, or 
today. They didn't show up until just this evening. 
If they really were tracking you, then they 
wouldn't be gone for such a stretch. They'd have to 
stick close to you all the time." 
   "They can leave us for a time in order to hunt—
or to make us doubt our suspicion of their true 
intent—and, even if we keep going, they can easily 
find us when they return. That's the advantage the 
black-tipped races have: they don't need to watch 
us every moment." 
   Jennsen planted her fists on her hips. "Then how 
in the world could you possibly be sure they're 
tracking you?" She flicked a hand out toward the 
darkness beyond. "You often see the same kind of 
birds. You see ravens, sparrows, geese, finches, 
hummingbirds, doves—how do you know that any one of 
them aren't following you and that the black-tipped 
races are?" 
   "I know," Richard said as he turned and started 
back toward the wagon. "Now, let's get our things 
out and set up camp." 
   Kahlan caught Jennsen's arm as she headed after 
him, about to renew her objections. "Let him be for 
tonight, Jennsen?" Kahlan lifted an eyebrow. 
"Please? About this, anyway." 

   Kahlan was pretty sure that the black-tipped 
races really were fol-lowing them, but it wasn't so 
much an issue of her being sure of it herself. 
Rather, she had confidence in Richard's word in 
matters such is this. Kahlan was versed in affairs 
of state, protocol, ceremony, and royalty; she was 
familiar with various cultures, the origins of 
ancient deputes between lands, and the history of 
treaties; and she was con-versant in any number of 
languages, including the duplicitous dialect of 
diplomacy. In such areas, Richard trusted her word 
when she ex-pressed her conviction. 
  In matters about something so odd as strange 
birds following them, she knew better than to 
question Richard's word. 
Kahlan knew, too, that he didn't yet have all the 
answers. She had seen him like this before, distant 
and withdrawn, as he struggled to understand the 
important connections and patterns in relevant 
details only he perceived. She knew that he needed 
to be left alone about it. Pestering him for 
answers before he had them only served to distract 
him from what he needed to do. 
   Watching Richard's back as he walked away, 
Jennsen finally forced a smile of agreement. Then, 
as if struck with another thought, her eyes 
widened. She leaned close to Kahlan and whispered, 
"Is this about magic?" 
"We don't know what it's about." 
Jennsen nodded. "I'll help. Whatever I can do, I 
want to help." 
   For the time being, Kahlan kept her worries to 
herself as she circled an arm around the young 
woman's shoulders in an appreciative embrace and 
walked her back toward the wagon. 
 
 
 
 
C        H        A        P        T        E        

R                 3 
 
 
 
 
In the immense, silent void of night, Kahlan could 
clearly hear Fried-rich, off to the side, speaking 
gently to the horses. He patted their shoulders or 
ran a hand along their flanks each time on his way 
by as he went about grooming and picketing them for 
the night. With dark-ness shrouding the empty 
expanse beyond, the familiar  
task of caring for the animals made the unfamiliar 
surroundings seem a little less forbidding. 
   Friedrich was an older, unassuming man of 
average height. Despite his age, he had undertaken 
a long and difficult journey to the Old World to 
find Richard. Friedrich had undertaken that 
journey, carrying with him important information, 
soon after his wife had died. The terrible sadness 
of that loss still haunted his gentle features. 
Kahlan supposed that it always would. 
   In the dim light, she saw Jennsen smile as Tom 
looked her way. A boyish grin momentarily overcame 
the big, blond-headed D'Haran when he spotted her, 
but he quickly bent back to work, pulling bedrolls 
from a corner beneath the seat. He stepped over 
supplies in his wagon and handed a load down to 
Richard. 
   "There's no wood for a fire, Lord Rahl." Tom 
rested a foot on the chafing rail, laying a forearm 
over his bent knee. "But, if you like, I have a 
little charcoal to use for cooking." 
   "What I'd really like is for you to stop calling 
me 'Lord Rahl.' If we're anywhere near the wrong 
people and you slip up and call me that, we'll all 
be in a great deal of trouble." 
   Tom grinned and patted the ornate letter "R" on 
the silver handle of the knife at his belt. "Not to 
worry, Lord Rahl. Steel against steel." 

   Richard sighed at the oft-repeated maxim 
involving the bond of the D'Haran people to their 
Lord Rahl, and he to them. Tom and Friedrich had 
promised they wouldn't use Richard's and Kahlan's 
titles around other people. A lifetime's habits 
were difficult to change, though, and Kahlan knew 
that they felt uncomfortable not using titles when 
they were so obviously alone. 
   "So," Tom said as he handed down the last 
bedroll, "would you like a small fire for cooking?" 
   "Hot as it is, it seems to me we could do 
without any more heat." Richard set the bedrolls 
atop a sack of oats already unloaded. "Besides, I'd 
prefer not to take the time. I'd like to be on our 
way at first light and we need to get a good rest." 
   "Can't argue with you there," Tom said, 
straightening his big frame. "I don't like us being 
so out in the open where we could easily be 
spotted." 
   Richard swept his hand in a suggestive arc 
across the dark vault above. 
   Tom cast a wary eye skyward. He nodded 
reluctantly before turning back to the task of 
digging out tools to mend the breeching and wooden 
buckets to water the horses. Richard put a boot on 
a spoke of the cargo wagon's stout rear wheel and 
climbed up to help. 
   Tom, a shy but cheerful man who had appeared 
only the day before, right after they'd encountered 
Jennsen, looked to be a merchant who hauled trade 
goods. Hauling goods in his wagon, Kahlan and 
Richard had learned, gave him an excuse to travel 
where and when he needed as a member of a covert 
group whose true profession was to protect the Lord 
Rahl from unseen plots and threats. 
   Speaking in a low voice, Jennsen leaned closer 
to Kahlan. "Vultures can tell you, from a great 
distance, where a kill lies—by the way they circle 
and gather, I mean. I guess I can see how the races 
could be like that—birds that someone could spot 

from afar in order to know there was something 
below." 
   Kahlan didn't say anything. Her head ached, she 
was hungry, and she just wanted to go to sleep, not 
to discuss things she couldn't answer. She wondered 
how many times Richard had viewed her own insistent 
questions in the same way she now viewed Jennsen's. 
Kahlan silently vowed to try to be at least half as 
patient as Richard always was. 
   "The thing is," Jennsen went on, matter-of-
factly, "how would someone get birds to ... well, 
you know, circle around you like vultures over a 
carcass in order to know where you were?" Jennsen 
leaned in again and whispered so as to be sure that 
Richard wouldn't hear. "Maybe they're sent with 
magic to follow specific people." 
   Cara fixed Jennsen with a murderous glare. 
Kahlan idly wondered if the Mord-Sith would clobber 
Richard's sister, or extend her leniency because 
she was family. Discussions about magic, especially 
in the context of its danger to Richard or Kahlan, 
made Cara testy. Mord-Sith were fearless in the 
face of death, but they did not like magic and 
weren't shy about making their distaste clear. 
   In a way, such hostility toward magic 
characterized the nature and purpose of Mord-Sith; 
they were singularly able to appropriate the 
gifted's power and use it to destroy them. Mord-
Sith had been mercilessly trained to be ruthless at 
their task. It was from the madness of this duty 
that Richard had freed them. 
   It seemed obvious enough to Kahlan, though, that 
if the races really were tracking them it would 
have to involve conjuring of some sort. It was the 
questions raised by that assumption that so worried 
her. 
   When Kahlan didn't debate the theory, Jennsen 
asked, "Why do you think someone would be using the 
races to track you?" 
   Kahlan lifted an eyebrow at the young woman. 

"Jennsen, we're in the middle of the Old World. 
Being hunted in enemy territory is hardly 
surprising." 
   "I guess you're right," Jennsen admitted. "It 
just seems that there would have to be more to it." 
Despite the heat, she rubbed her arms as if a chill 
had just run through her. "You have no idea how 
much Emperor Jagang wants to catch you." 
   Kahlan smiled to herself. "Oh, I think I do." 
   Jennsen watched Richard a moment as he filled 
the buckets with water from barrels carried in the 
wagon. Richard leaned down and handed one to 
Friedrich. Ears turned attentively ahead, the 
horses all watched, eager for a drink. Betty, also 
watching as her twins suckled, bleated her longing 
for a drink. After filling the buckets, Richard 
submerged his waterskin to fill it, too. 
   Jennsen shook her head and looked again into 
Kahlan's eyes. "Emperor Jagang tricked me into 
thinking Richard wanted me dead." She glanced 
briefly over at the men engaged in their work 
before she went on. "I was there with Jagang when 
he attacked Aydindril." 
   Kahlan felt as if her heart came up in her 
throat at hearing firsthand confirmation of that 
brute invading the place where she'd grown up. She 
didn't think she could bear to hear the answer, but 
she had to ask. "Did he destroy the city?" 
   After Richard had been captured and taken from 
her, Kahlan, with Cara at her side, had led the 
D'Haran army against Jagang's vast invading horde 
from the Old World. Month after month, Kahlan and 
the army fought against impossible odds, retreating 
all the way up through the Midlands. 
   By the time they lost the battle for the 
Midlands, it had been over a year since Kahlan had 
seen Richard; he had seemingly been cast into 
oblivion. When at last she learned where he was 
being held, Kahlan and Cara had raced south, to the 
Old World, only to arrive just as Richard ignited a 

firestorm of revolution in the heart of Jagang's 
homeland. 
   Before she'd left, Kahlan had evacuated 
Aydindril and left the Confessors' Palace empty of 
all those who called it home. Life, not a place, 
was what mattered. 
   "He never got a chance to destroy the city," 
Jennsen said. "When we arrived at the Confessors' 
Palace, Emperor Jagang thought he had you and 
Richard cornered. But out in front waited a spear 
holding the head of the emperor's revered spiritual 
leader: Brother Narev." Her voice lowered 
meaningfully. "Jagang found the message left with 
the head." 
Kahlan remembered well the day Richard had sent the 
head of that evil man, along with a message for 
Jagang, on the long journey north. " 'Compliments 
of Richard Rahl.'" 
   "That's right," Jennsen said. "You can't imagine 
Jagang's rage." She paused to be certain Kahlan 
heeded her warning. "He'll do anything to get his 
hands on you and Richard." 
   Kahlan hardly needed Jennsen to tell her how 
much Jagang wanted them. 
"All the more reason to get away—hide somewhere," 
Cara said. 
"And the races?" Kahlan reminded her. 
   Cara cast a suggestive look at Jennsen before 
speaking in a quiet voice to Kahlan. "If we do 
something about the rest of it, maybe that problem 
would go away, too." Cara's goal was to protect 
Richard. She would be perfectly happy to put him in 
a hole somewhere and board him over if she thought 
doing so would keep harm from reaching him. 
   Jennsen waited, watching the two of them. Kahlan 
wasn't at all sure there was anything Jennsen could 
do. Richard had thought it over and had come to 
have serious doubts. Kahlan had been amply 
skeptical without Richard's doubts. Still... 
"Maybe" was all she said. 

   "If there's anything I can do, I want to try 
it." Jennsen fussed with a button on the front of 
her dress. "Richard doesn't think I can help. If it 
involves magic, wouldn't he know? Richard is a 
wizard, he would know about magic." 
   Kahlan sighed. There was so much more to it. 
"Richard was raised in Westland—far from the 
Midlands, even farther from D'Hara. He grew up in 
isolation from the rest of the New World, never 
knowing anything at all about the gift. Despite all 
he's so far learned and some of the remarkable 
things he's accomplished, he still knows very 
little of his birthright." 
   They had already told Jennsen this, but she 
seemed skeptical, as if she suspected there was a 
certain amount of exaggeration in what they were 
telling her about Richard's unfamiliarity with his 
own gift. Her big brother had, after all, in one 
day rescued her from a lifetime of terror. Such a 
profound awakening probably seemed tangled in magic 
to one so devoid of it. Perhaps it was. 
"Well, if Richard is as ignorant of magic as you 
say," Jennsen pressed in a meaningful voice, 
finally having arrived at the heart of her purpose, 
"then maybe we shouldn't worry so much about what 
he thinks. Maybe we should just not tell him and go 
ahead and do whatever it is Cara wants me to do to 
fix your problem and get the races off your backs." 
   Nearby, Betty contentedly licked clean her 
little white twins. The sweltering darkness and 
vast weight of the surrounding silence seemed as 
eternal as death itself. 
   Kahlan gently took ahold of Jennsen's collar. "I 
grew up walking the corridors of the Wizard's Keep 
and the Confessors' Palace. I know a lot about 
magic." 
   She pulled the young woman closer. "I can tell 
you that such naive notions, when applied to 
ominous matters like this, can easily get people 
killed. There is always the possibility that it's 

as simple as you fancy, but most likely it's 
complex beyond your imagination and any rash 
attempt at a remedy could ignite a conflagration 
that would consume us all. Added to all that is the 
grave peril of not knowing how someone, such as 
yourself, someone so pristinely ungifted as to be 
forewarned of in that ancient book Richard has, 
might affect the equation. 
   "There are times when there is no choice but to 
act immediately; even then it must be with your 
best judgment, using all your experience and 
everything you do know. As long as there's a 
choice, though, you don't act in matters of magic 
until you can be sure of the consequence. You don't 
ever just take a stab in the dark." 
   Kahlan knew all too well the terrible truth of 
such an admonition. Jennsen seemed unconvinced. 
"But if he doesn't really know much about magic, 
his fears might only be—" 
   "I've walked through dead cities, walked among 
the mutilated bodies of men, women, and children 
the Imperial Order has left in their wake. I've 
seen young women not as old as you make 
thoughtless, innocent mistakes and end up chained 
to a stake to be used by gangs of soldiers for days 
before being tortured to death just for the 
amusement of men who get sick pleasure out of 
raping a woman as she's in the throes of death." 
Kahlan gritted her teeth as memories flashed 
mercilessly before her mind's eye. She tightened 
her grip on Jennsen's collar. 
   "All of my sister Confessors died in such a 
fashion, and they knew about their power and how to 
use it. The men who caught them knew, too, and used 
that knowledge against them. My closest girlhood 
friend died in my arms after such men were finished 
with her. 
"Life means nothing to people like that; they 
worship death. 
   "Those are the kind of people who butchered your 

mother. Those are the kind of people who will have 
us, too, if we make a mistake. Those are the kind 
of people laying traps for us—including traps 
constructed of magic. 
   "As for Richard not knowing about magic, there 
are times when he is so ignorant of the simplest 
things that I can scarcely believe it and must 
remind myself that he grew up not being taught 
anything at all about his gift. In those things, I 
try to be patient and to guide him as best I can. 
He takes very seriously what I tell him. 
   "There are other times when I suspect that he 
actually grasps complexities of magic that neither 
I nor anyone alive has ever before fathomed or even 
so much as imagined. In those things he must be his 
own guide. 
   "The lives of a great many good people depend on 
us not making careless mistakes, especially 
careless mistakes with magic. As the Mother 
Confessor I'll not allow reckless whim to 
jeopardize all those lives. Now, do you understand 
me?" 
   Kahlan had nightmares about the things she had 
seen, about those who had been caught, about those 
who had made a simple mistake and paid the price 
with their life. She was not many years beyond 
Jennsen's age, but right then that gulf was vastly 
more than a mere handful of years. 
Kahlan gave Jennsen's collar a sharp yank. "Do you 
understand me?" 
   Wide-eyed, Jennsen swallowed. "Yes, Mother 
Confessor." Finally, her gaze broke toward the 
ground. 
Only then did Kahlan release her. 
 
 
C        H        A        P        T        E        
R 
4 
 
 

 
 
Anyone hungry?" Tom called to the three women. 
   Richard pulled a lantern from the wagon and, 
after finally getting it lit with a steel and 
flint, set it on a shelf of rock. He passed a 
suspicious look among the three women as they 
approached, but apparently thought better of saying 
anything. 
   As Kahlan sat close at Richard's side, Tom 
offered him the first chunk he sliced from a long 
length of sausage. When Richard declined, Kahlan 
accepted it. Tom sliced off another piece and 
passed it to Cara and then another to Friedrich. 
   Jennsen had gone to the wagon to search through 
her pack. Kahlan thought that maybe she just wanted 
to be alone a moment to collect herself. Kahlan 
knew how harsh her words had sounded, but she 
couldn't allow herself to do Jennsen the disservice 
of coddling her with pleasing lies. 
   With Jennsen reassuringly close by, Betty lay 
down beside Rusty, Jennsen's red roan mare. The 
horse and the goat were fast friends. The other 
horses seemed pleased by the visitor and took keen 
interest in her two kids, giving them a good sniff 
when they came close enough. 
   When Jennsen walked over displaying a small 
piece of carrot, Betty rose up in a rush. Her tail 
went into a blur of expectant wagging. The horses 
whinnied and tossed their heads, hoping not to be 
left out. Each in turn received a small treat and a 
scratch behind the ears. 
   Had they a fire, they could have cooked a stew, 
rice, or beans; grid-died some bannock; or maybe 
have made a nice soup. Despite how hungry she was, 
Kahlan didn't think she would have had the energy 
to cook, so she was content to settle for what was 
at hand. Jennsen retrieved strips of dried meat 
from her pack, offering them around. Richard 
declined this, too, instead eating hard travel 

biscuits, nuts, and dried fruit. 
   "But don't you want any meat?" Jennsen asked as 
she sat down on her bedroll opposite him. "You need 
more than that to eat. You need something 
substantial." 
"I can't eat meat. Not since the gift came to life 
in me." 
   Jennsen's wrinkled her nose with a puzzled look. 
"Why would your gift not allow you to eat meat?" 
   Richard leaned to the side, resting his weight 
on an elbow as he momentarily surveyed the sweep of 
stars, searching for the words to explain. 
"Balance, in nature," he said at last, "is a 
condition resulting from the interaction of all 
things in existence. On a simple level, look at how 
predators and prey are in balance. If there were 
too many predators, and the prey were all eaten, 
then the thriving predators, too, would end up 
starving and dying out. 
   "The lack of balance would be deadly to both 
prey and predator; the world, for them both, would 
end. They exist in balance because acting in 
accordance with their nature results in balance. 
Balance is not their conscious intent. 
   "People are different. Without our conscious 
intent, we don't necessarily achieve the balance 
that our survival often requires. 
   "We must learn to use our minds, to think, if 
we're to survive. We plant crops, we hunt for fur 
to keep us warm, or raise sheep and gather their 
wool and learn how to weave it into cloth. We have 
to learn how to build shelter. We balance the value 
of one thing against another and trade goods to 
exchange what we've made for what we need that 
others have made or grown or built or woven or 
hunted. 
   "We balance what we need with what we know of 
the realities of the world. We balance what we want 
against our rational self-interest, not against 
fulfilling a momentary impulse, because we know 

that our long-term survival requires it. We use 
wood to build a fire in the hearth in order to keep 
from freezing on a winter night, but, despite how 
cold we might be when we're building the fire, we 
don't build the fire too big, knowing that to do so 
would risk burning our shelter down after we're 
warm and asleep." 
   "But people also act out of shortsighted 
selfishness, greed, and lust for power. They 
destroy lives." Jennsen lifted her arm out toward 
the darkness. "Look at what the Imperial Order is 
doing—and succeeding at. They don't care about 
weaving wool or building houses or trading goods. 
They slaughter people just for conquest. They take 
what they want." 
   "And we resist them. We've learned to understand 
the value of life, so we fight to reestablish 
reason. We are the balance." 
   Jennsen hooked some of her hair back behind an 
ear. "What does all this have to do with not eating 
meat?" 
   "I was told that wizards, too, must balance 
themselves, their gift— their power—in the things 
they do. I fight against those, like the Imperial 
Order, who would destroy life because it has no 
value to them, but that requires that I do the same 
terrible thing by destroying what is my highest 
value—life. Since my gift has to do with being a 
warrior, abstinence from eating meat is believed to 
be the balance for the killing I'm forced to do." 
"What happens if you eat meat?" 
   Kahlan knew that Richard had cause, from only 
the day before, to need the balance of not eating 
meat. 
   "Even the idea of eating meat nauseates me. I've 
done it when I've had to, but it's something I 
avoid if at all possible. Magic deprived of balance 
has grave consequences, just like building a fire 
in the hearth." 
   The thought occurred to Kahlan that Richard 

carried the Sword of Truth, and perhaps that weapon 
also imposed its own need for balance. Richard had 
been rightly named the Seeker of Truth by the First 
Wizard himself, Zeddicus Zu'l Zorander—Zedd, 
Richard's grandfather, the man who had helped raise 
him, and from whom Richard had additionally 
inherited the gift. Richard's gift had been passed 
down not only from the Rahl bloodline, but the 
Zorander as well. Balance indeed. 
   Rightly named Seekers had been carrying that 
very same sword for nearly three thousand years. 
Perhaps Richard's understanding of the need for 
balance had helped him to survive the things he'd 
faced. 
   With her teeth, Jennsen tugged off a strip of 
dried meat as she thought it over. "So, because you 
have to fight and sometimes kill people, you can't 
eat meat as the balance for that terrible act?" 
Richard nodded as he chewed dried apricots. 
   "It must be dreadful to have the gift," Jennsen 
said in a quiet voice. "To have something so 
destructive that it requires you balance it in some 
way." 
   She looked away from Richard's gray eyes. Kahlan 
knew what a difficult experience it sometimes was 
to meet his direct and incisive gaze. 
   "I used to feel that way," he said, "when I 
first was named the Seeker and given the sword, and 
even more so later, when I learned that I had the 
gift. I didn't want to have the gift, didn't want 
the things the gift could do, just as I hadn't 
wanted the sword because of the things in me that I 
thought shouldn't ever be brought out." 
"But now you don't mind as much, having the sword, 
or the gift?" 
   "You have a knife and have used it." Richard 
leaned toward her, holding out his hands. "You have 
hands. Do you hate your knife, or hands?" 
"Of course not. But what does that have to do with 
having the gift?" 

   "Having the gift is simply how I was born, like 
being born male, or female, or with blue, or brown, 
or green eyes—or with two hands. I don't hate my 
hands because I could potentially strangle someone 
with them. It's my mind that directs my hands. My 
hands don't act of their own accord; to think so is 
to ignore the truth of what each thing is, its true 
nature. You have to recognize the truth of things 
if you're to achieve balance—or come to truly 
understand anything, for that matter." 
   Kahlan wondered why she didn't require balance 
the way Richard did. Why was it so vital for him, 
but not for her? Despite how much she wanted to go 
to sleep, she couldn't keep silent. "I often use my 
Confessor's power for that same end—to kill—and I 
don't have to keep in balance by not eating meat." 
   "The Sisters of the Light claim that the veil 
that separates the world of the living from the 
world of the dead is maintained through magic. More 
precisely, they claim that the veil is here," 
Richard said, tapping the side of his temple, "in 
those of us who have the gift—wizards and to a 
lesser extent sorceresses. They claim that balance 
for those of us with the gift is essential because 
in us, within our gift, resides the veil, making 
us, in essence, the guardians of the veil, the 
balance between worlds. 
   "Maybe they're right. I have both sides of the 
gift: Additive and Subtractive. Maybe that makes it 
different for me. Maybe having both sides makes it 
more important than usual for me to keep my gift in 
balance." 
   Kahlan wondered just how much of that might be 
true. She feared to think how extensively the 
balance of magic itself had been altered by her 
doing. 
   The world was unraveling, in more ways than one. 
But there had been no choice. 
   Cara dismissively waggled a piece of dried meat 
before them. "All this balance business is just a 

message from the good spirits—in that other world—
telling Lord Rahl to leave such fighting to us. If 
he did, then he wouldn't have to worry about 
balance, or what he can and can't eat. If he would 
stop putting himself in mortal danger then his 
balance would be just fine and he could eat a whole 
goat." 
Jennsen's eyebrows went up. 
"You know what I mean," Cara grumbled. 
   Tom leaned in. "Maybe Mistress Cara is right, 
Lord Rahl. You have people to protect you. You 
should let them do it and you could better put your 
abilities to the task of being the Lord Rahl." 
   Richard closed his eyes and rubbed his temples 
with his fingertips. "If I had to wait for Cara to 
save me all the time, I'm afraid I'd have to do 
without a head." 
   Cara rolled her eyes at his wisp of a smile and 
went back to her sausage. 
   Studying his face in the dim light as he sucked 
on a small bite of dried biscuit, Kahlan thought 
that Richard didn't look well, and that it was more 
than simply being exhausted. The soft glow of light 
from the lantern lit one side of his face, leaving 
the rest in darkness, as if he were only half 
there, half in this world and half in the world of 
darkness, as if he were the veil between. 
   She leaned close and brushed back the hair that 
had fallen across his forehead, using the excuse to 
feel his brow. He felt hot, but they were all hot 
and sweating, so she couldn't really tell if he had 
a fever, but she didn't think so. 
   Her hand slipped down to cup his face, kindling 
his smile. She thought she could lose herself in 
the pleasure of just looking into his eyes. It made 
her heart ache with joy to see his smile. She 
smiled back, a smile she gave no one but him. 
   Kahlan had an urge to kiss him, too, but there 
always seemed to be people around and the kind of 
kiss she really wanted to give him wasn't the kind 

of kiss you gave in front of others. 
   "It seems so hard to imagine," Friedrich said to 
Richard. "I mean, the Lord Rahl himself, not 
knowing about the gift as he grew up." Friedrich 
shook his head. "It seems so hard to believe." 
   "My grandfather, Zedd, has the gift," Richard 
said as he leaned back. "He wanted to help raise me 
away from magic, much like Jennsen— hidden away 
where Darken Rahl couldn't get at me. That's why he 
wanted me raised in Westland, on the other side of 
the boundary from magic." 
   "And even your grandfather—a wizard—never let on 
that he was gifted?" Tom asked. 
   "No, not until Kahlan came to Westland. Looking 
back on it, I realize that there were a lot of 
little things that told me he was more than he 
seemed, but growing up I never knew. He just always 
seemed wizardly to me in the sense that he seemed 
to know about everything in the world around us. He 
opened up that world for me, making me want to all 
the time know more, but the gift wasn't ever the 
magic he showed me—life was what he showed me." 
   "It's really true, then," Friedrich said, "that 
Westland was set aside to be a place without 
magic." 
  Richard smiled at the mention of his home of 
Westland. "It is. I grew up in the Hartland woods, 
right near the boundary, and I never saw magic. 
Except maybe for Chase." 
  "Chase?" Tom asked. 
   "A friend of mine—a boundary warden. Fellow 
about your size, Tom. Whereas you serve to protect 
the Lord Rahl, Chase's charge was the boundary, or 
rather, keeping people away from it. He told me 
that his job was keeping away the prey—people—so 
that the things that come out of the boundary 
wouldn't get any stronger. He worked to maintain 
balance." Richard smiled to himself. "He didn't 
have the gift, but I often thought that the things 
that man could pull off had to be magic." 

   Friedrich, too, was smiling at Richard's story. 
"I lived in D'Hara all my life. When I was young 
those men who guarded the boundary were my heroes 
and I wanted to join them." 
"Why didn't you?" Richard asked. 
   "When the boundary went up I was too young." 
Friedrich stared off into memories, then sought to 
change the subject. "How much longer until we get 
out of this wasteland, Lord Rahl?" 
   Richard looked east, as if he could see off into 
the black of night beyond the dim circle of lantern 
light. "If we keep up our pace, a few more days and 
we'll be out of the worst of it, I'd say. It gets 
rockier now as the ground continues to rise up 
toward the distant mountains. The traveling will be 
more difficult but at least as we get higher it 
shouldn't be quite so hot." 
   "How far to this thing that... that Cara thinks 
I should touch?" Jennsen asked. 
   Richard studied her face a moment. "I'm not so 
sure that's a good idea." 
"But we are going there?" 
"Yes." 
   Jennsen picked at the strip of dried meat. "What 
is this thing that Cara touched, anyway? Cara and 
Kahlan don't seem to want to tell me." 
"I asked them not to tell you," Richard said. 
   "But why? If we're going to see it, then why 
wouldn't you want to tell me what it is?" 
   "Because you don't have the gift," Richard said. 
"I don't want to influence what you see." 
   Jennsen blinked. "What difference could that 
make?" 
   "I haven't had time to translate much of it yet, 
but from what I gather from the book Friedrich 
brought me, even those who don't have the gift, in 
the common sense, have at least some tiny spark of 
it. In that way they are able to interact with the 
magic in the world—much like you must be born with 
eyes to see color. Being born with eyes, you can 

see and understand a grand painting, even though 
you may not have the ability to create such a 
painting yourself. 
   "The gifted Lord Rahl gives birth to only one 
gifted heir. He may have other children, but rarely 
are any of them ever also gifted. Still, they do 
have this infinitesimal spark, as does everyone 
else. Even they, so to speak, can see color. 
   "The book says, though, that there are rare 
offspring of a gifted Lord Rahl, like you, who are 
born devoid of any trace whatsoever of the gift. 
The book calls them pillars of Creation. Much like 
those born without eyes can't perceive color, those 
born like you can't perceive magic. 
   "But even that is imprecise, because with you 
it's more than simply not perceiving magic. For 
someone born blind, color exists, they just aren't 
able to see it. For you, though, it isn't that you 
simply can't perceive magic; for you magic does not 
exist—it isn't a reality." 
"How is such a thing possible?" Jennsen asked. 
   "I don't know," Richard said. "When our 
ancestors created the bond of the Lord Rahl to the 
D'Haran people, it carried the unique ability to 
consistently bear a gifted heir. Magic needs 
balance. Maybe they had to make it work like this, 
have this counter of those born like you, in order 
for the magic they created to work; maybe they 
didn't realize what would happen and inadvertently 
created the balance." 
   Jennsen cleared her throat. "What would happen 
if... you know, if I were to have children?" 
   Richard surveyed Jennsen's eyes for what seemed 
a painfully long time. "You would bear offspring 
like you." 
   Jennsen sat forward, her hands reflecting her 
emotional entreaty. "Even if I marry someone with 
that spark of the gift? Someone able to perceive 
color, as you called it? Even then my child would 
be like me?" 

   "Even then and every time," Richard said with 
quiet certitude. "You are a broken link in the 
chain of the gift. According to the book, once the 
line of all those born with the spark of the gift, 
including those with the gift as it is in me, going 
back thousands of years, going back forever, is 
broken, it is broken for all time. It cannot be 
restored. Once forfeited in such a marriage, no 
descendant of that line can ever restore the link 
to the gift. When these children marry, they too 
would be as you, breaking the chain in the line of 
those they marry. Their children would be the same, 
and so on. 
   "That's why the Lord Rahl always hunted down 
ungifted offspring and eliminated them. You would 
be the genesis of something the world has never had 
before: those untouched by the gift. Every 
offspring of every descendant would end the line of 
the spark of the gift in everyone they married. The 
world, mankind, would be changed forever. 
   "This is the reason the book calls those like 
you 'pillars of Creation.' " 
The silence seemed brittle. 
   "And that's what this place is called, too," Tom 
said as he pointed a thumb back over his shoulder, 
seeming to feel the need to say something into the 
quiet, "the Pillars of Creation." He looked at the 
faces surrounding the weak light coming from the 
sputtering lantern. "Seems a strange coincidence 
that both those like Jennsen and this place would 
be called the same thing." 
   Richard stared off into the darkness toward that 
terrible place where Kahlan would have died had he 
made a mistake with the magic involved. "I don't 
think it's a coincidence. They are connected, 
somehow." 
   The book—The Pillars of Creation—describing 
those born like Jennsen was written in the ancient 
language of High D'Haran. Few people still living 
understood High D'Haran. Richard had begun to learn 

it in order to unravel important information in 
other books they'd found that were from the time of 
the great war. 
   That war, extinguished three thousand years 
before, had somehow ignited once again, and was 
burning uncontrolled through the world. Kahlan 
feared to think of the central—if inadvertent—part 
she and Richard had played in making it possible. 
   Jennsen leaned in, as if looking for some thread 
of hope. "How do you think the two might be 
connected?" 
Richard let out a tired sigh. "I don't know, yet." 
   With a finger, Jennsen rolled a pebble around in 
a small circle, leaving a tiny rut in the dust. 
"All of those things about me being a pillar of 
Creation, being the break in the link of the gift, 
makes me feel somehow... dirty." 
   "Dirty?" Tom asked, looking hurt to hear her 
even suggest such a thing. "Jennsen, why would you 
feel that way?" 
   "Those like me are also called 'holes in the 
world.' I guess I can see why, now." 
   Richard leaned forward, resting his elbows on 
his knees. "I know what it's like to feel regret 
for how you were born, for what you have, or don't 
have. I hated being born the way I was—with the 
gift. But I came to realize how senseless such 
feelings are, how completely wrong it was to think 
that way." 
   "But it's different with me," she said as she 
pushed at the sand with a finger, erasing the 
little ruts she'd made with the pebble. "There are 
others like you—wizards or sorceresses with the 
gift. Everyone else can at least see colors, as you 
put it. I'm the only one like this." 
   Richard gazed at his half sister, a beautiful, 
bright, ungifted half sister that any previous Lord 
Rahl would have murdered on the spot, and was 
overcome with a radiant smile. "Jennsen, I think of 
you as born pure. You're like a new snowflake, 

different than any other, and startlingly 
beautiful." 
   Looking up at him, Jennsen was overcome with a 
smile of her own. "I never thought of it that way." 
Her smile withered as she thought about his words. 
"But still, I'd be destroying—" 
   "You would be creating, not destroying," Richard 
said. "Magic exists. It cannot possess the 'right' 
to exist. To think so would be to ignore the true 
nature—the reality—of things. People, if they don't 
take the lives of others, have the right to live 
their life. You can't say that because you were 
born with red hair you supplanted the 'right' of 
brown hair to be born on your head." 
   Jennsen giggled at such a concept. It was good 
to see the smile taking firmer hold. By the look on 
Tom's face, he agreed. 
   "So," Jennsen finally asked, "what about this 
thing we're going to see?" 
   "If the thing Cara touched has been altered by 
someone with the gift, then since you can't see the 
magic, you might see something we can't see: what 
lies beneath that magic." 
   Jennsen rubbed the edge of her boot heel. "And 
you think that will tell you something important?" 
   "I don't know. It may be useful, or it may not, 
but I want to know what you see—with your special 
vision—without any suggestion from us." 
   "If you're so worried about it, why did you 
leave it? Aren't you afraid someone might come 
across it and take it?" 
"I worry about a lot of things," Richard said. 
   "Even if it really is something altered by magic 
and she sees it for what it truly is," Cara said, 
"that doesn't mean that it still isn't what it 
seems to us, or that it isn't just as dangerous." 
   Richard nodded. "At least we'll know that much 
more about it. Anything we learn might help us in 
some way." 
Cara scowled. "I just want her to turn it back 

over." 
   Richard gave her a look designed to keep her 
from saying anything else about it. Cara huffed, 
leaned in, and took one of Richard's dried 
apricots. She scowled at him as she popped the 
apricot into her mouth. 
As soon as supper was finished, Jennsen suggested 
that they pack all the food safely back in the 
wagon so that Betty wouldn't help herself to it in 
the night. Betty was always hungry. At least, with 
her two kids, she now had a taste of what it was 
like to be badgered for food. 
   Kahlan thought that Friedrich should be given 
consideration, because of his age, so she asked him 
if he'd like to take first watch. First watch was 
easier than being awakened in the middle of the 
night to stand watch between stretches of sleep. He 
smiled his appreciation as he nodded his agreement. 
   After opening his and Kahlan's bedroll, Richard 
doused the lantern. The night was sweltering but 
crystal clear so that, after Kahlan's eyes 
adjusted, the sweep of stars was enough to see by, 
if not very well. One of the white twins thought 
the newly unfurled bedrolls would be a perfect 
place to romp. Kahlan scooped up the leggy bundle 
and returned it to its tail-wagging mother. 
   As she lay down beside Richard, Kahlan saw the 
dark shape of Jennsen curl up by Betty and collect 
the twins in the tender bed of her arms, where they 
quickly settled down. 
   Richard leaned over and gently kissed Kahlan's 
lips. "I love you, you know." 
   "If we're ever alone, Lord Rahl," Kahlan 
whispered back, "I'd like to have more than a quick 
kiss." 
   He laughed softly and kissed her forehead before 
lying on his side, away from her. She had been 
expecting an intimate promise, or at least a 
lighthearted remark. 
   Kahlan curled up behind him and rested a hand on 

his shoulder. "Richard," she whispered, "are you 
all right?" 
   It took him longer to answer than she would have 
liked. "I have a splitting headache." 
   She wanted to ask what kind of headache, but she 
didn't want the tiny spark of fear she harbored to 
gain the glow of credence by voicing it aloud. 
   "It's different from the headaches I had 
before," Richard said, as if in answer to her 
thoughts. "I suppose it's this wicked heat on top 
of not having had any sleep for so long." 
   "I suppose." Kahlan bunched up the blanket she 
was using for a pillow to make a lump that would 
press against the sore spot at the base of her 
skull. "The heat is making my head pound, too." She 
gently rubbed the back of his shoulder. "Have a 
good sleep, then." 
   She was exhausted and aching all over, and it 
felt delicious to lie down. Her head felt better, 
too, with the soft lump of blanket pressed against 
the back of her neck. With her hand resting against 
Richard's shoulder, feeling his slow breathing, 
Kahlan fell into a dead sleep. 
 
 
C        H        A        P        T        E        
R 
5 
 
 
 
 
As tired as she was, it was a marvelous sensation 
being beside Richard and letting herself go, 
letting her concerns and worries go for the time 
being, and so effortlessly sinking into sleep. 
   But the sleep seemed only just started when she 
woke to find Cara gently shaking her shoulder. 
   Kahlan blinked up at the familiar silhouette 
standing over her. She ached to go back to sleep, 
to be left alone to be so wonderfully asleep again. 

"My watch?" Kahlan asked. 
Cara nodded. "I'll stand it if you'd like." 
   Kahlan glanced over her shoulder as she sat up, 
seeing that Richard was still fast asleep. "No," 
she whispered. "You get some sleep. You need rest, 
too." 
   Kahlan yawned and stretched her back. She took 
Cara's elbow and pulled her a short distance away, 
out of earshot, and leaned close. "I think you're 
right. There's more than enough of us to stand 
watch and all still get enough rest. Let's let 
Richard sleep till morning." 
   Cara smiled her agreement before heading for her 
bedroll. Conspiracy designed to protect Richard 
suited the Mord-Sith. 
   Kahlan yawned and stretched again, at the same 
time forcing herself to shake the lingering haze of 
sleep from her mind, to be alert. Pulling her hair 
back from her face and flipping it over her 
shoulder, she scanned the wasteland all around, 
looking for anything out of the ordinary. 
Everything beyond their camp was as still as death. 
Mountains blacked out the glittering sweep of stars 
in a jagged line all the way around the horizon. 
   Kahlan took careful assessment of everyone, 
making sure they were all accounted for. Cara 
already looked comfortable. Tom slept not far from 
the horses. Friedrich was asleep on the other side 
of the horses. Jennsen was curled up beside Betty, 
but by her movements, the way she turned from her 
side to her back, didn't look asleep. The babies 
had moved and now lay sprawled with their heads 
butted up tight against their mother. 
   Kahlan was always especially vigilant right at 
change of watch. Change of watch was a prime time 
for attack; she knew, for she had often initiated 
raids around change of watch. Those just going off 
watch were often tired and already thinking of 
other things, considering watch the duty of the 
next guard. Those just coming on watch were often 

not mentally prepared for a sudden attack. People 
tended to think that the enemy would not come until 
they were properly settled in and on the lookout. 
Victory favored those who were ready. Defeat 
stalked those who were unwary. 
   Kahlan made her way to a formation of rock not 
far from Richard. She scooted back, sitting atop a 
high spot in order to get a better view of the 
lifeless surroundings. Even in the middle of the 
night, the rough rock still radiated the fierce 
heat of the previous day. 
   Kahlan pulled a skein of damp hair away from her 
neck, wishing there were a breeze. There had been 
times, in winter, when she had nearly frozen to 
death. Try as she might, she couldn't seem to 
recall what it felt like to be truly cold. 
   It wasn't long after Kahlan had gotten herself 
situated before she saw Jennsen get up and step 
quietly through their camp, trying not to wake the 
others. 
   "All right if I sit with you?" she asked when 
she finally reached Kahlan. 
"Of course." 
Jennsen pushed her bottom back up onto the rock 
beside Kahlan, pulled her knees up, and wrapped her 
arms around them, hugging them close to her body. 
For a time she just gazed out at the night. 
   "Kahlan, I'm sorry—about before." Despite the 
dark, Kahlan thought she could see that the young 
woman looked miserable. "I didn't mean to sound 
like a fool who would do something without 
thinking. I'd never do anything to hurt any of 
you." 
   "I know you wouldn't deliberately do any such 
thing. It's the things you might do unwittingly 
that concern me." 
   Jennsen nodded. "I think I understand a little 
better, now, about how complicated everything is 
and how much I really don't know. I'll not do 
anything unless you or Richard tells me to, I 

promise." 
   Kahlan smiled and ran a hand down the back of 
Jennsen's head, letting it come to rest on her 
shoulder. "I only told you those things because I 
care about you, Jennsen." She gave the shoulder a 
compassionate squeeze. "I guess I'm worried for you 
the same way Betty worries for her innocent twins, 
knowing the dangers all around when they rarely do. 
   "You need to understand that if you go out on 
thin ice, it doesn't matter if the lake was frozen 
over by a cold spell, or a magic spell. If you 
don't know where you're stepping, so to speak, you 
could fall into the cold dark arms of death. It 
matters not what made the ice—dead is dead. My 
point is that you don't go out on that thin ice 
unless you have a very powerful need, because it 
very well could cost you your life." 
   "But I'm not touched by magic. Like Richard 
said, I'm like someone born without eyes who can't 
see color. I'm a broken link in the chain of magic. 
Wouldn't that mean that I can't accidentally get 
into trouble with it?" 
   "And if someone pushes a boulder off a cliff and 
it crushes you, does it matter if that boulder was 
sent crashing over the edge by a man with a lever, 
or by a sorceress wielding the gift?" 
   Jennsen's voice took on a troubled tone. "I see 
what you mean. I guess that I never looked at it 
that way." 
   "I'm only trying to help you because I know how 
easy it is to make a mistake." 
   She watched Kahlan in the dark for a moment. 
"You know about magic. What kind of mistake could 
you make?" 
"All kinds." 
"Like what?" 
   Kahlan stared off into the memories. "I once 
delayed for half a second in killing someone." 
"But I thought you said that it was wrong to be too 
rash." 

   "Sometimes the most foolhardy thing you can do 
is to delay. She Was a sorceress. By the time I 
acted it was already too late. Because of my 
mistake she captured Richard and took him away. For 
a year, I didn't know what had happened to him. I 
thought I would never see him again, that I would 
die of heartache." 
Jennsen stared in astonishment. "When did you find 
him again?" 
   "Not long ago. That's why we're down here in the 
Old World—she brought him here. At least I found 
him. I've made other mistakes, and they, too, have 
resulted in no end of trouble. So has Richard. Like 
he said, we all make mistakes. If I can, I want to 
spare you from making a needless mistake, at 
least." 
   Jennsen looked away. "Like believing in that man 
I was with yesterday—Sebastian. Because of him, my 
mother was murdered and I almost got you killed. I 
feel like such a fool." 
   "You didn't make that mistake out of 
carelessness, Jennsen. They deceived you, used you. 
More importantly, in the end you used your head and 
were willing to face the truth." 
Jennsen nodded. 
"What should we name the twins?" she finally asked. 
   Kahlan didn't think that naming the twins was a 
good idea, not yet anyway, but she was reluctant to 
say it. 
"I don't know. What names were you thinking?" 
   Jennsen let out a heavy breath. "It was a shock 
to suddenly have Betty back with me, and even more 
of a surprise to see that she had babies of her 
own. I never considered that before. I haven't even 
had time to think about names." 
"You will." 
   Jennsen smiled at the thought. Her smile grew, 
as if at the thought of something more. 
   "You know," she said, "I think I understand what 
Richard meant about thinking of his grandfather as 

wizardly, even though he never saw him do magic." 
"What do you mean?" 
   "Well, I can't see magic, so to speak, and 
Richard didn't do any tonight—at least none I know 
of." She laughed softly, as pleasing a laugh as 
Kahlan had ever heard, full of life and joy. It had 
a quality to it much like Richard's, the feminine 
balance to Richard's masculine laugh, two facets of 
the same delight. 
   "And yet," Jennsen went on, "the things he said 
made me think of him in that way—wizardly—like he 
said about Zedd. When he was saying that, I knew 
just what he meant, just how he'd felt, because 
Richard has opened up the world for me, but the 
gift wasn't the magic he showed me. It was him 
showing me life, that my life is mine, and worth 
living." 
   Kahlan smiled to herself, at how very much that 
described her own feeling of what Richard had done 
for her, how he had brought her to cherish life and 
believe in it not just for others, but, most 
importantly, for herself. 
   For a time they sat together, silently watching 
the empty wasteland. Kahlan kept an eye on Richard 
as he tossed in his sleep. 
   With growing concern, Jennsen, too, watched 
Richard. "It looks like there's something wrong 
with him," she whispered as she leaned close. 
"He's having a nightmare." 
   Kahlan watched, as she had so many times before, 
as Richard made fists in his sleep, as he struggled 
silently against some private terror. 
   "It's scary to see him like that," Jennsen said. 
"He seems so different. When he's awake he always 
seems so ... reasoned." 
"You can't reason with a nightmare," Kahlan said in 
quiet sorrow. 
 
 
 

C      H        A        P        T        E        
R           6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Richard woke with a start." 
They were back. 
   He had been having a bad dream. Like all of his 
dreams, he didn't remember it. He only knew it was 
a bad dream because it left behind the shapeless 
feeling of breathless, heart-pounding, undefined, 
frantic terror. He threw off the lingering pall of 
the nightmare as he would throw off a tangled 
blanket. Even though it felt as if the dark things 
in lingering remnants of the dream were still 
clawing at him, trying to drag him back into their 
world, he knew that dreams were immaterial, and so 
he dismissed it. Now that he was awake, the feeling 
of dread rapidly began to dissolve, like fog 
burning off under hot sunlight. 
Still, he had to make an effort to slow his 
breathing. 
   What was important was that they were back. He 
didn't always know when they returned, but this 
time, for some reason, he was sure of it. 
   Sometime in the night, too, the wind had come 
up. It buffeted him, pulling at his clothes, 
tearing at his hair. Out on the sweltering waste, 
the scorching gusts offered no relief from the 
heat. Rather than being refreshing, the wind was so 
hot that it felt as though the door to a blast 
furnace had opened and the heat were broiling his 
flesh. 
   Groping for his waterskin, he didn't find it 
immediately at hand. He tried to recall exactly 
where he'd laid it, but, with other thoughts 

screaming for his attention, he couldn't remember. 
He would have to worry about a drink later. 
   Kahlan lay close, turned toward him. She had 
gathered her long hair in a loose fist beneath her 
chin. The wind whipped stray strands across her 
cheek. Richard loved just to sit and look at her 
face; this time, though, he delayed but a moment, 
looking at her only long enough in the faint 
starlight to note her even breathing. She was sound 
asleep. 
   As he scanned their camp, he could just make out 
a weak blush in the eastern sky. Dawn was still 
some time off. 
   He realized that he'd slept through his watch. 
Cara and Kahlan had no doubt decided that he needed 
the sleep more than he was needed for standing a 
watch and had conspired to not wake him. They were 
probably right. He had been so exhausted that he'd 
slept right through the night. Now, though, he was 
wide awake. 
His headache, too, was gone. 
    Silently, carefully, Richard slipped away from 
Kahlan so as not to wake her. He instinctively 
reached for his sword lying at his other side. The 
metal was warm beneath his touch as his fingers 
curled around the familiar silver-and-gold-wrought 
scabbard. It was always reassuring to find the 
sword at the ready, but even more so at that 
moment. As he silently rolled to his feet, he 
slipped the baldric over his head, placing the 
familiar supple leather across his right shoulder. 
As he rose up, his   sword was already at his hip, 
ready to do his bidding. 
   Despite how reassuring it was to have the weapon 
at his side, after the carnage back at the place 
called the Pillars of Creation the thought of 
drawing it sickened him. He recoiled from the 
mental image of the things he had done. Had he not, 
though, Kahlan wouldn't be sleeping peacefully; she 
would be dead, or worse. 

   Other good had come of it, too. Jennsen had been 
pulled back from the brink. He saw her curled up 
beside her beloved goat, her arm corralling Betty's 
two sleeping kids. He smiled at seeing her, at what 
a wonder it was to have a sister, smiled at how 
smart she was and all the wonders of life she had 
ahead of her. It made him happy that she was eager 
to be around him, but being around him made him 
worry for her safety, too. There really wasn't any 
place safe, though, unless the forces of the Order 
that had been unleashed could be defeated, or at 
least bottled back up. 
   A heavy gust tore through their camp, raising 
even thicker clouds of dirt. Richard blinked, 
trying to keep the blowing sand out of his eyes. 
The sound of the wind in his ears was aggravating 
because it masked other sounds. Though he listened 
carefully, he could hear only the wind. 
   Squinting against the blowing grit, he saw that 
Tom was sitting atop his wagon, looking this way 
and that, keeping watch. Friedrich was asleep on 
the other side of the horses, Cara not far away on 
the desert side of Kahlan, putting herself between 
them and anything that might be out beyond. In the 
dim starlight Tom hadn't spotted Richard. When Tom 
scanned the night in the opposite direction, 
Richard moved away from camp, leaving Tom to watch 
over the others. 
   Richard was comfortable in the cloak of 
darkness. Years of practice had taught him to slip 
unseen through shadows, to move silently in the 
darkness. He did that now, moving away from camp as 
he focused on what had awakened him, on what others 
standing watch would not sense. 
   Unlike Tom, the races did not miss Richard's 
movements. They wheeled high overhead as they 
watched him, following him as he made his way out 
along the broken ground. They were almost invisible 
against the dark sky, but Richard could make them 
out as they blacked out stars, like telltale 

shadows against the sparkling black curtain of 
night—shadows that he thought he could feel as well 
as he could see. 
   That the crushing headache was gone was a great 
relief, but that it had vanished in the manner that 
it had was also a cause for concern. The torment 
often vanished when he was distracted by something 
important. Something dangerous. At the same time, 
even though the pain was gone, it felt as if it 
were simply hiding in the shadows of his mind, 
waiting for him to relax so that it could pounce. 
   When the headaches surged through him, the 
nauseating pain was so intense that it made him 
feel sick in every fiber of his being. Even though 
the crushing pain at times made it difficult for 
him to stand, to put one foot in front of the 
other, he had known that to remain behind, where 
they were, would have meant certain death. While 
the headaches were bad in and of themselves, 
Richard wasn't so much concerned about the pain as 
he was about the nature of the headaches—their 
cause. 
   They weren't the same as the headaches he'd had 
before that he so feared—the headaches brought on 
by the gift—but they weren't like those he 
considered to be normal headaches, either. 
Throughout his life he'd occasionally had terrible 
headaches, the same as his mother used to have on a 
more regular basis. She'd called them "my grim 
headaches." Richard thoroughly understood her 
meaning. 
   These, however grim, were not like those. He 
worried that they might be caused by the gift. 
   He'd had the headaches brought on by the gift 
before. He had been told that as he grew older, as 
his ability grew, as he came to understand more, he 
would, at times later in his life, be confronted 
with headaches brought on by the gift. The remedy 
was supposedly simple. He had only to seek the help 
of another wizard and have him assist with the 

necessary next level of awareness and comprehension 
of the nature of the gift within himself. That 
mental awareness and understanding would enable him 
to control and thereby eliminate the pain—to douse 
the flare-up. At least, that's what he had been 
told. 
   Of course, in the absence of another wizard to 
help, the Sisters of the Light would gladly put a 
collar around his neck to help control the runaway 
power of the gift. 
   He had been told that such headaches, if not 
properly tended to, were lethal. This much of it, 
at least, he knew was true. He couldn't afford to 
have that problem now, on top of all his others. 
Right now there was nothing he could do about it; 
there was no one anywhere near who could help him 
with that kind of headache—no wizard, and even 
though he would never allow it, no Sister of the 
Light to put him in a collar again. 
   Richard once more reminded himself that it 
wasn't the same kind of pain as the last time, when 
it had been brought on by the gift. He reminded 
himself not to invent trouble he didn't have. 
He had enough real trouble. 
   He heard the whoosh as one of the huge birds 
shot past low overhead. The race twisted in flight, 
lifting on a gust of wind, to peer back at him. 
   Another followed in its wake, and then a third, 
a fourth, and a fifth. They slipped silently away, 
out across the open ground, following one another 
roughly in a line. Their wings rocked as they 
worked to stabilize themselves in the gusty air. 
Some distance away, they soared into a gliding, 
climbing turn back toward him. 
   Before they returned, the races tightened their 
flight into a circle. When they stroked their huge 
wings, Richard could usually hear their feathers 
whisper through the air, although now, with the 
sound of the wind, he couldn't. Their black eyes 
watched him watching them. He wanted them to know 

he was aware of them, that he hadn't slept through 
their nocturnal return. 
   Were he not so concerned about the meaning of 
the races, he might think they were beautiful, 
their sleek black shapes silhouetted majestically 
against the crimson flush coming to the sky. 
   As he watched, though, Richard couldn't imagine 
what they were doing. He'd seen this behavior from 
them before and hadn't understood it then, either. 
He realized, suddenly, that those other times when 
they'd returned to circle in this curious fashion, 
he had also been aware of them. He wasn't always 
aware of them or aware of when they returned. If he 
had a headache, though, it had vanished when they 
returned. 
   The hot wind ruffled Richard's hair as he gazed 
out across wasteland obscured by the dusty predawn 
gloom. He didn't like this dead place. Dawn here 
would offer no promise of a world coming to life. 
He wished Kahlan and he were back in his woods. He 
couldn't help smiling as he recalled the place in 
the mountains where the year before they had spent 
the summer. The place was so wondrous that it had 
even managed to mellow Cara. 
   In the faint but gathering light, the black-
tipped races circled, as they always did when they 
performed this curious maneuver, not over him, but 
a short distance away, this time out over the open 
desert where the buffeting wind unfurled diaphanous 
curtains of sandy grit. The other times it had been 
over forested hills, or open grassland. This time, 
as he watched the races, he had to squint to keep 
the blowing sand from getting in his eyes. 
   Abruptly tipping their broad wings, the races 
tightened their circle as they descended closer to 
the desert floor. He knew that they would do this 
for a short while before breaking up their 
formation to resume their normal flight. They 
sometimes flew in pairs and performed spectacular 
aerial stunts, each gracefully matching the other's 

every move, as ravens sometimes did, but otherwise 
they never flew in anything like the compact group 
of their sporadic circling. 
   And then, as the inky shapes wheeled around in a 
tight vortex, Richard realized that the trailers of 
blowing sand below them weren't simply snaking and 
curling aimlessly in the wind, but were flowing 
over something that wasn't there. 
The hair along his arms stood stiffly up. 
   Richard blinked, squinting into the wind, trying 
to see better in the howling storm of blowing sand. 
Yet more dust and dirt lifted in the blast of a 
heavy gust. As the twisting eddies raced across the 
flat ground and passed beneath the races, they 
swirled around and over something below, making the 
shape more distinct. 
It appeared to be the form of a person. 
   The dirt swirled around the empty void, 
silhouetting it, defining it, revealing what was 
there, but not. Whenever the wind lifted and 
carried with it a heavy load, the outline of the 
shape, bounded by the swirling sand, looked like 
the outline of a man shrouded in hooded robes. 
Richard's right hand found the hilt of his sword. 
   There was nothing to the shape save the sand 
that flowed over the contours of what wasn't there, 
the way muddy water streaming around a clear glass 
bottle revealed its covert contour. The form seemed 
to be standing still, watching him. 
   There were, of course, no eyes in the empty 
sockets of blowing sand, but Richard could feel 
them on him. 
   "What is it?" Jennsen asked in a worried whisper 
as she rushed up beside him. "What's the matter? Do 
you see something?" 
   With his left hand, Richard pushed her back, out 
of his way. So urgent was his headlong rush of need 
that it took concentrated effort to be gentle about 
it. He was gripping the hilt of his sword so 
tightly that he could feel the raised letters of 

the word TRUTH woven in gold wire through the 
silver. 
Richard was invoking from within the sword its 
purpose for being, the very core of its creation. 
In answer, the might of the sword's power ignited. 
   Beyond the veil of rage, though, in the shadows 
of his mind, even as the anger of the sword 
thundered through him, Richard dimly perceived an 
unexpected opposition on the part of the flux of 
magic to rise to the summons. 
   It was like heading out a door and leaning his 
weight into the howl of a gale, and stumbling 
forward a step at unexpectedly finding less 
resistance than anticipated. 
   Before Richard could question the sensation, the 
wave of wrath flooded through him, saturating him 
in the cold fury of the storm that was the sword's 
power. 
   As the races wheeled, their circle began coming 
closer. This, too, they had done before, but this 
time the shape that moved with them was betrayed by 
the swirl of sand and grit. It appeared that the 
intangible hooded man was being pulled closer by 
the black-tipped races. 
   The distinctive ring of steel announced the 
arrival of the Sword of Truth in the hot dawn air. 
Jennsen squeaked at his sudden movement and jumped 
back. 
   The races answered with piercing, mocking cries 
that carried on the howling wind. 
   The unmistakable sound of Richard's sword being 
drawn brought Kahlan and Cara at a dead run. Cara 
would have leapt protectively ahead, but she knew 
better than to get in front of him when he had the 
sword out. Agiel clenched in her fist, she skidded 
to a halt off to the side, crouched and at the 
ready, a powerful cat ready to spring. 
   "What is it?" Kahlan asked as she ran up behind 
him, gaping out at the pattern in the wind. 
   "It's the races," came Jennsen's worried voice. 

"They've come back." 
   Kahlan stared incredulously at her. "The races 
don't look like the worst of it." 
   Sword in hand, Richard watched the thing below 
the wheeling races. Feeling the sword in his grip, 
its power sizzling through the very marrow of his 
bones, he felt a flash of hesitation, of doubt. 
With no time to waste, he turned back to Tom, just 
starting away from securing the lead lines to his 
big draft horses. Richard mimed shooting an arrow. 
Grasping Richard's meaning, Tom skidded to a halt 
and spun back to the wagon. Friedrich urgently 
seized the tethers to the other horses, working to 
keep them calm, keeping them from spooking. Leaning 
in the wagon, Tom threw gear aside as he searched 
for Richard's bow and quiver. 
   Jennsen peered from one grim face to another. 
"What do you mean the races aren't the worst of 
it?" 
Cara pointed with her Agiel. "That... that figure. 
That man." 
   Frowning in confusion, Jennsen looked back and 
forth between Cara and the blowing sand. 
"What do you see?" Richard asked. 
   Jennsen threw her hands up in a gesture of 
frustration. "Black-tipped races. Five of them. 
That, and the blinding blowing sand is all. Is 
there someone out there? Do you see people coming?" 
She didn't see it. 
   Tom pulled the bow and quiver from the wagon and 
ran for the rest of them. Two of the races, as if 
noting Tom running in with the bow, lifted a wing 
and circled wider. They swept around him once 
before disappearing into the darkness. The other 
three, though, continued to circle, as if bearing 
the floating form in the blowing sand beneath them. 
   Closer still the races came, and the form with 
them. Richard couldn't imagine what it was, but the 
sense of dread it engendered rivaled any nightmare. 
The power from the sword surging through him had no 

such fear or doubt. Then why did he? Storms of 
magic within, beyond anything storming across the 
wasteland, spiraled up through him, fighting for 
release. With grim effort, Richard contained the 
need, focused it on the task of doing his bidding 
should he choose to release it. He was the master 
of the sword and had at all times to consciously 
exert that mastery. By the sword's reaction to what 
the currents of sand revealed, there could be no 
doubt as to Richard's conviction of the nature of 
what stood before him. Then what was it he sensed 
from the sword? 
   From back by the wagon, a horse screamed. A 
quick glance over his shoulder revealed Friedrich 
trying to calm them. All three horses reared 
against the rope he held fast. They came down 
stamping their hooves and snorting. From the corner 
of his eye, Richard saw twin streaks of black shoot 
in out of the darkness, skimming in just above the 
ground. Betty let out a terrible wail. 
   And then, as quickly as they'd appeared, they 
were gone, vanished back into the thick gloom. 
"No!" Jennsen cried out as she ran for the animals. 
   Before them, the unmoving shape watched. Tom 
reached out, trying to stop Jennsen on the way 
past. She tore away from him. For a moment, Richard 
worried that Tom might go after her, but then he 
was again running for Richard. 
   Out of the dark swirling murk, the two races 
suddenly appeared, so close Richard could see the 
quills running down through their flight feathers 
spread wide in the wind. Swooping in out of the 
swirling storm of dust to rejoin the circle, each 
carried a small, limp, white form in its powerful 
talons. 
   Tom ran up holding the bow out in one hand and 
the quiver in the other. Making his choice, Richard 
slammed his sword into its scabbard and snatched up 
the bow. 
   With one smooth motion he bent the bow and 

attached the string. He yanked an arrow from the 
leather quiver Tom held out in his big fist. 
   As Richard turned to the target, he already had 
the arrow nocked and was drawing back the string. 
Distantly, it felt good to feel his muscles 
straining against the weight, straining against the 
spring of the bow, loading its force for release. 
It felt good to rely on his strength, his skill, 
his endless hours of practice, and not have to 
depend on magic. 
   The still form of the man who wasn't there 
seemed to watch. Eddies of sand sluiced over the 
shape, marking the outline. Richard glared at the 
head of the form beyond the razor-sharp steel tip 
of the arrow. Like all blades, it fell comfortingly 
familiar to Richard. With a blade in his hands, he 
was in his element and it mattered not if it was 
stone dust his blade drew, or blood. The steel-
tipped arrow was squarely centered on the empty 
spot in the curve of blowing sand that formed the 
head. 
The piercing cry of races carried above the howl of 
the wind. 
String to his cheek, Richard savored the tension in 
his muscles, the weight of the bow, the feathers 
touching his flesh, the distance between blade and 
objective filled with swirling sand, the pull of 
the wind against his arm, the bow, and the arrow. 
Each of those factors and a hundred more went into 
an inner calculation that after a lifetime of 
practice required no conscious computation yet 
decided where the point of the arrow belonged once 
he called the target. 
The form before him stood watching. 
Richard abruptly raised the bow and called the 
target. 
   The world became not only still but silent for 
him as the distance seemed to contract. His body 
was drawn as taut as the bow, the arrow becoming a 
projection of his fluid focused intent, the mark 

before the arrow his purpose for being. His 
conscious intent invoked the instant sum of the 
calculation needed to connect arrow and target. 
   The swirling sand seemed to slow as the races, 
wings spread wide, dragged through the thick air. 
There was no doubt in Richard's mind what the arrow 
would find at the end of a journey only just begun. 
He felt the string hit his wrist. He saw the 
feathers clear the bow above his fist. The arrow's 
shaft flexed slightly as it sprang away and took 
flight. 
   Richard was already drawing the second arrow 
from the quiver in Tom's fist as the first found 
its target. Black feathers exploded in the crimson 
dawn. The bird tumbled gracelessly through the air 
and with a hard thud hit the ground not far from 
the shape floating just above the ground. The 
bloody white form was free of the talons, but it 
was too late. 
   The four remaining races screamed in fury. As 
the birds pumped their wings, clawing for height, 
one railed at Richard with a shrill scream. Richard 
called the target. 
The second arrow was off. 
   The arrow ripped right into the race's open 
throat and out the back of the head, cutting off 
the angry cry. The flightless weight plummeted to 
the ground. 
   The form below the remaining three races began 
to dissolve in the swirling sand. 
   The three remaining birds, as if abandoning 
their charge, wheeled around, racing toward Richard 
with angry intent. He calmly considered them from 
behind feathers of his own. The third arrow was 
away. The race in the center lifted its right wing, 
trying to change direction, but took the arrow 
through its heart. Rolling wing over wing, it 
spiraled down through the blowing sand, crashing to 
the hardpan out ahead of Richard. 
   The remaining two birds, screeching defiant 

cries, plunged toward him. 
   Richard pulled string to cheek, placing the 
fourth arrow on target. The range was swiftly 
closing. The arrow was away in an instant. It tore 
through the body of the black-tipped race still 
clutching in its talons the bloody corpse of the 
tiny kid. 
     Wings raked back, the last angry race dove 
toward Richard. As soon as Richard snatched an 
arrow from the quiver an impatient Tom held out, 
the big D'Haran heaved his knife. Before Richard 
could nock the arrow, the whirling knife ripped 
into the raptor. Richard stepped aside as the huge 
bird shot past in a lifeless drop and slammed into 
the ground right behind him. As it tumbled, blood 
sprayed across the windswept rock and black-tipped 
feathers flew everywhere. 
The dawn, only moments ago filled with the the 
bloodcurdling screams of the black-tipped races, 
was suddenly quiet but for the low moan of the 
wind. Black feathers lifted in that wind, floating 
out across the open expanse beneath a yellow-orange 
sky. 
At that moment, the sun broke the horizon, throwing 
long shadows out over the wasteland. 
     Jennsen clutched one of the limp white twins 
to her breast. Betty, bleating plaintively, blood 
running from a gash on her side, stood on her hind 
legs trying to arouse her still kid in Jennsen's 
arms. Jennsen bent to the other twin sprawled on 
the ground and laid her lifeless charge beside it. 
Betty urgently licked at the bloody carcasses.             
Jennsen hugged Betty's neck a moment before trying 
to pull the goat away. Betty dug in her hooves, not 
wanting to leave her stricken kids. Jennsen could 
do no more than to offer her friend consoling words 
choked with tears. 
When she stood, unable to turn Betty from her dead 
offspring, Richard sheltered Jennsen under his arm. 
"Why would the races suddenly do that?" 

"I don't know," Richard said. "You didn't see 
anything other than the races, then?" 
   Jennsen leaned against Richard, holding her face 
in her hands, giving in briefly to the tears. "I 
just saw the birds," she said as she used the back 
of her sleeve to wipe her cheeks. 
   "What about the shape defined by the blowing 
sand?" Kahlan asked as she placed a comforting hand 
on Jennsen's shoulder. 
"Shape?" She looked from Kahlan to Richard. "What 
shape?" 
   "It looked like a man's shape." Kahlan drew the 
curves of an outline in the air before her with 
both hands. "Like the outline of a man wearing a 
hooded cape." 
   "I didn't see anything but black-tipped races 
and the clouds of blowing sand." 
   "And you didn't see the sand blowing around 
anything?" Richard asked. "You didn't see any shape 
defined by the sand?" 
Jennsen shook her head insistently before returning 
to Betty's side. 
   "If the shape involved magic," Kahlan said in a 
confidential tone to Richard, "she wouldn't see 
that, but why wouldn't she see the sand?" 
"To her, the magic wasn't there." 
"But the sand was." 
   "The color is there on a painting but a blind 
person can't see it, nor can they see the shapes 
that the brush strokes, laden with color, help 
define." He shook his head in wonder as he watched 
Jennsen. "We don't really know to what degree 
someone is affected by other things when they can't 
perceive the magic that interacts with those other 
things. For all we know, it could be that her mind 
simply fails to recognize the pattern caused by 
magic and just reads it as blowing sand. It could 
even be that because there is a pattern to the 
magic, only we can see those particles of sand 
directly involved with defining the pattern, while 

she sees them all and therefore the subordinate 
pattern is lost to her eyes. 
   "It could even be that it's something like the 
boundaries were; two worlds existing in the same 
place at the same time. Jennsen and we could be 
looking at the same thing, and see it through 
different eyes— through different worlds." Kahlan 
nodded as Richard bent to one knee beside Jennsen 
to inspect 
the gash through the goat's wiry brown hair. 
 
   "We'd better stitch this," he told Jennsen. 
"It's not life-threatening, but it needs 
attention." 
   Jennsen snuffled back her tears as Richard 
stood. "It was magic, then—the thing you saw?" 
   Richard stared off toward where the form had 
appeared in the blowing sand. "Something evil." 
   Off behind them, Rusty tossed her head and 
whinnied in sympathy with inconsolable Betty. When 
Tom laid a sorrowful hand on Jennsen's shoulder, 
she seized it as if for strength and held it to her 
cheek. 
   Jennsen finally stood, shielding her eyes 
against the blowing dust as she looked to the 
horizon. "At least we're rid of the filthy races." 
"Not for long," Richard said. 
   His headache came slamming back with such force 
that it nearly took him from his feet. He had 
learned a great deal about controlling pain, about 
how to disregard it. He did that now. 
There were bigger worries.  
 
 
 
CHAPTER 7 
 
 
 
 
Around midafternoon, as they were walking across 

the scorching desert, Kahlan noticed Richard 
carefully watching his shadow stretched out before 
him. 
"What is it?" she asked. "What's the matter?" 
   He gestured at the shadow before him. "Races. 
Ten or twelve. They just glided up behind us. 
They're hiding in the sun." 
"Hiding in the sun?" 
   "They're flying high and in the spot where their 
shadow falls on us. If we were to look up in the 
sky we wouldn't be able to see them because we'd 
have to look right into the sun." 
   Kahlan turned and, with her hand shielding her 
eyes, tried to see for herself, but it was too 
painful to try to look up anywhere near the 
merciless sun. When she looked back, Richard, who 
hadn't turned to look with her, again flicked his 
hand toward the shadows. 
   "If you look carefully at the ground around your 
shadow, you can just make out the distortion in the 
light. It's them." 
   Kahlan might have thought that Richard was 
having a little fun with her were it not about a 
matter as serious as the races. She searched the 
ground around their shadows until she finally saw 
what he was talking about. At such a distance, the 
races' shadows were little more than shifting 
irregularities in the light. 
   Kahlan glanced back at the wagon. Tom was 
driving, with Friedrich sitting up on the seat 
beside him. Richard and Kahlan were giving the 
horses a rest from being ridden, so they were 
tethered to the wagon. 
   Jennsen sat on blankets in the back of the 
wagon, comforting Betty as she bleated in misery. 
Kahlan didn't think the goat had been silent for 
more than a minute or two all day. The gash wasn't 
bad; Betty's suffering was from other pain. At 
least the poor goat had Jennsen for solace. 
   From what Kahlan had learned, Jennsen had had 

Betty for half her life. Moving around as she and 
her mother had, running from Darken Rahl, hiding, 
staying away from people so as not to reveal 
themselves and risk word drifting back to Darken 
Rahl's ears, Jennsen had never had a chance to have 
childhood friends. Her mother had gotten her the 
goat as a companion. In her constant effort to keep 
Jennsen out of the hands of a monster, it was the 
best she could offer. 
   Kahlan wiped the stinging sweat from her eyes. 
She took in the four black feathers Richard had 
bundled together and strung on his upper right arm. 
He had taken the feathers when he'd retrieved the 
arrows that were still good. Richard had given the 
last feather to Tom for killing the fifth race with 
his knife. Tom wore his single feather like 
Richard, on his arm. Tom thought of it as a trophy, 
of sorts, awarded by the Lord Rahl. 
   Kahlan knew that Richard wore his four feathers 
for a different reason: it was a warning for all to 
see. 
   Kahlan pulled her hair back over her shoulder. 
"Do you think that was a man below the races? A man 
watching us?" 
   Richard shrugged. "You know more about magic 
than me. You tell me." 
   "I've never seen anything like it." She frowned 
over at him. "If it was a man... or something like 
that, why do you think he finally decided to reveal 
himself?" 
   "I don't think he did decide to reveal himself." 
Richard's intent gray eyes turned toward her. "I 
think it was an accident." 
"How could it be an accident?" 
   "If it's someone using the races to track us, 
and he can somehow see us—" 
   "See us how?" 
"I don't know. See us through the eyes of the 
races." 
"You can't do that with magic." 

Richard fixed her with a trenchant look. "Fine. 
Then what was it?" 
   Kahlan looked back at the shadows stretching out 
before them on the buckskin-colored rock, back at 
the small bleary shapes moving around the shadow of 
her head, like flies around a corpse. "I don't 
know. You were saying? .. . About someone using the 
races to track us, to see us?" 
   "I think," Richard said, "that someone is 
watching us, through the races or with their aid—or 
something like that—and they can't really see 
everything. They can't see clearly." 
"So?" 
   "So, since he can't see with clarity, I think 
maybe he didn't realize that there was a sandstorm. 
He didn't anticipate what the blowing sand would 
reveal. I don't think he intended to give himself 
away." Richard looked over at her again. "I think 
he made a mistake. I think he showed himself 
accidentally." 
   Kahlan let out a measured, exasperated breath. 
She had no argument for such a preposterous notion. 
It was no wonder he hadn't told her the full extent 
of his theory. She had been thinking, when he said 
the races were tracking them, that probably a web 
had been cast and then some event had triggered it—
most likely Cara's innocent touch—and that spell 
had then attached to them, causing the races to 
follow that marker of magic. Then, as Jennsen had 
suggested, someone was simply watching where the 
races were in order to get a pretty good idea of 
where Richard and Kahlan were. Kahlan had thought 
of it in terms of the way Darken Rahl had once 
hooked a tracer cloud to Richard in order to know 
where they were. Richard wasn't thinking in terms 
of what had happened before; he was looking at it 
through the prism of a Seeker. 
   There were still a number of things about 
Richard's notion that didn't make sense to her, but 
she knew better than to discount what he thought 

simply because she had never heard of such a thing 
before. 
   "Maybe it's not a 'he,' " she finally said. 
"Maybe it's a she. Maybe a Sister of the Dark." 
Richard gave her another look, but this one was 
more worry than anything else. "Whoever it is—
whatever it is—I don't think it can be anything 
good." 
   Kahlan couldn't argue that much of it, but 
still, she couldn't reconcile such a notion. "Well, 
let's say it's like you think it is—that we spotted 
him spying on us, by accident. Why did the races 
then attack us?" 
   Dust rose from Richard's boot as he casually 
kicked a small stone. "I don't know. Maybe he was 
just angry that he'd given himself away." 
   "He was angry, so he had the races kill Betty's 
kids? And attack you?" 
   Richard shrugged. "I'm just guessing because you 
asked; I'm not saying I think it's so." The long 
feathers, bloodred at their base, turning to a dark 
gray and then to inky black at the tip, ruffled in 
the gusts of wind. 
   As he thought it over, his tone turned more 
speculative. "It could even be that whoever it was 
using the races to watch us had nothing at all to 
do with the attack. Maybe the races decided to 
attack on their own." 
   "They simply took the reins from whoever it was 
that was taking them for the ride?" 
   "Maybe. Maybe he can send them to us so he can 
have a peek at where we are, where we're going, but 
can't control them much more than that." 
   In frustration, Kahlan let out a sigh. 
"Richard," she said, unable to hold back her 
doubts, "I know a good deal about all sorts of 
magic and I've never heard of anything like this 
being possible." 
   Richard leaned close, again taking her in with 
those arresting gray eyes of his. "You know about 

all sorts of things magic from the Midlands. Maybe 
down here they have something you never encountered 
before. After all, had you ever heard of a dream 
walker before we encountered Jagang? Or even 
thought such a thing was possible?" 
   Kahlan pulled her lower lip through her teeth as 
she studied his grim expression for a long moment. 
Richard hadn't grown up around magic—it was all new 
to him. In some ways, though, that was a strength, 
because he didn't have preconceived notions about 
what was possible and what wasn't. Sometimes, the 
things they'd encountered were unprecedented. 
   To Richard, just about all magic was 
unprecedented. 
   "So, what do you think we should do?" she 
finally asked in a confidential tone. 
   "What we planned." He glanced over his shoulder 
to see Cara scouting a goodly distance off to their 
left side. "It has to be connected to the rest of 
it." 
"Cara only meant to protect us." 
   "I know. And who knows, maybe it would have been 
worse if she hadn't touched it. It could even be 
that by doing what she did, she actually bought us 
time." 
   Kahlan swallowed at the feeling of dread 
churning in her. "Do you think we still have enough 
time?" 
   "We'll think of something. We don't even know 
yet for sure what it could mean." 
   "When the sand finally runs out of an hourglass, 
it usually means the goose is cooked." 
"We'll find an answer." 
"Promise?" 
   Richard reached over and gently caressed the 
back of her neck. "Promise." 
   Kahlan loved his smile, the way it sparkled in 
his eyes. Somewhere in the back of her mind she 
knew that he always kept his promises. His eyes 
held something else, though, and that distracted 

her from asking if he believed the answer he 
promised would come in time, or even if it would be 
an answer that could help them. 
"You have a headache, don't you," she said. 
   "Yes." His smile had vanished. "It's different 
than before, but I'm pretty sure it's caused by the 
same thing." 
The gift. That's what he meant. 
   "What do you mean it's different? And if it's 
different, then what makes you think the cause is 
the same?" 
   He thought about it a moment. "Remember when I 
was explaining to Jennsen about how the gift needs 
to be balanced, how I have to balance the fighting 
I do by not eating meat?" When she nodded he went 
on. "It got worse right then." 
"Headaches, even those kind, vary." 
"No ..." he said, frowning as he tried to find the 
words. "No, it was almost as if talking about—
thinking about—the need not to eat meat in order to 
balance the gift somehow brought it more to the 
fore and made the headaches worse." 
   Kahlan didn't at all like that concept. "You 
mean like maybe the gift within you that is the 
cause of the headaches is trying to impress upon 
you the importance of balance in what you do with 
the gift." 
   Richard raked his fingers back through his hair. 
"I don't know. There's more to it. I just can't 
seem to get it all worked out. Sometimes when I 
try, when I go down that line of reasoning, about 
how I need to balance the fighting I do, the pain 
starts to get so bad I can't dwell on it. 
   "And something else," he added. "There might be 
a problem with my connection to the magic of the 
sword." 
"What? How can that be?" 
"I don't know." 
Kahlan tried to keep the alarm out of her voice. 
"Are you sure?" 

   He shook his head in frustration. "No, I'm not 
sure. It just seemed different when I felt the need 
of it and drew the sword this morning. It was as if 
the sword's magic was reluctant to rise to the 
need." 
   Kahlan thought it over a moment. "Maybe that 
means that the headaches are something different, 
this time. Maybe they aren't really caused by the 
gift." 
   "Even if some of it is different, I still think 
its cause is the gift," he said. "One thing they do 
have in common with the last time is that they're 
gradually getting worse." 
"What do you want to do?" 
   He lifted his arms out to the sides and let them 
fall back. "For now, we don't have much of a 
choice—we have to do what we planned." 
   "We could go to Zedd. If it is the gift, as you 
think, then Zedd would know what to do. He could 
help you." 
   "Kahlan, do you honestly believe that we have 
any chance in Creation of making it all the way to 
Aydindril in time? Even if it weren't for the rest 
of it, if the headaches are from the gift, I'd be 
dead weeks before we could travel all the way to 
Aydindril. And that's not even taking into account 
how difficult it's bound to be getting past 
Jagang's army all throughout the Midlands and 
especially the troops around Ay-dindril." 
"Maybe he's not there now." 
   Richard kicked at another stone in the path. 
"You think Jagang is just going to leave the 
Wizard's Keep and all it contains—leave it all for 
us to use against him?" 
   Zedd was First Wizard. For someone of his 
ability, defending the Wizard's Keep wouldn't be 
too difficult. He also had Adie there with him to 
help. The old sorceress, alone, could probably 
defend a place such as the Keep. Zedd knew what the 
Keep would mean to Jagang, could he gain it. Zedd 

would protect the Keep no matter what. 
   "There's no way for Jagang to get past the 
barriers in that place," Kahlan said. That much of 
it was one worry they could set aside. "Jagang 
knows that and might not waste time holding an army 
there for nothing." 
   "You may be right, but that still doesn't do us 
any good—it's too far." 
   Too far. Kahlan seized Richard's arm and dragged 
him to a halt. "The sliph. If we can find one of 
her wells, we could travel in the sliph. If nothing 
else, we know there's the well down here in the Old 
World— in Tanimura. Even that's a lot closer than a 
journey overland all the way to Aydindril." 
   Richard looked north. "That might work. We 
wouldn't have to make it past Jagang's army. We 
could come right up inside the Keep." He put his 
arm around her shoulders. "First, though, we have 
to see to this other business." 
   Kahlan grinned. "All right. We take care of me 
first, then we see to taking care of you." 
   She felt a heady sense of relief that there was 
a solution at hand. The rest of them couldn't 
travel in the sliph—they didn't have the required 
magic—but Richard, Kahlan, and Cara certainly 
could. They could come up right in the Keep itself. 
   The Keep was immense, and thousands of years 
old. Kahlan had spent much of her life there, but 
she had seen only a fraction of the place. Even 
Zedd hadn't seen it all, because of some of the 
shields that had been placed there ages ago by 
those with both sides of the gift, and Zedd had 
only the Additive side. Rare and dangerous items of 
magic had been stored there for eons, along with 
records and countless books. By now it was possible 
that Zedd and Adie had found something in the Keep 
that would help drive the Imperial Order back to 
the Old World. 
   Not only would going to the Keep be a way to 
solve Richard's problem with the gift, but it might 

provide them with something they needed to swing 
the tide of the war back to their side. 
   Suddenly, seeing Zedd, Aydindril, and the Keep 
seemed only a short time away. 
   With a renewed sense of optimism, Kahlan 
squeezed Richard's hand. She knew that he wanted to 
keep scouting ahead. "I'm going to go back and see 
how Jennsen is doing." 
As Richard moved on and Kahlan slowed, letting the 
wagon catch up with her, another dozen black-tipped 
races drifted in on the air currents high above the 
burning plain. They stayed close to the sun, and 
well out of range of Richard's arrows, but they 
stayed within sight. 
   Tom handed a waterskin down to Kahlan when the 
bouncing wagon rattled up beside her. She was so 
dry that she gulped the hot water without caring 
how bad it tasted. As she let the wagon roll past, 
she put a boot in the iron rung and boosted herself 
up and over the side. 
   Jennsen looked to be happy for the company as 
Kahlan climbed in. Kahlan returned the smile before 
sitting beside Richard's sister and the puling 
Betty. 
"How is she?" Kahlan asked, gently stroking Betty's 
floppy ears. 
   Jennsen shook her head. "I've never seen her 
like this. It's breaking my heart. It reminds me of 
how hard it was for me when I lost my mother. It's 
breaking my heart." 
   As she sat back on her heels, Kahlan squeezed 
Jennsen's hand sympathetically. "I know it's hard, 
but it's easier for an animal to get over something 
like this than for people to do the same. Don't 
compare it to you and your mother. Sad as this is, 
it's different. Betty can have more kids and she'll 
forget all about this. You or I never could." 
   Before the words were out, Kahlan felt a sudden 
stab of pain for the unborn child she had lost. How 
could she ever get over losing her and Richard's 

child? Even if she ever had others, she would never 
be able to forget what was lost at the hands of 
brutes. 
   She idly turned the small dark stone on the 
necklace she wore, wondering if she ever would have 
a child, wondering if there would ever be a world 
safe for a child of theirs. 
"Are you all right?" 
Kahlan realized that Jennsen was watching her face. 
Kahlan forced herself to put on a smile. "I'm just 
sad for Betty." 
Jennsen ran a tender hand over the top of Betty's 
head. "Me too." 
"But I know that she'll be all right." 
   Kahlan watched the endless expanse of ground 
slowly slide by to either side of the wagon. Waves 
of heat made the horizon liquid, with detached 
pools of ground floating up into the sky. Still, 
they saw nothing growing. The land was slowly 
rising, though, as they came ever closer to distant 
mountains. She knew that it was only a matter of 
time until they reached life again, but right then 
it felt like they never would. 
   "I don't understand about something," Jennsen 
said. "You told me how I shouldn't do anything 
rash, when it came to magic, unless I was sure of 
what would happen. You said it was dangerous. You 
said not to act in matters of magic until you can 
be sure of the consequence." 
Kahlan knew what Jennsen was driving at. "That's 
right." 
   "Well, that back there pretty much seemed like 
one of those stabs in the dark you warned me 
about." 
   "I also told you that sometimes you had no 
choice but to act immediately. That's what Richard 
did. I know him. He used his best judgment." 
   Jennsen looked to be satisfied. "I'm not 
suggesting that he was wrong. I'm just saying that 
I don't understand. It seemed pretty reckless to 

me. How am I supposed to know what you mean when 
you tell me not to do anything reckless if it 
involves magic?" 
   Kahlan smiled. "Welcome to life with Richard. 
Half the time I don't know what's in his head. I've 
often thought he was acting recklessly and it 
turned out to be the right thing, the only thing, 
he could have done. That's part of the reason he 
was named Seeker. I'm sure he took into account 
things he sensed that even I couldn't." 
   "But how does he know those things? How can he 
know what to do?" 
   "Oftentimes he's just as confused as you, or 
even me. But he's different, too, and he's sure 
when we wouldn't be." 
"Different?" 
   Kahlan looked over at the young woman, at her 
red hair shining in the afternoon sunlight. "He was 
born with both sides of the gift. All those born 
with the gift in the last three thousand years have 
been born with Additive Magic only. Some, like 
Darken Rahl and the Sisters of the Dark, have been 
able to use Subtractive Magic, but only through the 
Keeper's help—not on their own. Richard alone has 
been born with Subtractive Magic." 
   "That's what you mentioned last night, but I 
don't know anything about magic, so I don't know 
what that means." 
   "We're not exactly sure of everything it means 
ourselves. Additive Magic uses what is there, and 
adds to it, or changes it somehow. The magic of the 
Sword of Truth, for example, uses anger, and adds 
to it, takes power from it, adds to it until it's 
something else. With Additive, for example, the 
gifted can heal. 
   "Subtractive Magic is the undoing of things. It 
can take things and make them nothing. According to 
Zedd, Subtractive Magic is the counter to Additive, 
as night is to day. Yet it is all part of the same 
thing. 

   "Commanding Subtractive, as Darken Rahl did, is 
one thing, but to be born with it is quite another. 
   "Long ago, unlike now, being born with the gift—
both sides of the gift—was common. The great war 
then resulted in a barrier sealing the New World 
off from the Old. That's kept the peace all this 
time, but things have changed since then. After 
that time, not only have those born with the gift 
gradually become exceedingly rare, but those who 
have been born with the gift haven't been born with 
the Subtractive side of it. 
   "Richard was born of two lines of wizards, 
Darken Rahl and his grandfather Zedd. He's also the 
first in thousands of years to be born with both 
sides of the gift. 
   "All of our abilities contribute to how we're 
able to react to situations. We don't know how 
having both sides contributes to Richard's ability 
to read a situation and do what's necessary. I 
suspect he may be guided by his gift, perhaps more 
than he believes." 
   Jennsen let out a troubled sigh. "After all this 
time, how did this barrier come to be down, 
anyway?" 
"Richard destroyed it." 
   Jennsen looked up in astonishment. "Then it's 
true. Sebastian told me that the Lord Rahl—Richard—
had brought the barrier down. Sebastian said it was 
so that Richard could invade and conquer the Old 
World." 
   Kahlan smiled at such a grandiose lie. "You 
don't believe that part of it, do you?" 
"No, not now." 
   "Now that the barrier is down, the Imperial 
Order is flooding up into the New World, destroying 
or enslaving everything before them." 
"Where can people live that's safe? Where can we?" 
"Until they're stopped or driven back, there is no 
safe place to live." 
   Jennsen thought it over a moment. "If the 

barrier coming down let the Imperial Order flood in 
to conquer the New World, why would Richard have 
destroyed it?" 
   With one hand, Kahlan held on to the side of the 
wagon as it rocked over a rough patch of ground. 
She stared ahead, watching Richard walking through 
the glaring light of the wasteland. 
   "Because of me," Kahlan said in a quiet voice. 
"One of those mistakes I told you about." She let 
out a tired sigh. "One of those stabs in the dark." 
 
 
 
C       H        A        P        T        E        
R 
8 
 
 
    Richard squatted down, resting his forearms 
across his thighs as he studied the curious patch 
of rock. His head was pounding with pain; he was 
doing his best to ignore it. The headache had come 
and gone seemingly without reason. At times he had 
begun to think that it just might be the heat after 
all, and not the gift. 
   As he considered the signs on the ground, he 
forgot about his headache. 
   Something about the rock seemed familiar. Not 
simply familiar, but unsettlingly familiar. 
   Hooves partially covered by long wisps of wiry 
brown hair came to an expectant halt beside him. 
With the top of her head, Betty gently butted his 
shoulder, hoping for a snack, or at least a 
scratch. 
   Richard looked up at the goat's intent, floppy-
eared expression. As Betty watched him watching 
her, her tail went into a blur of wagging. Richard 
smiled and scratched behind her ears. Betty bleated 
her pleasure at the scratch, but it sounded to him 
like she would have preferred a snack. 
   After not eating for two days as she lay in 

misery in the wagon, the goat seemed to come back 
to life and begin to recover from the loss of her 
two kids. Along with her appetite, Betty's 
curiosity had returned. She especially enjoyed 
scouting with Richard, when he would let hercome 
along. It made Jennsen laugh to watch the goat 
trotting after him like a puppy. Maybe what really 
made her laugh was that Betty was getting back to 
her old self. 
   In recent days the land had changed, too. They 
had begun to see the return of life. At first, it 
had simply been the rusty discoloration of lichen 
growing on the fragmented rock. Soon after, they 
spotted a small thorny bush growing in a low place. 
Now the rugged plants grew at widely spaced 
intervals, dotting the landscape. Betty appreciated 
the tough bushes, dining on them as if they were 
the finest salad greens. On occasion the horses 
sampled the brush, then turned away, never finding 
it to their liking. 
   Lichen that had begun to grow on the rock 
appeared as crusty splotches streaked with color. 
In some places it was dark, thick, and leathery, 
while in other spots it was no more than what 
almost appeared to be a coat of thin green paint. 
The greenish discoloration filled cracks and 
crevasses and coated the underside of stones where 
the sun didn't bleach it out. Rocks sticking 
partway out of the crumbly ground could be pulled 
up to reveal thin tendrils of dark brown 
subterranean fungal growth. 
   Tiny insects with long feelers skittered from 
rock to rock or hid in holes in the scattering of 
rocks lying about on the ground that looked as if 
they had once been boiling and bubbling, and had 
suddenly turned to stone, leaving the bubbles 
forever set in place. An occasional glossy green 
beetle, bearing wide pincer jaws, waddled through 
the sand. Small red ants stacked steep ruddy mounds 
of dirt around their holes. There were cottony webs 

of spiders in the crotches of the isolated, small, 
spindly brush growing sporadically across the ever 
rising plain. Slender light green lizards sat on 
rocks basking in the sun, watching the people pass. 
If they came too close, the little creatures, 
lightning quick, darted for cover. 
   The signs of life Richard had so far seen were 
still a long way from being anything substantial 
enough to support people, but it was at least a 
relief to once again feel like he was rejoining the 
world of the living. He knew, too, that up beyond 
the first wall of mountains they would at last 
encounter life in abundance. He also knew that 
there they would again begin to encounter people. 
   Birds, as well, were just beginning to become a 
common sight. Most were small—strawberry-colored 
finches, ash-colored gnatcatchers, rock wrens and 
black-throated sparrows. In the distance Richard 
saw single birds winging through the blue sky, 
while sparrows congregated in small skittish 
flocks. Here and there, birds lit on the scraggly 
brush, flitting about looking for seeds and bugs. 
The birds disappeared instantly whenever the races 
glided into sight. 
   Staring at the expanse of rock and open ground 
before him, Richard rose up, startled, as the 
reason it looked unsettlingly familiar came to him. 
At the same time as the realization came to him, 
his headache vanished. 
   Off to his right, Richard saw Kahlan, with Cara 
at her side, making their way out to where Richard 
stood staring down at the astonishing stretch of 
rock. The wagon, with Tom, Friedrich, and Jennsen, 
rumbled on in the distance to the south. The dust 
raised by the wagon and horses hung in the dead air 
and could be seen for miles. Richard supposed that 
with the races periodically paying them a visit, 
the telltale of the dust didn't much matter. Still, 
he would be glad when they reached ground where 
they could at least have a chance to try to remain 

a little more inconspicuous. 
   "Find anything interesting?" Kahlan asked as she 
wiped her sleeve across her forehead. 
   Richard cast a few small pebbles down at the 
stretch of rock he'd been studying. "Tell me what 
you think of that." 
"I think you look like you feel better," Kahlan 
said. 
   Her eyes on his, she gave him her special smile, 
the smile she gave no one but him. He couldn't help 
grinning. 
   Cara, ignoring the smiles that passed between 
Richard and Kahlan, leaned in for a gander. "I 
think Lord Rahl has been looking at too many rocks. 
This is more rock, just like all the rest." 
   "Is it?" Richard asked. He gestured at the area 
he'd been scrutinizing and then pointed at another 
place by where Kahlan and Cara stood. "Is it the 
same as that?" 
   Cara peered at both areas briefly before she 
folded her arms. "The rock over there that you've 
been looking at is just a paler brown, that's all." 
   Kahlan shrugged. "I think she's right, Richard. 
It looks like the same kind of rock, maybe just a 
little more of a tan color." She thought it over a 
moment as she scanned the ground, then added to her 
assessment. "I guess it looks more like the rock 
we've been walking across for days until we started 
encountering a little bit of grass and brush." 
   Richard put his hands on his hips as he stared 
back at the remarkable stretch of rock he'd found. 
"Tell me, then, what characterized the rock in the 
place where we were before—a few days ago, back 
closer to the Pillars of Creation?" 
   Kahlan looked over at an expressionless Cara and 
then frowned at Richard. "Characterized it? 
Nothing. It was a dead place. Nothing grew there." 
   Richard waved his hand around, indicating the 
land through which they were now traveling. "And 
this?" 

   "Now things are growing," Cara said, becoming 
increasingly disinterested in his study of flora 
and fauna. 
Richard held a hand out. "And there?" 
   "Nothing is growing there, yet," Cara said in an 
exasperated sigh. "There are a lot of spots around 
where nothing is growing yet. It's still a 
wasteland. Just have patience, Lord Rahl, and we 
will soon enough be back among the fields and 
forests." 
   Kahlan wasn't paying attention to what Cara was 
saying; she was frowning as she leaned closer. 
   "The place where things begin to grow seems to 
start all at once," Kahlan said, almost to herself. 
"Isn't that curious." 
"I certainly think so," Richard said. 
"I think Lord Rahl needs to drink more water," Cara 
sniped. 
   Richard smiled. "Here. Stand over here," he told 
her. "Stand over by me and look again." 
   Cara, her curiosity aroused, did as he asked. 
She looked down at the ground, and then frowned at 
the places where things grew. 
   "The Mother Confessor is right." Cara's voice 
had taken on a decidedly businesslike tone. "Do you 
think it's important? Or somehow a danger?" 
"Yes—to the first, anyway," Richard said. 
He squatted down beside Kahlan. "Now, look at 
this." 
As Kahlan and Cara knelt down beside him, leaning 
forward, looking closely at the rock, Richard had 
to push a curious Betty back out of the way. He 
then pointed out a patch of yellow-streaked lichen. 
   "Look here," he said. "See this medallion of 
lichen? It's lopsided. This side is round, but this 
side, near where nothing grows, is flatter." 
   Kahlan looked up at him. "Lichen grows on rocks 
in all kinds of shapes." 
   "Yes, but look at how the rock over where there 
is lichen and brush growing is spotted all over 

with little bits of growth. Here, beyond the 
stunted side of the lichen, there is nearly 
nothing. The rock almost looks scoured clean. 
   "If you look closely there are a few tiny 
things, things that have started to grow only in 
the last couple of years, but they have yet to 
really begin to take hold." 
   "Yes," Kahlan said in a cautious drawl, "it is 
odd, but I'm not sure what you're getting at." 
"Look at where things are growing, and where they 
aren't." 
   "Well, yes, on that side there's nothing 
growing, and over here there is." 
   "Don't just look down." Richard lifted her chin. 
"Look out at the boundary between the two—look at 
the whole pattern." 
   Kahlan frowned off into the distance. All of a 
sudden, the color drained from her face. 
"Dear spirits ..." she whispered. 
Richard smiled that she finally saw what he was 
talking about. 
"What are you two mooning over?" Cara complained. 
   Richard put his hand behind Cara's neck and 
pulled her head in to look at what he and Kahlan 
were seeing. 
   "That's odd," she said, squinting off into the 
distance. "The place where things are growing seem 
to stop in a comparatively clean line— like someone 
had made an invisible fence running east." 
"Right," Richard said as he got up, brushing his 
hands clean. 
   "Now, come on." He started walking north. Kahlan 
and Cara scrambled to their feet and followed 
behind as he marched across the lifeless rock. 
Betty bleated and trotted after them. 
"Where are we going?" Cara asked as she caught up 
with him 
"Just come on," Richard told her. 
   For half an hour they followed his brisk pace as 
he headed in a straight line to the north, across 

rocky ground and gravelly patches where nothing at 
all grew. The day was sweltering, but Richard 
almost didn't notice the heat, so focused was he on 
the lifeless expanse they were crossing. He hadn't 
yet gone to see what lay at the other side, but he 
was convinced of what they would find once they 
reached it. 
   The other two were sweating profusely as they 
chased behind him. Betty bleated occasionally as 
she brought up the rear. 
   When they finally reached the place he was 
looking for, the place where lichen and scraggly 
brush once again began to appear, he brought them 
to a halt. Betty poked her head between Kahlan and 
Cara for a look. 
"Now, look at this," Richard said. "See what I 
mean?" 
   Kahlan was breathing hard from the brisk walk in 
the heat. She pulled her waterskin off her shoulder 
and gulped water. She passed the waterskin to 
Richard. He watched Cara study the patch of ground 
as he drank. 
   "The growing things start again over here," Cara 
said. She absently scratched behind Betty's ears 
when the goat rubbed the top of her head 
impatiently against Cara's thigh. "They start to 
appear in the same kind of line as the other side, 
back there, where we were." 
   "Right," Richard said, handing Cara the 
waterskin. "Now, follow me." 
Cara threw up her arms. "We just came from that 
way!" 
"Come on," Richard called back over his shoulder. 
   He headed south again, back toward the center of 
the lifeless patch of rock, the small group in tow. 
Betty bleated her displeasure at the pace of the 
hot dusty excursion. If Kahlan or Cara shared 
Betty's opinion, they didn't voice the complaint. 
   When Richard judged they were back somewhere in 
the middle, he stood with his feet spread, his 

fists on his hips, and looked east again. From 
where they stood, they couldn't make out the sides 
of the lifeless stretch, the places where growth 
began. 
   Looking to the east, though, the pattern was 
evident. A clearly defined strip—miles wide—ran off 
into the distance. 
   Nothing grew within the bounds of the straight 
strip of lifeless desert, whether going over rock 
or sandy ground. To either side the ground with 
widely spaced brush and lichen growing on the rock 
was darker. The place where nothing grew was a 
lighter tan. In the distance the discrepancy in the 
color was even more apparent. 
   The lifeless strip ran straight for mile after 
mile toward the far mountains, gradually becoming 
but a faint line following the rise of the ground 
until, finally, in the hazy distance, it could no 
longer be seen. 
   "Are you thinking what I'm thinking?" Kahlan 
asked in a low, troubled voice. 
"What?" Cara asked. "What are you thinking?" 
   Richard studied the confused concern on the 
Mord-Sith's face. "What kept Darken Rahl's armies 
in D'Hara? What prevented him, for so many years, 
from invading the Midlands and taking it, even 
though he wanted it?" 
   "He couldn't cross the boundary," Cara said as 
if he must be having heat stroke. 
"And what made up the boundary?" 
   At last, Cara's face, framed by the black desert 
garb, went white, too. "The boundary was the 
underworld?" 
   Richard nodded. "It was like a rip in the veil, 
where the underworld existed in this world. Zedd 
told us about it. He put the boundary up with a 
spell he found in the Keep—a spell from those 
ancient times of the great war. Once up, the 
boundary was a place in this world where the world 
of the dead also existed. In that place, where both 

worlds touched, nothing could grow." 
   "But are you so sure things wouldn't still grow 
there?" Cara asked. "It was still our world, after 
all—the world of life." 
   "It would be impossible for anything to grow 
there. The world of life was there, in that spot—
the ground was there—but life couldn't exist there 
on that ground because it shared that same space 
with the world of the dead. Anything there would be 
touched by death." 
   Cara looked out at the straight, lifeless strip 
running off into the wavering distance. "So you 
think what? . . . This is a boundary?" 
"Was."  
Cara looked from his face, to Kahlan, and again out 
to the distance. "Dividing what?" 
   Overhead a flight of black-tipped races came 
into sight, riding the high currents, turning lazy 
circles as they watched. 
"I don't know," Richard admitted. 
   He looked west again, back down the gradual 
slope running away from the mountains, back to 
where they had been. 
   "But look," Richard said, gesturing out into the 
burning wasteland from where they had come. "It 
runs back toward the Pillars of Creation." 
   As the things growing thinned and eventually 
ceased to be back that way, so too did the lifeless 
strip. It became indistinguishable from the 
surrounding wasteland because there was no life to 
mark where the line had been. 
   "There's no telling how far it runs. For all I 
know," Richard said, "it's possible that it runs 
all the way back to the valley itself." 
   "That part makes no sense to me," Kahlan said. 
"I can see what you mean about it maybe being like 
the boundaries up in the New World, the boundaries 
between Westland, the Midlands, and D'Hara. That 
much I follow. But the spirits take me, I don't get 
why it would run to the Pillars of Creation. That 

part just strikes me as more than odd." 
   Richard turned and gazed back to the east, where 
they were headed, to the rumpled gray wall of 
mountains rising steeply up from the broad desert 
floor, studying the distant notch that sat a little 
north of where the boundary line ran toward those 
mountains. 
   He looked south, to the wagon making its way 
toward those mountains. 
   "We better catch up with the others," Richard 
finally said. "I need to get back to translating 
the book." 
    
    
    
 
CHAPTER 9 
 
 
 
The spectral spires around Richard glowed under the 
lingering caress of the low sun. In the amber 
light, as he scouted the forsaken brink of the 
towering mountains beyond, long pools of shadow 
were darkening to the blue-black color of bruises.  
The pinnacles of reddish rock stood like stony 
guardians along the lower reaches of the desolate 
foothills, as if listening for the echoing crunch 
of his footsteps along the meandering gravel beds. 
   Richard had felt like being alone to think, so 
he had set out to scout by himself. It was hard to 
think when people were constantly asking questions. 
   He was frustrated that the book hadn't yet told 
him anything that would in any way help explain the 
presence of the strange boundary line, much less 
the connection of the book's title, the place 
called the Pillars of Creation, and those ungifted 
people like Jennsen. The book, in the beginning 
that he'd so far translated, anyway, appeared 
mostly to be an historical record dealing with 

unanticipated matters involving occurrences of 
"pillars of Creation," as those like Jennsen were 
called, and the unsuccessful attempts at "curing" 
those "unfortunates." 
   Richard was beginning to get the clear sense 
that the book was laying a careful foundation of 
early details in preparation for something 
calamitous. The nearly quaking care of the 
recounting of every possible course of action that 
had been investigated gave him the feeling that 
whoever wrote the book was being painstaking for 
reasons of consequence. 
   Not daring to slow their pace, Richard had been 
translating while riding in the wagon. The dialect 
was slightly different from the High D'Haran he was 
used to reading, so working out the translation was 
slow going, especially sitting in the back of the 
bouncing wagon. He had no way of knowing if the 
book would eventually offer any answers, but he 
felt a gnawing worry over what the unfolding 
account was working up to. He would have jumped 
ahead, but he'd learned in the past that doing so 
often wasted more time than it saved, since it 
interfered with accurately grasping the whole 
picture, which sometimes led to dangerously 
erroneous conclusions. He would just have to keep 
at it. 
   After working all day, focused intently on the 
book, he'd ended up with a fierce headache. He'd 
had days without them, but now when they came it 
seemed they were worse each time. He didn't tell 
Kahlan how concerned he was that he wouldn't make 
it to the sliph's well in Tanimura. Besides working 
at translating, he racked his brain trying to find 
a solution. 
   While he had no idea what the key to the 
headaches brought on by the gift was, he had the 
nagging feeling that it was within himself. He 
feared it was a matter of balance he was failing to 
see. He had even resorted when out alone, once, to 

sitting and meditating as the Sisters had once 
taught him in order to try to focus on the gift 
within. It had been to no avail. 
   It would be dark soon and they would need to 
stop for the night. Since the terrain had changed, 
it was no longer a simple task to see if the area 
all around them was clear. Now there were places 
where an army could lie in wait. With the races 
shadowing them, there was no telling who might know 
where to find them. Besides simply wanting a break 
to think about what he'd read and what he might 
find within himself to answer the problem of his 
headaches, Richard wanted to check the surrounding 
area himself. 
   Richard paused for a moment to watch a family of 
quail, the juveniles fully grown, hurry across an 
open patch of ground. They trotted across the 
exposed gravel in a line while the father, perched 
atop a rock, stood lookout. As soon as they melted 
into the brush, they were again invisible. 
   Small scraggly pine trees dotted the sweep of 
irregular hills, gullies, and rocky outcroppings at 
the fringe of the mountains. Up higher, on the 
nearby slopes, larger conifers grew in greater 
abundance. In low, sheltered places clumps of brush 
lay in thick clusters. Thin grasses covered some of 
the open ground. 
   Richard wiped sweat from his eyes. He hoped that 
with the sun going down the air might cool a 
little. As he made his way along the concealment of 
the base of a runoff channel in a fold of two 
hills, he reached for the strap of his waterskin, 
about to take a long drink, when movement on a far 
hillside caught his attention. 
   He slipped behind the screen of a long shelf of 
rock to stay out of sight. Taking a careful peek, 
he saw a man making his way down the loose scree on 
the side of the hill. The sound of the rock 
crunching underfoot and sliding down the slope sent 
a distant echo through the rocky canyons. 

   Richard had expected that as they left the 
forbidding wasteland they might at any time begin 
encountering people, so he had had everyone change 
out of the black outfits of the nomadic desert 
people and back into their unassuming traveling 
clothes. While he was in black trousers and simple 
shirt, his sword was hardly inconspicuous. Kahlan, 
as well, had put on simple clothes that were more 
in keeping with the impoverished people of the Old 
World, but on Kahlan they didn't seem to make much 
difference; it was hard to hide her figure and her 
hair, but most of all her presence. Once those 
green eyes of hers fixed on people, they usually 
had an urge to drop to a knee and bow their head. 
Her clothes made little difference. 
   No doubt Emperor Jagang had spread their 
description far and wide and had offered a reward 
large enough that even his enemies would find it 
hard to resist. For many in the Old World, though, 
the price of continued life under the brutal rule 
of the Imperial Order was too high. Despite the 
reward, there were many who hungered to live free 
and were willing to act to gain that goal. 
   There was also the problem of the bond the Lord 
Rahl had with the D'Haran people; through that 
ancient bond forged by Richard's ancestors, 
D'Harans could sense where the Lord Rahl was. The 
Imperial Order could discover where Richard was by 
that bond, too. All they had to do was torture the 
information out of a D'Haran. If one person failed 
to talk under torture, they would not be shy about 
trying others until they learned what they wanted. 
   As Richard watched, the lone man, once he 
reached the bottom of the hill, made his way along 
the gravel beds lining the bottom of the rocky 
gullies. Off to Richard's right the wagon and 
horses were lifting a long trail of dust. That was 
where the man seemed to be headed. 
   At such a distance it was hard to tell for sure, 
but Richard doubted that the man was a soldier. He 

wouldn't likely be a scout, not in his own 
homeland, and they weren't near the hotbeds of the 
revolt against the rule of the Imperial Order. 
Richard didn't think there would be any reason for 
soldiers to be going this way, through such 
uninhabited areas. That was, after all, why he had 
picked this route, heading east to the shadow of 
the mountains before turning to a more northerly 
route back to where they had been. 
   There was also the possibility that the bond had 
inadvertently revealed Richard's whereabouts and an 
army was out looking for him. If the man was a 
soldier, there could shortly be many more, like 
ants, swarming down out of the hills. 
   Richard climbed the back side of a short rocky 
prominence and lay on his stomach, watching over 
the top. As the man got closer, Richard could see 
that he looked young, under thirty years, a bit 
scrawny, and was dressed nothing at all like a 
soldier. By the way he stumbled, he was not used to 
the terrain, or maybe just not used to traveling. 
It was tiring walking over ground of loose, sharp, 
broken rock, especially if it was on a slope, since 
it never provided any solid place for a steady 
stride. 
   The man stopped, stretching his neck to peer at 
the wagon. Panting from the effort of making it 
down the slope, he combed his fine blond hair back 
repeatedly with his fingers, then bent at the waist 
and rested a hand on a knee while he caught his 
breath. 
   When the man straightened and started out once 
more, crunching through the gravel at the bottom of 
the wash, Richard slid back down the rock. He used 
the intervening lay of the land and patches of 
scraggly pine to screen himself from sight. He 
paused from time to time, as he moved closer, to 
listen for the heavy footsteps and labored 
breathing, checking his dead-reckoning estimation 
of where the man would be. 

   From behind a freestanding wall of rock a good 
sixty feet tall, Richard carefully peered out for a 
look. He had managed to close most of the distance 
without the man being aware of his presence. 
Richard moved silently from tree to rock to the 
back side of slopes, until he was out ahead of the 
man and in his line of travel. 
   Still as stone behind a twisted reddish spire of 
rock jutting from the broken ground, Richard 
listened to the crunch of footfalls approaching, 
listened to the man gulping for breath as he 
climbed over fingers of rock that lay in his way. 
   When the man was not six feet away, Richard 
stepped out right in front of him. 
   The man gasped, clutching his light travel coat 
beneath his chin as he cringed back a step. 
   Richard regarded the man without outward 
emotion, but inside the sword's power churned with 
the menace of rage restrained. For an instant, 
Richard felt the power falter. The magic of the 
sword keyed off its master's perception of danger, 
so such hesitation could be because the smaller man 
didn't appear to be an immediate threat. 
   The man's clothes, brown trousers, flaxen shirt, 
and a light, frayed fustian coat, had seen better 
days. He looked to have had a rough time of his 
journey—but then, Richard, too, had put on 
unassuming clothes in order not to raise suspicion. 
The man's backpack looked to hold precious little. 
Two waterskins, their straps crisscrossed across 
his chest, bunching the light coat, were flat and 
empty. He carried no weapons that Richard saw, not 
even a knife. 
The man waited expectantly, as if he feared to be 
the first to speak. 
   "You appear to be headed for my friends," 
Richard said, tipping his head toward the thin 
golden plume of dust hanging like a beacon in the 
sunlight above the darkening plain, giving the man 
a chance to explain himself. 

The man, wide-eyed, shoulders hunched, raked back 
his hair several times. Richard stood before him 
like a stone pillar, blocking his way. The man's 
blue eyes turned to each side, apparently checking 
to see if he had an escape route should he decide 
to bolt. 
   "I mean you no harm," Richard said. "I just want 
to know what you're up to." 
"Up to?" 
"Why you're headed for the wagon." 
   The man glanced toward the wagon, not visible 
beyond the craggy folds of rock, then down at 
Richard's sword, and finally up into his eyes. 
"I'm ... looking for help," he finally said. 
"Help?" 
   The man nodded. "Yes. I'm searching for the one 
whose craft is fighting." 
   Richard cocked his head. "You're looking for a 
soldier of some kind?" 
He swallowed at the frown on Richard's face. "Yes, 
that's right." 
   Richard shrugged. "The Imperial Order has lots 
of soldiers. I'm sure that if you keep looking you 
will come across some." 
   The man shook his head. "No. I seek the man from 
far away—from far to the north. The man who came to 
bring freedom to many of the oppressed people of 
the Old World. The man who gives us all hope that 
the Imperial Order—may the Creator forgive their 
misguided ways—will be cast out of our lives so 
that we can be at peace once again." 
"Sorry," Richard said, "I don't know anyone like 
that." 
   The man didn't look disappointed by Richard's 
words. He looked more like he simply didn't believe 
them. His fine features were pleasant-looking, even 
though he appeared unconvinced. 
   "Do you think you could"—the man hesitantly 
lifted an arm out, pointing—"at least... let me 
have a drink?" 

Richard relaxed a bit. "Sure." 
   He pulled the strap off his shoulder and tossed 
his waterskin to the man. He caught it as if it 
were precious glass he feared to drop. He pried at 
the stopper, finally getting it free, and started 
gulping the water. 
   He stopped abruptly, lowering the waterskin. 
"I'm sorry. I didn't mean to start drinking all 
your water right down." 
   "It's all right." Richard gestured for him to 
drink up. "I have more back at the wagon. You look 
to need it." 
   As Richard hooked a thumb behind his wide 
leather belt, the man bowed his head in thanks 
before tipping the waterskin up for a long drink. 
   "Where did you hear about this man who fights 
for freedom?" Richard asked. 
   The man brought the waterskin down again, his 
eyes never leaving Richard as he paused to catch 
his breath. "From many a tongue. The freedom he has 
spread down here in the Old World has brought hope 
to us all." 
   Richard smiled inwardly at how the bright hope 
of freedom burned even in a dark place like the 
heart of the Old World. There were people 
everywhere who hungered for the same things in 
life, for a chance to live their life free and by 
their own labor to better themselves. 
   Overhead a black-tipped race, wings spread wide, 
popped into sight as it glided across the open 
swath of sky above the rise of rock to each side. 
Richard didn't have his bow, but the race stayed 
out of range, anyway. 
   The man shrank at seeing the race the way a 
rabbit would shrink when it saw a hawk. 
   "Sorry I can't help you," Richard said when the 
race had disappeared. He checked behind, in the 
direction of the wagon, out beyond the nearby hill. 
"I'm traveling with my wife and family, looking for 
work, for a place to mind our own business." 

   Richard's business was the revolution, if he was 
to have a chance for his plan to work, and there 
were a number of people waiting on him in that 
regard. He had more urgent problems, first, though. 
"But, Lord Rahl, my people need—" 
Richard spun back around. "Why would you call me 
that?" 
"I'm, I'm sorry." The man swallowed. "I didn't mean 
to anger you." 
"What makes you think I'm this Lord Rahl?" 
The man painted his hand up and down in front of 
Richard as he sputtered, trying to find words. 
"You, you, you just... are. I can't imagine ... 
what else you want me to say. I'm sorry if I have 
offended you by being so forward, Lord Rahl." 
Cara stalked out from behind a rocky spire. "What 
have we here?" 
   The man gasped in surprise at seeing her as he 
flinched back yet another step, clutching the 
waterskin to his chest as if it were a shield of 
steel. 
   Tom, his silver knife to hand, stepped up out of 
a gully behind the man, blocking the way should the 
man decide to run back the way he'd come. 
   The man turned in a circle to see Tom towering 
behind. As he finally came back around and saw 
Kahlan standing beside Richard, he let out another 
gasp. They all were wearing dusty traveling 
clothes, but somehow Richard didn't suppose that at 
that moment they looked at all like simple 
travelers in search of work. 
"Please," the man said, "I don't mean any harm." 
   "Take it easy," Richard said as he stole a 
sidelong glance at Cara— his words meant not only 
for the man but the Mord-Sith as well. "Are you 
alone?" Richard asked him. 
   "Yes, Lord Rahl. I'm on a mission for my people, 
just as I told you. You are of course to be 
forgiven your aggressive nature—I would expect 
nothing less. I want you to know I hold no feelings 

of resentment toward you." 
   "Why does he think you're the Lord Rahl?" Cara 
said to Richard in a tone that sounded more 
accusation than question. 
   "I've heard the descriptions," the man put in. 
Still clutching the waterskin to his chest, he 
pointed with the other hand. "And that sword. I've 
heard about Lord Rahl's sword." His gaze moved 
cautiously to Kahlan. "And the Mother Confessor, of 
course," he added, dipping his head. 
"Of course," Richard sighed. 
   He'd expected that he would have to hide the 
sword around strangers, but now he knew just how 
important that was going to be whenever they went 
into any populated areas. The sword would be 
relatively easy to hide. Not so with Kahlan. He 
thought that maybe they could cover her in rags and 
say she was a leper. 
   The man leaned cautiously out, arm extended, and 
handed Richard his waterskin. "Thank you, Lord 
Rahl." 
   Richard took a long drink of the terrible-
tasting water before offering it to Kahlan. She 
lifted hers out for him to see as she declined with 
a single shake of her head. Richard took another 
long swig before replacing the stopper and slinging 
the strap back over his shoulder. 
"What's your name?" he asked. 
"Owen." 
   "Well, Owen, why don't you come back to camp 
with us for the night. We can fill up your 
waterskins for you, at least, before you're on your 
way in the morning." 
   Cara was near to bursting as she gritted her 
teeth at Richard. "Why don't you just let me see 
to—" 
   "I think Owen has problems we can all 
understand. He's concerned for his friends and 
family. In the morning, he can be on his way, and 
we can be on ours." 

   Richard didn't want the man out there somewhere, 
in the dark, where they couldn't as easily keep an 
eye on him as they could if he were in camp. In the 
morning it would be easy enough to make sure that 
he wasn't following them. Cara finally understood 
Richard's intent and relaxed. He knew she would 
want any stranger in her sight while Richard and 
Kahlan were sleeping. 
   Kahlan at his side, Richard started back to the 
wagon. The man followed, his head swiveling side to 
side, from Tom to Cara, and back again. 
   Since they were headed back to the wagon, 
Richard finished what water remained in his 
waterskin while, behind, Owen thanked him for the 
invitation and promised not to be any trouble. 
Richard intended to see to it that Owen kept his 
promise. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 10 
 
 
 
 
 
Up in the wagon, Richard dunked Owen's two 
waterskins in the barrel that still had water. 
Owen, sitting with his back pressed against a 
wheel, glanced up at Richard from time to time, 
watching expectantly, as Cara glared at him. Cara 
clearly didn't like the fellow, but as protective 
as Mord-Sith were, that didn't necessarily mean 
that it was warranted. 
   For some reason, though, Richard didn't care for 
the man, either. It wasn't so much that he disliked 
him, just that he couldn't warm to the fellow. He 
was polite and certainly didn't look threatening, 
but there was something about the man's attitude 

that made Richard feel... edgy. 
   Tom and Friedrich broke up dried wood they'd 
collected, feeding it into the small fire. The 
wonderful aroma of pine pitch covered the smell of 
the nearby horses. 
   From time to time Owen cast a fearful eye at 
Cara, Kahlan, Tom, and Friedrich. By far, though, 
he seemed most uneasy about Jennsen. He tried to 
avert his eyes from her, tried not to look her 
directly in the eye, but his gaze kept being drawn 
to her red hair shining in the firelight. When 
Betty approached to investigate the stranger, Owen 
stopped breathing. Richard told Owen that the goat 
just wanted attention. Owen gingerly patted the top 
of Betty's head as if the goat were a gar that 
might take off his arm if he weren't careful. 
   Jennsen, with a smile and ignoring the way he 
stared at her hair, offered Owen some of her dried 
meat. 
Owen just stared wide-eyed up at her leaning down 
over him. 
   "I'm not a witch," she said to Owen. "People 
think my red hair is a sign that I'm a witch. I'm 
not. I can assure you, I have no magic." 
   The edge in her voice surprised Richard, 
reminding him that there was iron under the 
feminine grace. 
   Still wide-eyed, Owen said, "Of course not. I, 
I... just never saw such ... beautiful hair before, 
that's all." 
   "Why, thank you," Jennsen said, her smile 
returning. She again offered him a piece of dried 
meat. 
   "I'm sorry," Owen said in polite apology, "but I 
prefer not to eat meat, if it's all right with 
you." 
   He quickly reached in his pocket, bringing out a 
cloth pouch holding dried biscuit. He forced a 
smile at Jennsen as he held out the biscuits. 
"Would you like one of mine?" 

Tom started, glaring at Owen. 
   "Thanks, no," Jennsen said as she withdrew her 
extended hand and sat down on a low, flat rock. She 
snagged Betty by an ear and made her lie down at 
her feet. "You'd best eat the biscuits yourself if 
you don't want meat," she said to Owen. "I'm afraid 
we don't have a lot that isn't." 
"Why don't you eat meat?" Richard asked. 
   Owen looked up over his shoulder at Richard in 
the wagon above him. "I don't like the thought of 
harming animals just to satisfy my want of food." 
Jennsen smiled politely. "That's a kindhearted 
sentiment." 
   Owen twitched a smile before his gaze was drawn 
once again to her hair. "It's just the way I feel," 
he said, finally looking away from her. 
   "Darken Rahl felt the same way," Cara said, 
turning the glare on Jennsen. "I saw him horsewhip 
a woman to death because he caught her eating a 
sausage in the halls of the People's Palace. It 
struck him as disrespectful of his feelings." 
   Jennsen stared in astonishment. 
   "Another time," Cara went on as she chewed a 
bite of sausage, "I was with him when he came 
around a corner outside, near the gardens. He 
spotted a cavalry man atop his horse eating a meat 
pie. Darken Rahl lashed out with a flash of 
conjured lightning, beheading the man's horse in an 
instant—thump, it dropped into the hedge. The man 
managed to land on his feet as the rest of his 
horse crashed to the ground. Darken Rahl reached 
out, drew the man's sword, and in a fit of anger 
slashed the belly of the horse open. Then he seized 
the soldier by the scruff of his neck and shoved 
his face into the horse's innards, screaming at him 
to eat. The man tried his best, but ended up 
suffocated in the horse's warm viscera." 
Owen covered his mouth as he closed his eyes. 
   Cara waved her sausage as if indicating Darken 
Rahl standing before her. "He turned to me, the 

fire gone out of him, and asked me how people could 
be so cruel as to eat meat." 
Jennsen, her mouth hanging open, asked, "What did 
you say?" 
Cara shrugged. "What could I say? I told him I 
didn't know." 
   "But why would people eat meat, then, if he was 
like that?" Jennsen asked. 
   "Most of the time, he wasn't. Vendors sold meat 
at the palace and he usually paid it no mind. 
Sometimes he would shake his head in disgust, or 
call them cruel, but usually he didn't even take 
notice of it." 
   Friedrich was nodding. "That was the thing about 
the man—you never knew what he was going to do. He 
might smile at a person, or have them tortured to 
death. You never knew." 
   Cara stared into the low flames of the fire 
before her. "There was no way to reason out how he 
would react to anything." Her voice took on a 
quiet, haunted quality. "A lot of people simply 
decided that it was only a matter of time until he 
killed them, too, and so they lived their lives as 
the condemned would, waiting for the axe to fall, 
taking no pleasure in life or the thought of their 
future." 
   Tom nodded his grim agreement with Cara's 
assessment of life in D'Hara as he fed a crook of 
driftwood into the fire. 
"Is that what you did, Cara?" Jennsen asked. 
Cara looked up and scowled. "I am Mord-Sith. Mord-
Sith are always ready to embrace death. We do not 
wish to die old and toothless." 
   Owen, nibbling his dried biscuit as if out of 
obligation to eat since the rest of them were, was 
clearly shaken by the story. "I can't imagine life 
with such savagery as all of you must live. Was 
this Darken Rahl related to you, Lord Rahl?" Owen 
suddenly seemed to think he might have made a 
mistake, and rushed to amend his question. "He has 

the same name ... so I thought, well, I just 
thought—but I didn't mean to imply that I thought 
you were like him...." 
   Stepping down from the wagon, Richard handed 
Owen his full wa-terskins. "He was my father." 
   "I didn't mean anything by the question. I would 
never intentionally cast aspersions on a man's 
father, especially a man who—" 
"I killed him," Richard said. 
   Richard didn't feel like elaborating. He 
recoiled from the very thought of going into the 
whole dreadful tale. 
Owen gaped around as if he were a fawn surrounded 
by wolves. 
   "He was a monster," Cara said, appearing to feel 
the need to rise to Richard's defense. "Now the 
people of D'Hara have a chance to look forward to a 
future of living their lives as they wish." 
   Richard sat down beside Kahlan. "At least they 
will if they can be free of the Imperial Order." 
Head down, Owen nibbled on his biscuit as he 
watched the others. 
   When no one else spoke, Kahlan did. "Why don't 
you tell us your reasons for coming here, Owen." 
   Richard recognized her tone as that of the 
Mother Confessor asking a polite question meant to 
put a frightened petitioner at ease. 
He dipped his head respectfully. "Yes, Mother 
Confessor." 
"You know her, too?" Richard asked. 
Owen nodded. "Yes, Lord Rahl." 
"How?" 
The man's gaze shifted from Richard to Kahlan and 
back again. 
   "Word of you and the Mother Confessor has spread 
everywhere. Word of the way you freed the people of 
Altur'Rang from the oppression of the Imperial 
Order is known far and wide. Those who want freedom 
know that you are the one who gives it." 
   Richard frowned. "What do you mean, I'm the one 

who gives it?" 
   "Well, before, the Imperial Order ruled. They 
are brutal—forgive me, they are misguided and don't 
know any better. That is why their rule is so 
brutal. Perhaps it isn't their fault. It is not for 
me to say." Owen looked away as he tried to come up 
with words while apparently seeing his own visions 
of what the Imperial Order had done to convince him 
of their brutality. "Then you came and gave people 
freedom—just as you did in Altur'Rang." 
   Richard wiped a hand across his face. He needed 
to translate the book, he needed to find out what 
was behind the thing Cara had touched and the 
black-tipped races following them, he needed to get 
back to Victor and those who were engaged in the 
revolt against the Order, he was past due to meet 
Nicci, and he needed to deal with his headaches. At 
least, maybe Nicci could help with that much of it. 
"Owen, I don't 'give' people freedom." 
"Yes, Lord Rahl." 
   Owen evidently took Richard's words as something 
he dared not argue with, but his eyes clearly said 
that he didn't believe it. 
   "Owen, what do you mean when you say that you 
think I give people freedom?" 
   Owen took a tiny bite of his biscuit as he 
glanced around at the others. He squirmed his 
shoulders in a self-conscious shrug. Finally, he 
cleared his throat. 
   "Well, you, you do what the Imperial Order does—
you kill people." He waved his biscuit awkwardly, 
as if it were a sword, stabbing the air. "You kill 
those who enslave people, and then you give the 
people who were enslaved their freedom so that 
peace can return." 
   Richard took a deep breath. He wasn't sure if 
Owen meant it the way it came out, or if it was 
just that he was having difficulty explaining 
himself in front of people who made him nervous. 
"That's not exactly the way it is," Richard said. 

   "But that's why you came down here. Everyone 
knows it. You came down here to the Old World to 
give people freedom." 
   Elbows on his knees, Richard leaned forward 
rubbing his palms together as he thought about how 
much he wanted to explain. He felt a wave of 
calmness when Kahlan draped a gentle, comforting 
hand over the back of his shoulder. He didn't want 
to go into the horror of how he had been taken 
prisoner and taken from Kahlan, thinking he would 
never see her again. 
   Richard put the whole weight of emotion over 
that long ordeal aside and took another approach. 
"Owen, I'm from up in the New World—" 
   "Yes, I know," Owen said as he nodded. "And you 
came here to free people from—" 
   "No. That's not the truth of it. We lived in the 
New World. We were once at peace, apparently much 
like your people were. Emperor Ja-gang—" 
"The dream walker." 
   "Yes, Emperor Jagang, the dream walker, sent his 
armies to conquer the New World, to enslave our 
people—" 
"My people, too." 
   Richard nodded. "I understand. I know what a 
horror that is. His soldiers are rampaging up 
through the New World, murdering, enslaving our 
people." 
   Owen turned his watery gaze off into the 
darkness as he nodded. "My people, too." 
   "We tried to fight back," Kahlan told him. "But 
there are too many. Their army is far too vast for 
us to drive them out of our land." 
   Owen nibbled his biscuit again, not meeting her 
gaze. "My people are terrified of the men of the 
Order—may the Creator forgive their misguided 
ways." 
   "May they scream in agony for all eternity in 
the darkest shadow of the Keeper of the 
underworld," Cara said in merciless correction. 

Owen stared slack-jawed at such a curse spoken 
aloud. 
   "We couldn't fight them like that—simply drive 
them back to the Old World," Richard said, bringing 
Owen's gaze back to him as he went on with the 
story. "So I'm down here, in Jagang's homeland, 
helping people who hunger to be free to cast off 
the shackles of the Order. While he's away 
conquering our land, he has left his own homeland 
open to those who hunger for freedom. With Jagang 
and his armies away, that gives us a chance to 
strike at Jagang's soft underbelly, to do him 
meaningful harm. 
   "I'm doing this because it's the only way we can 
fight back against the Imperial Order—our only 
means to succeed. If I weaken his foundation, his 
source of men and support, then he will have to 
withdraw his army from our land and return south to 
defend his own. 
   "Tyranny cannot endure forever. By its very 
nature it rots everything it rules, including 
itself. But that can take lifetimes. I'm trying to 
accelerate that process so that I and those I love 
can be free in our lifetimes—free to live our own 
lives. If enough people rise up against the 
Imperial Order's rule, it may even loosen Jagang's 
grip on power and bring him and the Order down. 
   "That's how I'm fighting him, how I'm trying to 
defeat him, how I'm trying to get him out of my 
land." 
   Owen nodded. 'This is what we need, too. We are 
victims of fate. We need for you to come and get 
his men out of our land, and then to withdraw your 
sword, your ways, from our people so we may live in 
tranquillity again. We need you to give us 
freedom." 
   The driftwood popped, sending a glowing swirl of 
sparks skyward. Richard, hanging his head, tapped 
his fingertips together. He didn't think the man 
had heard a word he'd said. They needed rest. He 

needed to translate the book. They needed to get to 
where they were going. At least he didn't have a 
headache. 
   "Owen, I'm sorry," he finally said in a quiet 
voice. "I can't help you in so direct a manner. But 
I would like you to understand that my cause is to 
your advantage, too, and that what I'm doing will 
also cause Jagang to eventually pull his troops out 
of your homeland as well, or at least weaken their 
presence so that you can throw them out 
yourselves." 
   "No," Owen said. "His men will not leave my land 
until you come and .. ." Owen winced. "And destroy 
them." 
The very word, the implication, looked sickening to 
the man. 
   "Tomorrow," Richard said, no longer bothering to 
try to sound polite, "we have to be on our way. You 
will have to be on your way as well. I wish you 
success in ridding your people of the Imperial 
Order." 
   "We cannot do such a thing," Owen protested. He 
sat up straighten "We are not savages. You and 
those like you—the unenlightened ones—it is up to 
you to do it and give us freedom, I am the only one 
who can bring you. You must come and do as your 
kind does. You must give our empire freedom." 
   Richard rubbed his fingertips across the furrows 
of his brow. Cara started to rise. A look from 
Richard sat her back down. 
   "I gave you water," Richard said as he stood. "I 
can't give you freedom." 
"But you must—" 
   "Double watch tonight," Richard said as he 
turned to Cara, cutting Owen off. 
   Cara nodded once as her mouth twisted with a 
satisfied smile of iron determination. 
"In the morning," Richard added, "Owen will be on 
his way." 
   "Yes," she said, her blue-eyed glare sliding to 

Owen, "he certainly will be." 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 11 
 
 
 
 
What is it?" Kahlan asked as she rode up beside the 
wagon. 
   Richard looked to be furious about something. 
She saw then that he had the book in one hand; his 
other was a fist. He opened his mouth, about to 
speak, but when Jennsen, up on the seat beside Tom, 
turned back to see what was going on, Richard said 
to her instead, "Kahlan and I are going to check 
the road up ahead. Keep your eye on Betty so she 
doesn't jump out, will you, Jenn?" 
Jennsen smiled at him and nodded. 
   "If Betty gives you any trouble," Tom said, 
"just let me know and I'll take her to a lady I 
know and have some goat sausages made up." 
   Jennsen grinned at their private joke and gave 
Tom a good-natured elbow in his ribs. As Richard 
climbed over the side of the wagon and dropped to 
the ground, she snapped her fingers at the tail-
wagging goat. 
   "Betty! You just stay there. Richard doesn't 
need you tagging along every single time." 
   Betty, front hooves on the chafing rail, bleated 
as she looked up at Jennsen, as if asking for her 
to reconsider. 
"Down," Jennsen said in admonishment. "Lie down." 
   Betty bleated and reluctantly hopped back down 
into the wagon bed, but she would settle for no 
less than a scratch behind the ears as consolation 
before she would lie down. 
   Kahlan leaned over from her seat in the saddle 

and untied the reins to Richard's horse from the 
back of the wagon. He stepped into the stirrup and 
gracefully swung up in one fluid motion. She could 
see that he was agitated about something, but it 
made her heart sing just to look at him. 
   He shifted his weight forward slightly, urging 
his horse ahead. Kahlan squeezed her legs to the 
side of her own horse to spur her into a canter to 
keep up with Richard. He rode out ahead, rounding 
several turns in the flatter land among the rough 
hillsides, until he caught up with Cara and 
Friedrich, patrolling out in the lead. 
   "We're going to check out front for a while," he 
told them. "Why don't you fall back and check 
behind." 
   Kahlan knew that Richard was sending them to the 
back because if he took Kahlan to the back under 
the pretense of watching anything that might come 
up on them from behind, Cara would keep falling 
back to check on them. If they were out front, Cara 
wouldn't worry about them dropping back and getting 
lost. 
   Cara laid her reins over and turned back. Sweat 
stuck Kahlan's shirt to her back as she leaned over 
her horse's withers, urging her ahead as Richard's 
horse sprang away. Despite the clumps of tall grass 
dotting the foothills and occasional sparse patches 
of woods, the heat was still with them. It cooled 
some at night, now, but the days were hot, with the 
humidity increasing as the clouds built up against 
the wall of mountains to their right. 
   Up close, the barrier of rugged mountains to the 
east was an intimidating sight. Sheer rock walls 
rose up below projecting plateaus heaped to their 
very edge with loose rock crumbled from yet higher 
plateaus and walls, as if the entire range was all 
gradually crumbling. With drops of thousands of 
feet at the fringe of overhanging shelves of rock, 
climbing such unstable scree would be impossible. 
If there were passes through the arid slopes, they 

were no doubt few and would prove difficult. 
   But making it past those gray mountains of 
scorching rock, they could now see, was hardly the 
biggest problem. 
   Those closer mountains spreading north and south 
in the burning heat at the edge of the desert 
partially hid what lay to the other side—a far more 
daunting range of snowcapped peaks rising up to 
completely block any passage east. Those imposing 
mountains were beyond the scale of any Kahlan had 
ever seen. Not even the most rugged of the 
Rang'Shada Mountains in the Midlands were their 
match. These mountains were like a race of giants. 
Precipitous walls of rock soared thousands of feet 
straight up. Harrowing slopes rose unbroken by any 
pass or rift and were so arduous that few trees 
could find a foothold. Lofty snow-packed peaks that 
ascended majestically above windswept clouds were 
jammed so close together that it reminded her more 
of a knife's long jagged edge than separate 
summits. 
   The day before, when Kahlan had seen Richard 
studying those imposing mountains, she had asked 
him if he thought there was any way across them. He 
had said no, that the only way he could see to get 
beyond was possibly the notch he'd spotted before, 
when he had found the place where the strange 
boundary had once been, and that notch still lay 
some distance north. 
   For now, they skirted the dry side of the closer 
mountains as that range made its way north along 
the more easily traversed lowlands. 
   Along the base of a gentle hill covered in 
clumps of brown grasses, Richard finally slowed his 
horse. He turned in his saddle, checking that the 
others were still coming, if a goodly distance 
behind. 
He pulled his horse close beside her. "I skipped 
ahead in the book." 
   Kahlan didn't like the sound of that. "When I 

asked you before why you didn't skip ahead, you 
said that it wasn't a wise thing to do.'\ 
   "I know, but I wasn't really getting anywhere 
and we need answers^ As their horses settled into a 
comfortable walk, Richard rubbed his shoulders. 
"After all that heat I can't believe how cold it's 
getting." 
"Cold? What are you—" 
   "You know those rare people like Jennsen?" The 
leather of his saddle squeaked as he leaned toward 
her. "Ones born pristinely ungifted— without even 
that tiny spark of the gift? The pillars of 
Creation? Well, back when this book was written, 
they weren't so rare." 
"You mean it was more common for them to be born?" 
   "No, the ones who had been born began to grow 
up, get married, and have children—ungifted 
children." 
   Kahlan looked over in surprise. "The broken 
links in the chain of the gift that you were 
talking about, before?" 
   Richard nodded. "They were children of the Lord 
Rahl. Back then, it wasn't like it has been in 
recent times with Darken Rahl, or his father. From 
what I can tell, all the children of the Lord Rahl 
and his wife were part of his family, and treated 
as such, even though they were born with this 
problem. It seems that the wizards tried to help 
them— both the direct offspring, and then their 
children, and their children. They tried to cure 
them." 
"Cure them? Cure them of what?" 
   Richard lifted his arms in a heated gesture of 
frustration. "Of being born ungifted—of being born 
without even that tiny spark of the gift like 
everyone else has. The wizards back then tried to 
restore the breaks in the link." 
   "How did they think they would be able to cure 
someone of not having even the spark of the gift?" 
   Richard pressed his lips together as he thought 

of a way to explain it_"Well, you know the wizards 
who sent you across the boundary to find Zedd?" 
"Yes," Kahlan said in a suspicious drawl. 
   "They weren't born with the gift—born wizards, 
that is. What were they—second or third wizards? 
Something like that? You told me about them, once." 
He snapped his fingers as it came to him. "Wizards 
of the third Order. Right?" 
   "Yes. Just one, Giller, was the Second Order. 
None were able to pass the tests to be a wizard of 
the First Order, like Zedd, because they didn't 
have the gift. Being wizards was their calling, but 
they weren't gifted in the conventional sense—but 
they still had that spark of the gift that everyone 
has." 
   "That's what I'm talking about," Richard said. 
"They weren't born with the gift to be wizards—just 
the spark of it like everyone else. Yet Zedd 
somehow trained them to be able to use magic—to be 
wizards— even though they weren't born that way, 
born with the gift to be wizards." 
"Richard, that was a lifetime of work." 
"I know, but the point is that Zedd was able to 
help them to be wizards—at least wizards enough to 
pass his tests and conjure magic." 
   "Yes, I suppose. When I was young they taught me 
about the workings of magic and the Wizard's Keep, 
about those people and creatures in the Midlands 
with magic. They may not have been born with the 
gift, but they had worked a lifetime to become 
wizards. They were wizards," she insisted. 
   Richard's mouth turned up with the kind of smile 
that told her that she had just framed the essence 
of his argument for him. "But they had not been 
born with that aspect, that attribute, of the 
gift." He leaned toward her. "Zedd, besides 
training them, must have used magic to help them 
become wizards, right?" 
   Kahlan frowned at the thought. "I don't know. 
They never told me about their training to become 

wizards. That was never germane to their 
relationship with me or my training." 
   "But Zedd has Additive Magic," Richard pressed. 
"Additive can change things, add to them, make them 
more than they are." 
"All right," Kahlan cautiously agreed. "What's the 
point?" 
   "The point is that Zedd took people who weren't 
born with the gift to be wizards and he trained 
them but—more importantly—he must have also used 
his power to help them along that path by altering 
how they were born. He had to have added to their 
gift to make them more than they were born to be." 
Richard glanced over at her as his horse stepped 
around a small, scraggly pine. "He altered people 
with magic." 
   Kahlan let out a deep breath as she looked away 
from Richard and ahead at the gentle spread of 
grassy hills to either side of them, as she tried 
to fully grasp the concept of what he was saying. 
   "I never considered that before, but all right," 
she finally said. "So, what of it?" 
   "We thought that only the wizards of old could 
do such a thing, but, apparently, it's not a lost 
art nor would it be entirely so far-fetched as I 
had imagined for the wizards back then to believe 
they could change what was, into what they thought 
it ought to be. What I'm saying is that, like what 
Zedd did to give people that with which they were 
not born, so too did the wizards of old try to give 
people born as pillars of Creation a spark of the 
gift." 
   Kahlan felt a chill of realization. The 
implication was staggering. Not just the wizards of 
old, but Zedd, too, had used magic to alter the 
very nature of people, the very nature of what they 
were, how they were born. 
   She supposed that he had only helped them to 
achieve what was their greatest ambition in life—
their calling—by enhancing what they already had 

been born with. He helped them to reach their full 
potential. But that was for men who had the innate 
potential. While the wizards of long ago probably 
had done similar things to help people, they had 
also sometimes used their power for less benevolent 
reasons. 
   "So," he said, "the wizards back then, who were 
experienced in altering people's abilities, thought 
that these people called the pillars of Creation 
could be cured." 
   "Cured of not having been born gifted," she said 
in a flat tone of incredulity. 
   "Not exactly. They weren't trying to make them 
into wizards, but they thought they could at least 
be cured of not having that infinitesimal spark of 
the gift that simply enabled them to interact with 
magic." 
Kahlan took a purging breath. "So then what 
happened?" 
   "This book was written after the great war had 
ended—after the barrier had been created and the 
Old World had been sealed away. It was written 
after the New World was at peace, or, at least, 
after the barrier kept the Old World contained. 
   "But remember what we found out before? That we 
think that during the war Wizard Ricker and his 
team had done something to halt Sub-tractive 
Magic's ability to be passed on to the offspring of 
wizards? Well, after the war, those born with the 
gift started becoming increasingly uncommon, and 
those who were being born were being born without 
the Subtractive side." 
   "So, after the war," she said, "those who were 
born with the gift of both Additive and Subtractive 
were rapidly becoming nonexistent. We already knew 
that." 
   "Right." Richard leaned toward her and lifted 
the book. "But then, when there are fewer wizards 
being born, all of a sudden the wizards 
additionally realize that they have all these 

pristinely ungifted—breaks altogether in the link 
to magic—on their hands. Suddenly, on top of the 
problem of the birth rate of those with the gift to 
be wizards dropping, they were faced with what they 
called pillars of Creation." 
   Kahlan swayed in the saddle as she thought about 
it, trying to imagine the situation at the Keep at 
the time. "I can see that they would have been 
pretty concerned." 
His voice lowered meaningfully. "They were 
desperate." 
   Kahlan laid her reins over, moving in behind 
Richard as his horse stepped around an ancient, 
fallen tree that had been bleached silver from the 
sweltering sun. 
   "So, I suppose," Kahlan asked as she walked her 
horse back up beside him, "that the wizards started 
to do the same thing Zedd did? Trained those who 
had the calling—those who wished to be wizards but 
had not been born with the gift?" 
   "Yes, but back then," Richard said, "they 
trained those with only Additive to be able to use 
the Subtractive, too, like full wizards of the 
time. As time went on, though, even that was being 
lost to them, and they were only able to do what 
Zedd did—train men to be wizards but they could 
only wield Additive Magic. 
   "But that isn't really what the book is about," 
Richard said as he gestured dismissively. "That was 
just a side point to record what they had 
attempted. They started out with confidence. They 
thought that these pillars of Creation could be 
cured of being pristinely ungifted, much like 
wizards with only Additive could be trained to use 
both sides of the magic, and those without the gift 
for wizardry could be made wizards able to use at 
least the Additive side of it." 
   The way he used his hands when he talked 
reminded her of the way Zedd did when he became 
worked up. "They tried to modify the very nature of 

how these people had been born. They tried to take 
people without any spark of the gift, and alter 
them in a desperate attempt to give them the 
ability to interact with magic. They weren't just 
adding or enhancing, they were trying to create 
something out of nothing." 
   Kahlan didn't like the sound of that. They knew 
that in those ancient times the wizards had great 
power, and they altered people with the gift, 
manipulated their gift, to suit a specific purpose. 
They created weapons out of people. 
In the great war, Jagang's ancestors were one such 
weapon: dream walkers. Dream walkers were created 
to be able to take over the minds of people in the 
New World and control them. Out of desperation, the 
bond of the Lord Rahl was created to counter that 
weapon, to protect a people from the dream walkers. 
   Any number of human weapons were conjured from 
the gifted. Such changes were often profound, and 
they were irrevocable. At times, the creations were 
monsters of boundless cruelty. From this heritage, 
Ja-gang had been born. 
   During that great war, one of the wizards who 
had been put on trial for treason refused to reveal 
what damage he had done. When even torture failed 
to gain the man's confession, the wizards 
conducting the trial turned to the talents of a 
wizard named Merritt and ordered the creation of a 
Confessor. Magda Searus, the first Confessor, 
extracted the man's confession. The tribunal was so 
pleased with the results of Wizard Merritt's 
conjuring that they commanded that an order of 
Confessors be created. 
   Kahlan felt no different than other people felt, 
she was no less human, no less a woman, loved life 
no less, but her Confessor's power was the result 
of that conjuring. She, too, was a descendant of 
women altered to be weapons—in this case weapons 
designed to find the truth. 
"What's the matter?" Richard asked. 

   She glanced over and saw the look of concern on 
his face. Kahlan forced a smile and shook her head 
that it was nothing. 
"So what is it that you discovered by jumping ahead 
in the book?" 
   Richard took a deep breath as he folded his 
hands over the pommel of the saddle. "Essentially, 
they were attempting to use color in order to help 
people born without eyes ... to see." 
   From Kahlan's understanding of magic and of 
history, this was fundamentally different from even 
the most malevolent experiments to alter people 
into weapons. Even in the most vile of these 
instances, they were attempting to take away some 
attribute of their humanity and at the same time 
add to or enhance an elemental ability. In none of 
it were they trying to create that which was not 
there at all. 
"In other words," Kahlan summed up, "they failed." 
   Richard nodded. "So, here they were, the great 
war was long over and the Old World—those who had 
wanted to end magic, much like the Imperial Order—
was safely sealed away beyond the barrier that had 
been created. Now they find out that the birth rate 
of those carrying the gift of wizardry is 
plummeting, and that the magic engendered by the 
House of Rahl, the bond with his people designed to 
stop the dream walkers from taking them, has an 
unexpected consequence—it also gives birth to the 
pristinely ungifted, who are an irreversible break 
in the lineage of magic." 
   "They have two problems, then," Kahlan said. 
"They have fewer wizards being born to deal with 
problems of magic, and they have people being born 
with no link at all to the magic." 
   "That's right. And the second problem was 
growing faster than the first. In the beginning, 
they thought they would find a solution, a cure. 
They didn't. Worse, as I explained before, those 
born of the pristinely ungifted, like Jennsen, 

always bear children the same as they. In a few 
generations, the number of the people without the 
link to the gift was growing faster than anyone 
ever expected." 
Kahlan let out a deep breath. "Desperate indeed." 
"It was becoming chaos." 
She hooked a loose strand of hair back. "What did 
they decide?" 
   Richard regarded her with one of those looks 
that told her he was pretty disturbed by what he'd 
found. 
   "They chose magic over people. They deemed that 
this attribute— magic, or those who possessed it—
was more important than human life." His voice 
rose. "Here they took the very thing they fought 
the war over, the right of those who were born the 
way they were—in that case people born with magic—
to their own lives, to exist, and they turned it 
all around to be that this attribute was more 
important than the life which held it!" 
   He let out a breath and lowered his voice. 
"There were too many to execute, so they did the 
next best thing—they banished them." 
Kahlan's eyebrows went up. "Banished them? To 
where?" 
Richard leaned toward her with fire in his eyes. 
"The Old World." 
"What!" 
   Richard shrugged, as if speaking on behalf of 
the wizards back then, mocking their reasoning. 
"What else could they do? They could hardly execute 
them; they were friends and family. Many of those 
normal people with the spark of the gift—but who 
were not gifted as wizards or sorceresses and so 
didn't think of themselves as gifted—had sons, 
daughters, brothers, sisters, uncles, aunts, 
cousins, neighbors who had married these pristinely 
ungifted, these pillars of Creation. They were part 
of society—a society which was less and less 
populated by the truly gifted. 

   "In a society where they were increasingly 
outnumbered and mistrusted, the ruling gifted 
couldn't bring themselves to put all these tainted 
people to death." 
"You mean they even considered it?" 
   Richard's eyes told her that they had and what 
he thought of the notion. "But in the end, they 
couldn't. At the same time, after trying 
everything, they now realized that they couldn't 
ever restore the link to magic once it was broken 
by these people, and such people were marrying and 
having children, and the children were marrying and 
having children—who in every case passed along this 
taint. And, those so tainted were increasing in 
numbers faster than anyone had imagined. 
   "As far as the gifted were concerned, their very 
world was threatened, in much the same way it had 
been threatened by the war. That was, after all, 
what those in the Old World had been trying to do— 
destroy magic—and here it was, the very thing they 
feared, happening. 
   "They couldn't repair the damage, they couldn't 
stop it from spreading, and they couldn't put to 
death all those among them. At the same time, with 
the taint multiplying, they knew that they were 
running out of time. So, they settled on what to 
them was the only way out— banishment." 
"And they could cross the barrier?" she asked. 
   "Those with the gift, for all practical 
purposes, were prevented from crossing the barrier, 
but for those who were pillars of Creation, magic 
did not exist; they were unaffected by it, so, to 
them, the barrier was not an obstacle." 
   "How could those in charge be sure they had all 
the pillars of Creation? If any escaped, the 
banishment would fail to solve their problem." 
   "Those with the gift—wizards and sorceresses—can 
somehow recognize those pristinely ungifted for 
what they are: holes in the world, as Jennsen said 
those like her were called. The gifted can see 

them, but not sense them with their gift. 
Apparently, it wasn't a problem to know who the 
pillars of Creation were." 
   "Can you tell any difference?" Kahlan asked. 
"Can you sense Jennsen as being different? Being a 
hole in the world?" 
"No. But I've not been taught to use my ability. 
How about you?" 
   Kahlan shook her head. "I'm not a sorceress, so 
I guess that I don't have the ability to detect 
those like her." She shifted her weight in her 
saddle. "So, what happened with those people back 
then?" 
   "The people of the New World collected all those 
ungifted offspring of the House of Rahl and their 
every single last descendant, and sent the whole 
lot of them across the great barrier, to the Old 
World, where the people had professed that they 
wanted mankind to be free of magic." 
   Richard smiled with the irony, even of such a 
grim event as this. "The wizards of the New World, 
in essence, gave their enemy in the Old World 
exactly what they professed to want, what they had 
been fighting for: mankind without magic." 
   His smile withered. "Can you imagine deciding 
that we had to banish Jennsen and send her into 
some fearful unknown, simply because of the fact 
that she can't see magic?" 
   Kahlan shook her head as she tried to envision 
such a time. "What a horror, to be uprooted and 
sent away, especially to the enemy of your own 
people." 
   Richard rode in silence for a time. Finally, he 
went on with the story. "It was a terrifying event 
for those banished, but it was also traumatic 
almost beyond endurance to those who were left. Can 
you even imagine what it must have been like. All 
those friends and relatives suddenly ripped out of 
your life, your family? The disruption to trade and 
livelihood?" Richard's words came with bitter 

finality. "All because they decided some attribute 
was more important than human life." 
   Just listening to the story, Kahlan felt as if 
she had been through an ordeal. She watched Richard 
riding beside her, staring off, lost in his own 
thoughts. 
   "Then what?" she finally asked. "Did they ever 
hear from those who were banished?" 
   He shook his head. "No, nothing. They were now 
beyond the great barrier. They were gone." 
   Kahlan stroked her horse's neck, just to feel 
the comfort of something alive. "What did they do 
about those who were born after that?" 
Still he stared off. "Killed them." 
   Kahlan swallowed in revulsion. "I can't imagine 
how they could do that." 
   "They could tell, once the child was born, if it 
was ungifted. It was said to be easier then, before 
it was named." 
   Kahlan couldn't find her voice for a moment. 
"Still," she said in a weak voice, "I can't imagine 
it." 
   "It's no different from what Confessors did 
about the birth of male Confessors." 
   His words cut through her. She hated the memory 
of those times. Hated the memory of a male child 
being born to a Confessor. Hated the memory of them 
being put to death by command of the mother. 
   There was said to be no choice. Male Confessors 
in the past had had no self-control over their 
power. They became monsters, started wars, caused 
unimaginable suffering. 
   It was argued that there was no choice but to 
put a male child of a Confessor to death, before 
they were named. 
   Kahlan couldn't force herself to look up into 
Richard's eyes. The witch woman, Shota, had 
foretold that she and Richard would conceive a male 
child. Neither Kahlan nor Richard would ever for an 
instant consider harming any child of theirs, a 

child resulting from their love for one another, 
from their love of life. She couldn't imagine 
putting a child of theirs to death for being born a 
male child of her as a Confessor, or an ungifted 
male or female child of Richard for being a Rahl. 
How could anyone say that such a life had no right 
to exist because of who they were, what they were 
like, or what they might possibly become. 
   "Somewhere along the line after this book was 
written," Richard said in a quiet voice, "things 
changed. When this book was written, the Lord Rahl 
of D'Hara always married, and they knew when he 
produced an offspring. When the child was 
pristinely ungifted, they ended its life as 
mercifully as they could. 
   "At some point, ruling wizards of the House of 
Rahl became like Darken Rahl. They took any woman 
they wanted, whenever they wanted. The details, 
such as if an ungifted child born of those 
couplings was actually a pillar of Creation, became 
unimportant to them. They simply killed any 
offspring, except the gifted heir." 
   "But they were wizards—they could have told 
which ones were like that and at least not killed 
the rest." 
   "If they wanted, I suppose they could have, but, 
like Darken Rahl, their only interest was in the 
single gifted heir. They simply killed the rest." 
   "So, such offspring hid for fear of their life 
and one managed to escape the grasp of Darken Rahl 
until you killed him first. And so you have a 
sister, Jennsen." 
Richard's smile returned. "And so I do." 
   Kahlan followed his gaze and saw distant specks, 
black-tipped races, watching, as they soared on the 
updrafts of the high cliffs of the mountains to the 
east. 
   She took a purging breath of the hot, humid air. 
"Richard, those ungifted offspring that were 
banished to the Old World, do you think they 

survived?" 
"If the wizards in the Old World didn't slaughter 
them." 
   "But everyone down here in the Old World is the 
same as in the New World. I've fought against the 
soldiers from here—with Zedd and the Sisters of the 
Light. We used magic of every sort to try to halt 
the Order's advance. I can tell you firsthand that 
all those from the Old World are affected by magic, 
so that means they all are born with that spark of 
the gift. There are no broken links in the chain of 
magic in the Old World." 
"From everything I've seen down here, I'd have to 
agree." 
   Kahlan wiped sweat from her brow. It was running 
into her eyes. "So what happened to those banished 
people?" 
   Richard gazed off toward the mountains beneath 
the races. "I can't imagine. But it must have been 
horrifying for them." 
   "So you think that maybe that was the end of 
them? That maybe they perished, or were put to 
death?" 
   He regarded her with a sidelong glance. "I don't 
know. But what I'd like to know is why that place 
back there is named the same as they were called in 
this book: the Pillars of Creation." His eyes took 
on a menacing gleam. "And far worse yet, I'd like 
to know why, as Jennsen told us, a copy of this 
book is among Jagang's most prized possessions." 
   That troublesome thought had been running 
through Kahlan's mind as well. 
   She looked up at him from beneath a frown. 
"Maybe you shouldn't have skipped ahead in your 
reading of the book, Lord Rahl." 
   Richard's fleeting smile wasn't all she'd hoped 
for. "I'll be relieved if that's the biggest 
mistake I've made, lately." 
"What do you mean?" 
   He raked his hair back. "Is anything different 

about your Confessor's power?" 
   "Different?" Almost involuntarily, his question 
caused her to draw back, to focus inwardly, to take 
stock of the force she always felt within herself. 
"No. It feels the same as always." 
   The power coiled in the core of her being did 
not need to be summoned when there was need of it. 
As always, it was there at the ready; it only 
required that she release her restraint of it for 
it to be unleashed. 
   "There's something wrong with the sword," he 
said, catching her by surprise. "Wrong with its 
power." 
   Kahlan couldn't imagine what to make of such a 
notion. "How can you tell? What's different?" 
   Richard idly stroked his thumbs along the reins 
turned back over his fingers. "It's hard to define 
exactly what's different. I'm just used to the 
feeling of it being at my beck and call. It 
responds when I need it, but for some reason it 
seems to be hesitant about doing so." 
   Kahlan felt that now, more than ever, they 
needed to get back to Aydindril and see Zedd. Zedd 
was the keeper of the sword. Even though they 
couldn't take the sword through the sliph, Zedd 
would be able to give them insight about any nuance 
of its power. He would know what to do. He would be 
able to help Richard with the headaches, too. 
And Kahlan knew that Richard needed help. She could 
see that he wasn't himself. His gray eyes held a 
glaze of pain, but there was something more etched 
in his expression, in the way he moved, the way he 
carried himself. 
   The whole explanation of the book and what he 
had discovered seemed to have sapped his strength. 
   She was beginning to think that it wasn't she, 
after all, who was the one running out of time, but 
that it was Richard. That thought, despite the warm 
afternoon sun, sent cold terror racing through her. 
   Richard checked the others over his shoulder. 

"Let's go back to the wagon. I need to get 
something warmer to put on. It's freezing today." 
    
    
    
    
   114 
    
    
    
    
CHAPTER 12 
 
 
Zedd peered up the deserted street. He could have 
sworn that he saw someone. Using his gift to search 
for any sign of life told him that there was no one 
anywhere around. Still, he remained motionless as 
he stared. 
The warm breeze pressed his simple robes against 
his bony frame and gently ruffled his disheveled 
white hair. A tattered, sun-faded blue dress that 
someone had pinned to a second-floor balcony 
railing to dry flapped like a flag in the wind. The 
dress, along with a city full of personal 
possessions, had long ago been left behind. 
The buildings, their walls painted various colors 
from a rusty red to yellow with shutters in bright, 
contrasting hues, stuck out to slightly varying 
degrees on either side of the narrow cobbled 
street, making a canyon of colorful walls. Most of 
the second stories overhung the bottom floors by a 
few feet, and, with their eaves hanging out even 
more, the buildings closed off the better part of 
the sky except for a snaking slit of afternoon 
sunlight that followed the sinuous course of the 
street up and over the gentle hill. The doors were 
all tightly shut, most of the windows shuttered. A 
pale green gate to an alleyway hung open, squeaking 
as it swung to and fro in the breeze. 

Zedd decided that it must have been a trick of the 
light that he'd seen, maybe a windowpane that had 
moved in the wind sending a flicker of light across 
a wall. 
  When he was at last sure that he had been 
mistaken about seeing anyone, Zedd started back 
down the street, yet remained close to one side, 
walking as quietly as possible. The Imperial Order 
army had not returned to the city since Zedd had 
unleashed the light web that had killed an enormous 
number of their force, but that didn't mean that 
there couldn't be dangers about. 
No doubt Emperor Jagang still wanted the city, and 
especially the Keep, but he was no fool and he knew 
that a few more light webs ignited among his army, 
no matter how vast it was, would in that instant 
reduce his force by such staggering numbers that it 
could alter the course of the war. Jagang had 
fought against the Midland and D'Haran forces for a 
year and in all those battles he had not lost as 
many men as he'd lost in that one blinding moment. 
He would not casually risk another such event. 
After such a blow Jagang would want to capture the 
Keep more than he had ever wanted it before. He 
would want Zedd more than ever before. 
Had Zedd more of the light webs like the one his 
frantic search through the Keep had turned up, he 
would have already unleashed them all on the Order. 
He sighed. If only he had more. 
Still, Jagang didn't know that he had no more such 
constructed spells. As long as Jagang feared that 
there were more, it served Zedd's purpose in 
keeping the Imperial Order out of Aydindril and 
away from the Wizard's Keep. 
Some harm had been done to the Confessors' Palace 
when Jagang had been gulled into attacking, but 
Zedd judged that trying that trick had been worth 
the regrettable damage; it had almost netted him 
and Adie the emperor's hide. Damage could always be 
repaired. He vowed that it would be repaired. 

Zedd clenched a fist at how close he had come to 
finishing Jagang that day. At least he had dealt a 
mighty blow to his army. 
And Zedd might have had Jagang had it not been for 
that strange young woman. He shook his head at the 
memory of actually seeing one who could not be 
touched by magic. He'd known, in theory, of  their 
existence, but had never before known it for 
certain to be true. Vague references in old books 
made for interesting abstract speculation, but 
seeing it with his own eyes was quite something 
else. 
It had been an unsettling sight. Adie had been 
shaken by the encounter even more than he; she was 
blind, yet with the aid of the gift could see 
better than he could. That day, she had not been 
able to see the young woman who was there, but, in 
some ways, not there. To Zedd's eyes, if not his 
gift, she was a beautiful sight, with some of 
Darken Rahl's looks, but different and altogether 
captivating. That she was half sister to Richard 
was clear; she shared some of his features, 
especially the eyes. If only Zedd could have 
stopped her, kept her out of the way, convinced her 
that she was making a terrible mistake by being 
with the Order, or even if he could have killed 
her, Jagang would not have escaped justice. 
Still, Zedd held no illusions about ending the 
threat of the Imperial Order simply by killing 
Jagang. Jagang was merely the brute who led other 
brutes in enforcing blind faith in the Order, a 
blind faith that embraced death as salvation from 
what it preached was the corrupt misery of life, a 
blind faith in which life itself had no value but 
as a bloody sacrifice upon the altar of altruism, a 
blind faith that blamed the failure of its own 
ideas on mankind for being wicked and for failing 
to offer sufficient sacrifice in an endless quest 
for some illusive greater good that grew ever more 
distant, a blind faith in an Order that clung to 

power by feeding off the carcasses of the 
productive lives it ruined. 
A faith that by its very beliefs rejected reason 
and embraced the irrational could not long endure 
without intimidation and force— without brutes like 
Jagang to enforce such faith. 
While Emperor Jagang was brutally effective, it was 
a mistake to think that if Jagang were to die that 
very day it would end the threat of the Order. It 
was the Order's ideas that were so dangerous; the 
priests of the Order would find other brutes. 
The only real way to end the Order's reign of 
terror was to expose the naked evil of its 
teachings to the light of truth, and for those 
suffering under its doctrines to throw off the 
Order's yoke. Until then, they would have to fight 
the Imperial Order back as best they could, hoping 
at least to eventually contain them. 
Zedd poked his head around a corner, watching, 
listening, sniffing the wind for any trace of 
anyone who might be lurking about. The city was 
deserted, but on a number of occasions stray 
Imperial Order soldiers had wandered in out of the 
mountains. 
After the destruction caused by the light web, 
panic had swept through the Order's encampment. 
Many soldiers had scattered to the hills. Once the 
army had regrouped, a large number of men had 
decided to desert instead of returning to their 
units. Tens of thousands of such deserters were 
rounded up and executed, their bodies left to rot 
as a warning of what happened to those who 
abandoned the cause of the greater glory of the 
Imperial Order, or as the Order liked to put it, 
the cause of the greater good. Most of the rest of 
the men who had run to the hills had then had a 
change of heart and straggled back into camp. 
 
There were still some, though, who had not wanted 
to go back and had not been caught. For a time, 

after Jagang's army had moved on, they had wandered 
into the city, sometimes alone, sometimes in small 
groups, half starved, to search for food and to 
loot. Zedd had lost count of how many such men he 
had killed. 
 
He was reasonably sure that all of those stragglers 
were dead, now. The Order was made up of men mostly 
from cities and towns. Such men weren't used to 
living in the wild. Their job was to overwhelm the 
enemy, to kill, rape, terrorize, and plunder. A 
whole corps of logistics personnel provided them 
with support, delivering and dispensing a constant 
stream of supplies that rolled in to feed and care 
for the soldiers. They were violent men, but they 
were men who needed to be tended, who depended on 
the group for their survival. They didn't last long 
on their own in the trackless forested mountains 
surrounding Ay-dindril. 
 
But Zedd hadn't seen any of them for quite some 
time. He was reasonably sure that the stragglers 
had starved, been killed, or had long ago headed 
back south, to the Old World. 
 
There was always the possibility, though, that 
Jagang had sent assassins to Aydindril; some of 
those assassins could be Sisters of the Light, or 
worse, Sisters of the Dark. For that reason, Zedd 
rarely left the safety of the Keep, and when he 
did, he was cautious. Too, he hated poking around 
the city, seeing it so devoid of life. This had 
been his home for much of his life. He remembered 
the days when the Keep was a hub of activity—not as 
it once had been, he knew, but alive with people of 
all sorts. He found himself smiling at the memory. 
 
His smile faded. Now the city was a joyless sight, 
forlorn without people filling the streets, people 
talking from one balcony to a neighbor across the 

street in another window, people gathering to trade 
goods in the market. Not so long ago men would have 
stopped to have conversations in doorways while 
vendors pulled carts of their wares along the 
narrow streets and children at play skipped through 
the throngs. Zedd sighed at the sad sight of such 
lifeless streets. 
 
At least those lives were safe, if a long way from 
home. Although he had many fundamental differences 
with the Sisters of the Light, he knew that their 
Prelate, Verna, and the rest of the free Sisters 
would watch over them. 
The only problem was that now that Jagang had 
nothing in Aydindril of any real value to conquer 
except the Keep, and much to lose, he had wheeled 
his army east toward the remnants of the Midland 
forces. To be sure, the D'Haran army waited across 
those mountains to the east and Zedd knew how 
formidable they were, but he couldn't fool himself 
that they stood a chance against a force as immense 
as the Imperial Order. 
Jagang had left the city in order to go after those 
D'Haran forces. The Imperial Order could not win 
the war by occupying an empty city; they needed to 
crush any resistance once and for all so that there 
would be no people left who could, by living 
prosperous, happy, peaceful lives, put the lie to 
the Order's teachings. 
Now that Jagang had come all the way up through the 
Midlands, he had cleaved the New World. Forces had 
been left all along the route to occupy cities and 
towns. Now the main force of the Order would turn 
its blood lust east, on a lone D'Hara. By dividing 
the New World in such a way, Jagang would be able 
to more efficiently crush opposition. 
Zedd knew that it wasn't for lack of trying that 
the New World had given ground. He and Kahlan, 
among a great many others, had worked themselves 
sick, month after month, trying to find a way to 

stop Ja-gang's forces. 
 
Zedd clutched his robes at his throat, at the 
painful memory of such ferocious fighting, at how 
nothing had worked against Jagang's numbers, at the 
death and dying, at the friends he had lost. It was 
only a matter of time until all was lost to the 
hordes from the Old World. 
Richard and Kahlan would not survive such a 
conquest by the Imperial Order. Zedd's thin fingers 
covered his trembling lips at the ghastly thought 
of them being lost, too. They were the only family 
he had left. They were everything to him. 
Zedd felt a crushing wave of hopelessness, and had 
to sit on the stump of a log section set outside a 
shoe shop that had been boarded closed. Once the 
Imperial Order finally annihilated all opposition, 
Ja-gang would return to take the city and lay siege 
to the Keep. Sooner or later, he would have it all. 
The future, as Zedd imagined it, seemed to be a 
world shrouded in the gray pall of life under the 
Imperial Order. If the world fell under that pall, 
it would probably be a very long time before 
mankind ever emerged to live free again. Once 
liberty was surrendered to tyranny, it could be 
smothered for centuries before its flames again 
sprang to life and brightened the world. 
Zedd hadn't sat for long when he forced himself to 
his feet. He was First Wizard. He had been in 
hopeless straits before and had seen the foe turned 
back. There was still the possibility that he and 
Adie could find something in the Keep that would 
aid them, or that they might yet discover 
information in the libraries that would give them a 
valuable advantage. 
As long as there was life, they could fight on 
toward their goal. They still had the ability to 
triumph. 
He harrumphed to himself. He would triumph. 
Zedd was glad that Adie wasn't with him to see him 

in such a sorry state that he would have—if even 
momentarily—considered defeat. Adie would have 
never let him hear the end of it, and deservedly 
so. 
He harrumphed again. He was hardly inexperienced, 
hardly without the wherewithal to handle challenges 
that arose. And if there were as-sassins about, 
gifted or not, they would find themselves caught up 
by one of the many little surprises he had left 
around. Very nasty surprises. 
Chin up, Zedd smiled to himself as he turned down a 
narrow alley, making his way past a patchwork of 
yards with empty pens that had once held chickens, 
geese, ducks, and pigeons. His gaze passed over 
small back courtyards, their herbs and flowers 
growing untended, their wash lines empty, their 
wood and other materials stacked to the sides, 
waiting for people to return and work them into 
something useful. 
 
Along the way he stopped in various vegetable 
gardens, harvesting the volunteer crops that had 
sprung up. There was lettuce aplenty, spinach, some 
small squash, green tomatoes, and still a few peas. 
He collected his bounty in a canvas sack and slung 
it over a shoulder as he walked the garden plots, 
checking on the progress of irregular patches of 
onions, beets, beans, and turnips. Still some 
growing to do, he concluded. 
While the vegetables weren't thick from a careful 
planting, the random growth in yards all over the 
city meant that he and Adie would have fresh 
vegetables for some time to come. Maybe she might 
even take to putting some things up for next 
winter. They could store root crops in the colder 
places in the Keep, and preserve more perishable 
vegetables. They would have more food than they 
could eat. 
 
On his way up the alley, Zedd spied a bush off 

toward the corner, sprawled green and lush over a 
short back fence between two homes. The blackberry 
bush was loaded with ripe berries. He paused 
occasionally to check up and down the streets 
beyond while he made a nice-sized pile of the dark, 
plump berries in a square of cloth, then tied it up 
and placed it atop the heavier goods in his sack. 
 
There were still plenty of ripe berries, and he 
hated to let them go to waste, or to the birds, so 
he worked at filling his pockets. He didn't worry 
that it would spoil his dinner; it was a long walk 
back up the mountain to the Wizard's Keep, so he 
could use a snack. Adie was making a thick stew 
from cured ham. There was no danger that he would 
spoil his appetite on mere berries. She would be 
pleased by the vegetables he brought and would no 
doubt want to add them to the stew straightaway. 
Adie was a wonderful cook, although he dared not 
admit it to her lest she get a big head. Before the 
stone bridge, Zedd paused, gazing back down the 
wide road leading up the mountainside. Only the 
wind in the trees and their shimmering leaves 
created any sound or movement. For a long moment, 
though, he stared down at the empty road. 
Finally, he turned back to the bridge that in less 
than three hundred paces spanned a chasm with near 
vertical sides dropping away for thousands of feet. 
Clouds far below hung hard against the sheer rock 
walls. Despite the countless times he had walked 
over the stone bridge, it still made him feel just 
a little queasy. Without wings, though, there was 
but this single way into the Keep—except for the 
little trick passage he had used as a boy. 
Because of their strategic role, Zedd had placed 
enough snares and traps along the bridge and the 
rest of the road up to the Keep that no one was 
going to live for more than a few paces once they 
came close. Not even a Sister of the Dark could 
trespass here. A few Sisters had attempted the 

impossible, and had paid with their lives. 
They would have suspected such webs laid by the 
First Wizard himself, and felt some of the warning 
shields, but no doubt Jagang had given them no 
choice in the matter and had sent them to attempt 
entry, sacrificing their lives for the greater good 
of the Order. 
Verna had once briefly been taken captive by the 
dream walker and she had told Zedd all about the 
experience in the hope that they might find a 
counter, other than swearing loyalty in one's heart 
to the Lord Rahl and thereby invoking the 
protection of the bond. Zedd had tried, but there 
was no countermagic he could provide. In the great 
war, wizards far more talented than he, and with 
both sides of the gift, had tried to devise 
defenses against dream walkers. Once the dream 
walker had taken over a person's mind, there was no 
defense; you had to do his bidding, regardless of 
the cost, even if the cost was your life. 
 
Zedd suspected that for a few, death was a coveted 
release from the agony of possession by the dream 
walker. Suicide was a course blocked by Jagang; he 
needed the talents of the Sisters and other gifted. 
He couldn't have them all kill themselves for 
release from the misery of life as his chattel. But 
if he sent them to their certain death, such as 
attempting to enter the Keep, then they could at 
last be free of the agony that had become their 
life. 
Ahead, the Keep towered on the mountainside. The 
soaring walls of dark stone, intimidating to most 
people, offered Zedd the warm sense of home. His 
eyes roamed the ramparts, and he remembered 
strolling there with his wife so many years ago—a 
lifetime ago, it seemed. From the towers he had 
often looked down at the beautiful sight of 
Aydindril below. He had once marched across the 
bridges and passageways to deliver orders defending 

the Midlands from an invasion from D'Hara, led by 
Darken Rahl's father. 
That, too, seemed a lifetime ago. Now Richard, his 
grandson, was the Lord Rahl, and had succeeded in 
uniting most of the Midlands under the rule of the 
D'Haran Empire. Zedd shook his head at the wonder 
of it, at the thought of how Richard had changed 
everything. By Richard's hand, Zedd was now a 
subject of the D'Haran Empire. What a wonder 
indeed. 
Before he reached the far side of the bridge, Zedd 
glanced down into the chasm. Movement caught his 
attention. Putting his bony fingers on the rough 
stone, he leaned out a little for a look. Below, 
but above the clouds, he saw two huge birds, black 
as moonless midnight, gliding along through the 
split in the mountain. Zedd had never seen the like 
of them. He couldn't imagine what to make of the 
sight. 
When he turned back to the Keep, he thought he saw 
three more of the same kind of large black birds 
flying together, high above the Keep. He decided 
that they had to be ravens. Ravens were big. He 
must simply be misjudging the distance—probably 
from lack of food. Concluding that they had to be 
ravens, he tried to adjust his estimation of their 
distance, but they were already gone. He glanced 
down, but didn't see the other two, either. 
As he passed under the iron portcullis, feeling the 
warm embrace of the Keep's spell, Zedd felt a wave 
of loneliness. He so missed Erilyn, his long-dead 
wife, as well as his long-passed daughter, 
Richard's mother, and, dear spirits, he missed 
Richard. He smiled then, thinking of Richard being 
with his own wife, now. It was still sometimes hard 
for him to think of Richard as grown into a man. He 
had had a wondrous time helping to raise Richard. 
What a time that had been in his life, off in 
Westland, away from the Midlands, away from magic 
and responsibility, with just that ever curious boy 

and a whole world of wonders to explore and show 
him.  
What a time indeed. Inside the Keep, lamps along 
the wall obediently sprang to flame as First Wizard 
Zeddicus Zu'l Zorander made his way along 
passageways and through grand rooms, deeper into 
the immense mountain fortress. As he passed the 
webs he'd placed, he checked the texture of their 
magic to find that they were undisturbed. He sighed 
in relief. He didn't expect that anyone would be 
foolish enough to try to enter the Keep, but the 
world had fools to spare. He didn't really like 
leaving such dangerous webs cast all about the 
place, in addition to the often dangerous shields 
already guarding the Keep, but he dared not relax 
his guard. 
As he passed a long side table in a towering 
gathering hall, Zedd, as he had done since he was a 
boy, ran his finger along the smooth groove in the 
edge of the variegated chocolate-brown marble top. 
He stopped, frowning down at the table, and 
realized that it contained something he suddenly 
felt the want of: a ball of fine black cord left 
there years ago to tie ribbons and other 
decorations on the lamp brackets in the gathering 
hall to mark the harvest festival. 
Sure enough, in the center drawer, he found the 
ball of fine cord. He snatched it up and slipped it 
into a pocket long emptied of its load of berries. 
From the wall bracket beside the table, he lifted a 
wand with six small bells. The wand, one of 
hundreds if not thousands throughout the Keep, was 
once used to summon servants. He sighed inwardly. 
It had been decades since servants and their 
families last lived in the Wizard's Keep. He 
remembered their children running and playing in 
the halls. He remembered the joy of laughter 
echoing throughout the Keep, bringing life to the 
place. 
 

Zedd told himself that one day children would again 
run and laugh in the halls. Richard and Kahlan's 
children. Zedd's broad smile stretched his cheeks. 
There were windows and openings in the stone that 
let light spill into many halls and rooms, but 
there were other places less well lit. Zedd found 
one of those darker places that was dim enough to 
satisfy him. He stretched a piece of the black 
cord, strung with one of the bells, across the 
doorway, winding it around coarse stone molding to 
each side. Moving deeper through the labyrinth of 
halls and passage-ways, he stopped and strung more 
strings with a bell at places where it would be 
hard to see. He had to collect several more of the 
servant wands for a supply of bells. 
 Although there were shields of magic laced 
everywhere, there was no telling what powers some 
of the Sisters of the Dark possessed. They would be 
looking for magic, not bells. It couldn't hurt to 
take the extra precaution. 
 
Zedd made mental notes of where he strung the fine 
black cord— he would have to let Adie know. He 
doubted, though, that with her gifted sight she 
would need the warning. He was sure that with her 
blind eyes she could see better than anyone. 
Following the wonderful aroma of ham stew, Zedd 
made his way to the comfortable room lined with 
bookshelves they used most of the time. Adie had 
hung spices to dry from the low beams carved with 
ancient designs. A leather couch sat before a broad 
fireplace and comfortable chairs beside a silver-
inlaid table placed in front of a diamond-patterned 
leaded window with a breathtaking view overlooking 
Aydindril. 
The sun was setting, leaving the city below bathed 
in a warm light. It almost looked like it always 
did, except there was no telltale smoke curling up 
from cooking fires. 
Zedd set his burlap sack loaded with his harvest on 

piles of books atop a round mahogany table behind 
the couch. He shuffled closer to the fire, all the 
while taking deep breaths to inhale the 
intoxicating aroma of the stew. 
"Adie," he called, "this smells delightful! Have 
you looked outside today? I saw the oddest birds." 
He smiled as he inhaled another whiff. 
"Adie—I think it must be done by now," he called 
toward the doorway to the side pantry room. "I 
think we ought to taste it, at least. Can't hurt to 
check, you know." 
Zedd glanced back over his shoulder. "Adie? Are you 
listening to me?" 
He went to the doorway and peered into the pantry, 
but it was empty. 
"Adie?" he called down the stairs at the back of 
the pantry. "Are you down there?" 
Zedd's mouth twisted with discontentment when she 
didn't answer. 
"Adie?" he called again. "Bags, woman, where are 
you?" 
He turned back, peering at the stew bubbling in the 
kettle hung on the crane over the fire. Zedd 
scooped up a long wooden spoon from a pantry 
cupboard. 
Spoon in hand, he stopped and leaned back toward 
the stairs. "Take your time, Adie. I'll just be up 
here . .. reading." 
Zedd grinned and hurried for the stew. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 13 
 
Richard rose up in a rush when he saw Cara marching 
up a ravine toward camp, pushing ahead of her a man 
Richard vaguely recognized. In the failing light, 
he couldn't make out the man's face. Richard 
scanned the surrounding flat washes, rocky hills, 
and steep tree-covered slopes beyond, but didn't 

see anyone else. 
Friedrich was off to the south and Tom to the west, 
checking the surrounding country, as Cara had been, 
to be sure there was no one about and that it was a 
safe place to spend the night; they were exhausted 
from picking a sinuous route through the 
increasingly rugged country. Cara had been checking 
north—the direction they were headed and the 
direction Richard considered potentially the most 
dangerous. Jennsen turned from the animals, waiting 
to see who the Mord-Sith had with her. 
Once on his feet, Richard wished he hadn't gotten 
up quite so quickly—doing so made him light-headed. 
He couldn't seem to shake the odd, disconnected 
sensation he felt, as if he were watching someone 
else react, talk, move. When he concentrated, 
forcing himself to focus his attention, the feeling 
would sometimes drift at least partly away and he 
would begin to wonder if it was only his 
imagination. 
Kahlan's hand slipped up on his arm, gripping him 
as if she thought he might fall. 
"Are you all right?" she whispered. 
He nodded as he watched Cara and the man as he also 
kept an eye on the surrounding countryside. By the 
end of their ride earlier that afternoon to discuss 
the book, Kahlan had become even more worried about 
him. They were both troubled about what he'd read, 
but Kahlan was far more concerned, at the moment, 
anyway, about him. 
 
Richard suspected that he might be coming down with 
a slight fever. That would explain why he was 
feeling so cold when everyone else was hot. From 
time to time, Kahlan would feel his forehead or 
place the back of her hand against his cheek. Her 
touch warmed his heart; she ignored his smiles as 
she fretted over him. She thought that he might be 
slightly feverish. Once she had Jennsen feel his 
forehead to see if she thought he might be warmer 

than he should be. Jennsen, too, thought that, if 
he did have a fever, it was minor. Cara, so far, 
had been satisfied by Kahlan's report that he 
didn't feel feverish, and hadn't deemed it 
necessary to see for herself. 
 
A fever was just about the last thing Richard 
needed. There were important... important, 
something. He couldn't seem to recall at the 
moment. He concentrated on trying to remember the 
young man's name, or at least where he'd seen him 
before. 
 
The last rays of the setting sun cast a pink glow 
across the mountains to the east. The closer hills 
were dimming to a soft gray in the gathering dusk. 
As darkness approached, the low fire was beginning 
to tint everything close around it a warm yellow-
orange. Richard had kept the cook fire small, not 
wanting it to signal their location any more than 
necessary. 
 
"Lord Rahl," the man said in a reverent tone as he 
stepped into camp. He dipped his head forward in a 
hesitant bow, apparently not sure if it was proper 
to bow or not. "It's an honor to see you again." 
He was perhaps a couple of years younger than 
Richard, with curly black hair that brushed the 
broad shoulders of his buckskin tunic. He wore a 
long knife at his belt but no sword. His ears stuck 
out to the sides of his head as if he were 
straining to listen to every little sound. Richard 
imagined that as a boy he'd probably endured a lot 
of taunts about his ears, but now that he was a man 
his ears made him look rather intent and serious. 
As muscular as the man was, Richard doubted that he 
still had to contend with taunts. 
"I'm . .. I'm sorry, but I can't quite seem to 
recall..." 
"Oh, no, you wouldn't remember me, Lord Rahl. I was 

only—" 
"Sabar," Richard said as it came to him. "Sabar. 
You loaded the furnaces in Priska's foundry, back 
in Altur'Rang." 
Sabar beamed. "That's right. I can't believe you 
remember me." 
Sabar had been one of the men at the foundry able 
to have work because of the supplies Richard hauled 
to Priska when no one else could. Sabar had 
understood how hard Priska worked just to keep his 
foundry alive under the oppressive, endless, and 
contradictory mandates of the Order. Sabar had been 
there the day the statue Richard carved had been 
unveiled; he had seen it before it was destroyed. 
He had been there at the beginning of the 
revolution in Altur'Rang, fighting close alongside 
Victor, Priska, and all the others who had seized 
the moment when it was upon them. Sabar had fought 
to help gain freedom for himself, his friends, and 
for his city. 
 
That had been a day everything had changed. 
Even though this man, like many others, had been a 
subject of the Imperial Order—one of the enemy—he 
wanted to live his own life under just laws, rather 
than under the dictates of despots who extinguished 
any hope of bettering oneself under the crushing 
burden of the cruel illusion of a greater good. 
 
Richard noticed, then, that everyone was standing 
in tense anticipation, as if they had expected this 
to be trouble. 
Richard smiled at Cara. "It's all right. I know 
him." 
"So he told me," Cara said. She put a hand on 
Sabar's shoulder and pushed him down. "Have a 
seat." 
"Yes," Richard said, glad to see that Cara had been 
fairly amiable about it. "Sit down and tell us why 
you're here." 

"Nicci sent me." 
 
Richard rose again in a rush, Kahlan coming up 
right beside him. "Nicci? We're on our way to meet 
her." 
Sabar nodded, rising into a half crouch, seeming 
not to be sure if he was supposed to stand, since 
Richard and Kahlan had, or stay seated 
Cara hadn't sat down; she stood behind Sabar like 
an executioner. Cara had been there when the 
revolution in Altur'Rang had started and might 
remember Sabar, but that would make no difference. 
Cara trusted no one where the safety of Richard and 
Kahlan was concerned. 
 
Richard gestured for Sabar to remain seated. "Where 
is she," Richard asked as he and Kahlan sat down 
again, sharing a seat on a bedroll. "Is she coming 
soon?" 
"Nicci said to tell you that she waited as long as 
she could, but there have been some urgent 
developments and she could wait no longer." 
Richard let out a disappointed sigh. "Some things 
came up for us, too." Kahlan had been captured and 
taken to the Pillars of Creation as bait to lure 
Richard into a trap. Rather than go into all that, 
he kept the story short and to the point. "We were 
trying to get to Nicci, but needed to go elsewhere. 
It was unavoidable." 
Sabar nodded. "I was worried when she returned to 
us and said that you had not shown up at your 
meeting place, but she told us that she was sure 
you were busy taking care of something important 
and that was the reason you had not come. 
"Victor Cascella, the blacksmith, was very worried, 
too, when Nicci told us this. He was thinking you 
would be returning with Nicci. He said that other 
places he knows, places he and Priska have dealings 
with for supplies and such, are on the verge of 
revolt. These people have heard about Altur'Rang, 

how the Order has been overthrown there, and how 
people are beginning to prosper. He said that he 
knows free men in these places who struggle to 
survive under the oppression of the Order as we 
once did, and they hunger to be free. They want 
Victor's help. 
 
"Some of the Brothers in the Fellowship of Order 
who escaped from Altur'Rang have gone to these 
other places to insure that such revolt does not 
spread there. Their cruelty in punishing any they 
suspect of insurrection is costing the lives of 
many people, both the innocent and those valuable 
to the cause of overthrowing the Imperial Order. 
 
"In order to insure their control of the gears of 
governance and to ready the Order's defense against 
the spread of the revolt, Brothers of the Order 
have gone to all the important cities, Surely, some 
of these priests have also gone to report to Jagang 
the fall of Altur'Rang, of the loss of so many 
officials in the fighting there, and of the deaths 
of Brothers Narev and many of his close circle of 
disciples." 
 
"Jagang already knows of the death of Brother 
Narev," Jennsen said, offering him a cup of water. 
Sabar smiled his satisfaction at her news. He 
thanked her for the water, then leaned forward 
toward Richard and Kahlan as he went on with his 
story. 
 
"Priska thinks the Order will want to sweep away 
the success of the revolt in Altur'Rang—that they 
can't afford to let it stand. He said that instead 
of worrying about spreading the revolt, we must 
prepare, make defenses, and have every man stand 
ready because the Order will return with the intent 
of slaughtering every last person in Altur'Rang." 
Sabar hesitated, clearly worried about Priska's 

warning. "Victor, though, said we should hammer the 
iron while it is hot and create a just and secure 
future for ourselves, rather than wait for the 
Order to gather their strength to deny us that 
future. He says that if the revolt is spreading 
everywhere, the Order will not so easily stamp it 
out." 
Richard ran a weary hand across his face. "Victor 
is right. If those in Altur'Rang try to sit alone 
as a singular place of freedom in the heart of 
hostile enemy territory, the Order will sweep in 
and cut out that heart. The Order can't survive on 
its perverted ideals and they know it; that's why 
they must use force to sustain their beliefs. 
Without that bully of force, the Order will 
crumble. 
"Jagang spent twenty years creating a system of 
roads to knit a diverse and fractured Old World 
together into the Imperial Order. That was but part 
of the means of how he succeeded. Many resisted the 
rantings of his priests. With roads to swiftly 
respond to any dissent, though, Jagang was able to 
react quickly, to sweep in and kill those who 
openly opposed his new Order. 
"More importantly, after eliminating those who 
resisted the Order's teachings, he filled the minds 
of children, who didn't know any better, with blind 
faith in those teachings, turning them into zealots 
eager to die for what they were taught was a noble 
cause—sacrifice to some all-consuming greater good. 
"Those young men, their minds twisted with the 
teachings of the Order, are now off to the north 
conquering the New World, butchering any who will 
not take up their altruistic tenets. 
"But while Jagang and that vast army are to the 
north, that strength there leaves the Order weak 
here. That weakness is our opportunity and we must 
capitalize on it. Now, while Jagang and his men are 
absent, those same roads he built down here will be 
our means of rapidly spreading the struggle for 

freedom far and wide. 
  
"The torch of freedom has been lit by the will of 
those like you, those in Altur'Rang who seized 
liberty for themselves. The flames of that torch 
must be held high, giving others the chance to see 
its light. If hidden and insulated, such flames 
will be extinguished by the Order. There may never 
be another chance in our lifetimes, or our 
children's lifetimes, to seize control of our own 
lives. That torch must be carried to other places." 
 
Sabar smiled, filled with quiet pride that he had 
been a part of it all coming to be. "I know that 
Victor would like for others, like Priska, to be 
reminded of such things, of what the Lord Rahl 
would say about what we must do. Victor wants to 
talk to you before he goes to these places to 'pump 
the bellows,' as he put it. Victor said that he 
awaits your word on how you would move next, on how 
best to 'put the white-hot iron to them'—again, his 
words." 
"So Nicci sent you to find me." 
"Yes. I was happy to go to you when she asked me. 
Victor will be happy, too, not only that you are 
well but to hear what the Lord Rahl would say to 
him." 
While Victor was awaiting word, Richard also knew 
that absent such word, Victor would act. The 
revolution did not revolve around Richard—it 
couldn't to be successful—but around the hunger of 
people to have their lives back. Still, Richard 
needed to help coordinate the spreading revolt in 
order to be sure it was as effective as possible, 
not just at bringing freedom to those who sought 
it, but at crumbling the foundation of the Order in 
the Old World. Only if they were successful in 
toppling the rule of the Order in the Old World 
would Jagang's attention—and many of his men—be 
pulled away from conquering the New World. 

Jagang intended to conquer the New World by first 
dividing it. Richard had to do the same if he was 
to succeed. Only dividing the Order's forces could 
defeat it. 
Richard knew that with everyone evacuated from 
Aydindril, the Imperial Order would now turn its 
swords on D'Hara. Despite the competence of the 
D'Haran troops, they would be overwhelmed by the 
numbers that Jagang would throw at them. If the 
Order was not diverted from its cause, or at least 
divided into smaller forces, D'Hara would fall 
under the shadow of the Order. The D'Haran Empire, 
forged to unite the New World against tyranny, 
would end before it had really gotten started. 
Richard had to get back to Victor and Nicci so that 
they could all continue what they had begun—
devising the most effective strategy to overthrow 
the Imperial Order. 
But they were running out of time to resolve 
another problem, a problem they didn't yet 
understand. 
"I'm glad you found us, Sabar. You can tell Victor 
and Nicci that we need to see to something first, 
but as soon as we do, we'll be able to help them 
with their plans." 
Sabar looked relieved. "Everyone will be happy to 
hear this." 
Sabar hesitated, then tilted his head, gesturing 
north. "Lord Rahl, when I came to find you, 
following the directions Nicci gave me, I went past 
the area where she was to meet with you, and then I 
continued coming south." Worry stole into his 
expression. "Not many days ago, I came to a place, 
miles wide, that was dead." 
Richard looked up. He realized that his headache 
seemed to be suddenly gone. "What do you mean, 
dead?" 
Sabar waved his hand out toward the evening gloom. 
"The area where I was traveling was much like this 
place; there were some trees, clumps of grass, 

thickets of brush." His voice lowered. "But then I 
came to a place where everything that grew ended. 
All at the same place. There was nothing but rock 
beyond. Nicci had not told me that I would come to 
such a place. I admit, I was afraid." 
Richard glanced to his right—to the east—to the 
mountains that lay beyond. "How long did this dead 
place last?" 
"I walked, leaving life behind, and I thought I 
might be walking into the underworld itself." Sabar 
looked away from Richard's eyes. "Or into the jaws 
of some new weapon the Order had created to destroy 
us all. 
 
"I came to be very afraid and I was going to turn 
back. But then I thought about how the Order made 
me afraid my whole life, and I didn't like that 
feeling. Worse, I thought about how I would stand 
before Nicci and tell her I turned around rather 
than go to Lord Rahl as she asked of me, and that 
thought made me ashamed, so I went on. In several 
miles I came again to growing things." He let out a 
breath. "I was greatly relieved, and then I felt a 
little foolish that I had been afraid." 
Two. That now made two of the strange boundaries. 
"I've been to places like that, Sabar, and I can 
tell you that I, too, have been afraid." 
Sabar broke into a grin. "Then I was not so foolish 
to be afraid." 
"Not foolish at all. Could you tell if this dead 
area was extensive? Could you tell if it was more 
than just a patch of open rock in that one place? 
Could you see if it ran in a line, ran in any 
direction in particular?" 
"It was like you say, like a line." Sabar flicked 
his hand toward the east. "It came down out of the 
far mountains, north of that depression." He held 
his hand flat like a cleaver, and sliced it 
downward in the other direction. "It ran off to the 
southwest, into that wasteland." 

Toward the Pillars of Creation. 
Kahlan leaned close and spoke under her breath. 
"That would be almost parallel to the boundary we 
crossed not far back to the south. Why would there 
be two boundaries so close together? That makes no 
sense." 
"I don't know," Richard whispered to her. "Maybe 
whatever the boundary was protecting was so 
dangerous that whoever placed it feared that one 
might not be enough." 
Kahlan rubbed her upper arms but didn't comment. By 
the look on her face, Richard knew how she felt 
about such a notion—especially considering that 
those boundaries were now down. 
"Anyway," Sabar said with a self-conscious shrug, 
"I was happy I did not turn back, or I would have 
had to face Nicci after she had asked me to help 
Lord Rahl—my friend Richard." 
 
Richard smiled. "I'm glad, too, Sabar. I don't 
think that place you went through is a danger any 
longer, at least not a danger the way it was once." 
Jennsen could contain her curiosity no longer. "Who 
is this Nicci?" 
"Nicci is a sorceress," Richard said. "She used to 
be a Sister of the Dark." 
Jennsen's eyebrows went up. "Used to?" 
Richard nodded. "She worked to further Jagang's 
cause, but she finally came to see how wrong she 
had been and joined our side." It was a story he 
didn't really feel like going into. "She now fights 
for us. Her help has been invaluable." 
Jennsen leaned in, even more astonished. "But can 
you trust someone like that, someone who had 
labored on behalf of Jagang? Worse, a Sister of the 
Dark? Richard, I've been with some of those women, 
I know how ruthless they are. They may have to do 
as Jagang makes them, but they're devoted to the 
Keeper of the underworld. Do you really think you 
can trust with your life that she will not betray 

you?" 
Richard looked Jennsen in the eye. "I trust you 
with a knife while I sleep." 
Jennsen sat back up. She smiled, more out of 
embarrassment than anything else, Richard thought. 
"I guess I see your point." 
"What else did Nicci say," Kahlan asked, keen to 
get back to the matter at hand. 
"Only that I must go in her place and meet you," 
Sabar said. 
Richard knew that Nicci was being cautious. She 
didn't want to tell the young man too much in case 
he was caught. 
"How did she know where I was?" 
"She said that she was able to tell where you were 
by magic. Nicci is as powerful with magic as she is 
beautiful." 
Sabar said this in a tone of awe. He didn't know 
the half of it. Nicci was one of the most powerful 
sorceresses ever to have lived. Sabar didn't know 
that when Nicci was laboring toward the ends sought 
by the Order, she was known as Death's Mistress. 
Richard surmised that Nicci had somehow used the 
bond to the Lord Rahl to find him. That bond was 
loyalty sworn in the heart, not by rote, and its 
power protected those so sworn from the dream 
walker entering their minds. Full-blooded D'Harans, 
like Cara, could tell through the bond where the 
Lord Rahl was. Kahlan had confided to him that she 
found it unnerving the way Cara always knew where 
Richard was. Nicci wasn't D'Haran, but she was a 
sorceress and she was bonded to Richard, so she 
might have been able to manipulate that bond to 
tell where he was. 
 
"Sabar, Nicci must have sent you to us for a 
reason," Richard said, "other than to say that she 
couldn't wait for us at our meeting place." 
"Yes, of course," Sabar said as he nodded hastily, 
as if chagrined to have to be reminded. "When I 

asked her what I was to say to you, she told me 
that she had put it all in a letter." Sabar opened 
the leather flap of the pouch at his belt. "She 
said that when she realized how far away you really 
were, she was distraught and couldn't take the time 
to journey to you. She told me that it was 
important for me to be sure I found you and gave 
you her letter. She said the letter would explain 
why she could not wait." 
With one finger and a thumb, Sabar lifted out the 
letter, looking as if he were handling a deadly 
viper instead of a small roll sealed with red wax. 
"Nicci told me that this is dangerous," he 
explained, looking up into Richard's eyes. "She 
said that if anyone but you opened it, I should not 
be standing too close or I would die with them." 
Sabar carefully laid the rolled letter on Richard's 
palm. It warmed appreciably in his hand. The red 
wax brightened, as if lit by a ray of sunlight even 
though it was getting dark. The glow spread from 
the wax to envelop the whole length of the rolled 
letter. Fine cracks raced all across the red wax, 
like autumn ice on a pond breaking up under the 
weight of a foot placed on it. The wax suddenly 
shattered and crumbled away. 
Sabar swallowed. "I hate to think of what would 
have happened had anyone but you tried to open it." 
Jennsen leaned in again. "Was that magic?" 
"Must have been," Richard told her as he started to 
unroll the letter. 
"But I saw it fall apart," she said in a 
confidential tone. 
"Did you see anything else?" 
"No, it just all of a sudden crumbled." 
With a thumb and finger, Richard lifted some of the 
disintegrated wax from his palm. "She probably put 
a web of magic around the letter and keyed that 
spell to my touch. If anyone else had tried to 
break that web to open the letter it would have 
ignited the spell. I guess that my touch unlocked 

the seal. You saw the result of the magic—the 
broken seal—not the magic itself." 
 
"Oh, wait!" Sabar smacked his forehead with the 
flat of his palm. "What am I thinking? I'm supposed 
to give you this, too." 
Shrugging the straps off his shoulders and down his 
arms, he pulled his pack around onto his lap. He 
quickly undid the leather thongs and reached 
inside, then carefully lifted out something wrapped 
in black quilted material. It was only about a foot 
tall but not very big around. By the way Sabar 
handled it, it appeared to be somewhat heavy. 
 
Sabar set the wrapped object on the ground, 
upright, in front of the fire. "Nicci told me that 
I should give this to you, that the letter would 
explain it." 
 
Jennsen leaned in a little, fascinated by the 
mystery of the tightly wrapped object. "What is 
it?" 
Sabar shrugged. "Nicci didn't tell me." He made a 
face that suggested he was somewhat uncomfortable 
with the way he was in the dark about much of the 
mission he'd been sent on. "When Nicci looks at you 
and tells you to do something, it goes out of your 
head to ask questions." 
 
Richard smiled to himself as he began to unroll the 
letter. He knew all too well what Sabar meant. 
"Did Nicci say anything about who could unwrap that 
thing?" 
"No, Lord Rahl. She just said to give it to you, 
that the letter would explain it." 
"If it had a web around it, like the letter, she 
would have warned you." Richard looked up. "Cara," 
he said, gesturing at the bundled package sitting 
before the fire, "why don't you unwrap it while 
Kahlan and I read the letter." 

As Cara sat cross-legged on the ground and started 
working on the knots in the leather thongs around 
the black quilted wrap, Richard held the letter 
sideways a bit so that Kahlan could read it 
silently along with him. 
Dear Richard and Kahlan, 
I am sorry that I cannot tell you everything right 
now that I would have you know, but there are 
urgent matters I must see to and I dare not delay. 
Jagang has initiated something I considered 
impossible. Through his ability as a dream walker, 
he has forced Sisters of the Dark he controls to 
attempt to create weapons out of people, as was 
done during the great war. This is dangerous enough 
in itself, but because Jagang does not have the 
gift, his understanding of such things is very 
crude. He is a blundering bull trying to use his 
horns to knit lace. They are using the lives of 
wizards as the fodder for his experiments. I don't 
yet know the exact extent of their success, but I 
fear to discover the results. More of this in a 
moment. 
First, the object I sent. When 1 picked up your 
trail and began tracking it to where we were to 
meet, I discovered this. I believe you have already 
come across it because it has been touched by a 
principal involved in the matter or involved with 
you. 
The object is a warning beacon. It has been 
activated—not by this touch, but by events. I 
cannot overstate the danger it represents. 
Such objects could only be made by the wizards of 
ancient times; the creation of such an object 
required both Additive and Subtractive Magic, and 
required the gift of both to be innate. Even then, 
they are so rare that I have never actually seen 
one. 
I have, however, read about them down in the vaults 
at the Palace of the Prophets. Such warning beacons 
are kept viable by a link to the dead wizard who 

created them. 
Richard sat back and let out a troubled breath. 
"How can such a link be possible?" Kahlan asked. 
He hardly had to read between the lines to be able 
to tell that Nicci was warning him in the gravest 
possible terms. 
"It has to be linked somehow to the underworld," 
Richard whispered back. 
Little points of firelight danced in her green eyes 
as she stared at him. 
Kahlan glanced again at Cara as she worked at the 
knots, pulling off one of the leather thongs around 
an object linked to a dead wizard in the 
underworld. Kahlan held up the edge of the letter 
as she urgently read along with him. 
From what I know of such warning beacons, they 
monitor powerful and vital protective shields 
created to seal away something profoundly 
dangerous. They are paired. The first beacon is 
always amber. It is meant to be a warning to the 
one who caused the breach of the seal. The touch of 
a principal or one involved with a principal 
kindles it so it may be recognized for what it is 
and serve as it was intended—as a warning to those 
involved. Only after alerting the one it is meant 
to warn can it be destroyed. I send it to be 
absolutely certain you have seen it. 
The precise nature of the second beacon is unknown 
to me, but that beacon is meant for the one able to 
replace the seal. 
I don't know the nature of the seal or what it was 
protecting. Without doubt, though, the seal has 
been breached. 
The source of the breach, while not the specific 
cause activating this beacon, is self-evident. 
"Oh, now wait a minute," Cara said, standing, 
backing away as if she had released a deadly plague 
from the black quilting, "it isn't my fault this 
time." She pointed down at it. "You told me to, 
this time." 

The translucent statue Cara had touched before now 
stood in the center of its unfolded black quilted 
wrapping. 
It was the same statue: a statue of Kahlan. 
The statue's left arm was pressed to its side, the 
right arm was raised, pointing. The statue, in an 
hourglass shape, looked as if it were made of 
transparent amber, allowing them to see inside. 
Sand trickled out of the top half of the hourglass, 
through the narrowed waist, into the bottom of the 
full dress of the Mother Confessor. 
The sand was still trickling down, just as it had 
been the last time Richard had seen the thing. At 
that time, the top half had been more full than the 
bottom half. Now, the top held less sand than the 
bottom. 
Kahlan's face had gone ashen. 
When he'd first seen it, Richard wouldn't have 
needed Nicci to tell him how dangerous such a thing 
was. He hadn't wanted any of them to touch it. When 
they had first come across it, in a recess of rock 
beside the trail, looking almost like part of the 
rock itself, the thing was opaque, with a dull, 
dark surface, yet it was clearly recognizable as 
Kahlan. It was lying on its side. 
Cara wasn't pleased to find such a thing and didn't 
want to leave a representation of Kahlan lying 
about for anyone to find and to pick up for who-
knew-what. Cara snatched it up, then, even though 
Richard started to yell at her to leave such a 
thing be. 
When she picked it up, it started turning 
translucent. 
In a panic, Cara set it back down. 
That was when the right arm had lifted and pointed 
east. 
That was when they could begin to see through the 
thing, to see the sand inside trickling down. 
The implied danger of the sand running out had them 
all upset. Cara wanted to pick it up again and turn 

it over, to stop the sand from falling. Richard, 
not knowing anything about such an object and 
doubting that so simple a solution would have any 
beneficial effect, hadn't allowed Cara to touch it 
again. He had piled rocks and brush around it so no 
one else would know it was there. Obviously, that 
hadn't worked. 
He knew now that Cara's touch had nothing to do 
with what was happening, except to initiate the 
warning, so he thought to confirm his original 
belief. "Cara, put it down." 
"Down?" 
"On its side—like you wanted to do the last time—to 
see if that will stop the sand." 
Cara stared at him for a moment and then used the 
toe of her boot to tip the figure over on its side. 
The sand continued to run as if it still stood 
upright. 
"How can the sand do that?" Jennsen asked, sounding 
quite shaken. "How can the sand still fall—how can 
it fall sideways?" 
"You can see it?" Kahlan asked. "You can see the 
sand falling?" 
Jennsen nodded. "I sure can, and I have to tell 
you, it's giving my goose bumps goose bumps." 
Richard could only stare at her staring at the 
statue of Kahlan lying on its side. If nothing 
else, the sand running sideways through the statue 
had to be magic. Jennsen was a pillar of Creation, 
a hole in the world, a pristinely ungifted 
offspring of Darken Rahl. She should not be able to 
see magic. 
And yet, she was seeing it. 
"I have to agree with the young lady," Sabar said. 
"That's even more frightening than those big black 
birds that I've seen circling for the last week." 
Kahlan straightened. "You been seeing—" 
When he heard Tom's urgent warning yell, Richard 
rose up in a rush, drawing his sword in one swift 
movement. The unique sound of ringing steel filled 

the night air. 
The magic did not come out with the sword. 
 
 
CHAPTER 14 
 
 
 
KahIan ducked to the side, out of harm’s way, as 
Richard pulled his sword free. The distinctive ring 
of steel being drawn in anger fused with Tom’s 
warning yell still echoing through the surrounding 
hills to send a flash of fright tingling across her 
flesh. As she stared out into the empty blackness 
of the surrounding night, her instinct was to reach 
for her own sword, but she had packed it in the 
wagon rather than wear it, so as not to raise 
suspicions about who they might be—women in the Old 
World did not carry weapons. 
By the light of the fire, Kahlan could clearly see 
Richard’s face. She had seen him draw the Sword of 
Truth countless times and in a variety of 
situations, from that very first time when Zedd, 
after giving him the sword, commanded him to draw 
it and Richard tentatively pulled it from its 
scabbard, to times he pulled it free in the heat of 
battle, to times like this when he drew it suddenly 
in defense. 
When Richard drew the sword, he was also drawing 
its attendant magic. That was the function of the 
weapon; the magic had not been created simply to 
defend the sword’s true owner, but, more 
importantly, to be a projection of his intent. The 
Sword of Truth was not even really a talisman, but 
rather a tool, of the Seeker of Truth. 
The true weapon was the rightly named Seeker who 
wielded the sword. The sword’s magic answered to 
him. 
Each and every one of the times Richard had drawn 
the sword, Kahlan had seen that magic dancing 

dangerously in his gray eyes. 
This was the first time he had drawn the sword that 
she didn't see the magic in his eyes; the raptor's 
glare was pure Richard. 
While seeing him draw the sword without seeing its 
concomitant magic evident in his eyes shocked her, 
it seemed to surprise Richard even more. For an 
instant he hesitated, as if mentally stumbling. 
Before they had time to even wonder what had 
prompted Tom's warning yell, shadowy shapes 
slipping through the cover of the nearby trees 
suddenly stormed out of the darkness and into their 
midst. The sudden sound and fury of bloodcurdling 
cries filled the night air as men rampaged into the 
camp, lit at last by firelight. 
They didn't appear to be soldiers—they weren't 
wearing uniforms— and they weren't attacking as 
soldiers would, with weapons drawn. Kahlan didn't 
see any of the men brandishing swords or axes or 
even knives. 
Weapons or not, there were a lot of men and they 
yelled fierce battle cries as if they intended 
nothing short of bloody murder. She knew, though, 
that the sudden shock of deafening noise was a 
tactic designed to render the intended target 
powerless with fright, making them easier to cut 
down. She knew because she used such tactics 
herself. 
Blade in hand, Richard was fully in his element; 
focused, resolute, ruthlessly committed—even 
without his sword's attendant magic. 
As assailants charged in, the sword, driven by 
Richard's own wrath, flashed through the air, a 
flash of crimson light from the fire's flames 
reflected along the blade's length, lending it a 
fleeting stain of red. In that charged moment of 
attack met, there was a split second when Kahlan 
feared that without the sword's magic, it all might 
go terribly wrong. 
In an instant, the camp that had been so quietly 

tense became pandemonium. Although the attackers 
weren't dressed like soldiers, they were all big 
and as they swept in there was no doubt whatsoever 
as to their hostile intent. 
A man rushing onward threw his arms up to seize 
Richard before his sword could be brought to bear. 
The sword's tip whistled as it came around, driven 
by deadly commitment. The blade severed one of the 
man's raised arms before exploding through his 
skull. The air above the fire filled with a spray 
of blood, bone, and brain. Another man lunged. 
Richard's sword ripped through his chest. In the 
space of two blinks, two men were dead. 
The magic at last seemed to slam into Richard's 
eyes, as if finally catching up with his intent. 
Kahlan couldn't make sense of what the men were 
doing. They attacked without weapons drawn, but 
they seemed no less fierce for it. Their speed, 
numbers, and size, and the angry look of them, were 
enough to make most anyone tremble in fright. 
From the darkness, more men rushed in on them. Cara 
stepped into the path of the attack, lashing out 
with her Agiel. Men cried out in horrifying pain 
when her weapon made contact, causing hesitation 
among the attackers. Sabar, knife to hand, tumbled 
to the ground with one of the men who had seized 
him from behind. Jennsen ducked away from another 
man snatching for her hair. As she spun away from 
him, she slashed his face with her knife. His cries 
joined a strident chorus of others. 
Kahlan realized that it wasn't just men yelling, 
but the horses were also screaming in fright. 
Cara's Agiel against a bull neck brought a 
terrifying shriek. Men yelled with effort and 
shouted orders that were cut off abruptly as 
Richard's sword tore through them. All the yelling 
seemed directed at the task of overwhelming the 
four of them. 
Kahlan understood, then, what was going on. This 
was not an attempt to kill, but to capture. For 

these men, killing would be a great mercy compared 
to what they intended. 
Two of the burly men dove across the fire, arms 
spread wide as if to tackle Richard and Kahlan. 
Cara reached out and seized a fistful of shirt, 
abruptly spinning one of the two around. She drove 
her Agiel into his gut, dropping him to his knees. 
The other man unexpectedly encountered Richard's 
sword thrust straight in with formidable muscle 
driving it. The scream of mortal pain was brief 
before the sword slashed his throat. Cara, standing 
above the man on his knees, pressed her Agiel to 
his chest and gave it a twist that dropped him 
instantly. 
Already, Richard was leaping over the fire to 
penetrate into the brunt of the attack. As his 
boots landed with a thud, his sword cut the man 
atop Sabar nearly in two, spilling his viscera 
across the ground. 
The man Jennsen had slashed rose up only to be met 
by her knife driven by desperate fright. She jumped 
back as he tumbled forward, clutching the base of 
his throat where she had severed his windpipe. Cara 
snagged the man Jennsen didn't see going for her 
back. The Mord-Sith, her face a picture of savage 
resolve, held her Agiel to his throat, following 
him to the ground as he choked on his own blood. 
Then, among the men Richard ripped into, Kahlan saw 
the knives coming out. The men abandoned their 
failed attempt to bring him down by grabbing and 
overpowering him, and decided, instead, to knife 
him. If anything, the threat of the knives served 
only to further unleash Richard's fury. By the look 
in his eyes, the sword's magic seemed to be fully 
engaged in the battle. 
For an instant, Kahlan stood transfixed by the 
sight of Richard so ruthlessly committed to self-
defense that the act of killing became a graceful 
manifestation of art—a dance with death. Compared 
with Richard's fluid movements, the men blundered 

like bulls. Without wasted motion, Richard slipped 
among them as if they were statues, his sword 
delivering unrestrained violence. Each thrust met a 
vital area of the enemy. Each swing sliced through 
flesh and bone. Each turn met an attack and crushed 
it. There was no lost opportunity, no slash that 
missed, no thrust gone wide, no bobble that only 
slightly wounded. Each time he spun past the thrust 
of a blade, met a rush, or turned to a new attack, 
he cut without mercy. 
Kahlan was furious that she didn't have her sword. 
There was no telling how many more men there were. 
She knew all too well what it was like to be 
helpless and overwhelmed by a gang of men. She 
started edging toward the wagon. 
Jennsen and Sabar were both tackled by a burly man 
diving in out of the darkness. As they hit the 
ground, the man landed atop them, knocking the wind 
from them. His big hands pinned their wrists to the 
ground, keeping their knives at bay. 
Richard's blade swept past with lightning speed, 
slicing across the man's back, severing his spine. 
Richard went to a knee as he turned, whipping the 
sword around to impale another attacker rushing in 
at a dead run, trying to get to Richard before he 
could recover. The look on the man's face was a 
picture of horrified surprise as he ran instead 
onto Richard's sword, running it into his own chest 
up to the hilt. The heavy man atop Jennsen and 
Sabar convulsed, unable to draw a breath, as they 
threw him off. Richard, still on one knee, yanked 
the sword free as the mortally wounded man fell 
past him. 
As another man rushed into camp, looking around, 
trying to get his bearings, Cara slammed her Agiel 
against his neck. As he crumbled, she drove her 
elbow up to smash the face of a man following the 
first in, trying to grab her from behind while she 
was occupied. Crying out, his hands covered crushed 
bone and gushing blood. She spun and kicked him 

between the legs. As he fell forward, his hands 
going to his groin, she broke his jaw with her 
knee, turned, and dropped a third man by slamming 
her Agiel to his chest. 
Another attacker threw himself at Sabar, knocking 
him back. Sabar lashed out with his knife, making 
solid contact. Another man saw the opening and 
snatched up Nicci's letter lying on the ground. 
Kahlan dove for the letter in his fist, but missed 
as he yanked his hand back before dashing away. 
Jennsen blocked his escape. He straight-armed her 
as he charged past. Jennsen was knocked reeling, 
but came around to bury her knife between his 
shoulder blades. 
Jennsen managed to keep hold of her knife, twisting 
it forcefully, as the man arched his back with a 
gasp of pain and then a bellow of anger that 
withered to a wet burble before it was fully out of 
his lungs. Jenn-sen's knife had found his heart. He 
staggered, stumbled, and fell onto the fire. The 
flames whooshed to life as his clothing ignited. 
Kahlan tried to snatch the letter from his fist as 
he writhed in horrifying pain, but, with the 
intensity of the heat, she couldn't get close 
enough. 
It was already too late, though; the letter she and 
Richard had only had a chance to partially read 
flared briefly before transforming to black ash 
that disintegrated and lifted skyward in the roar 
of flames. 
Kahlan covered her mouth and nose, gagging on the 
stench of burning hair and flesh as she was driven 
back by the heat. Though it seemed like hours of 
fighting, the assault had only just begun and 
already men lay dead everywhere as yet more of the 
big men joined the attack. 
As she recoiled from the flames and her futile 
attempt to recover the lost letter, Kahlan turned 
again toward the wagon, toward her sword. 
She looked up and saw a man who seemed as big as a 

mountain charging right at her, blocking her way. 
He grinned at seeing that he had run down a woman 
without a weapon. 
Beyond the man, Kahlan saw Richard. Their eyes met. 
He had taken his sword to the bulk of the attack, 
trying to cut it down before it could get to the 
rest of them, trying to end it before harm could 
get to any of the rest of them. 
He couldn't be everywhere at once. 
He wasn't close enough to get to her in time. That 
didn't stop him from trying. Even as he did, Kahlan 
discounted the attempt. He was too far away. The 
effort was futile. 
Looking into the eyes of the man she loved more 
than life itself, she saw his pure rage; she knew 
that Richard was seeing a face that showed nothing: 
a Confessor's face, as her mother had taught her. 
And then the racing enemy came between them, 
blocking their sight of one another. 
Kahlan's vision focused on the man bearing down on 
her. His arms lifted like a bear lost in a mad 
charge. His teeth were gritted with determination. 
A grimace twisted his face in his wild effort to 
reach her before she could dodge to the side, 
before she had a chance to escape. 
She knew he was too close for her to have that 
chance and so she didn't waste any effort in a 
useless attempt. 
This one had made it past the killing. He had 
avoided Jennsen and Sabar. He had figured his 
attack to skirt Richard's blade while making it 
past Cara's Agiel as she turned to another man. He 
hadn't charged in madly like the rest; he had 
delayed just enough to time his onslaught 
perfectly. 
This one knew he was on the verge of having what he 
sought. 
He was far less than a heartbeat away, plunging 
toward her at full speed. 
Kahlan could hear Richard's scream even as her gaze 

met the gleam of the man's dark eyes. 
The man let out a cry of rage as he lunged. His 
feet left the ground as he sailed through the air 
toward her. His wicked grin betrayed his 
confidence. 
Kahlan could see his eyeteeth hooked over his 
cracked lower lip, saw the dark tooth in the front 
of the top row between his other yellow teeth, saw 
the little white hook of a scar, as if he had once 
been eating with a knife and had accidentally 
sliced the corner of his mouth. His stubble looked 
like wire. His left eye didn't open as wide as his 
right. His right ear had a big V-shaped notch taken 
out of the upper portion. It reminded her of the 
way some farmers marked their swine. 
She could see her own reflection in his dark eyes 
as her right arm came up. 
Kahlan wondered if he had a wife, a woman who cared 
for him, missed him, pined for him. She wondered if 
he might have children, and, if he did, what a man 
like this would teach his children. She had a 
momentary flash of the ugliness it would be to have 
this beast atop her, his wire stubble scraping her 
cheek raw, his cracked lips on hers, his yellow 
teeth raking her neck as he lost himself in what he 
wanted. 
Time twisted. 
She held out her arm. The man crashed in toward 
her. She felt the coarse weave of his dark brown 
shirt as the flat of her hand met the center of his 
chest. 
That heartbeat of time she had before he was atop 
her had not yet begun. Richard had not yet managed 
to take a single frantic step. 
The weight of the bear of a man against her hand 
felt as if it were but a baby's breath. To Kahlan, 
it seemed as if he were frozen in space before her. 
Time was hers. 
He was hers. 
The rush of combat, the cries, the yells, the 

screams; the stink of sweat and blood; the flash of 
steel, the clash of bodies; the curses and growls; 
the fear, the terror, the heart-pounding dread... 
the rage ... was no longer there for her. She was 
in a silent world all her own. 
Even though she had been born with it and had 
always felt it there in the core of her being, the 
awesome power within, in many ways, seemed 
incomprehensible, inconceivable, unimaginable, 
remote. She knew it would seem that way until she 
let her restraint slip, and then she would once 
again be joined with a force of such breathtaking 
magnitude that it could only be fully comprehended 
as it was being experienced. Although she had 
unleashed it more times than she could remember, no 
matter how prepared she was the extraordinary 
violence of it always still astonished her. 
She regarded the man before her with cold 
calculation, ready for that violence. 
As he had charged in on her, time had belonged to 
this man. 
Now time belonged to her. 
She could feel the thread count of the fabric of 
his shirt, feel his woolly chest hairs beneath it. 
The heart-pounding shock of the sudden attack, the 
violence of it, was gone now. Now there was only 
this man and her, forever linked by what was to 
happen. This man had consciously chosen his own 
fate when he chose to attack them. Her certainty of 
what was called for carried her beyond the need for 
the assessment of emotion, and she felt none—no 
joy, not even relief; no hate, not even aversion; 
no compassion, not even sorrow. 
 
Kahlan shed those emotions to make way for the rush 
of power, to give it free run. 
Now he had no chance. 
He was hers. 
The man's face was contorted with the intoxicated, 
gloating glee of his certitude that he was the 

glorious victor who would have her, that he was now 
the one to decide what was to become of her life, 
that she was but his to plunder. 
Kahlan unleashed her power. 
By her deliberate intent, the subordinate state of 
her birthright instantly altered into overpowering 
force able to alter the very nature of 
consciousness. 
 
In the man's dark eyes had come the spark of 
suspicion that something which he could not 
comprehend had irrevocably begun. And then there 
came the lightning recognition that his life, as he 
had known it, was over. Everything he wanted, 
thought about, worked toward, hoped for, prayed 
for, possessed, loved, hated ... was ended. 
In her eyes he saw no mercy, and that, more than 
anything, brought him stark terror. 
Thunder without sound jolted the air. 
In that instant, the violence of it was as 
pristine, as beautiful, as exquisite, as it was 
horrific. 
That heartbeat of time Kahlan had before he was on 
her had still not yet begun. 
She could see in the man's eyes that even thought 
itself was too late for him, now. Perception itself 
was being outpaced by the race of brutal magic 
tearing through his mind, destroying forever who 
this man had been. 
The force of the concussion jolted the air. 
The stars shuddered. 
Sparks from the fire lashed along the ground as the 
shock spread outward in a ring, driving dust before 
its passing. Trees shook when hit by the blow, 
shedding needles and leaves as the raging wave 
swept past. 
He was hers. 
His full weight flying forward knocked Kahlan back 
a step as she twisted out of the way. The man flew 
past her and crashed to the ground, sprawling on 

his face. 
Without an instant of hesitation, he scrambled up 
onto his knees. His hands came up in prayerful 
supplication. Tears flooded his eyes. His mouth, 
which only an instant before was so warped with 
perverted expectation, now distorted with the agony 
of pure anguish. 
 
"Please, Mistress," he wailed, "command me!" 
Kahlan regarded him, for the first time in his new 
life, with an emotion: contempt. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER  15 
 
 
 
         O'nly the sound of Betty's soft, 
frightened bleating drifted out over the otherwise 
silent campsite. Bodies lay sprawled haphazardly 
across the ground. The attack appeared to be over. 
Richard, sword in hand, rushed through the carnage 
to get to Kahlan. Jennsen stood near the edge of 
the fire's light, while Cara checked the bodies for 
any sign of life. 
Kahlan left the man she had just touched with her 
power kneeling in the dirt, stalking past him 
toward Jennsen. Richard met her halfway there, his 
free arm sweeping around her with relief. 
"Are you all right?" 
Kahlan nodded, quickly appraising their camp, on 
the lookout for any more attackers, but saw only 
the men who were dead. 
"What about you?" she asked. 
Richard didn't seem to hear her question. His arm 
slipped from her waist. "Dear spirits," he said, as 
he rushed to one of the bodies lying on its side. 
It was Sabar. 
Jennsen stood not far away, trembling with terror, 

her knife held up defensively in a fist, her eyes 
wide. Kahlan gathered Jennsen in her arms, 
whispering assurance that it was over, that it was 
ended, that she was all right. 
Jennsen clutched at Kahlan. "Sabar—he was—
protecting me—" 
"I know, I know," Kahlan comforted. 
She could see that there was no urgency in 
Richard's movements as he laid Sabar on his back. 
The young man's arm flopped lifelessly to the side. 
Kahlan's heart sank. 
Tom ran into camp, gasping for air. He was streaked 
with blood and sweat. Jennsen wailed and flew into 
his arms. He embraced her protectively, holding her 
head to his shoulder as he tried to regain his 
breath. 
Betty bleated in dismay from beneath the wagon, 
hesitantly emerging only after Jennsen called 
repeated encouragement to her. The puling goat 
finally rushed to Jennsen and huddled trembling 
against her skirts. Tom kept a wary watch of the 
surrounding darkness. 
Cara calmly walked among the bodies, surveying them 
for any sign of life. With most, there could be no 
question. Here and there she nudged one with the 
toe of her boot, or with the tip of her Agiel. By 
her lack of urgency, there was no question that 
they were all dead. 
Kahlan put a tender hand to Richard's back as he 
crouched beside Sabar's body. 
"How many people must die," he asked in a low, 
bitter voice, "for the crime of wanting to be free, 
for the sin of wanting to live their own life?" 
She saw that he still held the Sword of Truth in a 
white-knuckled fist. The sword's magic, which had 
come out so reluctantly, still danced dangerously 
in his eyes. 
"How many!" he repeated. 
"I don't know, Richard," Kahlan whispered. 
Richard turned a glare toward the man across the 

camp, still on his knees, his hands pressed 
together in a beseeching gesture begging to be 
commanded, fearing to speak. 
Once touched by a Confessor, the person was no 
longer who they had once been. That part of their 
mind was forever gone. Who they were, what they 
were, no longer existed. 
In its place the magic of a Confessor's power 
placed unqualified devotion to the wants and wishes 
of the Confessor who had touched them. Nothing else 
mattered. Their only purpose in life, now, was to 
fulfill her commands, to do her bidding, to answer 
her every question. 
For one thus touched, there was no crime they 
wouldn't confess, if she asked it of them. It was 
for this alone that Confessors had been created. 
Their purpose, in a way, was the same as the 
Seeker's—the truth. In war, as in all other aspects 
of life, there was no more important commodity for 
survival than the truth. 
This man, kneeling not far away, cried in abject 
misery because Kahlan had asked nothing of him. 
There could be no agony more ghastly, no void more 
terrifying, than to be empty of knowing her wish. 
Existence without her wish was pointless. In the 
absence of her command, men touched by a Confessor 
had been known to die. 
Anything she now asked of him, whether it be to 
tell her his name, confess his true love's name, or 
to murder his beloved mother, would bring him 
boundless joy because he would finally have a task 
to carry out for her. 
"Let's find out what this is all about," Richard 
said in a low growl. 
In exhaustion, Kahlan stared at the man on his 
knees. She was so weary she could hardly stand. 
Sweat trickled down between her breasts. She needed 
rest, but this problem was more immediate and 
needed to be attended to first. 
On their way to the man waiting on his knees, his 

eyes turned expectantly up toward Kahlan, Richard 
halted. There, in the dirt before his boots, was 
the remains of the statue Sabar had brought to 
them. It was broken into a hundred pieces, none of 
them any longer recognizable except that those 
pieces were still a translucent amber color. 
Nicci's letter had said that they didn't need the 
statue, now that it had given its warning—a warning 
that Kahlan had somehow broken a protective shield 
sealing away something profoundly dangerous. 
Kahlan didn't know what the seal protected, but she 
feared that she knew all too well what she had done 
to break it. 
She feared even more that, because of her, the 
magic of Richard's sword had begun to falter. 
As Kahlan stood staring down at the amber fragments 
ground into the dirt, despair flooded into her. 
Richard's arm circled her waist. "Don't let your 
imagination get carried away. We don't know what 
this is about, yet. We can't even be certain that 
it's true—it could even be some kind of mistake." 
Kahlan wished that she could believe that. 
   Richard finally slid his sword back into its 
scabbard. "Do you want to rest first, sit a bit?" 
   His concern for her took precedence over 
everything. From the first day she met him, it 
always had. Right then, it was his well-being that 
concerned her. 
   Using her power sapped a Confessor of strength. 
It had left Kahlan feeling not only weak, but, this 
time, nauseated. She had been named to the post of 
Mother Confessor, in part, because her power was so 
strong that she was able to recover it in hours; 
for others it had taken a day or sometimes two. At 
the thought of all those other Confessors, some of 
whom she'd dearly loved, being long dead, Kahlan 
felt the weight of hopelessness pulling her even 
lower. 
   To fully recover her strength, she would need a 
night's rest. At the moment, though, there were 

more important considerations, not the least of 
which was Richard. 
   "No," she said. "I'm all right. I can rest 
later. Let's ask him what you will." 
   Richard's gaze moved over the campsite littered 
with limbs, entrails, bodies. The ground was soaked 
with blood. The stench of it all, along with the 
still smoldering body beside the fire, was making 
Kahlan sicker by the second. She turned away from 
the man on his knees, toward Richard, into the 
protection of his arms. She was exhausted. 
   "And then let's get away from this place," she 
said. "We need to get away from here. There might 
be more men coming." Kahlan worried that if he had 
to draw the sword again, he might not have the help 
of its magic. "We need to find a more secure camp." 
   Richard nodded his agreement. He looked over her 
head as he held her to his chest. Despite 
everything, or perhaps because of everything, it 
felt wonderful simply to be held. She could hear 
Friedrich just rushing back into camp, panting as 
he ran. He stumbled to a halt as he let out a moan 
of astonishment mixed with revulsion at what he 
saw. 
   "Tom, Friedrich," Richard asked, "do you have 
any idea if there are any more men coming?" 
"I don't think so," Tom said. "I think they were 
together. I caught them coming up a gully. I was 
going to try to make it back here to warn you, but 
four of them came over a rise and jumped me while 
the rest ran for our camp." 
   "I didn't see anyone, Lord Rahl," Friedrich 
said, catching his breath. "I came running when I 
heard the yelling." 
   Richard acknowledged Friedrich's words with a 
reassuring hand on the man's shoulder. "Help Tom 
get the horses hitched. I don't want to spend the 
night here." 
As the two men sprang into action, Richard turned 
to Jennsen. 

   "Please lay out some bedrolls in the back of the 
wagon, will you? I'd like Kahlan to be able to lie 
down and rest when we move out." 
   Jennsen patted Betty's shoulder, urging the goat 
to follow her. "Of course, Richard." She hurried 
off to the wagon, Betty trotting along close at her 
side. 
   As everyone rushed as quickly as possible to get 
their things together, Richard went by himself to 
an open patch of ground nearby to dig a shallow 
grave. There was no time for a funeral pyre. A 
lonely grave was the best they could do, but 
Sabar's spirit was gone, and wouldn't fault the 
necessity of their hurried care for his body. 
   Kahlan reconsidered her thought. After the 
letter from Nicci and learning the meaning of the 
warning beacon, she now had even more reason to 
doubt that many things, including spirits, were 
still true. The world of the dead was connected to 
the world of the living by links of magic. The veil 
itself was magic and said to be within those like 
Richard. They had learned that without magic those 
links themselves could fail, and that, since those 
other worlds couldn't exist independent of the 
world of life, but only existed in a relational 
sense to the world of life, should the links fail 
completely, those other worlds might very well 
cease to exist—much as, without the sun, the 
concept of daytime would not exist. 
   It was now clear to Kahlan that the world's hold 
on magic was slipping, and had been slipping for 
several years. 
She knew the reason. 
   Spirits, the good and the bad, and the existence 
of everything else that depended on magic, might 
soon be lost. That meant that death would become 
final, in every sense of the word. It could even be 
that there was no longer the possibility of being 
with a loved one after death, or of being with the 
good spirits. The good spirits, even the underworld 

itself, might be passing into nothingness. 
   When Richard was finished, Tom helped him gently 
place Sabar's body in the ground. After Tom spoke 
quiet words asking the good spirits to watch over 
one of their own, he and Richard covered the body 
over. 
   "Lord Rahl," Tom said in a low voice when they 
were finished, "while some of the men began the 
attack on you, here, others slit the horses' 
throats before joining their fellows to come after 
you four." 
"All the horses?" 
   "Except mine. My draft horses are pretty big. 
The men were probably worried about getting 
trampled. They left some men to take care of me, so 
these here thought they had me out of the way. They 
probably figured they could worry about the draft 
horses later, after they had the rest of you." Tom 
shrugged his broad shoulders. "Maybe they even 
planned to capture you, tie you up, and take you in 
the wagon." 
   Richard acknowledged Tom's words with a single 
nod. He wiped his fingers across his forehead. 
Kahlan thought he looked worse than she felt. She 
could see that the headache had returned and was 
crushing him under the weight of its pain. 
   Tom looked around their camp, his gaze playing 
over the fallen men. "What should we do with the 
rest of the bodies?" 
   "The races can have the rest of them," Richard 
said without hesitation. 
   Tom didn't look to have any disagreement with 
that. "I'd better go help Friedrich finish getting 
the horses hitched to the wagon. They'll be a 
handful with the scent of blood in their nostrils 
and the sight of the others dead." 
   As Tom went to see to his horses, Richard called 
to Cara. "Count the bodies," he told her. "We need 
to know the total." 
   "Richard," Kahlan asked in a confidential tone 

after Tom was out of earshot and Cara had started 
stepping over some of the bodies and between 
others, going about the task of taking a count, 
"what happened when you drew the sword?" 
He didn't ask what she meant or try to spare her 
from worry. 
"There's something wrong with its magic. When I 
drew the sword, it failed to heed my call. The men 
were rushing in and I couldn't delay in what I had 
to do. Once I met the attack, the magic finally 
reacted. 
   "It's probably due to the headaches from the 
gift—they must be interfering with my ability to 
join with the sword's magic." 
   "The last time you had the headaches they didn't 
interfere with the sword's power." 
   "I told you, don't let your imagination get 
carried away. This has only happened since I've 
started getting the headaches again. That has to be 
the reason." 
   Kahlan didn't know if she dared believe him, or 
if he really even believed it himself. He was 
right, though. The problem with the sword's magic 
had only recently developed—after he started 
getting the headaches. 
"They're getting worse, aren't they?" 
He nodded. "Come on, let's get what answers we 
can." 
   Kahlan let out a tired sigh, resigned to that 
part of it. They had to use this chance to find out 
what information was now available to them. 
Kahlan turned to the man still on his knees. 
                                                              
 
 
 
                                                               
CHAPTER 16 
 
 

 
 The man's tearful eyes gazed pleadingly up at 
Kahlan as she stepped in front of him. He had been 
waiting, alone and without her wishes, for quite a 
while and as a result was in a state of dire 
misery. 
   "You are to come with us," Kahlan told him in a 
cold tone. "You are to walk in front of the wagon 
for now, where we can keep an eye on you. You will 
obey the orders of any of the others with me as you 
would obey my orders. You will answer all questions 
truthfully." 
   The man fell to his belly on the ground, in 
tears, kissing her feet, thanking her profusely for 
at last commanding him. Groveling on the ground, 
with that V-shaped notch in his ear, he reminded 
her of nothing so much as a swine. 
   Fists at her side, Kahlan screamed "Stop that!" 
She didn't want this murdering pig touching her. 
   He sprang back instantly, aghast at the rage in 
her voice, horror-struck that she was displeased 
with him. He cringed motionless at her feet, his 
eyes wide, fearful that he would do something else 
to displease her. 
   "You aren't in a uniform," Richard said to the 
man. "You and the other men aren't soldiers?" 
   "We're soldiers, just not regular soldiers," the 
man said with eager excitement to be able to answer 
the question and thus do Kahlan's bidding. "We're 
special men serving with the Imperial Order." 
"Special? How are you special?" 
   With a hint of uncertainty in his wet eyes, the 
man looked nervously up at Kahlan. She gave him no 
sign. She had already told him that he was to 
follow all their orders. The man, at last certain 
of her intention, rushed to go on. 
   "We're a special unit of men—with the army—our 
task is to capture enemies of the Order—we have to 
pass tests to be sure we're able men—loyal men—and 
that we can accomplish the missions we're sent on—" 

"Slow down," Richard said. "You're talking too 
fast." 
   The man glanced quickly at Kahlan, his eyes 
filling with tears that he might have displeased 
her, too. 
"Go on," she said. 
   "We don't wear uniforms or let our purpose be 
known," the man said with obvious relief that if he 
continued it would satisfy her. "Usually we work in 
cities, searching out insurrectionists. We mingle 
with people, get them to think of us as one of 
them. When they plot against the Order, we go along 
until we find out the names of all those involved 
and then we capture them and turn them over for 
questioning." 
   Richard stared down at the man for a long time, 
his face showing no reaction. Richard had been in 
the hands of the Order and "questioned." Kahlan 
could only imagine what he must have been thinking. 
   "And do you hand over only those who you know to 
be plotting against the Order?" Richard asked. "Or 
do you simply turn in those you suspect and anyone 
who they know?" 
   "If we suspect they might be plotting—like if 
they keep to themselves and their own group, and 
won't open their lives to other citizens—then we 
turn them in to be questioned so that it can be 
determined what they might be hiding." The man 
licked his lips, keen to tell them the full extent 
of his methods. "We talk to those they work with, 
or neighbors, and get the names of anyone they 
associate with, any of their friends—sometimes even 
their closest family members. We usually take at 
least some of them, too, and turn them over for 
questioning. When they're questioned, they all 
confess their crimes against the Order so that 
proves our suspicions about them were right." 
   Kahlan thought that Richard might draw his sword 
and behead the man on the spot. Richard knew all 
too well what they did to those who were brought 

in, knew how hopeless was their plight. 
   Confessions obtained under torture often 
provided names of anyone who might be suspicious 
for any reason, making the job of torturing a very 
busy profession. The people of the Old World lived 
in constant fear that they would be taken to one of 
the many places where people were questioned. 
   Those pulled in were rarely guilty of plotting 
against the Order; most people were too busy just 
trying to survive, trying to feed their families, 
to have time to plot to overthrow the rule of the 
Imperial Order. Many people did, however, talk 
about a better life, about what they would like to 
do, to grow, to create, to own, about their hopes 
that their children would have a better life than 
theirs. Since mankind's duty was sacrifice to the 
betterment of their fellow man, not to their own 
betterment, that, to the Imperial Order, was not 
just insurrection, but blasphemy. In the Old World, 
misery was a widespread virtue, a duty to a higher 
calling. 
   There were others who didn't dream of a better 
life, but dreamed of helping the Order by turning 
in the names of those who spoke ill of the Order, 
or hid food or even a bit of money, or talked of a 
better life. Turning in such "disloyal citizens" 
kept yet other fingers from pointing at the 
informer. Informing became an indicator of 
sanctity. 
   Instead of drawing his sword, Richard changed 
the subject. "How many of you were there, tonight?" 
"Including me, twenty-eight," the man said without 
delay. 
"Were you all together in one group when you 
attacked?" 
   The man nodded, keen to admit their whole plan 
and thus gain Kah-lan's approval. "We wanted to 
make sure you and, and..." His eyes turned to 
Kahlan as he realized the incompatibility of his 
two goals— confessing and pleasing the Mother 

Confessor. 
   He burst into tears, clasping his hands 
prayerfully. "Forgive me, Mistress! Please, forgive 
me!" 
   If his voice was the quintessence of emotion, 
hers was the opposite. "Answer the question." 
He brought his sobbing to a halt in order to speak 
as he had been commanded. Tears, though, continued 
to stream down his filthy cheeks. "We stayed 
together for a focused attack, so we could be sure 
that we captured Lord Rahl and, and... you, Mother 
Confessor. When trying to capture a good-size group 
we split up, with half holding back to look for 
anyone who might try to slip away, but I told the 
men that I wanted the both of you, and you were 
said to be together, so this was our chance. I 
didn't want to run the risk that you would have any 
hope of fighting us off, so I ordered all the men 
to the attack, having some cut the throats of the 
saddle horses, first, to prevent any possibility of 
escape." 
His face brightened. "I never suspected that we 
might fail." 
"Who sent you?" Kahlan asked. 
   The man shuffled forward on his knees, his hand 
tentatively coming up to touch her leg. Kahlan 
remained motionless, but by her icy glare let him 
know that touching her would displease her greatly. 
The hand backed away. 
"Nicholas," he said. 
   Kahlan's brow twitched. She had been expecting 
him to say Jagang had sent him. 
   She was wary of the possibility that the dream 
walker might be watching through this man's eyes. 
Jagang had in the past sent assassins after he had 
slipped into their thoughts. With Jagang in a 
person's mind, he dominated and directed them, and 
even Cara could not control them. Nor, for that 
matter, could Kahlan. 
"You're lying to me. Jagang sent you." 

   The man fell to pitiful weeping. "No, Mistress! 
I've never had any dealings with His Excellency. 
The army is vast and far-flung. I take my orders 
from those in my section. I don't think that the 
ones they take orders from, or their commanders, or 
even theirs, are worthy of His Excellency's 
attention. His Excellency is far to the north, 
bringing the word of the Order's salvation to a 
lawless and savage people; he would not even be 
aware of us. 
   "We are but a lowly squad of men with the muscle 
to snatch people the Order wants, either for 
questioning or to silence them. We are all from 
this part of the empire and so we were called upon 
because we were here. I am not worthy of the 
attention of His Excellency." 
   "But Jagang has visited you—in your dreams. He 
has visited your mind." 
   "Mistress?" The man looked terrified to have to 
question her rather than answer her question. "I 
don't understand." 
   Kahlan stared. "Jagang has come into your mind. 
He has spoken to you." 
   He looked sincerely puzzled as he shook his 
head. "No, Mistress. I have never met His 
Excellency. I have never dreamed about him—I don't 
know anything about him, except that Altur'Rang has 
the honor of being the place where he was born. 
   "Would you like me to kill him for you, 
Mistress? Please, if it is your wish, allow me to 
kill him for you?" 
   The man didn't know how preposterous such a 
notion was; in his desire to please her, though, if 
she commanded it he would be only too happy to make 
the attempt. Kahlan turned her back on the man as 
Richard watched him. 
   She leaned toward Richard a bit as she spoke 
quietly, so the man wouldn't hear. "I don't know if 
those visited by the dream walker must always be 
aware of it, but I think they would be. The ones 

I've seen before were mindful of Jagang's presence 
in their mind." 
   "Couldn't the dream walker slip into a person's 
mind without their being aware of it just so he 
could watch us?" 
   "I suppose it's possible," she said. "But think 
of all the millions of people in the Old World—he 
can't know whose mind to enter so he can watch. 
Dream walker or not, he is only one man." 
"Are you gifted?" Richard asked the man. 
"No." 
   "Well," Richard whispered, "Nicci told me that 
Jagang rarely bothers with the ungifted. She said 
that it was difficult for him to take the mind of 
the ungifted, so he simply uses the gifted he 
controls and has them control the ungifted for him. 
He has all the Sisters he's captured that he has to 
worry about. He has to maintain his control over 
them and direct their actions—including what we 
started to read in Nicci's letter—about how he's 
guiding the Sisters in altering people into 
weapons. Besides that he heads the army and plans 
strategy. He has a lot of things to manage, so he 
usually confines himself to the minds of the 
gifted." 
   "But not always. If he has to, if he needs to, 
if he wants to, he can enter the minds of the 
ungifted. If we were smart," Kahlan whispered, "we 
would kill this man now." 
   As they spoke, Richard's glare never left the 
man. She knew he would not hesitate to agree unless 
he thought the man might still be of use. 
   "I have but to command it," Kahlan reminded him, 
"and he will drop dead." 
   Richard took in her eyes for a moment, then 
turned back to the man and frowned. "You said 
someone named Nicholas sent you. Who is this 
Nicholas?" 
"Nicholas is a fearsome wizard in the service of 
the Order." 

"You saw him. He gave you these orders?" 
   "No. We are too lowly for one such as he to 
bother with us. He sent orders that were passed 
down." 
"How did you know where we were?" Richard asked. 
   "The orders included the general area. They said 
that we should look for you coming north at the 
eastern edge of the desert wasteland and if we 
found you we were to capture you." 
"How did Nicholas know where we were?" 
   The man blinked, as if searching his mind to see 
if he had the answer. "I don't know. We weren't 
told how he knew. We were told only that we were to 
search this area and if we found you we were to 
bring you both in, alive. The commander who passed 
on the orders told me not to fail or the Slide 
would be very displeased with us." 
"Who would be displeased? ... The Slide?" 
   "Nicholas the Slide. That is what he's called. 
Some people just call him 'the Slide.' " 
Frowning, Kahlan turned back to the man. "The 
what?" 
The man began trembling at her frown. "The Slide, 
Mistress." 
"What does that mean? The Slide?" 
   The man fell to wailing, his hands clasped 
together again as he begged her forgiveness. "I 
don't know, Mistress. I don't know. You asked who 
sent me, that is his name. Nicholas. People call 
him the Slide." 
"Where is he?" Richard asked. 
   "I don't know," the man blurted out as he wept. 
"I received my orders from my commander. He said 
that a Brother of the Order brought the orders to 
his commander." 
   Richard took a deep breath as he rubbed the back 
of his neck. "What else do you know about this 
Nicholas, other than that he's a wizard and he's 
called 'the Slide'?" 
"I only know to fear him, as do my commanders." 

"Why? What happens if you displease him?" Kahlan 
asked. 
"He impales those who displease him." 
   With the stench of blood and burning flesh, 
along with the things she was hearing, it was all 
Kahlan could do to keep from being sick. She didn't 
know how much longer her stomach could take it if 
they stayed in this place, if this man told her 
anything else. 
   Kahlan gently grasped Richard's forearm. 
"Please, Richard," she whispered, "this isn't 
really getting us anything very useful. Please, 
let's get out of here? If we think of anything, we 
can question him more later." 
   "Get out in front of the wagon," Richard said 
without hesitation. "I don't want her having to 
look at you." 
The man bobbed his head and scrambled away. 
   "I don't think Jagang is in his mind," Kahlan 
said, "but what if I'm wrong?" 
   "For now, I think we should keep him alive. Out 
in front of the wagon, Tom will have a clear view 
of him. If we're wrong, well, Tom is very quick 
with his knife." Richard let out a shallow breath. 
"I've already learned something important." 
"What?" 
   His hand in the small of her back started her 
moving. "Let's get going and I'll tell you about 
it." 
   Kahlan could see the wagon waiting in the 
distant darkness. Tom's eyes followed the man as he 
ran out in front of the big draft horses and stood 
waiting. Jennsen and Cara were in the back of the 
wagon. Friedrich sat up on the seat beside Tom. 
   "How many?" Richard called to Cara as they 
approached the wagon. 
   "With the four out in the hills that Tom took 
care of, and this one, here, twenty-eight." 
"That's all of them, then," Richard said with 
relief. 

   Kahlan felt his hand on the small of her back 
slip away. He staggered to a halt. Kahlan paused 
beside him, not knowing why he'd stopped. Richard 
sank to one knee. Kahlan dropped down beside him, 
throwing an arm around him for support. He squeezed 
his eyes shut in pain. With his arm pressed across 
his abdomen, he doubled over. 
Cara leaped over the side of the wagon and raced to 
their side. 
   Despite how exhausted Kahlan was, panic jolted 
her instantly to full alert. "We need to get to the 
sliph," she said to Cara as well as Richard. "We 
need to get to Zedd and get some answers—and some 
help. Zedd can help." 
   Richard drew labored breaths, unable to speak as 
he held his breath against a wave of agony. Kahlan 
felt helpless not knowing what to do to help him. 
   "Lord Rahl," Cara said, kneeling before him, 
"you have been taught to control pain. You must do 
that, now." She seized a fistful of his hair and 
lifted his head to be able to look into his eyes. 
"Think," she commanded. "Remember. Put the pain in 
its place. Do it!" 
   Richard clutched her forearm as if to thank her 
for her words. "Can't," he finally managed to say 
to Kahlan through his obvious suffering. "We can't 
go in the sliph." 
"We must," she insisted. "The sliph is the fastest 
way." 
   "And if I step down into the sliph, breathe in 
that quicksilver creature—and my magic fails?" 
   Kahlan was frantic. "But we must go in the sliph 
to get there in a hurry." She feared to say "in 
time." 
   "And if anything is wrong, I'll die." He panted, 
trying to catch his breath against the pain. 
"Without magic, breathing the sliph is death. The 
sword is failing me." He swallowed, coughed, gasped 
for breath. "If my gift is causing the headaches, 
and that's making magic falter in me, and I enter 

the sliph, I will be dead after I take the first 
breath. There's no way to test it." 
An icy wave of terror shot through her veins. 
Getting to Zedd was Richard's only hope. That had 
been her plan. Without help, the headaches of the 
gift would kill him. 
   She feared, though, that she knew why the magic 
of his sword was failing, and it wasn't the 
headaches. She feared that it was in fact the same 
thing that had caused the seal to be broken. The 
warning beacon testified that she was the cause of 
that. If it was true, then she was the cause of 
that and much more. 
   If she was right, she realized, if it was true, 
then Richard was right about the sliph—going into 
the sliph would indeed be death. If she was right, 
then he wouldn't even be able to call the sliph, 
much less travel by it. 
   "Richard Rahl, if you're going to throw mud on 
my best ideas then you had better have an idea of 
your own to offer in its place." 
   He was gasping, now, in the clutch of violent 
pain. And then Kahlan saw blood when he coughed. 
"Richard!" 
   Tom, looking alarmed, raced up beside them. When 
he saw the blood running down Richard's chin, he 
turned ashen. 
   "Help him to the wagon," Kahlan said, trying to 
keep her voice steady. 
   Cara put her shoulder under his arm. Tom circled 
an arm around Richard and helped Kahlan and Cara 
lift him to his feet. 
"Nicci," Richard said. 
"What?" Kahlan asked. 
   "You wanted to know if I had an idea. Nicci." He 
gasped in pain and struggled to get his breath. Yet 
more blood came when he coughed. It was dripping 
off his chin. 
   Nicci was a sorceress, not a wizard. Richard 
needed a wizard. Even if they had to travel 

overland, they could race there. "But Zedd would be 
better able—" 
   "Zedd is too far," he said. "We need to get to 
Nicci. She can use both sides of the gift." 
Kahlan hadn't thought of that. Maybe she really 
could help. 
   Halfway to the wagon, Richard collapsed. It was 
all they could do to hold up his dead weight. With 
Tom gripping him under the backs of his shoulders 
and Cara and Kahlan each holding a leg, they ran 
the rest of the way to the wagon. 
   Tom, without the need of help from Cara and 
Kahlan, hoisted Richard into the back of the wagon. 
Jennsen hurriedly unfurled another bedroll. They 
laid Richard out as carefully as they could. Kahlan 
felt as if she were watching herself react, move, 
talk. She refused to allow herself to give in to 
panic. 
   Kahlan and Jennsen tried to lean in, to see how 
he was, but Cara shoved them back out of the way. 
She bent over Richard, putting her ear to his 
mouth, listening. Her fingers felt for a pulse at 
the side of his throat. Her other hand cupped the 
back of his neck, no doubt preparing to hold him to 
give him the breath of life if she had to. Mord-
Sith were knowledgeable about such things; they 
knew how to keep people alive in order to extend 
their torture. Cara knew how to use that knowledge 
to help save lives, too. 
   "He's breathing," Cara said as she straightened. 
She laid a comforting hand on Kahlan's arm. "He's 
breathing easier now." 
   Kahlan nodded her thanks, unwilling to test her 
voice. She moved in closer to Richard, on the other 
side, while Cara wiped the blood from his chin and 
mouth. Kahlan felt helpless. She didn't know what 
to do. 
   "We'll ride all night," Tom said over his 
shoulder as he climbed up into the driver's seat. 
Kahlan forced herself to think. They had to get to 

Nicci. 
   "No," she said. "It's a long way to Altur'Rang. 
We're not near any roads; picking our way cross 
country in the dark is foolhardy. If we're reckless 
and push too hard we'll just end up killing the 
horses—or they could break a leg, which would be 
just as bad. If we lose the horses, we can't very 
well carry Richard all the way and expect to make 
it in time. 
   "The wisest thing to do is to go just as fast as 
we possibly can, but we also have to get rest along 
the way to be ready should we be attacked again. We 
have to use our heads or we'll never make it." 
   Jennsen held Richard's hand in both of hers. "He 
has that headache, and he fought all those men—
maybe if he can just get some sleep, he'll be 
better, then." 
   Kahlan was buoyed by that thought, even though 
she didn't think it was that simple. She stood in 
the wagon bed, looking out at the man waiting for 
her to command him. 
   "Are there any more of you? Any more sent to 
attack us or capture us? Did this Nicholas send 
anyone else?" 
"Not that I'm aware of, Mistress." 
   Kahlan spoke softly to Tom. "If he even looks 
like he's going to cause any trouble, don't 
hesitate. Kill him." 
   With a nod, Tom readily agreed. Kahlan dropped 
back down and felt Richard's brow. His skin was 
cold and wet. 
   "We'd best go on until we find a place that will 
be easier to defend. I think Jennsen is right that 
he needs rest; I don't think bouncing around in the 
back of this wagon is going to help him. We'll all 
need to get some rest and then start out at first 
light." 
   "We need to find a horse," Cara said. "The wagon 
is too slow. If we can find a horse, I'll ride like 
the wind, find Nicci, and start back with her. That 

way we don't have to wait all the way until we get 
there in the wagon." 
   "Good idea." Kahlan looked up at Tom. "Let's get 
going—find a place to stop for the night." 
   Tom nodded as he threw off the brake. At his 
urging, the horses heaved their weight against the 
names and the wagon lurched ahead. 
   Betty, puling softly, lay beside an unconscious 
Richard and put her head down on his shoulder. 
Jennsen stroked Betty's head. 
   Kahlan saw tears running down Jennsen's cheeks. 
"I'm sorry about Rusty." 
Betty's head came up. She let out a pitiful bleat. 
   Jennsen nodded. "Richard will be all right," she 
said, her voice choked with tears as she took 
Kahlan's hand. "I know he will." 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 17 
 
 
 
Zedd thought he heard something. 
   The spoonful of stew he was about to put into 
his waiting mouth paused. He remained motionless, 
listening. 
   The Keep often had sounded alive to him, as if 
it were breathing. Once in a while it even sounded 
as if it were letting out a small sigh. Ever since 
he was a boy, Zedd had, on occasion, heard loud 
snaps that he never could trace. He suspected such 
sounds were most likely the massive stone blocks 
moving just a tad, popping as they yielded ground 
against a neighbor. There were stone blocks down in 
the foundations of the Keep that were the size of 
small palaces. 
   Once, when Zedd was no more than ten or twelve, 
a loud crack had rung through the entire Keep as if 

the place had been struck with a giant hammer. He 
ran out of the library, where he'd been studying, 
to see other people coming out of rooms all up and 
down the hall, looking about, whispering their 
worries to one another. Zedd's father had later 
told him that it was found to be nothing more than 
one of the huge foundation blocks cracking 
suddenly, and while it posed no structural problem, 
the abrupt snap of such an enormous piece of 
granite had been heard throughout the Keep. 
Although such occurrences were rare, it was not the 
last time he heard such a harmless, but 
frightening, sound in the Keep. 
   And then there were the animals. Bats flew 
unrestricted through parts of the Keep. There were 
towers that soared to dizzying heights, some empty 
inside but for stone stairs curving up around the 
inside of the outer wall on their way up to a small 
room at the top, or an observation deck. In the 
dusty streamers of sunlight penetrating the dark 
interiors of those towers there could be seen 
myriad bugs flitting about. The bats loved the 
towers. 
   Rats, too, lived in parts of the Keep. They 
scurried and squeaked, sometimes causing a fright. 
Mice were common in places, making noise scratching 
and gnawing at things. And then there were the 
cats, offspring of former mousers and pets, but now 
all wild, that lived off the rats and the mice. The 
cats also hunted the birds that flew in and out of 
uncovered openings to feed on bugs, or to build 
nests up in high recesses. 
   There were sometimes awful sounds when a bat, a 
mouse, a bird, or even a cat went somewhere they 
weren't permitted. The shields were meant to keep 
people away from dangerous or restricted areas, but 
they were also placed to prevent unauthorized 
access to many of the items stored and preserved in 
the Keep. The shields guarded against life; they 
made no distinction between human and nonhuman 

life. 
   Otherwise, after all, a pet dog that innocently 
wandered into a restricted area could theoretically 
retrieve a dangerous talisman and proudly take it 
to a child master who could be put in peril by it. 
Those who placed the shields were aware that it was 
also possible for unscrupulous people to train 
animals to go to restricted areas, snatch whatever 
they might be able to carry, and bring it to them. 
Not knowing what animal might potentially be 
trained for such a task, the shields were made to 
ward all life. If a bat flew into the wrong shield, 
it was incinerated. 
   There were shields in the Keep that even Zedd 
could not get through because they required both 
sides of the gift and he had only the Additive. 
   Some of the shields took the form of a barrier 
of magic that physically prevented passage in some 
way, either by restricting movement or by inducing 
a sensation so unpleasant that one wouldn't force 
oneself beyond. Those shields were meant to prevent 
ungifted people or children from entering certain 
areas, not to prevent entrance to the gifted, so it 
was not necessary for those shields to kill. 
But such shields only worked for those who were 
ungifted. 
   In other places, entrance was strictly forbidden 
to anyone but those with not only the appropriate 
ability, but proper authority. Without both the 
appropriate ability and authority granted by spells 
keyed to the particular defenses in that area, such 
as metal plates that had to be touched by an 
authorized wizard, the shields killed whatever 
entered them. The shields killed animals as 
infallibly, as effectively, as they would kill any 
intruder. 
   Such dangerous shields gave warnings of heat, 
light, or tingling as a warning so as to prevent 
people from unintentionally going near them—after 
all, with the size of the place, it was easy enough 

to become lost. Such warnings worked for the 
animals, too, but occasionally a cat chased a 
panicked mouse into a lethal shield, and sometimes 
the cat, racing after, would run right into it as 
well. 
   As Zedd waited, listening, the silence stretched 
on, unbroken. If he really had heard something, it 
could have been the Keep moving, or an animal 
squeaking when it approached a shield, or even a 
gust of wind coming through one of the hundreds of 
openings. Whatever it was, it was silent, now. The 
wooden spoonful of stew finally completed its 
journey. 
"Umm ..." Zedd declared to no one in particular. 
"Good!" 
   To his great disappointment when he'd first 
tasted it, he had found that the stew wasn't done. 
Rather than hurry the process with a bit of magic, 
and possibly incur Adie's wrath for meddling with 
her cooking, Zedd had sat down on the couch and 
resigned himself to doing a bit of reading. 
   There was no end to the reading. Books offered 
the potential of valuable information that could 
aid them in ways they couldn't foretell. From time 
to time, as he read, he checked the progress of the 
stew, rather patiently, he thought. 
   Now, as he tasted it, it finally seemed to be 
done. The chunks of ham were so tender they would 
fall apart when his tongue pressed them to the roof 
of his mouth. The whole delightfully bubbling pot 
had taken on the heady melding of onions and oils, 
carrots and turnips, a hint of garlic and a 
dizzying swirl of complementary spices, all crowded 
with nuggets of ham, some still with crisp fat 
along one edge. 
   To his great annoyance, Zedd had long ago 
noticed that Adie hadn't made any biscuits. Stew 
went well with biscuits. There should be biscuits. 
He decided that a bowl of stew would hold him until 
she returned and made some. There should be 

biscuits. It was only right. 
   He didn't know where Adie had gone. Since he had 
been down in Aydindril most of the day, he reasoned 
that she had probably gone off to one of the 
libraries to search through books for anything that 
might be of help. She was a great help ferreting 
potentially relevant books out of the libraries. 
Being from Nicobarese, Adie sought out books in 
that language. There were books all over the Keep, 
so there was no telling where she was. 
   There were also storerooms filled with racks and 
racks of bones. Other rooms contained rows of tall 
cabinets, each with hundreds of drawers. Zedd had 
seen bones of creatures there that he had never 
seen in life. Adie was an expert of sorts on bones. 
She had lived for a good portion of her life in 
seclusion in the shadow of the boundary. People 
living in the area had been afraid of her; they 
called her the bone woman because she collected 
bones. They had been everywhere in her house. Some 
of those bones protected her from the beasts that 
came out of the boundary. 
   Zedd sighed. Books or bones, there was no 
telling where she was. Besides that, there were any 
number of other things in the Wizard's Keep that 
would be of great interest to a sorceress. She 
might even have simply wanted to go for a walk, or 
up on a rampart to gaze at the stars and think. 
   It was much easier to wait for her to come back 
to her stew than for him to go looking for her. 
Maybe he should have put one of the bells around 
her neck. 
   Zedd hummed a merry tune to himself as he 
spooned stew into a wooden bowl. No use waiting on 
an empty stomach, he always said; that only made a 
person grouchy. It was really better to have a 
snack and be in good humor than to wait and be 
miserable. He would only be bad company if he was 
miserable. 
On the eighth spoon of stew into the bowl, he heard 

a sound. 
His hand froze above the bubbling pot. 
Zedd thought he'd heard a bell tinkle. 
   Zedd wasn't given to flights of imagination or 
to being unreasonably jumpy, but a cold shiver 
tingled across his flesh as if he'd been touched by 
the icy fingers of a spirit reaching out from 
another world. He stood motionless, partly bent 
toward the pot in the fire, partly turned toward 
the hall, listening. 
   It could be a cat. Maybe he hadn't tied the thin 
cord high enough and as a cat went under the line 
its tail had swished up and rung the bell. Maybe a 
cat was being mischievous and as it sat on its 
haunches, tail swishing back and forth, it had 
batted a bell. It could be a cat. 
   Or maybe a bird had landed on the line to roost 
for the night. A person couldn't get past the 
shields in order to trip a belled cord. Zedd had 
placed extra shields. It had to be an animal—a cat, 
or a bird. 
   If so, if no one could get past the regular 
shields and the extras he had placed, then why had 
he strung bells? 
   Despite the likely explanations, his hair was 
trying to stand on end. He didn't like the way the 
bell had rung; there was something about the 
character of the sound that told him it wasn't an 
animal. The sound had been too firm, too abrupt, 
too quick to stop. 
   He realized fully, now, that a bell had in fact 
rung. He wasn't imagining it. He tried to re-create 
the sound in his mind so that he might be able to 
put shape to the form that had tripped the cord. 
   Zedd silently set the bowl down on the side of 
the granite hearth. He rose up, listening with an 
ear turned toward the passage from where he had 
heard the bell. His mind raced through a map of all 
the bells he'd placed. 
He needed to be sure. 

   He slipped through the door and into the 
passageway, the back of his shoulder brushing the 
plastered wall as he moved down to the first 
intersection on his right, watching not just ahead 
but behind as well. Nothing moved in the hallway 
ahead. He paused, leaning ahead to take a quick 
glance down the hall to the right. When he found it 
clear, he took the turn. 
   Zedd moved quickly past closed doors, past a 
tapestry of vineyards that he had always thought 
was rather poorly executed, past an empty doorway 
to a room with a window that looked out over a deep 
shaft between towers on a high rampart, and past 
three more intersections until he reached the first 
stairway. He swept around the corner to the right, 
up the stairs that curved around to the left as 
they climbed up and crossed over the hall he'd just 
been in. In this way he could head back toward a 
network of halls where he'd placed a web of bells 
without using those same halls. 
   Zedd followed a mental map of a complex tangle 
of passages, halls, rooms, and dead ends that, over 
a lifetime, he had come to know intimately. Being 
First Wizard, he had access to every place in the 
Keep except those places that required Subtractive 
Magic. There were a few places where he could get 
confused, but this was not one of them. 
   He knew that unless someone was following in his 
footsteps, they would have to either go back or 
pass a place where he had set traps of elaborate 
magic as well as simple string. Then, if they 
didn't see the cord, they would ring another bell. 
Then he would be sure. 
   Maybe it was Adie. Maybe she simply hadn't seen 
the inky cord stretched across a doorway. Maybe she 
had been annoyed that he'd strung bells and maybe 
she'd rung one just to vex him. 
   No, Adie wasn't like that. She might shake her 
finger at him and deliver a scathing lecture on why 
she didn't agree with him that stringing bells was 

an effective thing to do, but she wouldn't pull a 
trick about something she would recognize as 
intended to warn of danger. No, Adie might possibly 
have accidentally rung the bell, but she wouldn't 
have rung it deliberately. 
Another bell rang. Zedd spun to the sound and then 
froze. 
   The bell had come from the wrong direction—from 
where he'd set a bell on the other side of a 
conservatory. It was too far from the first for 
anyone to have made it this soon. They would have 
had to go up a tower stairway, across a bridge to a 
rampart, along a narrow walkway in the dark, past 
several intersections to the correct turn that 
would descend a spiral ramp and make it down 
through a snarl of passageways in order to break 
the cord. 
Unless there was more than one person. 
The bell had chimed with a quick jerk and then 
clattered as it skittered across stone. It had to 
be a person tripping over the cord and sending the 
bell skipping across the stone floor. 
   Zedd changed his plan. He turned and raced down 
a narrow passageway to the left, climbing the first 
stairwell, running up the oak treads three at a 
time. He took the right fork at the landing, raced 
to the second circular stairwell of cut stone and 
climbed as fast as his legs would carry him. His 
foot slipped on the narrow wedges of spiraling 
steps and he banged his shin. He paused to wince 
only for a second. He used the time to consult his 
mental map of the Keep, and then he was moving 
again. 
   At the top, he dashed down a short paneled hall, 
sliding to a stop on the polished maple floor. He 
shouldered open a small, round-topped oak door. A 
starry sky greeted him. He sucked deep draughts of 
cool night air as he raced along the narrow 
rampart. He paused twice along the way to peer down 
through the slots in the crenellated battlements. 

He didn't see anyone. That was a good sign—he knew 
where they had to be if they weren't moving by an 
outer route. 
   He ran on across the swaying span between 
towers, robes flying behind, crossing over the 
entire section of the Keep where both bells had 
rung far below, going over the top of the area in 
order to get behind whoever had tripped the cords. 
While they had tripped bells on opposite sides of 
the conservatory, they had to have come in through 
the same wing—he knew that much. He wanted to get 
behind them, bottle them in before they could get 
to an unprotected section where they would 
encounter a bewildering variety of passageways. If 
they were to make it there and hide in that area, 
he could have a time of rooting them out. 
   His mind raced as fast as his feet as he tried 
to think, tried to recall all the shields, tried to 
figure how someone could have gotten past the 
defenses to get to that specific wing where the 
bells that had rung were placed. There were shields 
that should have made it impossible. He had to 
consider thousands of corridors and passageways in 
the Keep, trying to come up with all the potential 
routes. It was like a complex multilevel puzzle, 
and despite how thorough he'd been, it was possible 
he'd missed something. He had to have missed 
something. 
There were rooms or even entire sections that were 
shielded and could not be entered, but often they 
could be circumvented. Even if a hall was shielded 
at both ends, so as to prevent anyone from getting 
to the rooms in that hall, you could still usually 
get around to the other end of the hall and make 
your way to whatever lay beyond. That was 
deliberate; while the rooms might have held 
dangerous items of magic that had to be kept 
contained, there needed to be ways to get to them, 
and get beyond to other rooms that might, from time 
to time, also have to be restricted. Most of the 

Keep was like that—a three-dimensional maze with 
almost endless possible routes. 
   For the unwary, it could also be a killing field 
of traps. There were places layered with warning 
barriers and other devices that would keep any 
innocent person away. Beyond those protective 
layers, the shields gave no warning before they 
killed. Trespassers would not know there were 
shields embedded beyond, and that they were 
stepping into a trap. Such shields were designed 
that way in order to kill invaders who penetrated 
that deep; the lack of warning was deliberate. 
   Zedd supposed it was possible for someone to 
bypass all the shields and work their way into the 
depths of the place in order to ring those 
particular bells, but for the life of him, he 
couldn't trace all the steps necessary. But whoever 
it was, no matter how lucky they were, they would 
soon get themselves stuck in the labyrinth and 
then, if they weren't killed by a shield, he could 
deal with them. 
   Zedd gazed out past towers, ramparts, bridges, 
and open stairs to rooms projecting from soaring 
walls, out on the city of Aydindril far below, now 
all dark and dead-looking. How had someone gotten 
past the stone bridge up to the Keep? 
   A Sister of the Dark, maybe. Maybe one of them 
had figured out how to use Subtract!ve Magic to 
take his shield down. But even if one had, the 
shields in the Keep were different. Most of them 
had been placed by the wizards in ancient times, 
wizards with both sides of the gift. A Sister of 
the Dark would not be able to breach such shields— 
they had been designed to withstand enemy wizards 
of that time. They were far more powerful than any 
mere Sister of the Dark. 
   And where was Adie? She should have been back. 
He wished now that he had gone and found her. She 
needed to know that there was someone in the Keep. 
Unless she already knew. Unless they had her. 

   Zedd turned and raced down the rampart. At the 
projecting bastion, he seized the railing to the 
side to halt his forward rush and spin himself 
around the corner. He raced down the dark steps as 
if he were running down a hill. 
   With his gift, he could sense that there was no 
one in the vicinity. Since there was no one near, 
that meant that he had managed to get behind them. 
He had them trapped. 
   At the bottom of the steps he threw open the 
door and flew into the hallway beyond. 
He crashed into a man standing there, waiting. 
   Zedd's momentum knocked the big man from his 
feet. They fell in a tangle, sliding together along 
the polished green and yellow marble floor, both 
grappling for control. 
   Zedd could not have been more surprised. His 
gifted sense told him the man was not there. His 
gifted sense was obviously wrong. The 
disorientation of encountering a man when he had 
sensed that the hall was empty was more jarring 
than the headlong tumble. 
   Even as he was rolling, Zedd was casting webs to 
tangle the man in a snare of magic. The man, in 
turn, lunged to tangle Zedd in meaty arms. 
   In desperation, despite the close range, Zedd 
pulled enough heat from the surrounding air to 
unleash a thunderous blast of lightning and cast it 
directly into the man. The blinding flash burned a 
lacing line through the stone block wall beyond 
him. 
   Only too late did Zedd realize that the 
discharge of deadly power had lanced through the 
man without effect. The hall filled with shards of 
stone whistling about, ricocheting from walls and 
ceiling, skipping along the floor. 
   The man landed on Zedd, driving the wind from 
him. Desperately yelling for help, the man wrestled 
Zedd on the slippery floor. Zedd concocted a weak 
and fumbling defense, to give the man a false sense 

of confidence, until he was able to suddenly land a 
knee sharply at the point of his attacker's 
sternum. The man cried out in surprise as much as 
in pain as he flipped backward off Zedd, gasping to 
get his wind back. 
Having sucked so much heat from the air had left it 
as frigid as a winter night. Clouds of their breath 
filled the cold air as both men panted with the 
effort of the struggle. The man again cried out for 
help, hoping to bring comrades to his aid. 
   Zedd would assume that anyone would fear to 
attack a wizard by muscle alone. This man, though, 
had no need to fear magic. Even if he hadn't known 
that before, certainly the evidence was now all too 
clear. Yet, despite the man being at least twice 
the size of his opponent, less than a third his 
age, and having immunity from the conjuring being 
thrown at him, Zedd thought that he fought 
rather... squeamishly. 
   However timid the man was, he was determined. He 
scrambled to attack again. If he broke Zedd's neck, 
it wouldn't matter that he did so timidly. 
   As the man regained his feet and lunged, Zedd 
drew back his arms, elbows cocked, fingers spread, 
and cast more of the lightning, but this time he 
knew better than to waste his effort trying to cut 
down a man not touched by magic. Instead, Zedd 
sought to rake the floor with the conjured bolts of 
power. It slammed into the stone with unrestrained 
violence, ripping and splintering whole sections, 
throwing sharp jagged shards streaking through the 
air. 
   A fist-sized block of stone hurtling at 
tremendous speed crashed into the man's shoulder. 
Above the boom of thunderous power, Zedd heard 
bones snap. The impact spun the man around and 
knocked him back against the wall. Since Zedd now 
knew that this intruder could not directly be 
harmed by magic, he instead filled the hall with a 
deafening storm of magic designed not to assail the 

man directly but to tear the place apart into a 
cloud of deadly flying fragments. 
   The man, as he recoiled from striking the wall, 
again threw himself at Zedd. He was met by a shower 
of deadly shards whistling through the air toward 
him. Blood splattered across the wall beyond as the 
man was ripped to shreds. In a blink, he was killed 
and dropped heavily to the floor. 
   From beyond the smoke and dust filling the hall, 
two more men suddenly flew at Zedd. His gifted 
sense told him that, like the first man, these men 
were not there, either. 
   Zedd threw yet more lightning to rip up the 
floor and unleash flying stone at the men, but they 
were already through the flares of power, diving 
onto him. He crashed to his back, the men atop him. 
They seized his arms. 
   Zedd struggled frantically to let loose a blast 
to bring down the ceiling. He began to whirl the 
air above the men to tear the hall to pieces, and 
them with it. 
   A beefy hand with a filthy white rag clamped 
down over Zedd's face. He gasped, only to inhale a 
powerful smell that made his throat want to clench 
shut, but too late. 
   With the cloth and the big hand covering his 
whole face, Zedd couldn't see. The world spun 
sickeningly. 
   Soft, silent blackness pressed in around him as 
he fought to resist it, until he lost 
consciousness. 
   
   
   
   
   
   
  C        H       A       P       TER 18 
 
 

 
 
Zedd woke, his head spinning, his stomach heaving 
with rippling waves of nausea. He didn't think that 
in his entire life he had ever felt so sick. He 
hadn't known it was possible to feel so intense an 
urge to vomit, without actually throwing up. He 
couldn't lift his head. If he could just die right 
then, it would be a welcome release from such 
dizzying agony. 
   He started to put his hands over the light 
hurting his eyes, but found his wrists were tied 
behind his back. 
"I think he's waking," a man said in a subservient 
voice. 
   Despite his nausea, Zedd instinctively tried to 
use his gift to sense how many people were around 
him. For some reason, his gift that ordinarily 
flowed as easily as thought, as simply as using his 
eyes to see, his ears to hear, felt thick and slow, 
as if mired in molasses. He reasoned that it was 
probably the result of whatever vile substance it 
was they had soaked the rag in to cause him to pass 
out when held over his face. Still, he managed to 
sense that there was only one person around him. 
   Powerful hands seized his robes and yanked him 
to his feet. Zedd gave himself permission to vomit. 
Against all expectation, it didn't happen. The dark 
night swam before his blurred vision. He could make 
out trees against the sky, stars, and the looming 
black shape of the Keep. 
   Suddenly, a tongue of flame ignited in midair. 
Zedd blinked at the unexpected brightness. The 
small flame, wavering with a lazy motion, floated 
above the upturned palm of a woman with wiry gray 
hair. Zedd saw other people in the shadows; his 
gifted sense was wrong. Like the man who had 
attacked him, these, too, had to be people not 
affected by magic. 
   The woman standing before him peered at him 

intently. Her expression twisted with satisfied 
loathing. 
   "Well, well, well," she said with patronizing 
delight. "The great wizard himself awakes." 
   Zedd said nothing. It seemed to amuse her. Her 
fearsome scowl and humped nose, lit from the side 
by the flame she held above her palm, floated 
closer. 
"You are ours, now," she hissed. 
   Zedd, having waited patiently to gather his 
resolve, abruptly initiated the required mental 
twist to the gift all the way down to his soul in 
order to simultaneously call down lightning, focus 
air to slice this woman in two, and gather every 
stone and pebble from all around to crush her under 
an avalanche of rock. He expected the night to 
light with such power as he unlocked and sent 
forth. 
Nothing happened. 
   Not waiting to waste the time to analyze what 
could be the difficulty, he was forced to abandon 
attempts at satisfying his emotional preferences, 
and to ignite wizard's fire itself to consume her. 
Nothing happened. 
   Not only did nothing happen, but it felt as if 
the attempt itself were but a pebble falling 
endlessly into a vast, dark well. The expectation 
withered in the face of what he found within 
himself: a kind of dreadful emptiness. 
   Zedd felt as if he couldn't light a tongue of 
flame to match hers if his life depended on it. He 
was somehow cut off from forming his ability into 
much of anything useful other than to use it for a 
bit of dim awareness. Probably a lingering result 
of the foul-smelling substance they had pressed 
over his face to make him lose consciousness. 
   Since Zedd couldn't muster any power, he did the 
only thing he could: he spit in her face. 
   With lightning speed, she backhanded him, 
knocking him from the arms of the men holding him. 

Unable to use his hands to break his fall, he hit 
the ground unexpectedly hard. He lay in the dirt 
for a time, his ears ringing in the aftereffect of 
the hit he'd taken, waiting for someone to lean 
over and kill him. 
   Instead, they hauled him to his feet again. One 
of the men seized his hair and pulled his head up, 
forcing him to look into the woman's face. The 
scowl he saw there looked like it spent a great 
deal of time on her face. 
She spit in his face. 
   Zedd smiled. "So, here we have a spoiled child 
playing the game of tit for tat." 
   Zedd grunted with the sudden shock of a wallop 
of pain that twisted inside of his abdomen. Had the 
men not been holding him under his arms he would 
have doubled over and fallen to the ground. He 
wasn't quite sure how she had done it—probably with 
a fist of air delivered with all the power of her 
gift behind it. She had left the gathered air 
loosely formed, rather than focusing it to a sharp 
edge, or it would have torn him in two. As it was, 
he knew it would leave his middle black and blue. 
   It was a long and desperate wait before he was 
able to at last draw a breath. 
The men who his gift said weren't there pulled him 
straight. 
   "I'm disappointed to discover I'm in the hands 
of a sorceress who can be no more inventive than 
that," Zedd mocked. 
   That brought a smile to her scowl. "Don't you 
worry, Wizard Zo-rander, His Excellency very much 
wants your scrawny hide. He will be playing a game 
of tit for tat that I believe you will find quite 
inventive. I have learned that when it comes to 
inventive cruelty, His Excellency is peerless. I'm 
sure he will not disappoint you." 
   "Then what are we standing around for? I can't 
wait to have a word with His Excellency." 
As the men held his head back for her, she ran a 

fingernail down the side of his face and across his 
throat, not hard enough to draw blood, but enough 
to hint at her own restrained cruelty. She leaned 
in again. One eyebrow lifted in a way that ran a 
chill up Zedd's spine. 
   "I imagine you have grand ideas about such a 
visit, about what you think you will do or say." 
She reached out and hooked a finger around 
something at his neck. When she gave it a firm tug, 
he realized that he was wearing a collar of some 
sort. By the way it dug into the flesh at the back 
of his neck, it had to be metal. 
"Guess what this is," she said. "Just guess." 
   Zedd sighed. "You really are a tedious woman. 
But I imagine you've heard that ofttimes before." 
   She ignored his gibe, eager to be the messenger 
of bad news. Her scowling smile widened. "It's a 
Rada'Han." 
Zedd's sense of alarm rose, but he kept any trace 
of it from his face. 
   "Really." He paused for an extended, bored yawn. 
"Well, I'd not expect a woman of your limited 
intellect to think up something clever." 
   She slammed a knee into his groin. Zedd doubled 
over in pain, unable to contain his groan. He 
hadn't been expecting something so crude. 
   The men pulled him up straight, not allowing him 
pause to recover. Being pulled up straight brought 
a gasp of agony. His teeth were clenched, his eyes 
were watering, and his knees wanted to buckle, but 
the men held him upright. 
   Her smile was getting annoying. "You see, Wizard 
Zorander? Being clever isn't necessary at all." 
Zedd saw her point but didn't say so. 
   He was already preparing to unlock the cursed 
collar from his neck. He'd been "captured" before—
by the Prelate herself—and had had a Rada'Han put 
around his neck, like some boy born with the gift 
who needed training. The Sisters of the Light put 
such a collar around those boys so that the gift 

wouldn't harm them before they could learn to 
control their gift. Richard had been captured and 
put in such a Rada'Han right after his gift came to 
life in him. 
   The collar was also used to control the young 
wizard wearing it, to give pain, when the Sisters 
thought it necessary. Zedd understood the Prelate's 
reasons for wanting Richard's help, since they knew 
he had been born with both sides of the gift, and, 
too, they worried about the dark forces that 
pursued him, but he could never forgive her for 
putting Richard in a collar. A wizard needed to be 
trained by a wizard, not some misguided gaggle like 
the Sisters of the Light. 
   The Prelate, though, had harbored no delusion of 
actually training Richard to be a wizard. She had 
collared him in order to smoke out the traitors 
among her flock: the Sisters of the Dark. 
   Unlike Richard, though, Zedd knew how to get 
such a disgusting contrivance off his neck. In 
fact, he had done it before, when the Prelate had 
thought to collar him and thus force his 
cooperation. 
   Zedd used a thread of power to probe at the 
lock, not overtly, so as this woman might notice 
it, but just enough to find the twist in the spell 
where he would be able to focus his ability to snap 
the conjured lock. 
   When the time was right, when he had his feet 
solidly under him, when his head stopped spinning 
long enough, he would break the collar's hold. In 
that same instant, before she knew what had 
happened, he would release wizard's fire and 
incinerate this woman. 
She hooked a finger under the collar again and gave 
it another tug. 
   "The thing is, my dear wizard, I would expect 
that a man of your renowned talent might know how 
to get such a device off." 
   "Really? I'm renowned?" Zedd flashed her a grin. 

"That's very gratifying." 
   Her utter contempt brought her a smile of pure 
disdain. With her finger through the collar she 
pulled him close to her twisted expression. She 
ignored his words and went on. 
   "Since His Excellency would be extremely 
displeased should you get the collar off, I've 
taken measures to insure that such a thing would 
not happen. I used Subtractive Magic to weld it 
on." 
Now, that was a problem. 
   She nodded to the men. Zedd glanced to them at 
each side and noticed for the first time that their 
eyes were wet. It shocked him to realize they were 
weeping. 
   Weeping or not, they followed her orders, 
unceremoniously lifting him and heaving him in the 
back of a wagon as if he were firewood. 
Zedd landed beside someone else. 
"Glad to see you be alive, old man," a soft voice 
rasped.It was Adie. The side of her face was 
swollen and bleeding. It looked like they'd clubbed 
her nearly to death. Her wrists were tied behind 
her back as well. He saw, too, tears on her cheeks. 
It broke his heart to see her hurt. "Adie, what did 
they do to you?" 
She smiled. "Not as much as they intend to, I 
fear." 
   In the dim light of a lantern, Zedd could see 
that she, too, wore one of the awful collars. 
"Your stew was excellent," he said. 
Adie groaned. "Please, old man, do not mention food 
to me right now." 
   Zedd cautiously turned his head and saw more men 
waiting in the darkness off to the side. They had 
been behind him, so he hadn't noticed them before. 
His gift had not told him they were there. 
   "I think we're in a great deal of trouble," he 
whispered to no one in particular. 
"Really?" Adie rasped. "What be your first clue?" 

   Zedd knew she was only trying to make him smile, 
but he could not even manage a small one. 
"I be sorry, Zedd." 
   He nodded, as best he could lying on his side 
with his wrists bound behind his back. "I thought I 
was so clever, laying every kind of trap I could 
think of. Unfortunately, such traps didn't work for 
those who are not affected by magic." 
   "You could not know of such a thing," Adie said 
in a comforting tone. 
   His mood sank into bitter regret. "I should have 
taken it into account after we encountered that one 
down at the Confessors' Palace, in the spring. I 
should have realized the danger." He stared off 
into the darkness. "I served our cause no better 
than a fool." 
   "But where did all of them come from?" She 
looked on the verge of losing herself to panic. "I 
have never encountered a single such person in my 
entire life, and now there be a whole gang of them 
standing there." 
   Zedd hated to see Adie so distraught. Adie only 
knew there were a number of them by the telltale 
sounds they made. At least he could see the men 
with his eyes, if not his gift. 
The men stood around, heads hanging, waiting to be 
commanded. 
They didn't look pleased by what was happening. 
They all looked young, in their twenties. Some were 
crying. It seemed strange to see such big men 
weeping. Zedd almost regretted killing one of them. 
Almost. 
   "You three," the woman growled to more of the 
men waiting in the shadows as she lifted another 
lantern from one of them and sent the flame she 
held into it, "get in there and start the search." 
   Adie's completely white eyes turned to Zedd, her 
expression grave. "Sister of the Dark," she 
whispered. 
And now they had the Keep. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 19 
 
 
And just how can you be sure that it was a Sister 
of the Dark you saw?" Verna asked, absently, as she 
dipped her pen again. 
   She scrawled her initials at the bottom of the 
request for a Sister to travel to a town down south 
to see to a local sorceress's plans for a defense 
of their area. Even in the field, the paperwork of 
the office of the Prelate seemed to have chased 
after and found her. Their palace had been 
destroyed, the prophet himself was at large and the 
real Prelate was off alone chasing after him, some 
of the Sisters of the Light had pledged their souls 
to the Keeper of the underworld and in so doing had 
brought the Keeper a step closer to having them all 
in the dark forever of eternity, a good number of 
the Sisters—both Sisters of the Light and Sisters 
of the Dark—were in the cruel hands of the enemy 
and doing his bidding, the barrier separating the 
Old and New World was down, the whole world had 
been turned upside down, the only man—Richard Rahl—
whom prophecy named as having a chance of defeating 
the threat of the Imperial Order was off who-knew-
where doing who-knew-what, and yet, the paperwork 
managed to survive it all and persist to vex her. 
   Some of Verna's assistants handled the paperwork 
and the requests, but, as much as she disliked 
dealing with such tedious matters, Verna felt a 
sense of duty to keep an eye on it all. Besides, as 
much as paperwork vexed her, it also occupied her 
mind, preventing her from dwelling on the might-
have-been. 

   "After all," Verna added, "it could just as 
easily have been a Sister of the Light. Jagang uses 
both for their ability with magic. You can't really 
be sure it was a Sister of the Dark. He's been 
sending Sisters to accompany his scouts all winter 
and spring." 
   The Mord-Sith placed her knuckles on the small 
desk and leaned in. "I'm telling you, Prelate, it 
was a Sister of the Dark." 
   Verna saw no point in arguing, since it mattered 
little, so she didn't. "If you say so, Rikka." 
   Verna turned over the paper to the next in the 
stack, a request for a Sister to come and speak to 
children on the calling of the Sisters of the 
Light, with a lecture on why the Creator would be 
against the ways of the Imperial Order and on their 
side. Verna smiled to herself, imagining how Zedd 
would fume at the very idea of a Sister, in the New 
World, lecturing her views on such a subject. 
   Rikka withdrew her knuckles from the desk. "I 
thought you might say as much." 
   "Well, there you go, then," Verna mumbled as she 
read the next message from the Sisters of the Light 
to the south reporting on the passes through the 
mountains and the methods that had been used to 
seal them off. 
"Wait right here," Rikka growled before flying out 
of the tent. 
   "I'm not going anywhere," Verna said with a sigh 
as she scanned the written account, but the fiery, 
blond-headed woman was already gone. 
   Verna heard a commotion outside the tent. Rikka 
was delivering a scathing lecture to someone. The 
Mord-Sith was incorrigible. That was probably why, 
despite everything, Verna liked her. 
   Since Warren had died, Verna's heart was no 
longer in much of anything, though. She did as she 
had to, did her duty, but she couldn't make herself 
feel anything but despair. The man she loved, the 
man she had married, the most wonderful man in the 

world... was gone. 
Nothing much mattered after that. 
   Verna tried to do her part, to do as was needed, 
because so many people depended on her, but, if 
truth be told, the reason she worked herself nearly 
to death was to try to keep her mind occupied, to 
think of something else, anything else, except 
Warren. It didn't really work, but she kept at it. 
She knew that people counted on her, but she just 
couldn't make herself truly care. 
   Warren was gone. Life was empty of what mattered 
most to her. That was the end of it, the end of her 
caring about much of anything. 
   Verna idly pulled her journey book from her 
belt. She didn't know what made her do so, except 
perhaps that it had been some time since she had 
last looked for a message from the real Prelate. 
Ann was having her own crisis of caring ever since 
Kahlan had laid the blame for so much of what had 
gone wrong, including being the cause of the war 
itself, right at the Prelate's feet. Verna thought 
that Kahlan had been wrong about much of it, but 
she understood all too well why she thought that 
Ann had been responsible for tangling up their 
lives; Verna had felt the same way for a time. 
   Holding the journey book off to the side with 
one hand, flipping the pages with a thumb, Verna 
saw a message flash by. 
   Rikka swept back into the tent. She plunked a 
heavy sack down on Verna's desk, right on top of 
the reports. 
"Here!" Rikka said, fury powering her voice. 
   It was then, when Verna looked up, that she saw 
for the first time the strange way Rikka was 
dressed. Verna's mouth fell open. Rikka was not 
wearing the skintight red leather that the Mord-
Sith typically wore, except for occasionally when 
they were relaxing and then they sometimes wore 
brown leather, instead. Verna had never seen the 
woman in anything other than those leather outfits. 

Now Rikka had on a dress. 
Verna could not remember being so astonished. 
   Not just a dress, but a pink dress that no 
decent woman of Rikka's age, probably her late 
twenties or early thirties, would be caught dead 
in. The neckline plunged down to reveal ample 
cleavage. The twin mounds of exposed flesh were 
shoved up and nearly spilling out the top. Verna 
was amazed that Rikka's nipples had managed to 
remain covered, what with the way her breasts 
heaved with her heated breathing. 
"You, too?" Rikka snapped. 
Verna finally looked up into Rikka's blazing blue 
eyes. "Me, too, what?" 
"You, too, can't get enough of looking at my 
chest?" 
   Verna felt her face go scarlet. She gave her red 
face an excuse by shaking a finger at the woman. 
   "What are you doing dressed like that in an army 
camp! Around all these soldiers! You look like a 
whore!" 
   Despite how their leather outfits went all the 
way up to their necks, the tight leather left 
little to the imagination. Seeing the woman's 
flesh, though, was altogether different, and quite 
shocking. 
   Verna realized, only then, because she had 
finally looked up at the woman's face, that Rikka's 
single braid was undone. Her long blond hair was as 
free as a horse's mane. Verna had never seen one of 
the Mord-Sith out in public without her hair done 
up in the single braid that in large part 
identified their profession of Mord-Sith. 
   Even seeing the woman's cleavage exposed was not 
as shocking as seeing her hair undone. It was that, 
more than anything, Verna realized, that lent a 
lewd look to the woman. Something about her braid 
being undone seemed sacrilegious, even though Verna 
could not condone a profession dedicated to 
torture. 

   Verna remembered, then, that she had asked one 
of the Mord-Sith, Cara, to do her worst to the 
young man—a boy, really—who had murdered Warren. 
Verna had sat up the entire night listening to that 
young man scream his life away. His suffering had 
been monstrous, and yet it had not been nearly 
enough to suit her. 
   At times, Verna wondered if in the next life the 
Keeper of the underworld would have something 
wholly unpleasant in store for her for all eternity 
in recompense for what Verna had done. She didn't 
really care; it had been worth whatever the price 
might be. 
   Besides, she decided, if she was to be punished 
for condemning that man to just retribution, then 
the very concept of justice would have to be 
invalid, rendering living a life of good or evil to 
have no meaning. In fact, for the justice she had 
meted out to that vile amoral animal walking the 
world of life in the form of a man who had murdered 
Warren, she should be rewarded in the afterlife by 
being eternally in the warmth of the Creator's 
light, along with the good spirit of Warren, or 
else there was no justice. 
   General Meiffert swept into the tent, fists at 
his sides, coming to a halt beside Rikka. He raked 
his blond hair back when he saw Verna sitting 
behind her little desk, and cooled visibly. 
   He'd had the carpenters nail together the tiny 
desk for her out of scrap furniture left in an 
abandoned farm. It was nothing like the desks at 
the Palace of the Prophets, of course, but it had 
been given with more concern and meaning behind it 
than the grandest gold-leafed desk she had ever 
seen. General Meiffert had been proud at seeing how 
useful Verna found it. 
   With a quick glance, he took in Rikka's dress 
and her hair. "What's this about?" 
   "Well," Verna said, "I'm not sure. Something 
about one of Jagang's Sisters scouting a pass." 

   Rikka folded her bare arms atop her nearly bare 
bosom. "Not just a Sister, but a Sister of the 
Dark." 
   "Jagang has been sending Sisters scouting the 
passes all winter," the young general said. "The 
Prelate has laid traps and shields." His level of 
concern rose. "Are you telling us that one of them 
got through?" 
"No, I'm telling you that I went hunting for them." 
   Verna frowned. "What are you talking about? We 
lost half a dozen Mord-Sith trying that. After you 
found the heads of two of your sister Mord-Sith 
mounted on pikes, the Mother Confessor herself 
ordered you to stop throwing their lives away on 
such useless missions." 
   Rikka at last smiled. It was the kind of 
satisfied smile, especially coming from a Mord-
Sith, that tended to give people nightmares. 
"Does this look useless?" 
   Rikka reached into her sack and pulled out a 
human head. Holding it by the hair, she brandished 
it in front of Verna's face. She turned, shook it 
at General Meiffert as well, and then plunked it 
down on the desk. Gore oozed out over the reports. 
"Like I said, a Sister of the Dark." 
   Verna recognized the face, even as twisted in 
death as it was. Rikka was right, it was a Sister 
of the Dark. The question was, how did she know it 
was a Sister of the Dark, and not one of the Light? 
   Outside Verna could hear horses clopping past 
her tent. Some of the soldiers called out greetings 
to men returning from patrols. In the distance 
could be heard conversations and men issuing 
orders. Hammers on steel rang like bells as men 
worked hot metal into useful shapes for repairs to 
equipment. Nearby, horses frisked in a corral. As 
men made their way past Verna's tent, their gear 
jingled. Fires crackled as wood was added for the 
cooks or roared as bellows pumped to turn it white-
hot for the blacksmiths. 

   "You touched her with your Agiel?" Verna asked 
in a quiet voice. "Your Agiel doesn't work 
effectively on those the dream walker controls." 
   Rikka's smile turned sly. She spread her arms. 
"Agiel? Do you see an Agiel." 
   Verna knew that no Mord-Sith would ever let her 
Agiel out of her control. With a glance to the 
woman's cleavage, she could only imagine where she 
had it hidden. 
   "All right," General Meiffert said, his tone no 
longer indulgent. "I want to know what's going on, 
and I want to know right now." 
   "I was down near Dobbin Pass, checking around, 
and what do I find but an Imperial Order patrol." 
   The general nodded as he let out a frustrated 
sigh. "They've been coming in that way from time to 
time. But how did you manage to come across such an 
enemy patrol? Why hadn't one of our Sisters already 
snared them?" 
   Rikka shrugged. "Well, this patrol was still on 
the other side of the pass. Back at that deserted 
farm." She tapped Verna's desk with her toe. "Where 
you got the wood for this." 
   Verna twisted her mouth with displeasure. Rikka 
wasn't supposed to be beyond the pass. The Mord-
Sith, though, recognized no orders but those from 
Lord Rahl himself. Rikka had only followed Kahlan's 
orders because, during his absence, Kahlan was 
acting on Richard's behalf. Verna suspected that it 
was simpler than that, though; she suspected that 
they had only followed the Mother Confessor's 
orders because she was wife to Lord Rahl, and if 
they didn't it would bring Lord Rahl's wrath down 
on them. As long as such orders weren't viewed by 
the Mord-Sith as troublesome, they went along. When 
they decided otherwise, they did as they wished. 
   "The Sister was by herself," Rikka went on, 
"having one powerful-looking headache." 
   "Jagang," Verna said. "Jagang was issuing his 
order, or punishing her for something, or giving 

her a lecture in her mind. He does that from time 
to time. It isn't pleasant." 
   Rikka stroked the hair on the woman's head 
sitting on Verna's desk, making a mess of the 
reports. "The poor thing," she mocked. "While she 
was off among the pines staring at nothing while 
she pressed her fingers to her temples, her men 
were back at the farmhouse, having their way with a 
couple of young women. The two were squealing and 
crying and carrying on, but the men weren't put off 
by it any." 
   Verna lowered her eyes as she let out a heavy 
breath. Some people had refused to believe the 
necessity of fleeing before the arrival of the 
Imperial Order. 
   Sometimes, when people refused to recognize the 
existence of evil, they found themselves having to 
face precisely that which they had never been 
willing to admit existed. 
   Rikka's satisfied smile returned. "I went in and 
took care of the brave soldiers of the Imperial 
Order. They were so distracted, they paid no 
attention as I snuck up behind them. The women were 
so terrorized that they screamed even though I was 
saving them. The Sister hadn't been paying any 
attention to the screaming before, and didn't then, 
either. 
   "One of the young women was blond and about my 
size, so an idea struck me. I put on her dress and 
took out my braid, so I might be mistaken for her. 
I gave the one girl some of the men's clothes to 
wear and told them both to run for the hills, in 
the opposite direction of the Sister, and not to 
look back. I didn't have to tell them twice. Then I 
sat down on a stool outside the barn. 
   "Sure enough, in a while the Sister came back. 
She saw me sitting there, hanging my head, 
pretending to be crying. She thought the other 
woman was still inside, with the men. She said, 
'It's time those foolish bastards in there were 

done with you and your friend. His Excellency wants 
a report, and he wants it now—he's ready to move.' 
" 
Verna came up out of her chair. "You heard her say 
that?" 
"Yes." 
"Then what?" General Meiffert asked. 
   "Then the Sister made for the side door into the 
barn. When she stormed past me, I rose up behind 
her and cut her throat with one of the men's 
knives." 
   General Meiffert leaned toward Rikka. "You cut 
her throat? You didn't use your Agiel?" 
   Rikka gave him a look that suggested she thought 
he hadn't been paying attention. "Like the Prelate 
said, an Agiel doesn't work very well on those the 
dream walker controls. So I used a knife. Dream 
walker or not, cutting her throat worked just 
fine." 
   Rikka lifted the head before Verna again. One of 
the reports stuck to the bottom of it as it swung 
by the hair. "I sliced the knife through her throat 
and around her neck. She was thrashing about quite 
a bit, so I had a good hold on her as she died. All 
of a sudden, there was an instant when the whole 
world went black—and I mean black, black as the 
Keeper's heart. It was as if the underworld had 
suddenly taken us all." 
   Verna looked away from the head of a Sister she 
had known for a very long time and had always 
believed was devoted to the Creator, to the light 
of life. She had been devoted, instead, to death. 
   "The Keeper came to claim one of his own," Verna 
explained in a quiet voice. 
   "Well," Rikka said, rather sarcastically, Verna 
thought, "I didn't think that when a Sister of the 
Light died such a thing happened. I told you it was 
a Sister of the Dark." 
Verna nodded. "So you did." 
   General Meiffert gave the Mord-Sith a hurried 

clap on the back of the shoulder. "Thanks, Rikka. 
I'd better spread the word. If Jagang is starting 
to move, it won't be many days before he's here. We 
need to be sure the passes are ready when his force 
finally gets here." 
   "The passes will hold," Verna said. She let out 
a silent sigh. "At least for a while." 
   The Order had to come across the mountains if 
they were to conquer D'Hara. There were few ways 
across those formidable mountains. 
Verna and the Sisters had shielded and sealed those 
passes as well as it was possible to seal them. 
They had used magic to bring down walls of rock in 
places, making the narrow roads impassable. In 
other places, they had used their power to cleave 
away roads cut into the steep sides of mountains, 
leaving no way through, except to clamber over 
rubble. To prevent that, and in other places, the 
men had worked all winter constructing stone walls 
across the passes. Atop those walls were 
fortifications from which they could rain down 
death on the narrow passes below. Additionally, in 
every one of those places, the Sisters had set 
snares of magic so deadly that coming through would 
be a bloody ordeal that would only get worse, and 
that was before they encountered the walls lined 
with defenders. 
   Jagang had Sisters of the Dark to try to undo 
the barriers of both magic and stone, but Verna was 
more powerful, in the Additive anyway, than any of 
them. Besides that, she had joined her power with 
other Sisters in order to invest in those barriers 
magic that she knew would prove formidable. 
   Still, Jagang would come. Nothing Verna, her 
Sisters, and the D'Haran army could do would 
ultimately be able to withstand the numbers Jagang 
would throw at them. If he had to command his men 
to march through passes filled a hundred feet deep 
with their fallen comrades, he would not flinch 
from doing so. Nor would it matter to him if the 

corpses were a thousand feet deep. 
   "I'll be back a little later, Verna," the 
general said. "We'll need to get the officers and 
some of the Sisters together and make sure 
everything is ready." 
"Yes, of course," Verna said. 
Both General Meiffert and Rikka started to leave. 
   "Rikka," Verna called. She gestured down at the 
desk. "Take the dear departed Sister with you, 
would you please?" 
   Rikka sighed, which nearly spilled her bosom out 
of the dress. She made a long-suffering face before 
snatching up the head and vanishing out of the tent 
behind the general. 
   Verna sat down and put her head in her hands. It 
was going to start all over again. It had been a 
long and peaceful, if bitterly cold, winter. Jagang 
had made his winter encampment on the other side of 
the mountains, far enough away that, with the snow 
and cold, it was difficult to launch effective 
raids against his troops. Just as it had the summer 
before, the summer Warren had died, now that the 
weather was favorable, the Order would begin to 
move. It was starting all over again. The killing, 
the terror, the fighting, running, hunger, 
exhaustion. 
   But what choice was there, other than to be 
killed. In many ways, life had come to seem worse 
than death. 
   Verna abruptly remembered, then, about the 
journey book. She worked it out of the pocket in 
her belt and pulled the lamp closer, needing the 
comfort as well as the light. She wondered where 
Richard and Kahlan were, if they were safe, and she 
thought, too, about Zedd and Adie all alone 
guarding the Wizard's Keep. Unlike everyone else, 
at least Zedd and Adie were safe and at peace where 
they were—for the time being, anyway. Sooner or 
later, D'Hara would fall and then Jagang would 
return to Aydindril. 

   Verna tossed the small black book on the desk, 
smoothed her dress beneath her legs, and scooted 
her chair closer. She ran her fingers over the 
familiar leather cover on an object of magic that 
was over three thousand years old. The journey 
books had been invested with magic by those 
mysterious wizards who so long ago had built the 
Palace of the Prophets. A journey book was twinned, 
and as such, they were priceless; what was written 
in one appeared at the same time in its twin. In 
that way, the Sisters could communicate over vast 
distances and know important information as it 
happened, rather than weeks or even months later. 
Ann, the real Prelate, had the twin to Verna's. 
   Verna, herself, had been sent by Ann on a 
journey of nearly twenty years to find Richard. Ann 
had known all along where Richard had been. It was 
for that reason that Verna could understand 
Kahlan's rage at how Ann had seemed to twist her 
and Richard's life. But Verna had come to 
understand that the Prelate had sent her on what 
was actually a mission of vital importance, one 
that had brought change to the world, but also 
brought hope for the future. 
   Verna opened the journey book, holding it a 
little sideways to see the words in the light. 
   Verna, Ann wrote, / believe I have discovered 
where the prophet is hiding. 
   Verna sat back in surprise. After the palace had 
been destroyed, Nathan, the prophet, had escaped 
their control and had since been roaming free, a 
profound danger. 
   For the last couple of years, the rest of the 
Sisters of the Light had believed that the Prelate 
and the prophet were dead. Ann, when she'd left the 
Palace of the Prophets with Nathan on an important 
mission, had feigned their deaths and named Verna 
Prelate to succeed her. Very few people other than 
Verna, Zedd, Richard, and Kahlan knew the truth. 
During that mission, however, Nathan had managed to 

get his collar off and escape Ann's control. There 
was no telling what catastrophe that man could 
cause. 
Verna leaned over the journey book again. 
   / should have Nathan within days, now. I can 
hardly believe that after all this time, I nearly 
have my hands on that man. I will let you know 
soon. 
   How are you, Verna? How are you feeling? How are 
the Sisters and how go matters with the army? Write 
when you can. I will be checking my journey book 
nightly. I miss you terribly. 
   Verna sat back again. That was all there was. 
But it was enough. The very notion of Ann finally 
capturing Nathan made Verna's head swim with 
relief. 
   Even that momentous news, though, failed to do 
much to lift her mood. Jagang was about to launch 
his attack on D'Hara and Ann was about to finally 
have Nathan under control, but Richard was 
somewhere off to the south, beyond their control. 
Ann had worked for five hundred years to shape 
events so that Richard could lead them in the 
battle for the future of mankind, and now, on the 
eve of what could very well prove to be that final 
battle, he was not there with them. 
   Verna drew the stylus out of the journey book's 
spine and leaned over to write Ann a report. 
   My dearest Ann, I'm afraid that things here are 
about to become very unpleasant. 
The siege of the passes into D'Hara is about to 
begin. 
 
 
CHAPTER 20 
 
 
 
The sprawling corridors of the People's Palace, 
seat of power in D'Hara, were filled with the 

whisper of footsteps on stone. Ann pushed herself 
back a little on the white marble bench where she 
sat stuffed between three women on one side and an 
older couple on the other, all gossiping about what 
people were wearing as they strolled the grand 
halls, or what other people did while they were 
here, or what they most wanted to see. Ann supposed 
that such gossip was harmless enough and probably 
meant to take people's minds off the worries of the 
war. Still, it was hard to believe that at such a 
late hour people would rather be out gossiping than 
in a warm bed asleep. 
   Ann kept her head down and pretended to be 
pawing through her travel bag while at the same 
time keeping a wary eye on the soldiers passing not 
too far away as they patrolled. She didn't know if 
her caution was necessary, but she would rather not 
find out too late that it was. 
"Come from far?" the closest woman beside her 
asked. 
   Ann looked up, realizing that the woman had 
spoken to her. "Well, yes, I guess it has been a 
bit of a journey." 
   Ann put her nose back in her bag and rummaged in 
earnest, hoping to be left alone. 
The woman, middle-aged with her curls of brown hair 
just starting to carry a bit of gray, smiled. "I'm 
not all that far from home, myself, but I do so 
like to spend a night at the palace, now and then, 
just to lift my spirits." 
   Ann glanced around at the polished marble 
floors, the glossy red stone columns below arches, 
decorated with carved vines, that supported the 
upper balconies. She gazed up at the skylights that 
allowed the light to flood in the place during the 
day, and peered off at the grand statues that stood 
on pedestals around a fountain with life-sized 
stone horses galloping forever through a shimmering 
spray of water. 
"Yes, I see what you mean," Ann murmured. 

   The place didn't lift her spirits. In fact, the 
place made her as nervous as a cat in a doghouse 
with the door closed. She could feel that her power 
was frighteningly diminished in this place. 
   The People's Palace was more than any mere 
palace. It was a city all joined together and under 
countless roofs atop a huge plateau. Tens of 
thousands of people lived in the magnificent 
structure, and thousands more visited it daily. 
There were different levels to the palace itself, 
some where people had shops and sold goods, others 
where officials worked, some that were living 
quarters. Many sections were off limits to those 
who visited. 
   Sprawled around the base of the plateau were 
informal markets where people gathered to buy, 
sell, and trade goods. On the climb all the way up 
through the interior of the plateau to reach the 
palace itself, Ann had passed many permanent shops. 
The palace was a center of trade, drawing people 
from all over D'Hara. 
   More than that, though, it was the ancestral 
home of the House of Rahl. As such, it was grand 
for arcane reasons beyond the awareness or even 
understanding of most of the people who called it 
home or visited it. The People's Palace was a 
spell—not a place spelled, as had been the Palace 
of the Prophets where Ann had spent most of her 
life. The place itself was the spell. 
   The entire palace had been built to a careful 
and precise design: that of a spell drawn on the 
face of the ground. The outer fortified walls 
contained the actual spell form and the major 
congregations of rooms formed significant hubs, 
while the halls and corridors themselves were the 
drawn lines—the essence of the spell itself, the 
power. 
   Like a spell being drawn in the dirt with the 
point of a stick, the halls would have had to have 
been built in the sequence required by the specific 

magic the spell was intended to invoke. It would 
have been enormously expensive to build it in that 
manner, ignoring the typical requirements of 
construction and accepted methods of the trade of 
building, but only by doing so would the spell 
work, and work it did. 
   The spell was specific. It was a place of safety 
for any Rahl. It was meant to give a Rahl more 
power in the place, and to leach power away from 
anyone else who entered. Ann had never been in a 
place where she felt such a waning of her Han, the 
essence of life and the gift within. She doubted 
that in this place her Han would for long be vital 
enough to light a candle. 
   Ann's jaw dropped in astonishment as another 
element of the spell abruptly occurred to her. She 
looked out at the halls—part of the lines of the 
spell—filled with people. 
   Spells drawn with blood were always more 
effective and powerful. But when the blood soaked 
into the ground, decomposed, and dissipated, the 
power of the spell would often fade as well. But 
this spell, the drawn lines of the spell itself—the 
corridors—were filled with the vital living blood 
of all the people moving through them. Ann was 
struck dumb with awe at such a brilliant concept. 
"So, you're renting a room, then." 
   Ann had forgotten the woman beside her, still 
staring at her, still holding the smile on her 
painted lips. Ann forced herself to close her 
mouth. 
   "Well. . ." Ann finally admitted, "I haven't 
actually made arrangements yet as to where I will 
sleep." 
   The woman's smile persisted, but it looked as if 
it was taking more and more effort all the time. 
"You can't curl up on a bench, you know. The guards 
won't allow it. You have to rent a room, or be put 
out at night." 
   Ann understood, then, what the woman was driving 

at. To these people, most dressed in their finest 
clothes for their visit to the palace, Ann must 
look like a beggar in their midst. After all the 
gossip about what people were wearing, this woman 
must have been disconcerted to find herself beside 
Ann. 
   "I have the price of a room," Ann assured her. 
"I just haven't found where they are, yet, that's 
all. After such a long journey, I meant to go there 
right away and get myself cleaned up, but I just 
needed to rest my weary feet for a bit, first. 
Could you tell me where to find the rooms to rent?" 
   The smile looked a little easier. "I'm off to my 
own room and I could take you. It isn't far." 
   "That would be kind of you," Ann said as she 
rose now that she saw the guards moving off down 
the corridor. 
The woman stood, bidding her two benchmates a good 
night. 
   If Ann was tired, it was only from being caught 
up in the afternoon devotion to the Lord Rahl. A 
bell in an open square had tolled, and everyone had 
moved to gather there and bow down. Ann had noticed 
then that no one missed the devotion. Guards moved 
among the crowd watching people gather. She felt 
like a mouse being watched by hawks so she joined 
with the other people moving toward the square. 
   She had spent nearly two hours on her knees, on 
a hard clay tile floor, bowed down with her 
forehead touching the ground like everyone else, 
repeating the devotion in concert with all the 
other somber voices. 
   Master Rahl guide us. Master Rahl teach us. 
Master Rahl protect us. In your light we thrive. In 
your mercy we are sheltered. In your wisdom we are 
humbled. We live only to serve. Our lives are 
yours. 
   Twice a day, those in the palace were expected 
to go to the devotion. Ann didn't know how people 
endured such torture. 

   Then she remembered the bond between the Lord 
Rahl and his people that prevented the dream walker 
from entering their minds, and she knew how they 
could endure it. She, herself, had briefly been a 
prisoner of Emperor Jagang. He murdered a Sister 
right before her eyes, just to make a point. 
   In the face of brutality and torture, she 
guessed that she knew how people endured a mere 
devotion. 
   For her, though, such a spoken devotion to the 
Lord Rahl, to Richard, was hardly necessary. She 
had been devoted to him for nearly five hundred 
years before he had even been born. 
Prophecy said that Richard was their only chance to 
avoid catastrophe. Ann peered carefully around the 
halls. Now she just needed the prophet himself. 
"This way," the woman said, tugging at Ann's 
sleeve. 
   The woman gestured for Ann to follow her down a 
hallway to the right. Ann pulled her shawl forward, 
covering the pack she carried, and hugged her 
travel bag closer as she followed along the wide 
corridor. She wondered how many people sitting on 
benches and low marble walls around fountains were 
gossiping about her. 
   The floor had a dizzying pattern of dark brown, 
rust, and pale tan-colored stone running across the 
hall in zigzag lines meant to look three-
dimensional. Ann had seen such traditional patterns 
before, down in the Old World, but none of this 
grand scale. It was a work of art, and it was but 
the floor. Everything about the palace was 
exquisite. 
   Shops were set back under a mezzanine to each 
side. Some of them looked to sell items travelers 
might want. There was a variety of small food and 
drink stands, everything from hot meat pies, to 
sweets, to ale, to warm milk. Some places sold 
nightclothes. Others sold hair ribbons. Even at 
this late hour, some of the shops were still open 

and doing brisk business. In a place such as this, 
there would be people who worked at night and would 
have need of such shops. The places that offered to 
do up a woman's hair, or paint her face, or 
promised to do wonders with her fingernails, were 
all closed until morning. Ann doubted they could 
pull off wonders with her. 
   The woman cleared her throat as they strolled 
down the broad corridor, gazing at the shops to 
each side. "And where have you traveled from?" 
   "Oh, far to the south. Very far." Ann took note 
of the woman's focused attention as she leaned in a 
bit. "My sister lives here," Ann said, giving the 
woman something more to chew on. "I'm here to visit 
my sister. She advises Lord Rahl on important 
matters." 
   The woman's eyebrows lifted. "Really! An advisor 
to Lord Rahl himself. What an honor for your 
family." 
"Yes," Ann drawled. "We're all proud of her." 
"What does she advise him on?" 
"Advise him on? Oh, well, matters of war." 
The woman's mouth fell open. "A woman? Advising 
Lord Rahl on warfare?" 
   "Oh yes," Ann insisted. She leaned over and 
whispered, "She's a sorceress. Sees into the 
future, you know. Why, she wrote me a letter and 
told me she saw me coming to the palace for a 
visit. Isn't that amazing?" 
  The woman frowned a bit. "Well, that does seem 
rather remarkable, since here you are and all." 
"Yes, and she told me that I'd meet a helpful 
woman." 
   The woman's smile returned, it again looked 
forced. "She sounds to be quite talented." 
   "Oh, you have no idea," Ann insisted. "She is so 
specific in her forecasts about the future." 
   "Really? Had she anything else to say about your 
visit, then? Anything specific?" 
   "Oh yes indeed. Why, do you know that she told 

me I would meet a man when I came here?" 
   The woman's gaze flicked around the halls. 
"There are a lot of men here. That hardly seems 
very specific. Surely, she must have said more than 
that... I mean, if she is so talented, and an 
advisor to Lord Rahl and all." 
   Ann put a finger to her lip, frowning in feigned 
effort at recollection. "Why, yes, she did, now 
that you mention it. Let's see if I can remember 
..." Ann laid a hand on the woman's arm in a 
familiar manner. "She tells me about my future all 
the time. My sister is always telling me so many 
things about my future in her letters that I 
sometimes feel as if I'm having trouble catching up 
with my own life! I sometimes have trouble 
remembering it all." 
   "Oh do try," the woman said, eager for the 
gossip. "This is so fascinating." 
   Ann returned the finger to her lower lip as she 
gazed at the ceiling, pretending to be engaged in 
deep thought, and noticed for the first time that 
the ceiling was painted like the sky, with clouds 
and all. The effect was quite clever. 
"Well," Ann finally said when she was sure she had 
the woman's full attention, "my sister said that 
the man I would meet was old." She returned the 
hand to the woman's arm. "But very distinguished. 
Not old and decrepit, but tall—very tall—with a 
full head of white hair that comes all the way down 
to his broad shoulders. She said that he would be 
clean-shaven, and that he would be ruggedly 
handsome, with penetrating dark azure eyes." 
   "Dark azure eyes ... my, my," the woman 
tittered, "but he does sound handsome." 
   "And she said that when he looks at a woman with 
those hawklike eyes of his, their knees want to 
buckle." 
   "That is precise," the woman said, her face 
getting flushed. "Too bad she didn't know this 
handsome fellow's name." 

   "Oh, but she did. What kind of advisor to the 
Lord Rahl would she be if she wasn't talented 
enough to know such things." 
   "She told his name, too? She can really do such 
tellings of the future?" 
"Oh my yes," Ann assured her. 
   She strolled along for a time, watching people 
making their way up and down the hall, stopping at 
some of the shops that were still open, or sitting 
on benches, gossiping. 
   "And?" the woman asked. "What is the name your 
sister foretold? The name of this tall 
distinguished gentleman." 
   Ann frowned up at the ceiling again. "It was N 
something. Nigel or Norris, or something. No, wait—
that wasn't it." Ann snapped her finger and thumb. 
"The name she said was Nathan." 
   "Nathan," the woman repeated, looking almost as 
if she had been ready to pluck the name off Ann's 
tongue if she didn't spit it out. "Nathan." 
   "Yes, that's it. Nathan. Do you know anyone here 
at the palace by that name? Nathan? A tall fellow, 
older, with long white hair, broad shoulders, azure 
eyes?" 
   The woman peered up at the ceiling in thought. 
This time it was Ann leaning in, waiting for word, 
watching intently for any reaction. 
   A hand seized Ann's dress at her shoulder and 
brought her to an abrupt halt. Ann and the woman 
turned. 
Behind them stood a very tall woman, with a very 
long blond braid, with very blue eyes, wearing a 
very dark scowl and an outfit of very red leather. 
   The woman beside Ann went as pale as vanilla 
pudding. Her mouth fell open. Ann forced her own 
mouth to stay shut. 
"We've been expecting you," the woman in red 
leather said. 
   Behind her, back up the hallway a short 
distance, spread out to block the hall, stood a 

dozen perfectly huge men in perfect leather armor 
carrying perfectly polished swords, knives, and 
lances. 
"Why, I think you must have me mistaken for—" 
"I don't make mistakes." 
   Ann wasn't nearly as tall as the blond woman in 
red leather. She hardly came up past the yellow 
crescent and star across her stomach. 
   "No, I don't suppose you do. What's this about?" 
Ann asked, losing the timid innocent tone. 
"Wizard Rahl wanted us to bring you in." 
"Wizard Rahl?" 
"Yes. Wizard Nathan Rahl." 
   Ann heard a gasp from the woman beside her. She 
thought the woman was going to faint, and so took 
hold of her arm. 
"Are you all right, my dear?" 
   She stared, wide-eyed, at the woman in red 
leather glowering down at her. "Yes. I have to go. 
I'm late. I must go. Can I go?" 
"Yes, you had better go," the tall blonde said. 
   The woman dipped a quick bow and muttered "Good 
night" before scurrying off down the hall, looking 
over her shoulder only once. 
   Ann turned back to the scowl. "Well I'm glad you 
found me. Let's be off to see Nathan. Excuse me ... 
Wizard Rahl." 
"You won't be having an audience with Wizard Rahl." 
   "You mean, not tonight, I won't be having an ... 
audience with him tonight." 
   Ann was being as polite as she could be, but she 
wanted to clobber that troublesome man, or wring 
his neck, and the sooner the better. 
"My name is Nyda," the woman said. 
"Pleased to meet—" 
   "Do you know what I am?" She didn't wait for Ann 
to answer. "I am Mord-Sith. I give you this one 
warning as a courtesy. It is the only warning, or 
courtesy, you will receive, so listen closely. You 
came here with hostile intent against Wizard Rahl. 

You are now my prisoner. Use of your magic against 
a Mord-Sith will result in the capture of that 
magic by me or one of my sister Mord-Sith and its 
use as a weapon against you. A very, very 
unpleasant weapon." 
   "Well," Ann said, "in this place my magic is not 
very useful, I'm afraid. Hardly worth a hoot, as a 
matter of fact. So, you see, I'm quite harmless." 
   "I don't care how useful you find your magic. If 
you try to so much as light a candle with it, your 
power will be mine." 
"I see," Ann said. 
   "Don't believe me?" Nyda leaned down. "I 
encourage you to try to attack me. I haven't 
captured a sorceress's magic for quite a while. 
Might be ... fun." 
   "Thank you, but I'm a bit too tired out—from my 
travels and all—to be attacking anyone just now. 
Maybe later?" 
   Nyda smiled. In that smile Ann could see why 
Mord-Sith were so feared. "Fine. Later, then." 
   "So, what is it you intend to do with me in the 
meantime, Nyda? Put me up in one of the palace's 
fine rooms?" 
   Nyda ignored the question and gestured with a 
tilt of her head. Two of the men a short way back 
up the hall rushed forward. They towered over Ann 
like two oak trees. Each grasped her under an arm. 
   "Let's go," Nyda said as she marched off down 
the hall ahead of them. 
   The men started out after her, pulling Ann along 
with them. Her feet seemed to touch the floor only 
every third or fourth step. People in the hall 
parted for the Mord-Sith. Passersby pressed 
themselves up against the walls to the side, a 
goodly distance away. Some people disappeared into 
the open shops, from where they peered out windows. 
Everyone stared at the squat woman in the dark 
dress being hauled along by the two palace guards 
in burnished leather and gleaming mail. Behind she 

could hear the jangle of metal gear as the rest of 
the men followed along. 
   They turned into a small hall to the side going 
back between columns holding a projecting balcony. 
One of the men rushed forward to unlock the door. 
Before she knew it, they'd all swept through the 
little door like wine through a funnel. 
   The corridor beyond was dark and cramped—nothing 
like the marble-lined hallways most people saw. Not 
far down the hall, they turned down a stairway. The 
oak treads creaked underfoot. Some of the men 
handed lanterns forward so Nyda could light her 
way. The sound of all the footsteps echoed back 
from the darkness below. 
   At the bottom of the steps, Nyda led them 
through a maze of dirty stone passageways. The 
seldom-used halls smelled musty, and in places 
damp. When they reached another stairwell, they 
continued down a square shaft with landings at each 
turn, descending into the dark recesses of the 
People's Palace. Ann wondered how many people in 
the past were taken by routes such as this, never 
to be seen again. Richard's father, Darken Rahl, 
and his father before him, Panis, were rather fond 
of torture. Life meant nothing to men such as 
those. 
Richard had changed all that. 
But Richard wasn't at the palace, now. Nathan was. 
   Ann had known Nathan for a very long time—for 
nearly a thousand years. For most of that time, as 
Prelate, she had kept him locked in his apartments. 
Prophets could not be allowed to roam free. Now, 
though, this one was free. And, worse, he had 
managed to establish his authority in the palace—
the ancestral home of the House of Rahl. He was an 
ancestor to Richard. He was a Rahl. He was a 
wizard. 
   Ann's plan suddenly started to seem very 
foolish. Just catch the prophet off guard, she'd 
thought. Catch him off guard and snap a collar back 

around his neck. Surely, there would be an opening 
and he would be hers again. 
It had seemed to make sense at the time. 
   At the bottom of the long descent, Nyda swept to 
the right, following a narrow walk with a stone 
wall soaring up on the right and an iron railing on 
the left. Ann gazed off over the railing, but the 
lantern light showed nothing but inky darkness 
below. She feared to think how far it might drop—
not that she had any ideas of a battle with her 
captors, but she was beginning to worry that they 
just might heave her over the edge and be done with 
her. 
Nathan had sent them, though. Nathan, as irascible 
as he could sometimes be, wouldn't order such a 
thing. Ann considered, then, the centuries she had 
kept him locked away, considered the extreme 
measures it had sometimes taken to keep that 
incorrigible man under control. Ann glanced over 
the iron rail again, down into the darkness. 
   "Will Nathan be waiting for us?" she asked, 
trying to sound cheerful. "I'd really like to talk 
to him. We have business we must discuss." 
   Nyda shot a dark look back over her shoulder. 
"Nathan has nothing to talk to you about." 
   At an uncomfortably narrow passageway tunneling 
into the stone on the right, Nyda led them into the 
darkness. The way the woman rushed lent a 
frightening aspect to an already frightening 
journey. 
   Ann at last saw light up ahead. The narrow 
passageway emptied into a small area where several 
halls converged. Ahead and to the right they all 
funneled down steep stairs that twisted as they 
descended. As she was prodded down the stairs, Ann 
gripped the iron rail, fearful of losing her 
footing, although the big hand holding a fistful of 
her dress at her right shoulder would probably 
preclude any chance of falling, to say nothing of 
running off. 

   In the passageway at the bottom of the stairs, 
Nyda, Ann, and the guards came to a halt under the 
low-beamed ceiling. Wavering light from torches in 
floor stands gave the low area a surreal look. The 
place stank of burning pitch, smoke, stale sweat, 
and urine. Ann doubted that any fresh air ever 
penetrated this deep into the People's Palace. 
   She heard a hacking cough echoing from a dim 
corridor to the right. She peered into that dark 
hall and saw doors to either side. In some of the 
doors fingers gripped iron bars in small openings. 
Other than the coughing, no sound came from the 
cells holding hopeless men. 
   A big man in uniform waited before an iron-bound 
door to the left. He looked as if he might have 
been hewn from the same stone as the walls. Under 
different circumstances, Ann might have thought 
that he was a pleasant enough looking fellow. 
   "Nyda," the man said by way of greeting. When 
his eyes turned back up after a polite bow of his 
head, he asked in his deep voice, "What have we 
here?" 
"A prisoner for you, Captain Lerner." Nyda seized 
the empty shoulder of Ann's dress and hauled her 
forward as if showing off a pheasant after a 
successful hunt. "A dangerous prisoner." 
   The captain's appraising gaze glided briefly 
over Ann before he returned his attention to Nyda. 
"One of the secure chambers, then." 
   Nyda nodded her approval. "Wizard Rahl doesn't 
want her getting out. He said she's no end of 
trouble." 
   At least half a dozen curt responses sprang to 
mind, but Ann held her tongue. 
   "You had better come with us, then," Captain 
Lerner said, "and see to her being locked in behind 
the shields." 
   Nyda tilted her head. Two of her men dashed 
forward and pulled torches from stands. The captain 
finally found the right key from a dozen or so he 

had on a ring. The lock sprang open with a strident 
clang that filled the surrounding low corridors. It 
sounded to Ann like a bell being tolled for the 
condemned. 
   With a grunt of effort, the captain tugged the 
heavy door, urging it to slowly swing open. In the 
long hallway beyond, Ann saw but a couple of 
candles bringing meager light to the small openings 
in doors to each side. Men began hooting and 
howling, like animals, calling vile curses at who 
might be entering their world. Arms reached out, 
clawing the air, hoping to net a touch of a passing 
person. 
   The two men with torches swept into the hall 
right behind Nyda, the firelight illuminating her 
in her red leather so all those faces pressed up 
against the openings in their doors could see her. 
Her Agiel, hanging on a fine chain at her wrist, 
spun up into her fist. She glared at the openings 
in the doors to each side. Filthy arms drew back 
in. Voices fell silent. Ann could hear men scurry 
to the far recesses of their cells. 
   Nyda, once certain there would be no 
misbehavior, started out again. Big hands shoved 
Ann ahead. Behind, Captain Lerner followed with his 
keys. Ann pulled the corner of her shawl over her 
mouth and nose, trying to block the sickening 
stench. 
   The captain took a small lamp from a recess, lit 
it from a candle to the side, and then stepped 
forward to unlock another door. In the low 
passageway beyond, the doors were spaced closer 
together. A hand covered with infected lesions hung 
limp out of one of the tiny openings to the side. 
   The hall beyond the next door was lower, and no 
wider than Ann's shoulders. She tried to slow her 
racing heart as she followed the rough, twisting 
passageway. Nyda and the men had to stoop, arms 
folded in, as they made their way. 
"Here," Captain Lerner said as he came to a halt. 

   He held up his lantern and peered into the small 
opening in the door. On the second try, he found 
the right key and unlocked the door. He handed his 
small lamp to Nyda and then used both hands to pull 
the lever. He grunted and tugged with all his 
weight until the door grated partway open. He 
squeezed around the door and disappeared inside. 
   Nyda handed in the lamp as she followed the 
captain in. Her arm, sheathed in red leather, came 
back out to seize a fistful of Ann's dress and drag 
her in after. 
   The captain was opening a second door on the 
other side of the tiny room. Ann could sense that 
this was the room containing the shield. The second 
door grated open. Beyond was a room carved from 
solid bedrock. The only way out was through the 
door, and the outer room that contained the shield, 
and then the second door. 
The House of Rahl knew how to build a secure 
dungeon. 
   Nyda's hand gripped Ann's elbow, commanding her 
into the room beyond. Even Ann, as short as she 
was, had to duck as she stepped over the high sill 
to get through the doorway. The only furniture 
inside was a bench carved from the stone of the far 
wall itself, providing both a seat and a bed off 
the floor. A tin ewer full of water sat on one end 
of the bench. At the opposite end was a single, 
folded, brown blanket. There was a chamber pot in 
the corner. At least it was empty, if not clean. 
Nyda set the lamp on the bench. "Nathan said to 
leave you this." 
Obviously it was a luxury the other guests weren't 
afforded. 
   Nyda stepped one leg over the sill, but paused 
when Ann called her name. 
   "Please give Nathan a message for me? Please? 
Tell him that I would like to see him. Tell him 
that it's important." 
   Nyda smiled to herself. "He said you would say 

those words. Nathan is a prophet, I guess he would 
know what you would say." 
"And will you give him that message?" 
Nyda's cold blue eyes looked to be weighing Ann's 
soul. "Nathan said to tell you that he has a whole 
palace to run, and can't come running down to see 
you every time you clamor for him." 
   Those were almost the exact words she had sent 
down to Nathan's apartments countless times when a 
Sister had come to her with Nathan's demands to see 
the Prelate. Tell Nathan that I have a whole palace 
to run and I can't go running down there every time 
he bellows for me. If he has had a prophecy, then 
write it down and I will look it over when I have 
the time. 
   Until that moment, Ann had never truly realized 
how cruel her words had been. 
   Nyda pulled the door shut behind her. Ann was 
alone in a prison she knew she could not escape. 
   At least she was near the end of her life, and 
could not be held as a prisoner for nearly her 
entire life, as she had held Nathan prisoner for 
his. 
Ann rushed to the little window. "Nyda!" 
   The Mord-Sith turned back from the second door, 
from beyond the shield Ann could not cross. "Yes?" 
"Tell Nathan ... tell Nathan that I'm sorry." 
Nyda let out a brief laugh. "Oh, I think Nathan 
knows you're sorry." 
   Ann thrust her arm through the door, reaching 
toward the woman. "Nyda, please. Tell him . .. tell 
Nathan that I love him." 
   Nyda stared at her a long moment before she 
pushed the outer door closed. 
    
    
    
 
CHAPTER 21 
 

Kahlan lifted her head. She gently laid a hand on 
Richard's chest as she turned her ear toward the 
sound she'd heard off in the darkness. Beneath her 
hand, Richard's chest rose and fell with his 
labored breathing, but, even at that, she felt 
relief—he was still alive. As long as he was alive 
she could fight to find a solution. She wouldn't 
give him up. They would get to Nicci. Somehow, they 
would get to her. 
   A quick glance to the position of the quarter 
moon told her that she'd been asleep less than an 
hour. Clouds, silvery in the moonlight, had 
silently begun streaming in from the north. In the 
distant sky she saw, too, the moonlit wings of the 
black-tipped races that always trailed them. 
   She hated those birds. The races had been 
following them ever since Cara had touched the 
statue of Kahlan that Nicci said was a warning 
beacon. Those dark wings were never far, like the 
shadow of death, always following, always waiting. 
   Kahlan recalled all too well the sand in that 
hourglass statue trickling out. Her time was 
running out. She had no actual indication of what 
would happen when the time that sand had 
represented finally ran out— but she could imagine 
well enough. 
   The place where they had set up camp, before a 
sharp rise of rock with a stand of bristlecone pine 
and thorny brush to one side, wasn't as protected 
or tenable a camp as any of them would have liked, 
but Cara had confided that she was afraid that if 
they didn't stop, Richard wouldn't live the night. 
   That whispered warning had set Kahlan's heart to 
pounding, brought cold sweat to her brow, and swept 
her to the verge of panic. 
   She had known that the rough wagon ride, slow as 
it had been while they made their way across open 
country in the dark, seemed to have made it more 
difficult for Richard to breathe. Less than two 
hours after they had started out, after Cara's 

warning, they'd been forced to stop. After they had 
stopped, they were all relieved that Richard's 
breathing became more even, and sounded a little 
less labored. 
   They needed to make it to roads so that 
traveling would be easier on Richard, and so they 
could make better time. Maybe after he rested the 
night, they could make swifter progress. 
   She had to fight constantly to tell herself that 
they would get him there, that they had a chance, 
and that the journey's purpose wasn't merely empty 
hope meant to forestall the truth. 
   The last time Kahlan had felt this helpless, 
felt this sense of Richard's life slipping away, 
she'd at least had one solid chance available to 
her to save him. She'd had no idea, at the time, 
that that one chance taken would be the catalyst 
that would initiate a cascade of events that would 
begin the disintegration of magic itself. 
   She was the one who had made the decision to 
take that chance, and she was the one responsible 
for all that was now coming to pass. Had she known 
what she now knew, she would have made the same 
decision—to save Richard's life—but that made her 
no less liable for the consequences. 
   She was the Mother Confessor, and, as such, was 
responsible for protecting the lives of those with 
magic, of creatures of magic. And, instead, she 
might very well be the cause of their end. 
   Kahlan sprang to her feet, sword in hand, when 
she heard Cara's whistled birdcall to alert them to 
her return. It was a birdcall Richard had taught 
her. 
   Kahlan slid the shutter on the lantern open all 
the way to provide more light. She saw Tom, hand 
resting on the silver-handled knife at his belt, 
rise from the nearby rock where he'd been sitting 
as he watched over both the camp and the man Kahlan 
had touched with her power. The man still lay on 
the ground at Tom's feet where Kahlan had ordered 

him to stay. 
   "What is it?" Jennsen whispered as she appeared 
at Kahlan's side, hastily rubbing the sleep from 
her eyes. 
   "I'm not sure, yet. Cara signaled, so she must 
have someone with her." 
   Cara walked in out of the darkness, and, as 
Kahlan had suspected, she was pushing a man ahead 
of her. Kahlan frowned, trying to recall where 
she'd seen him before. She blinked, then, realizing 
it was the young man they had come across a week or 
so back—Owen. 
   "I tried to get to you sooner!" Owen cried out 
when he saw Kahlan. "I swear, I tried." 
   Holding him by the shoulder of his light coat, 
Cara marched the man closer, then yanked him to a 
halt in front of Kahlan. 
"What are you talking about?" Kahlan asked. 
   When Owen caught sight of Jennsen standing 
behind Kahlan's shoulder, he paused with his mouth 
hanging open for an instant before he answered. 
   "I meant to get to you earlier, I swear," he 
said to Kahlan, sounding on the verge of tears. "I 
went to your camp." He clutched his light coat 
closed at his chest as he began to tremble. "I, I 
saw ... I saw all the ... remains. Dear Creator, 
how could you be so brutal?" 
   Kahlan thought Owen looked like he might throw 
up. He covered his mouth and closed his eyes as he 
shook. 
   "If you mean all those men," Kahlan said, "they 
tried to capture us, to kill us. We didn't collect 
them from their rocking chairs beside their hearths 
and bring them out into this wasteland where we 
slaughtered them. They attacked us; we defended 
ourselves." 
   "But, dear Creator, how could you ..." Owen 
stood before her, unable to control his shivering. 
He closed his eyes. "Nothing is real. Nothing is 
real. Nothing is real." He repeated it over and 

over, as if it were an incantation meant to protect 
him from evil. 
   Cara forcibly dragged Owen back a bit and sat 
him down on a shelf of rock. Eyes closed 
meditatively, he mumbled "Nothing is real" to 
himself continually while Cara took up a position 
to the left side of Kahlan. 
   "Tell us what you're doing here," Cara commanded 
in a low growl. Although she didn't say it, the "or 
else" was clear enough. 
   "And be quick about it," Kahlan said. "We have 
enough trouble and we don't need you added on top 
of it." 
   Owen opened his eyes. "I went to your camp to 
tell you about it, but... all those bodies ..." 
   "We know about what happened back there. Now, 
tell us why you're here." Kahlan was at the end of 
her patience. "I'm not going to ask you again." 
"Lord Rahl," Owen wailed, tears bursting forth at 
last. 
"Lord Rahl what," Kahlan demanded through gritted 
teeth. 
"Lord Rahl has been poisoned," he blurted out as he 
wept. 
   Gooseflesh prickled up Kahlan's legs. "How can 
you possibly know such a thing is true?" 
   Owen stood, clutching twisted wads of his coat 
at his chest. "I know," he cried, "because I'm the 
one who poisoned him." 
   Could it be? Could it be that it wasn't really 
the runaway power of the gift killing Richard, but 
poison? Could it be that they had it all wrong? 
Could it be that it was all caused by this man 
poisoning Richard? 
   Kahlan felt her sword's hilt slip from her 
fingers as she started for the man. 
   He stood watching her come, like a fawn watching 
a mountain lion about to leap. 
   Kahlan knew there was something strange about 
this man. Richard, too, had thought there was 

something unsettling about him, something not quite 
right. 
Somehow, this quaking stranger had poisoned 
Richard. 
   Richard barely hung to life. He was suffering 
and in pain. This man had been the cause of it all. 
Kahlan would know why, and she would know the truth 
of it. 
   Kahlan closed the distance quickly. She would 
not risk his escape. She would not risk his lies. 
   She would have his confession. 
  Her hand started coming up toward him. Her power 
was recovered— she could feel it there, in the core 
of her being, at the ready. 
   This man had tried to kill Richard. She intended 
to find out if there was a way to save him. This 
man could tell her. 
She committed herself to taking him. 
   It was not necessary for Kahlan to invoke her 
birthright, but merely to withdraw her restraint of 
it. Her feelings about what this man had done faded 
away; they no longer mattered in this. Only the 
truth would serve her now. She was a being of raw 
commitment. 
He had no chance. He was hers. 
   She saw him standing frozen, watching her come, 
saw his blue eyes widen, saw the tears running down 
his cheeks. Kahlan felt the cold coil of power 
straining for release, demanding to be freed. As 
her hand rose toward this man who had harmed 
Richard, she wanted nothing so much as what she 
would have. 
He was hers. 
Cara abruptly jumped in between them. 
   Kahlan's sight of the man was blocked by the 
Mord-Sith. Kahlan tried to brush Cara aside, but 
she was ready and firmly held her ground. Cara 
seized Kahlan by the shoulders and forced her back 
three paces. 
"No. Mother Confessor, no." 

   Kahlan was still focused on Owen, even if she 
couldn't see him. "Get out of my way." 
"No. Stop." 
   "Move!" Kahlan tried to shove Cara aside, but 
the woman had her feet spread and couldn't be 
budged. "Cara!" 
"No. Listen to me." 
"Cara, get out of—" 
   She shook Kahlan so hard that Kahlan thought her 
neck would snap. "Listen to me!" 
Kahlan panted in rage. "What." 
   "Wait until you hear what he says. He came here 
for a reason. When he finishes, you can use your 
power if you want, or you can let me make him 
scream until the moon covers its ears, but first we 
need to hear what he says." 
   "I'll find out soon enough what he says, and 
I'll know the truth. When I touch him he will 
confess every detail." 
   "And if Lord Rahl dies as a result? Lord Rahl's 
life hanging in the balance. We must think of that 
first." 
"I am. Why do you think I'm going to do this?" 
   Cara pulled Kahlan close to hear her whisper. 
"And what if using your power on this man kills him 
for some reason we don't yet even know about. 
Remember when we didn't know everything in the 
past? Remember Marlin Pickard announcing he had 
come to assassinate Richard? It was too easy then, 
and it's too easy this time. 
   "What if your touching this man is someone's 
design—a trick, with this man sent as bait of some 
sort? What if they want you to do it for some 
reason? What if you do what they intend you to do—
then what? It won't be a simple mistake that we can 
work to fix. If Lord Rahl dies we can't bring him 
back." 
   Cara's fierce blue eyes were wet. Her powerful 
fingers dug into Kah-lan's shoulders. "What can it 
hurt to hear him first, before you touch him? You 

can then touch him, if you still think it's 
necessary—but hear him first. Mother Confessor, as 
a sister of the Agiel, I'm asking you, please, for 
the sake of Lord Rahl's life, wait." 
   More than anything, it was Cara's reluctance to 
use force that gave Kahlan pause. If there was 
anyone who would be more than willing to use 
physical force to protect Richard, it was Cara. 
   In the dim light of the lantern, Kahlan studied 
the emotion in Cara's expression. Despite 
everything Cara said, Kahlan didn't know if she 
could afford to take the chance, to hesitate. 
"What if it's a stab in the dark?" Jennsen asked 
from behind. 
   Kahlan glanced back over her shoulder at 
Richard's sister, at the worry on her face. 
   Kahlan had made a mistake before in not acting 
quickly enough, and it resulted in Richard being 
captured and taken from her. Then it was his 
freedom; this time it was his life at stake. 
   She knew that while hesitation had been a 
mistake in that instance, that didn't mean that 
immediate action was always right. 
   She looked back into Cara's eyes. "All right. 
We'll hear what he has to say." With a thumb, she 
brushed a tear from Cara's cheek, a tear of terror 
for Richard, a tear of terror at the thought of 
losing him. "Thanks," Kahlan whispered. 
   Cara nodded and released her. She turned and 
folded her arms, fixing Owen in her glare. 
"You had better not make me sorry for stopping 
her." 
   Owen peered about at all the faces watching him—
Friedrich, Tom, Jennsen, Cara, Kahlan, and even the 
man Kahlan had touched, lying on the ground not far 
away. 
   "In the first place, how could you possibly have 
poisoned Richard?" Kahlan asked. 
   Owen licked his lips, fearful of telling her, 
even though that was apparently why he had 

returned. His gaze finally broke toward the ground. 
   "When I saw the dust rising from the wagon, and 
I knew that I was near, I dumped out what water I 
had left, so it would appear I had none. Then, when 
Lord Rahl found me, I asked for a drink. When he 
gave me his waterskin so I could have a drink, I 
put poison in it, just before I handed it back. I 
was relieved that you had showed up, too. It was my 
intention that I poison both Lord Rahl and you, 
Mother Confessor, but you had your own water and 
didn't take a drink when he offered it to you. But 
I guess it doesn't matter. This will work just as 
well." 
   Kahlan couldn't make sense of such a confession. 
"So you intended to kill us both, but you were only 
able to poison Richard." 
   "Kill... ?" Owen looked up in shock at the very 
idea. He shook his head emphatically. "No, no, 
nothing like that. Mother Confessor, I tried to get 
to you earlier, but those men went to your camp 
before I got there. I needed to get the antidote to 
Lord Rahl." 
   "I see. You wanted to save him—after you'd 
poisoned him—but when you got to our camp, we'd 
gone." 
   His eyes filled with tears again. "It was so 
awful. All the bodies— the blood. I've never seen 
such brutal murder." He covered his mouth. 
   "It would have been murder—our murder," Kahlan 
said, "had we not defended ourselves." 
   Owen seemed not to hear her. "And you were gone—
you'd left. I didn't know where you'd gone. It was 
hard to follow your wagon's trail in the dark, but 
I had to. I had to run, to catch up with you. I was 
afraid the races would get me, but I knew I had to 
reach you tonight. I couldn't wait. I was afraid, 
but I had to come." 
The whole story was nonsense to Kahlan. 
   "So you're like one of those people who starts a 
fire, calls out an alarm, and then helps put it 

out—all so you can be a hero." 
   Startled, Owen shook his head. "No, no, nothing 
like that. Nothing like that at all—I swear. I 
hated doing it. I did. I hated it." 
"Then why did you poison him!" 
   Owen twisted his light coat in his fists as 
tears trickled down his cheeks. "Mother Confessor, 
we have to give him the antidote, now, or he will 
die. It's already so very late." He clasped his 
hands prayerfully and gazed skyward. "Dear Creator, 
let it not be too late, please." He reached out for 
Kahlan, as if to urgently beg her as well, to 
assure her of his sincerity, but at the look on her 
face, drew back. "There's no more time, Mother 
Confessor. I tried to get to you earlier—I swear. 
If you don't let him have the remedy now, it will 
be the end of him. It will all be for naught—
everything, all if it, all for nothing!" 
   Kahlan didn't know if she dared trust in such an 
offer. It made no sense to poison a man and then 
save him. 
"What's the antidote?" she asked. 
   "Here." Owen hurriedly pulled a small vial from 
a pocket inside his coat. "Here it is. Please, 
Mother Confessor." He held the square-sided vial 
out toward her. "He must have this now. Please, 
hurry, or he will die." 
"Or this will finish him," Kahlan said. 
   "If I wanted to finish him, I could have done so 
when I slipped the poison into his waterskin. I 
could have used more of it, or I could simply not 
have come with the antidote. I'm not a killer, I 
swear— that's why I had to come in the first 
place." 
   Owen wasn't making a whole lot of sense. Kahlan 
wasn't confident in such an offer. It was Richard's 
life that would be forfeit if she chose wrong. 
"I say we give Richard Owen's antidote," Jennsen 
whispered. 
"A stab in the dark?" Kahlan asked. 

"You said that there were times when there is no 
choice but to act immediately, but even then it 
must be with your best judgment, using all your 
experience and everything you do know. Earlier, in 
the wagon, I heard Cara tell you that she didn't 
know if Richard would live the night. Owen says he 
has an antidote. I think this is one of those times 
we must act." 
   "If it means anything," Tom offered in a 
confidential tone, "I'd have to agree. I don't see 
as there really is any choice. But if you have an 
alternative that might save Lord Rahl, I think now 
would be the time to add it to the stew." 
   Kahlan didn't have any alternative, except 
getting to Nicci, and that was looking more and 
more like no more than empty hope. 
   "Mother Confessor," Friedrich offered in a 
hushed tone, "I agree as well. I think you should 
know that if you let him have the remedy, we all 
were in agreement that it was the best choice to be 
made." 
   If the antidote killed Richard, they wouldn't 
blame her. That was what he was saying. 
   Jennsen stepped toward Owen, pulling Betty along 
with her. "If you're lying about this being an 
antidote, you will have to answer to me, and to 
Cara, and then to the Mother Confessor—if there's 
even anything left of you by then. You do 
understand that, don't you?" 
   Owen shrank from her, his head turned away, as 
he nodded vigorously, apparently fearing to look up 
at her, or at Betty. Kahlan thought that he looked 
more afraid of Jennsen than of any of the rest of 
them. 
   Cara leaned toward Kahlan and whispered. "He has 
to have an antidote. What purpose would it be to 
place himself in danger of all we'll do to him if 
he's lying? Why even come back here, if he only 
wanted to poison Lord Rahl? He had already poisoned 
him and gotten away. Mother Confessor, I say that 

we give Lord Rahl the antidote, and we do it 
quickly." 
   "Then why poison him in the first place?" Kahlan 
whispered back. "If you intend to give a man the 
antidote, then why poison him?" 
   Cara let out a frustrated sigh. "I don't know. 
But right now, if Lord Rahl dies ..." 
Cara's words trailed off at the unthinkable. 
Kahlan looked over at Richard lying unconscious. 
She went weak at the thought of him never waking. 
How could she live in a world without Richard? 
"How much do we give him?" she asked Owen. 
   Owen rushed forward, past Jennsen. "All of it. 
Make him drink it all down." He pressed the small, 
square-sided bottle into Kahlan's hands. "Hurry. 
Please hurry." 
   "You've hurt him," Kahlan said with unrestrained 
menace. "Your poison hurt him. He's been coughing 
up blood, and he passed out from the pain. If you 
think I'll ever forget that and be pleased with you 
for now returning to save his life, you're wrong." 
   Owen nervously licked his lips. "But I tried to 
get to you. I was bringing you the antidote so that 
wouldn't happen. I never intended him such pain. I 
tried to get to you—but you slaughtered all those 
men." 
"So, it's our fault, then?" 
   Owen smiled just a bit as he nodded, a small 
smile of satisfaction that she'd finally seen the 
light and at last understood that it wasn't his 
fault at all, but their fault. 
   While Jennsen watched Owen, keeping him back out 
of the way, Tom watched the man Kahlan had touched, 
and Friedrich watched Betty, Kahlan and Cara knelt 
and lifted Richard so they could try to get him to 
drink the antidote. Cara propped his back against 
her thigh while Kahlan cradled his head in her arm. 
   She pulled the stopper with her teeth and spit 
out the cork. Careful not to spill and waste any of 
the antidote, she put the bottle to his lips and 

tipped it up. She watched it wet his lips. She 
tilted his head back more, so that his mouth would 
fall open a bit, and tipped the bottle some more. 
Carefully, she let some of the clear liquid dribble 
into his mouth. 
   Kahlan didn't know if what was in the bottle 
really was an antidote. It was colorless and looked 
to her just like water. As Richard smacked his lips 
a little, swallowing what she had poured in his 
mouth, Kahlan smelled the bottle. The liquid had 
the slight aroma of cinnamon. 
   She dribbled more of it into Richard's mouth. He 
coughed, but then swallowed. Cara used a finger to 
swipe up a drop that ran down his chin and return 
it to his mouth. 
   Kahlan, her heart pounding with worry, poured 
the rest of the liquid past his lips. Holding the 
empty bottle between her thumb and first finger, 
she used the palm of her hand to push Richard's jaw 
up, forcing his head back, forcing him to swallow. 
   She sighed with relief when he swallowed several 
times, taking all the cure. At least she'd been 
able to get him to swallow it. 
   Carefully, Kahlan and Cara laid Richard back 
down. As Cara stood, Owen rushed forward. 
"Did you give him all of it? Did he drink it all?" 
   Cara's Agiel spun into her fist. As Owen, in his 
exuberance to get to Richard, charged forward, Cara 
rammed her Agiel into Owen's shoulder. 
   Owen tottered back a step. "I'm sorry." He 
rubbed his shoulder where Cara had jabbed her Agiel 
into him. "I only wanted to see how he is. I don't 
mean any harm. I want him to be well, I swear." 
   Kahlan stared in astonishment. Cara glanced down 
at her Agiel, then at Owen. 
Her Agiel hadn't worked on him. He wasn't affected 
by magic. 
   Even Jennsen was staring at Owen. He was just 
like her—a pillar of Creation, born pristinely 
ungifted and unaffected by magic. While Jennsen 

understood what that meant, it didn't seem that 
Owen did. He had no idea that Cara had done 
anything more than poke him good and hard to get 
him to stand back. 
Her Agiel should have dropped him to his knees. 
   "Richard drank all the antidote. Now it must do 
its work. In the meantime, I think we had better 
get some sleep." Kahlan gestured with a tilt of her 
head. "See to the watches, would you Cara? I'll 
stay with Richard." 
Cara nodded. She gave Tom a look, which he 
understood. 
   "Owen," Tom said, "why don't you come over by me 
and spend the night over here, with this fellow." 
   Owen blanched at the look on the face of the big 
D'Haran, and understood that he wasn't being 
offered a choice. "Yes, all right." He turned back 
to Kahlan. "I'll pray that he got the antidote in 
time. I'll pray for him." 
"Pray for yourself," she said. 
When everyone had gone, Kahlan lay down beside 
Richard. Now that she was alone with him, tears of 
worry finally began to seep out. Richard was 
shivering with cold, even though it was a warm 
night. She drew the blanket back up around him and 
then put her hand on his shoulder as she cuddled 
close, not knowing if when the new day came he 
would still be with her. 
 
 
 
 
 
          CHAPTER 22 
 
 
 
 
 
     Richard opened his eyes, only to squint at the 

light, even though it was far from sunny. By the 
layered streaks of violet tinting the iron gray 
sky, it appeared to be just dawn. A heavy overcast 
hung low overhead. Or it could be sunset—he wasn't 
really sure. He felt strangely disoriented. 
   The dull throbbing in his head ached back down 
through his neck. His chest burned with every 
breath he drew. His throat was raw. It hurt to 
swallow. 
   The heavy pain, though, the pain that had 
squeezed so hard it had taken his breath and had 
made the world go black, seemed to have ebbed. The 
bone-chilling grip of cold had lifted, too. 
   Richard felt as if he had lost contact with the 
world for a time— how long a time he didn't know. 
It seemed like it had been an eternity, as if the 
world of life was a distant memory from his past. 
He also felt as if he had come close to never 
waking again. It brought a flash of sweat to his 
brow to feel that he had been close to losing his 
life, to realize that he might never have awakened. 
   The surroundings were different from those he 
remembered. Close by, a wall of straw-colored rock 
with sharp fractured edges rose nearly straight up. 
To the side he saw a stand of twisted bristlecone 
pine. Pale, bare wood stood out in naked relief 
where sections of dark bark had peeled open. The 
imposing mountains loomed closer than he 
remembered, and there were more trees on the slopes 
of the nearby hills. 
   Jennsen lay curled up in a blanket beside Betty, 
her back against the rear wheel of the wagon. Tom 
was asleep not too far away right beside his draft 
horses. Friedrich sat on a rock standing watch. 
Richard couldn't make sense of the two men who lay 
at Friedrich's feet. Richard thought one of them 
must be the man Kahlan had touched with her power. 
The other one, though, he wasn't sure of, although 
Richard thought there was something familiar about 
him. 

   Kahlan was sound asleep up against him. His 
sword lay on his other side, close by his hand. On 
the other side of Kahlan lay her sword, sheathed, 
but at the ready. 
   All the Seekers who had used the Sword of Truth 
before Richard, the good and the evil, had left 
within the sword's magic the essence of their 
skill. By mastering the sword as the true Seeker 
for whom the makers of the sword intended its 
power, Richard had learned to tap that ability and 
make it his own, to draw on all the skill and 
knowledge of those before him. He had become a 
master of the blade, in more ways than one, and 
part of that had come from the blade itself. 
   Kahlan had been taught to use a sword by her 
father, King Wyborn Amnell, once king of Galea 
before Kahlan's mother had taken him for her mate. 
Richard had completed Kahlan's training, teaching 
her how to use a sword in ways she had never been 
shown, ways that used her size and speed to her 
best advantage, rather than fighting like the enemy 
and depending on strength. 
   Despite his pounding head, and the pain when he 
drew a breath, the warm feel of Kahlan against his 
side brought him a smile. She looked so beautiful, 
even with her hair all in a tangle. She made his 
heart ache with longing. He had always loved her 
long beautiful hair. He loved to watch her sleep 
almost as much as he loved to gaze into her 
arresting green eyes. He loved to make her hair a 
tangled mess. 
   He remembered, back when he had first met her, 
watching her sleep on the floor of Adie's home, 
watching her slow heartbeat in the vein in her 
neck. He remembered, as he'd watched, being struck 
by the life in her. She was just so alive, so 
passionately filled with life. He couldn't stop 
smiling as he looked at her. 
   Gently, he bent and kissed the top of her head. 
She stirred, nuzzling up tighter to him. 

   Suddenly, she jerked upright, sitting on a hip 
as she stared wide-eyed at him. 
"Richard!" 
   She threw herself down beside him, her head on 
his shoulder, her arm across his chest. She 
clutched him for dear life. A single gasp of a sob 
that terrified him with its forlorn misery escaped 
her throat. 
"I'm all right," he soothed as he smoothed her 
hair. 
   She pushed herself up again, slower, gazing at 
him as if she hadn't seen him in an eternity. Her 
special smile, the one she gave only him, spread 
incandescent across her face. 
"Richard..." She seemed only able to stare at him 
and smile. 
   Richard, still lying back trying to let his head 
clear, lifted an arm just enough to point. "Who is 
that?" 
   Kahlan looked back over her shoulder. She turned 
back and took up Richard's hand. 
"Remember that fellow a week or so back? Owen? 
That's him." 
"I thought I recognized him." 
   "Lord Rahl!" Cara dropped to the ground on the 
side of him opposite Kahlan. "Lord Rahl..." 
   She, too, seemed to have trouble finding words. 
Instead, she took up his free hand. That, in 
itself, said a world to him. 
   Richard took the hand back, kissed his first two 
fingers and touched the fingers to her cheek. 
"Thanks for watching out for everyone." 
   Jennsen hobbled over, the blanket still tangled 
around her legs. "Richard! The antidote worked! It 
worked, dear spirits, it worked!" 
   Richard rose up onto an elbow. "Antidote?" He 
frowned at the three women around him. "Antidote to 
what?" 
   "You were poisoned," Kahlan told him. She aimed 
a thumb back over her shoulder. "Owen. When he came 

to us the first time, you gave him a drink. In 
thanks, he put poison in your waterskin. He 
intended to poison me with it, too, but only you 
drank it." 
Richard's glare settled on the men at Friedrich's 
feet, watching them.He nodded his confirmation that 
it was true, as if he should be commended for it. 
"One of those little mistakes," Jennsen said. 
Richard puzzled at her. "What?" 
   "You said that even you made mistakes, and even 
a little one could cause big trouble. Don't you 
remember? Cara said you were always making 
mistakes, especially simple ones, and that's why 
you need her around." Jennsen flashed him a teasing 
smile. "I guess she was right." 
   Richard didn't correct the story, but said, as 
he stood, "It just goes to show how you can be 
taken by surprise by something as simple as that 
fellow over there." 
Kahlan was watching Owen. "I have a suspicion he 
isn't so simple." 
   Cara put her arm out for Richard to grab hold of 
in order to steady himself. 
   "Cara," he said as he had to sit down on a 
nearby crate from the wagon, "bring him over here, 
would you?" 
   "Gladly," she said as she started across their 
camp. "Don't forget to tell him about Owen," Cara 
said to Kahlan. 
"Tell me what?" 
   Kahlan leaned close as she watched Cara haul 
Owen to his feet. "Owen is pristinely ungifted—like 
Jennsen." 
   Richard raked his hair back, trying to make 
sense of it. "Are you saying that he's also my half 
brother?" 
   Kahlan shrugged. "We don't know that; we know 
only that he's pristinely ungifted." A wrinkle of 
puzzlement tightened on her brow. "By the way, back 
at the camp where those men attacked us, you were 

about to tell me something important you figured 
out when we were questioning the man that I 
touched, but you never got the chance." 
   "Yes"—Richard squinted, trying to recall what 
the man had told them—"it was about the one he said 
gave the orders sending him to capture us: Nicholas 
... Nicholas something." 
"The Slide," Kahlan reminded him. "Nicholas the 
Slide." 
   "Right. Nicholas told him where to find us—at 
the eastern edge of the wasteland, heading north. 
How could he know?" 
Kahlan mulled over the question. "Come to think of 
it, how could he know? We've seen no one, at least 
no one we were aware of, who could have reported 
where we were. Even if someone had seen us, by the 
time they reported our position and Nicholas sent 
the men, we would have been far from here. Unless 
Nicholas is close." 
   "The races," Richard said. "It has to be that 
he's the one watching us through the races. We've 
seen no one else. That's the only way anyone could 
have known where we were. This Nicholas the Slide 
had to have seen us, to have seen where we were, 
through those birds that have been shadowing us. 
That's how he was able to give our location along 
with the orders." 
Richard rose as the man approached. 
   "Lord Rahl," Owen said, arms spread in a gesture 
of relief as he scurried forward, Cara holding a 
fistful of his coat at his shoulder to keep him 
reined in. "I'm so relieved you're better. I never 
meant for the poison to hurt you as it did—and it 
never would have, had you had the antidote sooner. 
I tried to get to you sooner—I meant to—I swear I 
did, but all those men you slaughtered... it wasn't 
my fault." He added a small smile to the pleading 
expression he gave Kahlan. "The Mother Confessor 
knows, she understands." 
   Kahlan folded her arms as she looked up at 

Richard from under her frown. "It's our fault, you 
see, that Owen didn't make it to us sooner with the 
antidote to the poison. Owen got to our last camp, 
intending to hand over the antidote to cure you, 
only to find that we had murdered all those men and 
then up and left. So, it's not his fault—his 
intentions were good and he tried; we spoiled his 
effort. Very inconsiderate of us." 
   Richard stared, not sure if Kahlan was giving 
him a sarcastic summation of what Owen had told 
her, or an accurate portrayal of Owen's excuse, or 
if his head still wasn't clear. 
Richard's mood turned as dark as the thick 
overcast. 
   "You poisoned me," he said to Owen, wanting to 
be sure he had the man's story straight, "and then 
you brought an antidote to where we were camped, 
but when you got to that camp, you came across the 
men who had attacked us and you found we had gone." 
   "Yes." His cheer that Richard had it right 
abruptly faded. "Such savagery from the 
unenlightened is to be expected, of course." Owen's 
blue eyes filled with tears. "But still, it was so 
..." He hugged himself and closed his eyes as he 
rocked his weight from side to side, from one foot 
to the other. "Nothing is real. Nothing is real. 
Nothing is real." 
   Richard seized the man's shirt at his throat and 
yanked him closer. "What do you mean, nothing is 
real?" 
   Owen paled before Richard's glare. "Nothing is 
real. We can't know if what we see, if anything, is 
real or not. How could we?" 
"If you see it, then how can you possibly think it 
isn't real?" 
   "Because our senses all the time distort the 
truth of reality and deceive us. Our senses only 
delude us into the illusion of certainty. We can't 
see at night—our sight tells us that the night is 
empty—but an owl can snatch up a mouse that with 

our eyes we couldn't sense was there. Our reality 
says the mouse didn't exist—yet we know it must, in 
spite of what our vision tells us—that another 
reality exists outside our experience. Our sight, 
rather than revealing truth, hides the truth from 
us—worse, it gives us a false idea of reality. 
   "Our senses deceived us. Dogs can smell a world 
of things we can't, because our senses are so 
limited. How can a dog track something we can't 
smell, if our senses tell us what is real and what 
isn't. Our understanding of reality, rather than 
being enhanced by, is instead limited by, our 
flawed senses. 
   "Our bias causes us to mistakenly think we know 
what is unknowable—don't you see? We aren't 
equipped with adequate senses to know the true 
nature of reality, what is real and what isn't. We 
only know a tiny sampling of the world around us. 
There is a whole world hidden from us, a whole 
world of mysteries we don't see—but it's there just 
the same, whether we see it or not, whether we have 
the wisdom to admit our inadequacies to the task of 
knowing reality, or not. What we think we know is 
actually unknowable. Nothing is real." 
   Richard leaned down. "You saw those bodies 
because they were real." 
   "What we see is only an apparent reality, mere 
appearances, a self-imposed illusion, all based on 
our flawed perception. Nothing is real." 
   "You didn't like what you saw, so you choose, 
instead, to say it isn't real?" 
"I can't say what's real. Neither can you. To say 
otherwise is unenlightened arrogance. A truly 
enlightened man admits his woeful ineffectiveness 
when confronting his existence." 
   Richard pulled Owen closer. "Such whimsy can 
only bring you to a life of misery and quaking 
fear, a life wasted and never really lived. You had 
better start using your mind for its true purpose 
of knowing the world around you, instead of 

abandoning it to faith in irrational notions. With 
me, you will confine yourself to the facts of the 
world we live in, not fanciful daydreams as 
concocted by others." 
   Jennsen tugged on Richard's sleeve, pulling him 
back to hear her as she whispered. "Richard, what 
if Owen is right—not necessarily about the bodies, 
but about the general idea?" 
   "You mean you think his conclusions are all 
wrong, and yet, somehow, the convoluted idea behind 
them must be right." 
   "Well, no—but what if what he says really is 
true? After all, look at you and me. Remember the 
conversation we had a while back, the one where you 
were explaining how I was born without eyes to 
see"— she glanced briefly at Owen and apparently 
abbreviated what she had intended to say—"certain 
things. Remember that you said that, for me, such 
things don't exist? That reality is different for 
me? That my reality is different than yours?" 
   "You're getting what I said wrong, Jennsen. When 
most people get into a patch of poison ivy, they 
blister and itch. Some rare people don't. That 
doesn't mean the poison ivy doesn't exist, or, more 
to the point, that its existence depends on whether 
or not we think it's there." 
   Jennsen pulled him even closer. "Are you so 
sure? Richard, you don't know what it's like to be 
different from everyone else, to not see and feel 
what they do. You say there's magic, but I can't 
see it, or feel it. It doesn't touch me. Am I to 
believe you on faith, when my senses say it doesn't 
exist? Maybe because of that I can understand a 
little better what Owen means. Maybe he doesn't 
have it all wrong. It makes a person wonder what's 
real and what's not, and if, like he says, it's 
only your own point of view." 
   "The information our senses give us must be 
taken in context. If I close my eyes the sun 
doesn't stop shining. When I go to sleep I'm 

consciously unaware of anything; that doesn't mean 
that the world ceases to exist. You have to use the 
information from your senses in context along with 
what you've learned to be true about the nature of 
things. Things don't change because of the way we 
think about them. What is, is." 
   "But, like he says, if we don't experience 
something with our own senses, then how can we know 
it's real?" 
   Richard folded his arms. "I can't get pregnant. 
So would you argue that for me women don't exist." 
Jennsen backed away, looking a little sheepish. "I 
guess not." 
   "Now," Richard said, turning back to Owen, "you 
poisoned me— you admit that much." He tapped his 
fist against his own chest. "It hurts in here; 
that's real. You caused it. 
   "I want to know why, and I want to know why you 
brought the antidote. I'm not interested in what 
you think of the camp where the men who attacked us 
lay dead. Confine yourself to the matter at hand. 
You brought the antidote for the poison you gave 
me. That can't be the end of it. What's the rest?" 
   "Well," Owen stammered, "I didn't want you to 
die, that's why I saved you." 
   "Stop telling me your feelings about what you 
did and tell me instead what you did and why. Why 
poison me, and why then save me? I want the answer 
to that, and I want the truth." 
   Owen glanced around at the grim faces watching 
him. He took a breath as if to gather his 
composure. 
   "I needed your help. I had to convince you to 
help me. I asked, before, for your help and you 
refused, even though my people have great need. I 
begged. I told you how important it was for them to 
have your help, but you still said no." 
   "I have my own problems I must deal with," 
Richard said. "I'm sorry the Order invaded your 
homeland—I know how terrible that is— but I told 

you, I'm trying to bring them down and our doing so 
will only help you and your people in your effort 
to rid yourselves of them. You aren't the only one 
who has had their home invaded by those brutes. We 
have men of the Order murdering our loved ones as 
well." 
   "You must help us, first," Owen insisted. "You 
and those like you, the unenlightened ones, must 
free my people. We can't do it ourselves—we are not 
savages. I heard what you all had to say about 
eating meat. Such talk made me ill. Our people are 
not like that—we can't be, because we are 
enlightened. I saw how you murdered all those men 
back there. I need you to do that to the Order." 
"I thought that wasn't real?" 
Owen ignored the question. "You must give my people 
freedom." 
"I already told you, I can't!" 
   "Now, you must." He looked at Cara, Jennsen, 
Tom, and Friedrich. His gaze settled on Kahlan. 
"You must see to it that Lord Rahl does this—or he 
will die. I have poisoned him." 
   Kahlan seized Owen's shirt. "You brought him the 
antidote to the poison." 
   Owen nodded. "That first night, when I told you 
all of my great need, I had just given him the 
poison." His gaze returned to Richard. "You had 
just drunk it, within hours. Had you agreed to give 
my people the freedom they need, I would have given 
you the antidote then, and you would be free of the 
poison. It would have cured you. 
   "But you refused to come with me, to help those 
who cannot help themselves, as is your duty to 
those in need. You sent me away. So, I did not 
offer you the antidote. In the time since, the 
poison has worked its way through your body. Had 
you not been selfish, you would have been cured 
back then. 
   "Instead, the poison is now established in you, 
doing its work. Since it was so long since you 

drank the poison, the antidote I had with me was no 
longer enough to cure you, only to make you better 
for a while." 
"And what will cure me?" Richard asked. 
   "You will have to have more of the antidote to 
rid you of the rest of the poison." 
"And I don't suppose you have any more." 
   Owen shook his head. "You must give my people 
freedom. Only then, will you be able to get more of 
the antidote." 
   Richard wanted to shake the answers out of the 
man. Instead, he took a breath, trying to stay calm 
so that he could understand the truth of what Owen 
had done and then think of the solution. 
"Why only then?" he asked. 
"Because," Owen said, "the antidote is in the place 
taken by the Imperial Order. You must rid us of the 
invaders if you are to be able to get to the 
antidote. If you want to live, you must give us our 
freedom. If you don't, you will die." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 23 
      
      
      
      
      
      
     Kahlan reached in to seize Owen by the throat. 
She wanted to strangle him, to choke him, to make 
him feel the desperate, panicked need of breath 
that Richard had endured, to make him suffer, to 
show him what it was like. Cara went for Owen as 

well, apparently having the same thought as Kahlan. 
Richard thrust his arm out, holding them both back. 
   Holding Owen's shirt in his other fist, Richard 
shook the man. "And how long do I have until I get 
sick again? How long do I have to live before your 
poison kills me?" 
   Owen's confused gaze flitted from one angry face 
to another. "But if you do as I ask, as is your 
duty, you will be fine. I promise. You saw that I 
brought you the antidote. I don't wish to harm you. 
That is not my intent—I swear." 
   Kahlan could only think of Richard in crushing 
pain, unable to breathe. It had been terrifying. 
She couldn't think of anything else but him going 
through it again, only this time never to wake. 
"How long?" Richard repeated. 
"But if you only—" 
"How long!" 
   Owen licked his lips. "Not a month. Close to it, 
but not a month, I believe." 
   Kahlan tried to push Richard away. "Let me have 
him. I'll find out—" 
   "No." Cara pulled Kahlan back. "Mother 
Confessor," she whispered, "let Lord Rahl do as he 
must. You don't know what your touch would do to 
one such as he." 
   "It might do nothing," Kahlan insisted, "but it 
might still work, and then we can find out 
everything." 
   Cara restrained her with an arm around her waist 
that Kahlan could not pry off. "And if only the 
Subtractive side works and it kills him?" 
   Kahlan stopped struggling as she frowned at 
Cara. "And since when have you taken up the study 
of magic?" 
   "Since it might harm Lord Rahl." Cara pulled 
Kahlan back farther away from Richard. "I have a 
mind, too, you know. I can think things through. 
Are you using your head? Where is this city? Where 
is the antidote within the city? What will you do 

if using your power kills this man and you are the 
one who condemns Lord Rahl to death when you could 
have had the information we need had you not 
touched him. 
   "If you want, I will break his arms. I will make 
him bleed. I will make him scream in agony. But I 
will not kill him; I will keep him alive so that he 
can give us the information we need to rid Lord 
Rahl of this death sentence. 
   "Ask yourself, do you really want to do this 
because you believe it will gain you the answers we 
need, or because you want to lash out, to strike 
out at him? Lord Rahl's life may hang on you being 
truthful with yourself." 
   Kahlan panted from the effort of the struggle, 
but more from her rage. She wanted to lash out, to 
strike back, just as Cara said—to do whatever she 
could to save Richard and to punish his attacker. 
   "I've had it with this game," Kahlan said. "I 
want to hear the story— the whole story." 
   "So do I," Richard said. He lifted the man by 
his shirt and slammed him down atop the crate. "All 
right, Owen, no more excuses for why you did this 
or that. Start at the beginning and tell us what 
happened, and what you and your people did about 
it." 
Owen sat trembling like a leaf. Jennsen urged 
Richard back. 
"You're frightening him," she whispered to Richard. 
"Give him some room or he will never be able to get 
it out." 
   Richard took a purging breath as he acknowledged 
Jennsen's words with a hand on her shoulder. He 
walked off a few paces, standing with his hands 
clasped behind his back as he stared off in the 
direction of the sunrise, toward the mountains 
Kahlan had so often seen him studying. It had been 
on the other side of the range of the smaller, 
closer mountains, tight in the shadows of those 
massive peaks thrusting up through the iron gray 

clouds, where they had found the warning beacon and 
first encountered the black-tipped races. 
   The clouds that capped the sky all the way to 
the wall of those distant peaks hung heavy and 
dark. For the first time since Kahlan could 
remember, it looked like a storm might be upon 
them. The expectant smell of rain quickened the 
air. 
"Where are you from?" Richard asked in a calm 
voice. 
   Owen cleared his throat as he straightened his 
shirt and light coat, as if rearranging his 
dignity. He remained seated atop the crate. 
   "I lived in a place of enlightenment, in a 
civilization of advanced culture ... a great 
empire." 
   "Where is this noble empire?" Richard asked, 
still staring off into the distance. 
   Owen stretched his neck up, looking east. He 
pointed at the far wall of towering peaks where 
Richard was looking. 
   "There. Do you see that notch in the high 
mountains? I lived past there, in the empire beyond 
those mountains." 
   Kahlan remembered asking Richard if he thought 
they could make it over those mountains. Richard 
had been doubtful about it. 
He looked back over his shoulder. "What's the name 
of this empire?" 
   "Bandakar," Owen said in a reverent murmur. He 
smoothed his blond hair to the side, as if to make 
himself a respectable representative of his 
homeland. "I was a citizen of Bandakar, of the 
Bandakaran Empire." 
   Richard had turned and was staring at Owen in a 
most peculiar manner. "Bandakar. Do you know what 
that name, Bandakar, means?" 
   Owen nodded. "Yes. Bandakar is an ancient word 
from a time long forgotten. It means 'the chosen'—
as in, the chosen empire." 

Richard seemed to have lost a little of his color. 
When his eyes met Kahlan's, she could see that he 
knew very well what the word meant, and Owen had it 
wrong. 
   Richard seemed to suddenly remember himself. He 
rubbed his brow in thought. "Do you—do any of your 
people—know the language that this ancient word, 
bandakar, is from?" 
   Owen gestured dismissively. "We don't know of 
the language; it's long forgotten. Only the meaning 
of this word has been passed down, because it is so 
important to our people to hold on to the heritage 
of its meaning: chosen empire. We are the chosen 
people." 
   Richard's demeanor had changed. His anger seemed 
to have faded away. He stepped closer to Owen and 
spoke softly. 
   "The Bandakaran Empire—why isn't it known? Why 
does no one know of your people?" 
   Owen looked away, toward the east, seeing his 
distant homeland through wet eyes. "It is said that 
the ancient ones, the ones who gave us this name, 
wanted to protect us—because we are a special 
people. They took us to a place where no one could 
go, because of the mountains all around. Such 
mountains as only the Creator could impose to close 
off the land beyond, so that we are protected." 
   "Except that one place"—Richard gestured east—
"that notch in the mountain range, that pass." 
   "Yes," Owen admitted, still staring off toward 
his homeland. "That was how we entered the land 
beyond, our land, but others could enter there as 
well; it was the one place where we were 
vulnerable. You see, we are an enlightened people 
who have risen above violence, but the world is 
still full of savage races. So, those ancient 
people, who wanted our advanced culture to survive, 
to thrive without the brutality of the rest of the 
world .. . they sealed the pass." 
   "And your people have been isolated for all this 

time—for thousands of years." 
   "Yes. We have a perfect land, a place of an 
advanced culture that is undisturbed by the 
violence of the people out here." 
"How was the pass, the notch in the mountains, how 
was it sealed?" 
   Owen looked at Richard, somewhat startled by the 
question. He thought it over a moment. "Well. . . 
the pass was sealed. It was a place that no one 
could enter." 
   "Because they would die if they entered this 
boundary." 
   With an icy wave of understanding, Kahlan 
suddenly understood what composed the seal to this 
empire. 
   "Well, yes," Owen stammered. "But it had to be 
that way to keep outsiders from invading our 
empire. We reject violence unconditionally. It's 
unenlightened behavior. Violence only invites ever 
more violence, spiraling into a cycle of violence 
with no end." He fidgeted with the worry of such a 
trap catching them up in the allure of its wicked 
spell. "We are an advanced race, above the violence 
of our ancestors. We have grown beyond. But without 
the boundary that seals that pass and until the 
rest of the world rejects violence as we have, our 
people could be the prey of unenlightened savages." 
"And now, that seal is broken." 
Owen stared at the ground, swallowing before he 
spoke. "Yes." 
"How long ago did the boundary fail?" 
   "We aren't sure. It is a dangerous place. No one 
lives near it, so we can't be positive, but we 
believe it was close to two years ago." 
Kahlan felt the dizzying burden of confirmation of 
her fears. 
   When Owen looked up, he was a picture of misery. 
"Our empire is now naked to unenlightened savages." 
   "Sometime after the boundary came down, the 
Imperial Order came in through the pass." 

"Yes." 
   "The land beyond those snowcapped mountains, the 
Empire of Ban-dakar, is where the black-tipped 
races are from, isn't it?" Richard said. 
   Owen looked up, surprised that Richard knew 
this. "Yes. Those awful creatures, innocent though 
they are of malice, prey on the people of my 
homeland. We must stay indoors at night, when they 
hunt. Even so, people, especially children, are 
sometimes surprised and caught by those fearsome 
creatures—" 
   "Why don't you kill them?" Cara asked, 
indignantly. "Fight them off? Shoot them with 
arrows? Dear spirits, why don't you bash their 
heads in with a rock if you have to?" 
   Owen looked shocked by the very suggestion. "I 
told you, we are above violence. It would be even 
more wrong to commit violence on such innocent 
creatures. It is our duty to preserve them, since 
it is we who entered into their domain. We are the 
ones who bear the guilt because we entice them into 
such behavior which is only natural to them. We 
preserve virtue only by embracing every aspect of 
the world without the prejudice of our flawed human 
views." 
   Richard gave Cara a stealthy gesture to be 
quiet. "Was everyone in the empire peaceful?" he 
asked, pulling Owen's attention away from Cara. 
"Yes." 
   "Weren't there occasionally those who... I don't 
know, misbehaved? Children, for example. Where I 
come from, children can sometimes become rowdy. 
Children where you come from must sometimes become 
rowdy, too." 
   Owen shrugged a bit with one shoulder. "Well, 
yes, I guess so. There were times when children 
misbehave and become unruly." 
"And what do you do with such children?" 
   Owen cleared his throat, plainly uncomfortable. 
"Well, they are... put out of their home for a 

time." 
   "Put out of their home for a time," Richard 
repeated. He lifted his arms in a questioning 
shrug. "The children I know will usually be happy 
to be put outside. They simply go play." 
   Owen shook his head emphatically at the serious 
nature of the matter. "We are different. From the 
time we are born, we are together with others. We 
are all very close. We depend on one another. We 
cherish one another. We spend all our waking hours 
with others. We cook and wash and work together. We 
sleep in a sleeping house, together. Ours is an 
enlightened life of human contact, human closeness. 
There is no higher value than being together." 
   "So," Richard asked, feigning a puzzled look, 
"when one of you— a child—is put out, that is a 
cause of unhappiness?" 
   Owen swallowed as a tear ran down his cheek. 
"There could be nothing worse. To be put out, to be 
closed off from others, is the worst horror we can 
endure. To be forced out into the cold cruelty of 
the world is a nightmare." 
   Just talking about such a punishment, thinking 
about it, was making Owen start to tremble. 
"And that's when, sometimes, the races get such 
children," Richard said in a compassionate tone. 
"When they're alone and vulnerable." 
   With the back of his hand Owen wiped the tear 
from his cheek. "When a child must be put out to be 
punished, we take all possible precautions. We 
never put them out at night because that is when 
the races usually hunt. Children are put out for 
punishment only in the day. But when we are away 
from others, we are vulnerable to all the terrors 
and cruelties of the world. To be alone is a 
nightmare. 
   "We would do anything to avoid such punishment. 
Any child who misbehaves and is put out for a while 
will not likely misbehave again anytime soon. There 
is no greater joy than to finally be welcomed back 

in with our friends and family." 
"So, for your people, banishment is the greatest 
punishment." 
Owen stared into the distance. "Of course." 
   "Where I come from, we all got along pretty 
well, too. We enjoyed each other's company and had 
great fun when many people would gather. We valued 
our times together. When we're away for a time, we 
inquire about all the people we know and haven't 
seen in a while." 
Owen smiled expectantly. "Then you understand." 
   Richard nodded, returning the smile. "But 
occasionally there will be someone who won't 
behave, even when they're an adult. We try 
everything we can, but, sometimes, someone does 
something wrong—something they know is wrong. They 
might lie or steal. Even worse, at times someone 
will deliberately hurt another person—beat someone 
when robbing them, or rape a woman, or even murder 
someone." 
Owen wouldn't look up at Richard. He stared at the 
ground. 
   As he spoke, Richard paced slowly before the 
man. "When someone does something like that where 
you come from, Owen, what do your people do? How do 
an enlightened people handle such horrible crimes 
some of your people commit against others?" 
   "We attack the root cause of such behavior from 
the beginning," Owen was quick to answer. "We share 
all we have to make sure that everyone has what 
they need so that they don't have to steal. People 
steal because they feel the hurt of others acting 
superior. We show these people that we are no 
better than they and so they need not harbor such 
fears of others. We teach them to be enlightened 
and reject all such behavior." 
   Richard shrugged nonchalantly. Kahlan would have 
thought that he would be ready to strangle the 
answers out of Owen, but, instead, he was behaving 
in a calm, understanding manner. She had seen him 

act this way before. He was the Seeker of Truth, 
rightfully named by the First Wizard himself. 
Richard was doing what Seekers did: find the truth. 
Sometimes he used his sword, sometimes words. 
   Even though this was the way Richard often 
disarmed people when he questioned them, in this 
case it struck Kahlan that such a manner was 
precisely what Owen would be most accustomed to, 
most comfortable with. This gentle manner was 
pulling answers from the man and filling in a lot 
of information Kahlan had never thought of trying 
to get. 
   She had already learned that she was the cause 
of what had befallen these people. 
   "We both know, Owen, that, try as we might, such 
efforts to change people's ways don't always work. 
Some people won't change. There are times when 
people do evil things. Even among civilized people, 
there are some who will not behave in a civil 
manner despite all your best efforts. What's worse 
is that, if allowed to continue, these few 
jeopardize the whole community. 
   "After all, if you have a rapist among you, you 
can't allow him to continue to prey on women. If a 
man committed murder, you couldn't allow such a man 
to threaten the empire with his ways, now could 
you? An advanced culture, especially, can't be 
faulted for wanting to stop such dangers to 
enlightened people. 
   "But you've shunned all forms of violence, so 
you can hardly punish such a man physically—you 
couldn't put a murderer to death—not if you've 
truly rejected violence unconditionally. What do 
you do with such men? How does an enlightened 
people handle grave problems, such as murder?" 
   Owen was sweating. It seemed not to have 
occurred to him to deny the existence of murderers—
Richard had already led him past that, had already 
established the existence of such men. Before Owen 
could think to object, Richard was already beyond, 

to the next step. 
"Well," Owen said, swallowing, "as you say, we are 
an enlightened people. If someone does something to 
harm another, they are given ... a denunciation." 
   "A denunciation. You mean, you condemn their 
actions, but not the man. You give him a second 
chance." 
   "Yes, that's right." Owen wiped sweat from his 
brow as he glanced up at Richard. "We work very 
hard to reform people who make such mistakes and 
are given a denunciation. We recognize that their 
actions are a cry for help, so we counsel them in 
the ways of enlightenment in order to help them to 
see that they are hurting all our people when they 
hurt one, and that since they are one of our 
beloved people, they are only hurting themselves 
when they hurt another. We show such people 
compassion and understanding." 
   Kahlan caught Cara's arm, and with a stern look 
convinced her to remain silent. 
   Richard paced slowly before Owen, nodding as if 
he thought that sounded reasonable. "I understand. 
You put a great deal of effort into making them see 
that they can never do such a thing again." 
Owen nodded, relieved that Richard understood. 
   "But then there are times when one of those who 
has received a denunciation, and has been counseled 
to the very best of your ability, goes out and does 
the same crime again—or one even worse. 
   "It's clear, then, that he refuses to be 
reformed and that he's a threat to public order, 
safety, and confidence. Left to his own devises, 
such a person, by himself, will bring the very 
thing you unconditionally reject—violence—to stalk 
among your people and win others to his ways." 
   A light mist had begun to fall. Owen sat on the 
crate, trembling, frightened, alone. Only a short 
time ago he had been reluctant to answer even the 
most basic question in a meaningful way; now 
Richard had him speaking openly. 

   Friedrich stroked the jaw of one of the horses 
as he quietly watched. Jennsen sat on a rock, Betty 
lying at her feet. Tom stood behind Jenn-sen, a 
hand resting gently on her shoulder, but keeping an 
eye on the man Kahlan had touched with her power. 
That man sat off to the side, listening 
dispassionately as he waited to be commanded. Cara 
stood beside Kahlan, ever watchful for trouble, but 
obviously caught up in the unfolding story of 
Owen's homeland, even if she was having a hard time 
holding her tongue. 
   For her part, Kahlan, while she could sympathize 
with Cara's difficulty in holding her tongue, was 
transfixed by the tale of a mysterious empire that 
Richard casually, effortlessly, drew from this man 
who had poisoned him. She couldn't imagine where 
Richard was going with his matter-of-fact 
questions. What did this empire's forms of 
punishment have to do with Richard being poisoned? 
It was clear to her, though, that Richard knew 
where he was headed, and that the path he was 
following was wide and sunlit. 
   Richard paused before Owen. "What do you do in 
those instances?— when you can't reform someone who 
has become a danger to everyone. What do an 
enlightened people do with that kind of person?" 
   Owen spoke in a soft voice that carried clearly 
in the misty early-morning hush. "We banish them." 
"Banish them. You mean, you send them into the 
boundary?" 
Owen nodded. 
   "But you said that going into the boundary is 
death. You couldn't simply send them into the 
boundary or you would be executing them. You must 
have a place to send them through. A special place. 
A place where you can banish them, without killing 
them, but a place where you know they can never 
return to harm your people." 
   Owen nodded again. "Yes. There is such a place. 
The pass that is blocked by the boundary is steep 

and treacherous. But there is a path that leads 
down into the boundary. Those ancient ones who 
protected us by placing that boundary placed the 
path as well. The path is said to allow passage 
out. Because of the way the mountain descends, it 
is a difficult path, but it can be followed." 
   "And just because of how difficult it is, it's 
not possible to climb back up? To enter the 
Bandakaran Empire?" 
   Owen chewed his lower lip. "It goes down through 
a terrible place, a narrow passageway through the 
boundary, a lifeless land, where it is said that 
death itself lies to each side. The person banished 
is given no water or food. He must find his own, on 
the other side, or perish. We place watchers at the 
entrance of the path, where they wait to be sure 
that the one banished has gone through and is not 
lingering in the boundary only to return. The 
watchers wait and watch for several weeks to be 
sure that the one banished has gone beyond in 
search of water and food, in search of his new life 
away from his people. 
   "Once beyond, the forest is a terrible place, a 
frightening place, with roots that descend over the 
edge like a land of snakes. The path takes you down 
under that cascade of roots and running water. 
Then, even lower, you find yourself in a strange 
land where the trees are far above, reaching for 
the distant light, but you see only their roots 
twisting and stretching down into the darkness 
toward the ground. It is said that once you see 
that forest of roots towering all around you, you 
have made it through the boundary and the pass 
through the mountains. 
   "There is said to be no way to enter our land 
from that other side—to use the pass to return to 
our empire. 
"Once banished, there is no redemption." 
   Richard moved up close beside Owen and placed a 
hand on his shoulder. 

"What did you do to be banished, Owen?" 
   Owen sank forward, putting his face in his hands 
as he finally broke down sobbing. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 24 
 
 
 
 
Richard left his hand on Owen's shoulder as he 
spoke in a compassionate tone. "Tell me what 
happened, Owen. Tell me in your own way." 
   Kahlan was startled to hear, after all Owen had 
said, that he had become one of the banished. She 
saw Jennsen's jaw fall open. Cara lifted an 
eyebrow. 
   Kahlan could see that Richard's hand on Owen's 
shoulder was an emotional lifeline for the man. He 
finally sat up, sniffling back the tears. He wiped 
his nose on his sleeve. 
   He looked up at Richard. "Should I tell you the 
whole story? All of it?" 
"Yes. I'd like to hear it all, from the beginning." 
   Kahlan was struck at how much Richard reminded 
her, at that moment, of his grandfather, Zedd, and 
the way Zedd always wanted to hear the whole story. 
   "Well, I was happy among my people, with them 
all around me. They held me to their breast when I 
was young. I was always safe in their welcoming 
arms. While I knew of other children who became 
unruly and were put out as punishment, I never did 
anything to be put out. I hungered to learn to be 
like my people. They taught me the ways of 
enlightenment. For a time I served my people as the 
Wise One. 
   "Later, my people were pleased with how 
enlightened I was, how I embraced them all, and so 

they made me the speaker of our town. I traveled to 
nearby towns to speak the words of what the people 
of my town all believed as one. I went to our great 
cities for the same reason. I was always happiest, 
though, when I was home with my closest people. 
"I fell in love with a woman from my town. Her name 
is Marilee." 
   Owen stared off into his memories. Richard 
didn't rush him, but waited patiently until he 
began again at his own pace. 
   "It was spring, a little more than two years 
ago, when we fell joyfully in love. Marilee and I 
spent time talking, holding hands, and, when we 
could, sitting together while among all the others. 
Among all the others, though, I only had eyes for 
Marilee. She only had eyes for me. 
   "When we were with others, it felt like we were 
alone in the world, Marilee and I, and the world 
belonged to us alone, that only we had the eyes to 
see all its hidden beauty. It is wrong to feel this 
way, to be so alone in our hearts is to be selfish 
and to think our eyes can see so clearly is sinful 
pride, but we could not help ourselves. The trees 
blossomed just for us. The water in the streams 
burbled their music just for us. The moon rose for 
us alone." Owen slowly shook his head. "You could 
not understand how it was ... how we felt." 
   "I understand quite well how it was," Richard 
assured him in a quiet voice. 
   Owen glanced up at Richard; then his gaze moved 
to Kahlan. She nodded to him that it was so. His 
brow twitched with wonder. He looked away then, 
perhaps, Kahlan thought, in guilt. 
   "Well," Owen said, going back to his story, "I 
was the speaker of our town—the one who speaks what 
all decide that must be decided as being true. I 
also sometimes helped other people resolve 
questions of what is right according to the tenets 
of an advanced culture." Owen flicked his hand in a 
self-conscious manner. "As I said, I once served my 

people as the Wise One, so the people trusted me." 
   Richard just nodded, not interrupting, even 
though Kahlan knew that he didn't quite understand 
the meaning of many of the details of what Owen was 
saying any more than she did. The gist of the 
story, though, was becoming all too clear. 
   "I asked Marilee if she would be my wife, if she 
would marry me and no other. She said that it was 
the happiest day of her life, to be asked by me, 
for I said I wanted no other but her. It was the 
happiest day of my life when she said she would 
have me as her husband. 
   "Everyone was very pleased. Everyone loved us 
both, and kept us sheltered in their arms for a 
long time to show their joy. As we sat together 
with everyone, we all talked about the plans for 
the wedding and how much we would all be pleased 
that Marilee and I would be husband and wife and 
bring children among our people." 
   Owen stared off in his thoughts. It seemed that 
he might have forgotten that he'd stopped speaking. 
"So, was it a grand wedding?" Richard finally 
prompted. 
   Owen still stared off. "The men of the Order 
came. That was when we first realized that the 
seal, that had protected our people since the 
beginning times, had failed. There was no longer a 
barrier protecting us. 
"Our empire was now naked to savages." 
   Kahlan knew that what she had done had caused 
the boundary to fail, resulting in these people 
being defenseless. She had had no choice, but that 
didn't make it any easier to hear. 
   "They came to our town, where I was speaker. Our 
town, like others, has walls all around; those who 
gave us our name, Bandakar, proclaimed that towns 
should be built such as this. It was wise of them 
to tell us this. The walls protect us from the 
beasts of the forests, make us safe, without having 
to harm any creatures. 

   "The men of the Order set up a camp outside our 
walls. There was really no place for them to stay 
in the town—we have no accommodations to house so 
many people because we never have great numbers of 
visitors from other towns. Worse, I was fearful of 
having such men as they looked sleeping under our 
roof with us. It was wrong to have such fear; it is 
my failing, not theirs, I know, but I had the fear. 
   "Since I was the speaker for my town, I went out 
to their camp with food and offerings. I was filled 
with my sinful failing of being afraid of them. 
They were big, some with long, dark, greasy, 
tangled hair, some with shaved heads, many with 
filthy beards of coarse hair—none of them with fair 
sun-golden hair like our people. It was shocking to 
see them wearing hides of animals, leather plates, 
chains and metal, and straps with sharp studs. 
Hanging on their belts, they all carried vicious-
looking implements the likes of which I had never 
in my life imagined, but which I later learned were 
weapons. 
   "I told these strange men that they were welcome 
to share what we had, that we would honor them. I 
told them that they were invited to sit with us, to 
share their words with us." 
   Everyone waited in silence, not wanting to say a 
word as tears ran down Owen's face and dripped off 
his jaw. 
   "The men of the Order did not sit with us. They 
did not share their words with us. Though I spoke 
to them, they acted as if I were not worthy of 
their recognition, other than to grin at me as if 
they intended to eat me. 
   "I sought to allay their fears, since it is the 
fear of others that causes hostility. I assured the 
men that we were peaceful and intended them no ill 
will. I told them that we would do our best to 
accommodate them among us. 
   "The man who was their speaker, a commander he 
called himself, spoke to me then. He told me that 

his name was Luchan. His shoulders were twice as 
wide as mine, even though he was no taller than me. 
This man, Luchan, said that he did not believe me. 
I was horrified to hear this. He said that he 
thought my people meant him harm. He accused us of 
wishing to kill his men. I was shaken that he would 
think such a thing of us, especially after I had 
told him of our open welcome to his men. I was 
shaken to know that I had done something to cause 
him to feel we were threatening to him and his men. 
I assured him of our desire to be peaceful with 
them. 
   "Luchan smiled at me then, not a smile of 
happiness, not a smile like I had ever seen before. 
He said that they were going to burn down our town 
and kill all the people in it to prevent us from 
attacking his men as they slept. I begged him to 
believe our peaceful ways, to sit with us and share 
his worries and we would do what we needed to do to 
dispel such doubts and show him our love of him for 
being our fellow man. 
   "Luchan said, then, that he would not burn down 
our town and kill us all upon a condition, as he 
called it. He said that if I would surrender my 
woman to him as a token of my sincerity and 
goodwill he would then believe our words. He said 
that if, on the other hand, I failed to send her 
out to him, what happened would be my fault, would 
be on my head, for not cooperating with them, for 
not showing my sincerity and goodwill toward them. 
   "I went back to hear the words of my people. 
Everyone agreed and said that I must do this—that I 
must send Marilee out to the men of the Order so 
that they would not burn down our town and murder 
everyone. I asked them not to decide so quickly, 
and offered the idea that we could close the gates 
in the wall to keep the men from coming in and 
harming us. My people said that men such as these 
would find a way to break the wall, and then they 
would murder everyone for shutting our gates and 

shaming them with our bigotry toward them. The 
people all spoke up loudly that I must show the man 
Luchan goodwill and our peaceful intent, that I 
must allay his fears of us. 
   "I never felt so alone among my people. I could 
not go against the word of everyone, for it is 
taught that only the voices of people joined 
together in one voice can be wise enough to know 
the true way. No one person can know what is right. 
Only consensus can make a thing right. 
   "My knees trembled as I stood before Marilee. I 
heard myself ask if she wished me to do as the men 
wanted—as our people wanted. I told her that I 
would run away with her if she would wish it. She 
wept as she said that she would not hear such 
sinful talk from me, for it would mean the death of 
everyone else. 
   "She said that she must go to the men of the 
Order to appease them or there would be violence. 
She told me that she would tell them of our 
peaceful ways and thus gentle them toward us. 
   "I was proud of Marilee for upholding the 
highest values of our people. I wanted to die for 
being proud of such a thing as would take her from 
me. 
   "I kissed Marilee a last time, but I could not 
stop my tears. I held her in my arms and we wept 
together. 
   "Then, I took her out to the man who was their 
commander, Luchan. He had a thick black beard, a 
shaved head, and a ring through one ear and one 
nostril. He said that I had made a wise choice. His 
sundarkened arms were nearly as big around as 
Marilee's waist. His big filthy hand took Marilee 
by her arm and bore her away with him as he turned 
back and told me to 'scurry back' to my town, to my 
people. His men laughed at me as they watched me go 
back up the road. 
   "The men of the Order left my town and my people 
alone. We had peace I had purchased with Marilee. 

"I had no peace in my heart. 
   "For a time, the men of the Order were gone from 
our town. They returned, then, one afternoon, and 
called for me to come out. I asked Luchan about 
Marilee, if she was well, if she was happy. Luchan 
turned his head and spat, then said he didn't know, 
that he never asked her. I was worried, and asked 
if she spoke with him of our peaceful ways, assured 
him of our innocent intent toward him. He said that 
when he was with women he wasn't much interested in 
them for their talking. 
   "He winked at me. Though I had never seen anyone 
wink in such a fashion, I knew his meaning. 
   "I was very frightened for Marilee, but I 
reminded myself that nothing is real, that I could 
not really know anything from what I was hearing. I 
was only hearing what this one man said of things, 
as he saw them, and I knew that I was only sensing 
part of the world. I could not know reality from my 
eyes and ears alone. 
   "Luchan said, then, that I should open the town 
gates lest they think we were acting in a hostile 
way toward them. Luchan said that if we failed to 
do as he asked, it would begin a cycle of violence. 
   "I went back and spoke his words to all the 
people gathered around me. My people all spoke in 
one voice, and said that we must open the gates and 
invite them in to prove that we held no hostility, 
no prejudice, toward the men. 
   "The men of the Order came in through those 
gates we let stand wide for them and seized nearly 
all the women, from those still the age of girls to 
grandmothers. I stood with the other men, begging 
them to leave our women be, to leave us be. I told 
them that we had agreed to their demands to prove 
to them that we meant them no harm, but it did no 
good. They would not listen. 
"I told Luchan, then, that I had sent Marilee to 
him as his condition for peace. I told him that 
they must honor their agreement. Luchan and his men 

laughed. 
   "I cannot say if what I saw then was real. 
Reality is in the realm of fate, and we, in this 
place we think we know as the world, cannot know it 
in full truth. That day, fate swept down on my 
people; we had no say in it. We know that we must 
not fight against fate, for it has already been 
foreordained by the true reality we cannot see. 
   "I watched as our women were dragged away. I 
watched, unable to do anything, as they screamed 
our names, as they reached out for us, as the hands 
of those big men held our women and bore them away 
from us. I had never heard such screams as I heard 
that day." 
   The overcast seemed as if it would soon brush 
the tops of the trees. In the thick silence, Kahlan 
heard a bird in the bristlecone pines singing. Owen 
was alone, off in his solitary world of terrible 
memories. Richard stood, arms folded, watching the 
man, but saying nothing. 
   "I went to other towns," Owen finally said. "In 
a couple of places, the Order had been there before 
me. The men of the Order did much the same to those 
towns as they had done to my town; they took the 
women. In some places they also took a few men. 
   "In other places I went, the Order had not come 
yet. As the speaker of my town, I told them of what 
had befallen my town and I urged others to do 
something. They were angry with me and said it was 
wrong to resist, that to resist was to give in to 
violence, to become no better than the savages. 
They urged me to renounce my outspoken ways and to 
heed the wisdom of the joined voices of our people 
that had brought enlightenment and thousands of 
years of peace. They told me that I was only 
looking at events through my limited eyes, and not 
the better judgment of the group. 
   "I went then to one of our important cities and 
told them again that the seal on the pass was 
broken and that the Imperial Order was upon us, and 

that something must be done. I urged them to listen 
to me and to consider what we could do to protect 
our people. 
   "Because I was so inconsiderately assertive, the 
assembly of speakers took me to the Wise One so 
that I might have his counsel. It is a great honor 
to have the words of the Wise One. The Wise One 
told me that I must forgive those who had done 
these things against my people, if we were to end 
the violence. 
   "The Wise One said that the anger and hostility 
shown by the men of the Order was a mark of their 
inner pain, a cry for help, and they must be shown 
compassion and understanding. I should have been 
humbled by such clear wisdom as could only come 
from the Wise One, but instead I spoke out of my 
wish for Marilee and all the other people to be 
returned from such men, and for the speakers to 
help me in this. 
   "The Wise One said that Marilee would find her 
own happiness without me and that I was guilty of 
selfishness for wanting to keep her for myself. He 
said that fate had come for the other people and it 
was not my place to make demands of fate. 
   "I asserted to the speakers and the Wise One 
that the men of the Order had not upheld the 
agreement made by Luchan for Marilee to be sent to 
them. The Wise One said that Marilee had acted 
properly by going in peace to the men so that the 
cycle of violence would end. He said that it was 
selfish and sinful for me to put my wants above 
peace she selflessly worked toward and that my 
attitude toward them was probably what had provoked 
the men to anger. 
   "I asked what I was to do, when I had acted 
honestly but they had not. The Wise One said that I 
was wrong to condemn men I did not know, men I had 
not first forgiven, or tried to embrace, or even to 
understand. He said that I must encourage them in 
the ways of peace by throwing myself before them 

and begging them to forgive me for acting in a way 
that kindled their inner pain by reminding them of 
past wrongs done to them. 
   "I told the Wise One, then, in front of all the 
other speakers, that I did not want to forgive 
these men or to embrace these men, but that I 
wanted to cast them out of our lives. 
"I was given a denunciation." 
   Richard handed Owen a cup of water but said 
nothing. Owen sipped at the water without seeing 
it. 
   "The gathering of speakers commanded me to go 
back to my town and seek the advice of those among 
whom I lived, commanding that I ask my people to 
counsel me back to our ways. I went back intending 
to redeem myself, only to discover that it had 
become worse than before. 
   "Now, the Order had returned to take whatever 
they wanted from the town—food and goods. We would 
have given them whatever they wanted, but they 
never asked, they just took. More of our men had 
been taken away, too—some of the boys and some of 
those who were young and strong. Other men, who had 
in some way offended the dignity of the men of the 
Order, had been murdered. 
   "People I knew stood staring with empty eyes at 
blood where our friends had died. In other such 
places, people gathered to mound remembrances over 
the blood. These places had become sacred shrines 
and people knelt there to pray. The children would 
not stop crying. No one would counsel me. 
   "Everyone in my town trembled behind doors, but 
they cast their eyes down and opened those doors 
when the men of the Order knocked, lest we offend 
them. 
   "I could not stand to be in our town any longer. 
I ran to the country, even though I was terrified 
that I would be alone. There, in the hills, I found 
other men, selfish as I, hiding in fear for their 
lives. Together, we decided to try to do something, 

to try to bring an end to the misery. We resolved 
to restore peace. 
   "At first, we sent representatives to speak with 
the men of the Order, to let them know that we 
meant them no harm, and that we only sought peace 
with them, and to ask what we could do to satisfy 
them. The men of the Order hung these men by their 
ankles from poles at the edge of our town and 
skinned them alive. 
   "I knew these men all my life, these men who had 
counseled me, advised me, broken fasts with me, 
sheltered me in their arms with joy when I had told 
them Marilee and I wanted to be wed. The men of the 
Order left these poor men to hang by their ankles 
as they screamed in agony in the hot summer sun, 
where the black-tipped races came and found them. 
   "I reminded myself that what I saw that day was 
not real, and that I should not believe such 
sights, that possibly my eyes were deceiving me as 
punishment for having improper thoughts, and that 
my mind could not possibly know if this sight was 
real or an illusion. 
   "Not every man that had gone to speak with the 
men of the Order was killed. A few of our men were 
sent back to us with word from the Order. They said 
that if we did not come down out of the hills and 
return to their rule in our town, to show that we 
did not intend to attack them, then they would 
begin skinning a dozen people a day, and hanging 
them on poles for the races, until either we 
returned to demonstrate our peaceful intent, or 
until every last person left in the town was 
skinned alive. 
   "Many of our men wept, unable to stand to think 
that they would be the cause of a cycle of 
violence, so they went back to the town to show 
that they intended no harm. 
   "Not all of us went back. A few of us remained 
in the hills. Since most returned, and the Order 
had no count of us, they thought all had complied 

with their command. 
   "Those few of us who were left in the hills hid, 
living off the nuts, fruits, and berries we could 
find or the food we snuck back and stole. We slowly 
gathered together supplies to see us through. I 
told the other men with me that we should find out 
what the Order was doing with our people they had 
taken away. Since the men of the Order didn't know 
us, we could sometimes mingle in with people 
working the fields or tending to animals and sneak 
back into our town without the Order knowing who we 
were—without knowing that we were men from the 
hills. Over the next months, we followed and 
watched the men of the Order. 
   "The children had been sent away, but the men of 
the Order had taken all the women to a place they 
built—an encampment, they called it—that they 
fortified against attack." 
   Owen put his face in his hands again as he spoke 
through sobs. "They were using our women as 
breeding stock. They sought to have them bear 
children—as many children as they could birth—
children of their soldiers. Some women were already 
pregnant. Most of those who weren't already 
pregnant became pregnant. Over the next year and a 
half, many children were born. They were nursed for 
a time, and then they were all sent away as their 
mothers were gotten pregnant again. 
"I don't know where these children were taken—
somewhere beyond our empire. The men who had been 
taken from the towns were also taken away beyond 
our empire. 
   "The men of the Order did not watch their 
captives well, since our people shunned violence, 
so a couple of men escaped and ran to the hills, 
where they found us. They told us that the Order 
had taken them to see the women, and told them that 
if they did not do as they were told, if they did 
not follow all the orders they were given, then all 
these women before them would die—that they would 

be skinned alive. These men who escaped did not 
know where they were to be taken, or what it was 
they were to do, only that if they did not follow 
the instructions given them, then they would be the 
cause of the violence to our women. 
   "After a year and a half of hiding, of meeting 
with others, we learned that the Order had spread 
to other places in our empire, taken other towns 
and cities. The Wise One and the speakers went into 
hiding. We discovered that some towns and cities 
had invited the Order to come in, to be among them, 
in an attempt to appease them and keep them from 
doing harm. 
   "No matter how hard our people tried, their 
concessions failed to placate the belligerence of 
the men of the Order. We could not understand why 
this was true. 
   "In some of the largest cities, though, it was 
different. The people there had listened to the 
speakers of the Order and had come to believe that 
the cause of the Imperial Order was the same as our 
cause—to bring an end to abuse and injustice. The 
Order convinced these people that they abhorred 
violence, that they had been enlightened as were 
our people, but they had to turn to violence to 
defeat those who would oppress us all. They said 
that they were champions of our people's cause of 
enlightenment. The people there rejoiced that they 
were at last in the hands of saviors who would 
spread our words of enlightenment to the savages 
who did not yet live by peace." 
   Richard, a thunderstorm building, could hold his 
tongue no longer. "And even after all the 
brutality, these people believed the words of the 
Imperial Order?" 
   Owen spread his hands. "The people in those 
places were swayed by the words of the Order—that 
they were fighting for the same ideals as we lived 
by. They told our people in those cities that they 
had only acted as they did because my town and some 

of the other places like it had sided with the 
savages from the north—with the D'Haran Empire. 
   "I had heard this name before—the D'Haran 
Empire. During the year and a half that I lived in 
the hills with the other men, I sometimes traveled 
out of our land, out into the surrounding places, 
to see what I could discover that might help us to 
cast the Imperial Order out of Bandakar. While I 
was out of my land, I went to some of the cities in 
the Old World, as I learned it was called. In one 
place, Altur'Rang, I heard whispers of a great man 
from the north, from the D'Haran Empire, who 
brought freedom. 
   "Other of my men also went out to other places. 
When we returned, we all told each other what we 
had seen, what we had heard. All those who came 
back told of the same thing, told of hearing of one 
called Lord Rahl, and his wife, the Mother 
Confessor, who fought the Imperial Order. 
   "Then, we learned where the Wise One was being 
kept safe, as were most of our greatest speakers. 
It was in our greatest city, a place where the 
Order had not yet come. The Order was busy with 
other places and so they were in no hurry. My 
people were going nowhere—they had nowhere to go. 
   "The men who were with me wanted me to be their 
speaker, to go to talk with these great speakers, 
to convince them that we must do something to stop 
the Imperial Order and cast them out of Bandakar. 
   "I journeyed to the great city, a place I had 
never been before, and I was inspired at seeing a 
place that such a great culture as ours had built. 
A culture about to be destroyed, if I could not 
convince these great speakers and the Wise One to 
think of something to do to stop the Order. 
   "I spoke before them with great urgency. I told 
them of all the Order had done. I told them of the 
men I had in hiding, waiting for word of what they 
were to do. 
   "The great speakers said that I cannot know the 

true nature of the Order from what I and a few men 
had seen—that the Imperial Order was a vast nation 
and we saw only a tiny speck of their people. They 
said that men cannot do such cruel acts as I 
described because it would cause them to shrink 
back in horror before they could complete them. To 
prove it, they suggested that I try to skin one of 
them. I admitted that I could not, but I told them 
that I had seen the men of the Order do this. 
   "The speakers scorned my insistence that it was 
real. They said I must always keep in mind that 
reality is not for us to know. They said that the 
men of the Imperial Order were probably frightened 
that we might be a violent people, and simply 
wanted to test our resolve by tricking us into 
believing that the things I described were real so 
that they could see how we reacted—if peace was 
really our way, or if we would attack them. 
   "The great speakers said, then, that I could not 
know if I really saw all the things I said, and 
that even if I did, I could not judge if they were 
for the bad, or the good—that I was not the person 
to judge the reasons of men I did not know, that to 
do so would be to believe that I was above them, 
and to put myself above them would be an act of 
prejudiced hostility. 
   "I could only think of all the things I had 
seen, of the men with me who all agreed that we 
must convince the great speakers to act to preserve 
our empire. I could only see in my mind the face of 
Luchan. And then, I thought of Marilee in the hands 
of this man. I thought of the sacrifice she had 
made, and how her life was cast away into this 
horror for nothing. 
   "I stood up before the great speakers and 
screamed that they were evil." 
   Cara snorted a laugh. "Seems you can tell what's 
real, when you put your mind to it." 
Richard shot her a withering glare. 
   Owen glanced up and blinked. His thoughts had 

been so distant as he told his story that he hadn't 
really heard her. He looked up at Richard. 
"That was when they banished me," he said. 
   "But the boundary seal had failed," Richard 
said. "You had already come and gone through the 
pass. How could they enforce a banishment with the 
boundary down?" 
   Owen waved dismissively. "They do not need the 
wall of death. Banishment is in a way a sentence of 
death—the death of the person as a citizen of 
Bandakar. My name would be known throughout the 
empire, at least what was left of it, and every 
person would shun me. I would be turned away from 
every door. I was one of the banished. No one would 
want to have any contact with me. I was now an 
outcast. It does not matter that they could not put 
me beyond the barrier; they put me beyond my 
people. That was worse. 
   "I went back to my men in the hills to collect 
my things and confess to them that I had been 
banished. I was going to go out beyond our 
homeland, as I had been commanded by the will of 
our people through our great speakers. 
   "But my men, those in the hills, they would not 
see me go. They said that the banishment was wrong. 
These men had seen the things I had seen. They had 
wives, mothers, daughters, sisters who had been 
taken away. They all had seen their friends 
murdered, seen the men skinned alive and left to 
suffer in agony as they died, seen the races come 
to circle over them as they hung on those poles. 
They said that since all our eyes had seen these 
things, then these things must be true, must be 
real. 
   "They all said that we had gone into the hills 
because we love our land and want to restore the 
peace we once had. They said that the great 
speakers were the ones whose eyes did not see and 
they were condemning our people to murder at the 
hands of savage men and those of our people who 

lived to a cruel life under the rule of the 
Imperial Order, to be used as breeding stock or as 
slaves. 
   "I was shocked that these men would not reject 
me for being banished—that they wanted me to stay 
with them. 
   "It was then that we decided that we would be 
the ones to do something, to come up with the plan 
we always wanted the speakers to decide. When I 
asked what would be our plan, everyone said the 
same thing. 
   "They all said that we must get Lord Rahl to 
come and give us freedom. They all spoke with one 
voice. 
   "We decided, then, what we would do. Some men 
said that one such as the Lord Rahl would come to 
cast out the Order when we asked. 
   Others thought you might not be willing, since 
you are unenlightened and not of our ways, not of 
our people. When we considered that possibility, we 
decided that we must have a way to insure you would 
have to come, should you refuse us. 
   "Since I was banished, I said that it was upon 
me to do this thing. Except to live in the hills 
with my men, I could have no life among our people 
unless we cast out the Imperial Order and our ways 
were restored to us. I told the men that I did not 
know where I could find the Lord Rahl, but that I 
would not give up until I did so. 
   "First, though, one of the men, an older man who 
had spent his life working with herbs and cures, 
made me the poison I put into your waterskin. He 
made me the antidote as well. He told me how the 
poison worked, and how it could be counteracted, 
since none of us wished to consider that it would 
come to murder, even of an unenlightened man." 
   By the sidelong look Richard gave her, Kahlan 
knew that he wanted her to hold her tongue, and 
knew that she was having difficulty doing so. She 
redoubled her effort. 

   "I was worried about how I would find you," Owen 
said to Richard, "but I knew I had to. Before I 
could go in search of you, though, I had to hide 
the rest of the antidote, as was our plan. 
   "While in a city where the Order had won the 
people to their side, I heard some people at a 
market say that it was a great honor that the very 
man who had come to their city was the most 
important man among all those of the Imperial Order 
in Bandakar. The thought struck me that this man 
might know something of the man the Order hated 
most—Lord Rahl. 
   "I stayed in the city for several days, watching 
the place where this man was said to be. I watched 
the soldiers come and go. I saw that they sometimes 
took people in with them, and then later the people 
came back out. 
   "One day I saw people come back out and they did 
not appear to be harmed, so I made my way close to 
them to hear what they might say. I heard them talk 
that they had seen the great man himself. I could 
not hear much of what they said of their visit 
inside, but none said that they were hurt. 
"And then I saw the soldiers come out, and I 
suspected that they might be going to get more 
people to take them in to see this great man, so I 
went before them into a central gathering square. I 
waited, then, near the open isles between the 
public benches. The soldiers rushed in and gathered 
up a small crowd of people and I was swept up with 
the others. 
   "I was terrified of what would happen to me, but 
I thought this might be my only chance to go in the 
building with this important man, my only chance to 
see what he looked like, to see the place where he 
was so I could know where to sneak back and listen, 
as I had learned to do when living in the hills 
with my men. I had resolved to do this to see if I 
could learn any information on Lord Rahl. Still, I 
was trembling with worry when they took us all into 

the building and down halls and up stairs to the 
top floor. 
   "I feared that I was being led to the slaughter 
and wanted to run, but I thought, then, of my men 
back in the hills, depending on me to find the Lord 
Rahl and get him to come to Bandakar and give us 
freedom. 
   "We were taken through a heavy door into a dim 
room that filled me with fear because it stank of 
blood. The windows on two walls of the stark room 
were closed off by shutters. I saw that across the 
room there was a table with a broad bowl and, 
nearby, a row of fat, sharpened wooden stakes 
standing nearly as tall as my chest. They were 
stained dark with blood and gore. 
   "Two women and a man with us fainted. Out of 
anger, the soldiers kicked them in the heads. When 
the people did not rise, the soldiers dragged them 
away by their arms. I saw blood trails smear along 
the floor behind them. I didn't want to have my 
head caved in by the boot of one of these gruesome 
men, so I resolved not to faint. 
   "A man swept into the room, suddenly, like a 
chill wind. I had not ever been afraid of any man, 
even Luchan, like I was afraid of this man. He was 
dressed in layer upon layer of cloth strips that 
flowed out behind as he moved. His jet black hair 
was swept back and smoothed with oils that made it 
glisten. His nose seemed to stick out even more 
than it would have, had he not slicked back his 
hair. His small black eyes were rimmed in red. When 
those beady eyes fixed on me, I had to remind 
myself that I had vowed not to faint. 
"He peered at each person in turn as he slowly 
walked past us, as if he were picking out a turnip 
for dinner. It was then, as his knobby fingers came 
out from his odd clothes to point in a waving 
manner at one person and then another until he had 
pointed out five people, that I saw that his 
fingernails were all painted as black as his hair. 

   "His hand waved, dismissing the rest of us. The 
soldiers moved between the five people this man had 
pointed out and the rest of us. They started 
pushing us toward the door, but just then, before 
we could be ushered out, a commander with a nose 
that had been flattened to the side, as if from 
being broken repeatedly, came in and said that the 
messenger had arrived. The man with the black hair 
ran his black nails back through his black hair and 
told the commander to tell the messenger to wait, 
that by morning he would have the latest 
information. 
   "I was then led out and down the stairs along 
with the rest of the people. We were taken outside 
and told to go away, that our services wouldn't be 
needed. The soldiers laughed when they said this. I 
left with the others, so as not to make the men 
angry. The people all whispered about having seen 
the great man himself. I could think only of what 
the latest information might be. 
   "Later, after dark, I sneaked back, and in the 
rear of the building I discovered, behind a gate 
through a high wooden fence, a narrow alleyway. In 
the dark, I entered the alley and hid myself inside 
a doorway entrance to the back hall of the 
building. There were passageways beyond, and, in 
the candlelight, I recognized one passage as the 
place I had been earlier. 
   "It was late and there was no one in the halls. 
I moved deeper into the passageways. Rooms and 
recesses lined each side of the hall, but with the 
late hour no one came out. I sneaked up the stairs 
and crept to the big thick door to the room where I 
had been taken. 
   "It was there, in that dark hall before the big 
door, that I heard the most horrifying cries I have 
ever heard. People were begging and weeping for 
their lives, crying for mercy. One woman pleaded 
endlessly to be put to death to end her suffering. 
   "I thought I would vomit, or faint, but one 

thought kept me still and hidden, kept me from 
running as fast as my legs would carry me. That was 
the thought that this was the fate of all my people 
if I did not help them by bringing Lord Rahl. 
   "I stayed there all night, in a dark recess in a 
hall across from the big door, listening to those 
poor people in unimaginable agony. I don't know 
what the man was doing to them, but I thought I 
would die of sorrow for their slow suffering. The 
whole of the night, the moans of agony never 
ceased. 
   "I shivered in my hiding place, weeping, and 
told myself that it wasn't real, that I shouldn't 
be afraid of what was not real. I imagined the 
people's pain, but told myself that I was putting 
my imagination on top of my senses—the very thing I 
had been taught was wrong. I put my thoughts to 
Marilee, the times we had been together, and 
ignored the sounds that were not real. I could not 
know what was real, what these sounds really were. 
   "Early in the morning the commander I had seen 
before returned. I peeked carefully out from my 
dark hiding place. The man with the black hair came 
to the door. I knew it was him because when his arm 
came out of the room to hand the man a scrolled 
paper, I saw his black fingernails. 
   "The man with the black hair said to the 
commander with the flattened, crooked nose, he 
called him 'Najari,' that he had found them. That's 
what he said—'them.' Then he said, 'They've made it 
to the east edge of the wasteland and are now 
heading north.' He told the man to give the 
messenger the orders right away. Najari said, 
'Shouldn't be long, then, Nicholas, and you will 
have them and we'll have the power to name our 
price.' " 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER 25 
 
 
 
 
         Richard spun around. "Nicholas? You heard 
him say that name?" 
Owen blinked in surprise. "Yes. I'm sure of it. He 
said Nicholas." 
   Kahlan felt a weary hopelessness settle over 
her, like the cold, wet mist. 
Richard gestured urgently. "Go on." 
   "Well, I wasn't sure that they were talking 
about you—about the Lord Rahl and the Mother 
Confessor—when the commander said 'them,' but by 
the grim excitement in their voices I had the 
impression that it was so. Their voices reminded me 
of the first time the Order came, at the way Luchan 
smiled at me in a way I had never seen before, like 
he might eat me. 
   "I thought that this information was my best 
chance to find you. So I started out at once." 
   Borne on a light gust, drizzle replaced the 
morning mist. Kahlan realized that she was 
shivering with the cold. 
   Richard pointed at the man sitting on the ground 
not far away, the man with the notch in his right 
ear, the man Kahlan had touched. Some of the storm 
within Richard boiled to the surface. 
   "There is the man the orders from Nicholas were 
sent to. He brought with him those men you saw at 
our last camp. Had we not defended ourselves, had 
we put our own sincere hatred of violence above the 
nature of reality, we would be as lost as Marilee." 
Owen stared at the man. "What is his name?" 
   "I don't know and it doesn't matter to me in the 
least. He fought for the Imperial Order—fought to 
uphold a view of all life, including his, as 
unimportant, interchangeable, expendable in the 

mindless pursuit of an ideal that holds individual 
lives as worthless in themselves—a tenet that 
demands sacrifice to others until you are nothing. 
"He fights for the dream of everybody to be nobody 
and nothing. 
   "The beliefs of the Order hold that you had no 
right to love Marilee, that everyone is the same 
and so your duty should be to marry someone who 
could best use your help. In that way, through 
selfless sacrifice, you would properly serve your 
fellow man. Despite how you struggle not to see 
what's before your eyes, Owen, I think somewhere 
beneath all your regurgitated teachings, you know 
that that is the greatest horror brought by the 
Order—not their brutality, but their ideas. It is 
their beliefs that sanction brutality, and yours 
that invite it. 
   "He didn't value his own life, who he was; why 
should I care what his name was. I give him what 
was his greatest ambition: nothingness." 
   When Richard saw Kahlan shivering in the cold 
drizzle, he withdrew his hot glare from Owen and 
retrieved her cloak from her pack in the wagon. 
With the utmost gentleness and care, he wrapped it 
around her shoulders. By the look on his face, he 
seemed to have had all he could take of listening 
to Owen. 
   Kahlan seized his hand, holding it to her cheek 
for a moment. There was some small good in the 
story they had heard from Owen. 
   "This means that the gift isn't killing you, 
Richard," she said in a confidential tone. "It was 
the poison." 
   She was relieved that they hadn't run out of 
time to get him help, as she had so feared on that 
brief, eternal wagon ride when he'd been 
unconscious. 
   "I had the headaches before I ran into Owen. I 
still have the headaches. The sword's magic as well 
faltered before I was poisoned." 

   "But at least this now gives us more time to 
find the solutions to those problems." 
   He ran his fingers back through his hair. "I'm 
afraid we have worse problems, now, and not the 
time you think." 
"Worse problems?" 
   Richard nodded. "You know the empire Owen comes 
from? Ban-dakar? Guess what 'Bandakar' means." 
   Kahlan glanced at Owen sitting hunched on the 
crate and all by himself. She shook her head as her 
gaze returned to Richard's gray eyes, troubled more 
by the suppressed rage in his voice than anything 
else. 
"I don't know, what?" 
   "In High D'Haran it's a name. It means 'the 
banished.' Remember from the book, The Pillars of 
Creation, when I was telling you what it said about 
how they decided to send all the pristinely 
ungifted people away to the Old World—to banish 
them? Remember that I said no one ever knew what 
became of them? 
"We just found out. 
   "The world is now naked before the people of the 
Bandakaran Empire." 
   Kahlan frowned. "How can you know for certain 
that he is a descendant of those people?" 
   "Look at him. He's blond and looks more like 
full-blooded D'Harans than he does the people down 
here in the Old World. More importantly, though, 
he's not affected by magic." 
"But that could be just him." 
   Richard leaned in closer. "In a closed place 
like he comes from, a place shut off from the rest 
of the world for thousands of years, even one 
pillar of Creation would have spread that ungifted 
trait throughout the entire population by now. 
   "But there wasn't just one; they were all 
ungifted. For that, they were banished to the Old 
World, and in the Old World, where they tried to 
establish a new life, they were again all collected 

and banished to that place beyond those mountains—a 
place they were told was for the bandakar, the 
banished." 
   "How did the people in the Old World find out 
about them? How did they keep them all together, 
without a single one surviving to spread their 
ungifted trait to the general population, and how 
did they manage to then put them all in that place—
banish them?" 
"Good questions, all, but right now not the 
important ones. 
   "Owen," Richard called as he turned back to the 
others, "I want you to stay right there, please, 
while the rest of us decide what will be our single 
voice about what we must do." 
   Owen brightened at a method of doing things with 
which he identified and felt comfortable. He didn't 
seem to detect, as did Kahlan, the undercurrent of 
sarcasm in Richard's voice. 
   "You," Richard said to the man Kahlan had 
touched, "go sit beside him and see that he waits 
there with you." 
   While the man scurried to do as he was told, 
Richard tilted his head in gesture to the rest of 
them, calling them away with him. "We need to 
talk." 
   Friedrich, Tom, Jennsen, Cara, and Kahlan 
followed Richard away from Owen and the man. 
Richard leaned back against the chafing rail of the 
wagon and folded his arms as they all gathered 
close around him. He took time to appraise each 
face looking at him. 
   "We have big problems," Richard began, "and not 
just from the poison Owen gave me. Owen isn't 
gifted. He's like you, Jennsen. Magic doesn't touch 
him." His gaze remained locked on Jennsen's. "The 
rest of his people are the same as he, as you." 
   Jennsen's jaw fell open in astonishment. She 
looked confused, as if unable to reconcile it all 
in her mind. Friedrich and Tom looked nearly as 

startled. Cara's brow drew down in a dark frown. 
   "Richard," Jennsen finally said, "that just 
can't be. There's too many of them. There's no way 
that they can all be half brothers and sisters of 
ours." 
   "They aren't half brothers and sisters," Richard 
said. "They're a line of people descended from the 
House of Rahl—people like you. I don't have time 
right now to explain all of it to you, but remember 
how I told you that you would bear children who 
were like you, and they would pass that pristinely 
ungifted trait on to all future generations? Well, 
back a long time ago, there were people like that 
spreading in D'Hara. The people back then gathered 
up all these ungifted people and sent them to the 
Old World. The people down here then sealed them 
away beyond those mountains, there. The name of 
their empire, Bandakar, means 'the banished.' " 
   Jennsen's big blue eyes filled with tears. She 
was one of those people, people so hated that they 
had been banished from the rest of the people in 
their own land and sent into exile. 
   Kahlan put an arm around her shoulders. 
"Remember how you said that you felt alone in the 
world?" Kahlan smiled warmly. "You don't have to 
feel alone anymore. There are people like you." 
   Kahlan didn't think her words seemed to help 
much, but Jennsen welcomed the comfort of the 
embrace. 
   Jennsen abruptly looked back up at Richard. 
"That can't be true. They had a boundary that kept 
them locked in that place. If they were like me 
they wouldn't be affected by a boundary of magic. 
They could have come out of there any time they 
wished. Over all this time, at least some of them 
would have come out into the rest of the world— the 
magic of the boundary couldn't have held them 
back." 
   "I don't think that's true," Richard said. 
"Remember when you saw the sand flowing sideways in 

that warning beacon that Sabar brought us? That was 
magic, and you saw it." 
   "That's right," Kahlan said. "If she's a pillar 
of Creation, then how is such a thing possible?" 
   "That's right," Jennsen agreed. "How could that 
be, if I'm truly ungifted?" Her eyebrows went up. 
"Richard—maybe it's not true after all. Maybe I 
have a bit of the spark of the gift—maybe I'm not 
really, truly ungifted." 
   Richard smiled. "Jennsen, you're as pure as a 
snowflake. You saw that magic for a reason. Nicci 
wrote us in her letter that the warning beacon was 
linked to the wizard who created it—linked to him 
in the underworld. The underworld is the world of 
the dead. That means that the statue functioned 
partly through Subtractive Magic—magic having to do 
with the underworld. You may be immune to magic, 
but you are not immune to death. Gifted or not, 
you're still linked to life, and thus death. 
   "That's why you saw some of the magic of the 
statue—the part relating to the advancement of 
death. 
"The boundary was a place in this world where death 
itself existed. 
To go into that boundary was to enter the world of 
the dead. No one returns from the dead. If any 
pristinely ungifted person in Bandakar had gone 
into the boundary, they would have died. That was 
how they were sealed in." 
   "But they could banish people through the 
boundary," Jennsen pressed. "That would have to 
mean that the boundary didn't really affect them." 
   Richard was shaking his head even as she was 
protesting. "No. They were touched by death, the 
same as anyone. But there was a way left through 
the boundary—much like the one that once divided 
the three lands of the New World. I got through 
that boundary without being touched by it. There 
was a pass through it, a special, hidden place to 
get through the boundary. This one was the same." 

   Jennsen wrinkled her nose. "That makes no sense, 
then. If that was true, and it wasn't hidden from 
them—since they all knew of this passage through 
the boundary—then why couldn't they all just leave 
if they wanted to? How could it seal the rest of 
them in, if they could send banished people 
through?" 
   Richard sighed, wiping a hand across his face. 
It looked to Kahlan like he wished she hadn't asked 
that question. 
   "You know the area we passed a while back?" 
Richard asked her. "That place where nothing grew?" 
Jennsen nodded. "I remember." 
   "Well, Sabar said he came through another one, a 
little to the north of here." 
   "That's right," Kahlan said. "And it ran toward 
the center of the wasteland, toward the Pillars of 
Creation—just like the one we saw. They had to be 
roughly parallel." 
   Richard was nodding to what she was beginning to 
suspect. "And they were to either side of the notch 
into Bandakar. They weren't very far apart. We're 
in that place right now, between those two 
boundaries." 
   Friedrich leaned in. "But Lord Rahl, that would 
mean that if someone was banished from the 
Bandakaran Empire, when they emerged from that 
boundary they would find themselves trapped between 
the walls of these two boundaries out here, and 
there wasn't much room between them. A person would 
have nowhere to go but..." 
   Friedrich covered his mouth as he turned west, 
looking off into the gloom. 
"The Pillars of Creation," Richard finished with 
quiet finality. 
   "But, but," Jennsen stammered, "are you saying 
that someone made it that way? Made these two 
boundaries deliberately to force anyone who was 
sent out of the Bandakaran Empire to go into that 
place—the Pillars of Creation? Why?" 

Richard looked into her eyes for a long moment. "To 
kill them." 
   Jennsen swallowed. "You mean, whoever banished 
these people wanted anyone they in turn sent out, 
anyone they exiled, to die?" 
"Yes," Richard said. 
   Kahlan pulled her cloak tighter around herself. 
It had been hot for so long she could hardly 
believe that the weather had so suddenly turned 
cold. 
   Richard swiped a lock of wet hair back off his 
forehead as he went on. "From what Adie told me 
once, boundaries have to have a pass to create 
balance on both sides, to equalize the life on both 
sides. I suspect that those down here in the Old 
World who banished these people wanted to give them 
a way to get rid of criminals and so told the 
people about the existence of the pass. But they 
didn't want such people to be loosed on the rest of 
the world. Criminals or not, they were ungifted. 
They couldn't be allowed to run free." 
   Kahlan immediately saw the problem with his 
theory. "But all three boundaries would have had to 
have a pass," she said. "Even if the other two 
passes, in the remaining two boundaries, were 
secret, that still left the possibility that anyone 
exiled and sent through the notch might find one of 
them and so not try to escape through the Pillars 
of Creation where they would die. That left the 
chance that they might still escape into the Old 
World." 
   "If there really were three boundaries, such 
might be the case," Richard said. "But I don't 
think there were three. I think there really was 
only one." 
   "Now you're not making any sense," Cara 
complained. "You said there was the one going north 
and south blocking the pass, and then there were 
these two parallel ones out here, going east and 
west, to funnel anyone who came out of the empire 

through that first boundary, toward the Pillars of 
Creation where they would die." 
   Kahlan had to agree. It seemed that there might 
be a chance for someone to escape through one of 
the other two. 
   "I don't think there were three boundaries," 
Richard repeated. "I think there was only one. That 
one boundary wasn't straight—it was bent in half." 
He held two fingers up, side by side. "The bottom 
of the bend went across the pass." He pointed at 
the web between the two fingers. "The two legs 
extended out here, parallel, going off to where 
they ended at the Pillars." 
Jennsen could only ask "Why?" 
   "It seems to me, by how elaborate the whole 
design was, that the ones who sealed those people 
in wanted to give them a way to rid themselves of 
dangerous people, possibly knowing from what they 
had learned of their beliefs that they would balk 
at executing anyone. When these people were 
banished here to the Old World, they may have 
already had at least the core of the same beliefs 
they hold now. Those beliefs leave them completely 
vulnerable to those who are evil. Protecting their 
way of life, without executing criminals, meant 
they had to cast such people out of their community 
or be destroyed by them. 
   "The banishment away from D'Hara and the New 
World, across the barrier into the Old World, must 
have terrified them. They stuck together as a means 
of survival, a common bond. 
   "Those down here in the Old World who put them 
behind that boundary must have used those people's 
fear of persecution to convince them that the 
boundary was meant to protect them, to keep others 
from harming them. They must have convinced those 
people that, since they were special, they needed 
such protection. That, along with their well-
established need to stick together, had to have 
reinforced in them a terrible fear of being put out 

of their protected place. Banishment had a special 
terror to those people. 
   "They must have felt the anguish of being 
rejected by the rest of the peoples of the world 
because they were ungifted, but, together as they 
were, they also felt safe behind the boundary. 
"Now that the seal is off, we have big problems." 
   Jennsen folded her arms. "Now that there's more 
than one of us— more than one snowflake—you're 
having worries about a snowstorm?" 
   Richard fixed her with a reproachful look. "Why 
do you think the Order came in and took some of 
their people?" 
   "Apparently," Jennsen said, "to breed more 
children like them. To breed precious magic out of 
the race of man." 
   Richard ignored the heat in her words. "No, I 
mean why would they take men?" 
   "Same reason," Jennsen said. "To mate with 
regular women and give them ungifted children." 
   Richard drew in a patient breath and let it out 
slowly. "What did Owen say? The men were taken to 
see the women and told that if they didn't follow 
orders those women would be skinned alive." 
Jennsen hesitated. "What orders?" 
   Richard leaned toward her. "What orders, indeed. 
Think about it," he said, looking around at the 
rest of them. "What orders? What would they want 
ungifted men for? What is it they would want 
ungifted men to do?" 
Kahlan gasped. "The Keep!" 
   "Exactly." Richard's unsettling gaze met each of 
them in turn. "Like I said, we have big problems. 
Zedd is protecting the Keep. With his ability and 
the magic of that place he can no doubt single-
handedly hold off Jagang's entire army. 
   "But how is that skinny old man going to resist 
even one young ungifted man who is untouched by 
magic and comes up and grabs him by the throat?" 
   Jennsen's hand came away from her mouth. "You're 

right, Richard. Jagang, too, has that book—The 
Pillars of Creation. He knows how those like me 
aren't touched by magic. He tried to use me in that 
very way. That's why he worked so hard to convince 
me that you were trying to kill me—so that I would 
think my only chance was to kill you first. He knew 
I was ungifted and couldn't be stopped by magic." 
   "And, Jagang is from the Old World," Richard 
added. "In all likelihood he would have known 
something about the empire beyond that boundary. 
For all we know, in the Old World Bandakar might be 
legendary, while those in the New World, beyond the 
great barrier for three thousand years, would never 
have known what happened to those people. 
   "Now, the Order has been taking men from there 
and threatening them with the brutal murder of 
their defenseless women—women who are loved ones—if 
those men don't follow orders. I think those orders 
are to assault the Wizard's Keep and capture it for 
the Imperial Order." 
   Kahlan's legs shook. If the Keep fell, they 
would lose the one real advantage, however limited, 
they had. With the Keep in the hands of the Order, 
all those ancient and deadly things of magic would 
be available to Jagang. There was no telling what 
he might unleash. There were things in the Keep 
that could kill them all, Jagang included. He had 
already proven with the plague he'd unleashed that 
he was willing to kill any number to have his way, 
that he was willing to use any weapon, even if such 
weapons decimated his own people as well. 
   Even if Jagang did nothing with the Keep, just 
him having control of it denied the D'Haran Empire 
the possibility of finding something there that 
could help them. That was, in addition to 
protecting the Keep, what Zedd was doing while he 
was there—trying to find something that would help 
them win the war, or at least find a way to put the 
Imperial Order back behind a barrier of some kind 
and confine them to the Old World. 

   Without the Keep, their cause would likely be 
hopeless. Resistance would be nothing more than 
delaying the inevitable. Without the Keep on their 
side, all resistance to Jagang would eventually be 
crushed. His troops would pour into every part of 
the New World. There would be no stopping them. 
   With trembling fingers Kahlan clutched her cloak 
closed. She knew what awaited her people, what it 
was like when the Imperial Order invaded and 
overpowered places. She had been with the army for 
nearly a year, fighting against them. They were 
like a pack of wild dogs. There was no peace with 
such animals after you. They would be satisfied 
only when they could tear you apart. 
   Kahlan had been to cities, like Ebinissia, that 
had been overrun by Imperial Order soldiers. In a 
wild binge of savagery that went on for days, they 
had tortured, raped, and murdered every person 
trapped in the city, finally leaving it a wasteland 
of human corpses. None, no matter their age, had 
been spared. 
That was what the people of the New World had to 
look forward to. 
With enemy troops overrunning all of the New World, 
any trade that was not already disrupted would be 
brought to a standstill. Nearly all businesses 
would fail. The livelihood of countless people 
would be lost. Food would quickly become scarce, 
and then simply unavailable at any cost. People 
would have no means of supporting themselves and 
their families. People would lose everything for 
which they had worked a lifetime. 
   Cities, even before the troops arrived, would be 
in a destructive panic. When the enemy troops 
arrived, most people would be burned out of their 
homes, driven from their cities and their land. 
Jagang would steal all supplies of food for his 
troops and give conquered land to his favored 
elite. The true owners of that land would perish, 
or become slaves working their own farms. Those who 

escaped before the invading horde would desperately 
cling to life, living like animals in wild areas. 
   Most of the population would be in flight, 
running for their lives. Hundreds of thousands 
would be out in the elements without shelter. There 
would be little food, and no ability to prepare for 
winter. When the weather turned harsh, they would 
perish in droves. 
   As civilization crumbled and starvation became 
the norm, disease would sweep across the land, 
catching up those on the run. Families would 
collapse as those they depended on suffered 
agonizingly slow and painful deaths. Children and 
the weak would be alone, to be preyed upon as a 
source of food for the starving. 
   Kahlan knew what such widespread disease was 
like. She knew what it was to watch people dying by 
the thousands. She had seen it happen in Aydindril 
when the plague was there. She saw scores stricken 
without warning. She had watched the old, the 
young—such good people— contract something they 
could not fight, watched them suffer in misery for 
days before they died. 
   Richard had been stricken with that plague. 
Unlike everyone else, though, he had gotten it 
knowingly. Taking the plague deliberately had been 
the price to get back to her. He had traded his 
life just to be with her again before he died. 
That had been a time beyond horror. 
Kahlan knew, firsthand, savage desperation. It was 
then that she had taken the only chance available 
to her to save his life. It was then that she had 
loosed the chimes. That act had saved Richard's 
life. She hadn't known at the time that it would 
also be a catalyst that would set unforeseen events 
into motion. 
   Because of her desperate act, the boundary to 
this empire had lost its power and failed. Because 
of her, all magic might eventually fail. 
   Now, because of that boundary failing, the 

Wizard's Keep, their last bastion to work a 
solution against the Order, was in terrible 
jeopardy. 
Kahlan felt as if it was all her fault. 
   The world was on the brink of destruction. 
Civilization stood at the threshold of obliteration 
in the name of the Order's mindless idea of a 
greater good. The Order demanded sacrifice to that 
greater good; what they were determined to 
sacrifice was reason, and, therefore, civilization 
itself. Madness had cast its shadow across the 
world and would have them all. 
   They now stood in the edge of the shadow of a 
dark age. They were all on the eve of the end 
times. 
   Kahlan couldn't say that, though. She couldn't 
tell them how she felt. She dared not reveal her 
despair. 
   "Richard, we simply can't allow the Order to 
capture the Keep." Kahlan could hardly believe how 
calm and determined her voice sounded. She wondered 
if anyone else would believe that she thought they 
still stood a chance. "We have to stop them." 
"I agree," Richard said. 
   He sounded determined, too. She wondered if he 
saw in her eyes the true depths of her despair. 
   "First," he said, "the easy part: Nicci and 
Victor. We have to tell them that we can't come 
now. Victor needs to know what we would say to him. 
He will need to know that we agree with his plans—
that he must proceed and that he can't wait for us. 
We've talked with him; he knows what to do. Now, he 
must do it, and Priska must know that he has to 
help. 
   "Nicci needs to know where we're going. She 
needs to know that we believe we've discovered the 
cause of the warning beacon. She has to know where 
we are." 
   He left unsaid that she had to come to help him 
if he couldn't get to her because his gift was 

killing him. 
   "She needs to know, too," Richard said, "that we 
only had a chance to read part of her warning about 
what Jagang was doing with the Sisters of the Dark 
in creating weapons out of people." 
Everyone's eyes widened. They hadn't read the 
letter. 
   "Well," Kahlan said, "with all the other 
problems we have, at least that's one we won't have 
to deal with for now." 
   "We have that much on our side," Richard agreed. 
He gestured to the man watching, the man waiting 
for Kahlan to command him. "We'll send him to 
Victor and Nicci so they will know everything." 
"And then what?" Cara asked. 
   "I want Kahlan to command him that when he's 
finished with carrying out that part of his orders, 
he's then to go north and find the Imperial Order 
army. I want him to pretend to be one of them to 
get close enough to assassinate Emperor Jagang." 
   Kahlan knew how implausible such a scheme was. 
By the way everyone stared in astonishment, they 
had a good idea, too. 
   "Jagang has layers of men to protect him from 
assassination," Jenn-sen said. "He's always 
surrounded by special guards. Regular soldiers 
can't even get close to him." 
   "Do you really think he has any chance at all to 
accomplish such a thing?" Kahlan asked. 
   "No," Richard admitted. "The Order will most 
likely kill him before he can get to Jagang. But he 
will be driven by the need to fulfill your orders. 
He will be single-minded. I expect he will be 
killed in the effort, but I also suspect he will at 
least make a good attempt of it. I want Jagang to 
at least lose some sleep knowing that any of his 
men might be assassins. I want him to worry that he 
will never know who might be trying to kill him. I 
don't want him ever to be able to sleep soundly. I 
want him to be haunted by nightmares of what might 

be coming next, of who among his men might be 
waiting for an opening." 
   Kahlan nodded her agreement. Richard appraised 
the grim faces waiting for the rest of what he had 
to say. 
"Now, to the most important part of what must be 
done. It's vital we get to the Keep and warn Zedd. 
We can't delay. Jagang is ahead of us in all this—
he's been planning and acting and we never realized 
what he was up to. We don't know how soon those 
ungifted men might be sent north. We haven't a 
moment to lose." 
   "Lord Rahl," Cara reminded him, "you have to get 
to the antidote before time runs out. You can't go 
running off to the Keep to ... Oh, no. Now you just 
wait a minute—you're not sending me to the Keep 
again. I'm not leaving you at a time like this, at 
a time when you're next to defenseless. I won't 
hear of it and I won't go." 
   Richard laid a hand on her shoulder. "Cara, I'm 
not sending you, but thanks for offering." 
Cara folded her arms and shot him a fiery scowl. 
"We can't take the wagon up into Bandakar—there's 
no road—" 
   "Lord Rahl," Tom interrupted, "without magic 
you'll need all the steel you have." He sounded 
only slightly less emphatic than Cara had. 
   Richard smiled. "I know, Tom, and I agree. It's 
Friedrich who I think must go." Richard turned to 
Friedrich. "You can take the wagon. An older man, 
by himself, will raise less suspicion than would 
any of the rest of us. They won't see you as a 
threat. You will be able to make better time with 
the wagon and without having to worry that the 
Order might snatch you and put you in the army. 
Will you do it, Friedrich?" 
   Friedrich scratched his stubble. A smile came to 
his weathered face. "I guess I'm at last being 
called upon to be a boundary warden, of sorts." 
   Richard smiled with him. "Friedrich, the 

boundary has failed. As the Lord Rahl, I appoint 
you to the post of boundary warden and ask that you 
immediately undertake to warn others of the danger 
come from out of that boundary." 
   Friedrich's smile departed as he put a fist to 
his heart in salute and solemn pledge. 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 26 
 
 
 
 
Somewhere back in a distant room, where his body 
waited, Nicholas heard an insistent noise. He was 
absorbed in the task at hand, so he ignored the 
sound. The light was fading, and although light 
helped to see, darkness would not hinder eyes such 
as he used. 
   Again, he heard the noise. Indignant that the 
sound kept calling him, kept annoying him, kept 
demanding his attention, he returned to his body. 
Someone was banging a fist on the door. 
   Nicholas rose from the floor, where his body sat 
cross-legged, taking his body with him. It was 
always, at first, disorienting to have to be in his 
body again, to be so limited, so confined. It felt 
awkward to have to move it about, to use his own 
muscles, to breathe, to see, to hear with his own 
senses. 
   The knock came again. Irate at the interruption, 
Nicholas went not to the door but to the windows, 
and threw the shutters closed. He cast a hand out, 
igniting the torch, and finally stalked to the 
door. Layered strips of cloth covering his robes 
flowed out behind, like a heavy mantle of black 
feathers. 

"What is it!" He threw open the heavy door and 
peered out. 
   Najari stood just outside, in the hall, his 
weight on one foot, his thumbs hooked behind his 
belt. His muscular shoulders nearly touched the 
walls to each side. Nicholas saw, then, the huddled 
crowd behind the man. Najari's crooked nose, 
flattened to the left in some of the numerous 
brawls his temper got him into, cast an oddly 
shaped shadow across his cheek. Anyone unfortunate 
enough to find themselves in a brawl with Najari 
usually suffered far worse than a mere broken nose. 
   Najari waggled a thumb over his shoulder. "You 
asked for some guests, Nicholas." 
   Nicholas raked his nails back through his hair, 
feeling the silken smooth pleasure of oils gliding 
against his palm. He rolled his shoulders, ruffling 
away his pique. 
   Nicholas had been so absorbed in what he had 
been doing that he had forgotten that he had 
requested that Najari bring him some bodies. 
"Very good, Najari. Bring them in, then. Let's have 
a look at them." 
   Nicholas watched as the commander led the gaggle 
of people into the flickering torchlight. Soldiers 
in the rear herded the stragglers through the door 
and into the large room. Heads swiveled around, 
looking at the strange, stark surroundings, at the 
wooden walls, the torches in brackets, the plank 
flooring, the lack of furniture other than a stout 
table. Noses twitched at the sharp smell of blood. 
   Nicholas watched carefully as people spotted the 
sharpened stakes standing in a line along the wall 
to their right, stakes as thick as Najari's wrists. 
   Nicholas studied the people, watching for the 
telltales of fear as they spread out along the wall 
beside the door. Eyes flitted about, worried, and 
at the same time eager to take it all in so they 
could report to their friends what they had seen 
inside. Nicholas knew that he was an object of 

great curiosity. 
A rare being. 
A Slide. 
No one knew what his name meant. This day, some 
would learn. 
   Nicholas glided past the undulating mob. They 
were a curious people, these odd, ungifted 
creatures, curious like mockingbirds, but not 
nearly so bold. Because they were without any spark 
whatsoever of the gift, Nicholas had to handle them 
in special ways in order for them to be of any use 
to him. It was a bother, but it had its rewards. 
Some necks craned in his wake, trying to better see 
the rare man. 
He ran his nails through his hair again just to 
feel the oils slide against his hand. As he leaned 
close to some of the people he passed, observing 
individuals in the gathering, one of the women 
before him closed her eyes, turning her face away. 
Nicholas lifted a hand toward her, flicking out a 
finger. He glanced to Najari to be sure he saw 
which one had been picked. 
   Najari's gaze flicked from the woman up to 
Nicholas; he had noted the selection. 
   A man back against the wall stood stiff, his 
eyes wide. Nicholas flicked a finger at him. 
Another man twisted his lips in an odd manner. 
Nicholas glanced down and saw that the man, in a 
state of wild fright, had wet himself. Nicholas's 
finger flitted out again. Three selected. Nicholas 
walked on. 
   A thin whine escaped the throat of a woman in 
the front, right before him. He smiled at her. She 
peered up, trembling, unable to take her wide-eyed 
gaze from him, from his red-rimmed black eyes, 
unable to halt the puling sound escaping her 
throat. She had never seen one so human ... yet 
not. Nicholas tapped her shoulder with a long-
nailed finger. He would reward her unspoken 
revulsion with service to a greater good. His. 

   Jagang had sought to create something ... 
unusual, for himself. A bauble of flesh and blood. 
A magical trinket crafted from a wizard. A lapdog 
... with teeth. 
   His Excellency had gotten what he wanted, and 
more. Oh, so much more. 
   Nicholas would enjoy seeing how the emperor 
liked having a puppet without strings, a specially 
crafted creation with a mind of its own, and 
talents to fulfill his wishes. 
   A man at the rear, against the wall, appeared to 
be somewhat uninterested, as if impatient for the 
exhibition to be over so he could go back to his 
own affairs. While none of these people could be 
said to think of themselves as important 
individuals with consequential sway over any 
meaningful aspects of life in their empire, a few 
occasionally exhibited tendencies, even if 
inconsistent, toward self-interest. Nicholas 
flicked his finger for the fifth time. The man 
would soon have reason to be highly interested in 
the proceedings, and he would find that he was no 
better than anyone else. He would be going nowhere—
at least not in body. 
   Everyone stared in silence as Nicholas chuckled 
alone at his own joke. 
   His amusement ended. Nicholas tipped his head 
toward the door in a single nod. The soldiers 
jumped into action. 
   "All right," Najari growled, "move along. Move! 
Get going. Out, out, out!" 
   The feet of the crowd shuffled urgently through 
the door as ordered. Some people cast worried 
glances back over their shoulders at the five 
Najari had cut out of the flock. Those five were 
shoved back when they sought to stay with the rest. 
A stiff finger to the chest backed them up as 
effectively as would a club or a sword. 
   "Don't cause any trouble," Najari warned, "or 
you will be making trouble for the others." 

   The five remaining huddled close to one another, 
rocking nervously side to side like a covey of 
quail before a bird dog. 
   When the soldiers had driven the rest of the 
people out, Najari closed the door and stood before 
it, hands clasped behind his back. 
   Nicholas returned to the windows, opening the 
shutters on the west wall. The sun was down, 
leaving a red slash across the sky. 
Soon they would be on the wing, on the hunt. 
Nicholas would be with them. 
   Casting an arm back without needing to turn to 
look, he doused the torch. The flickering light was 
a distraction during this cusp of time, the 
transient twilight that was so fragile, so brief. 
He would need the light, but, at the moment, he 
wanted only to see the sky, to see the glorious, 
unbounded sky. 
   "Are we going to be able to leave soon?" one of 
the people asked in a timid squeak. 
   Nicholas turned and peered at them. Najari's 
eyes revealed which one had spoken. Nicholas 
followed his commander's gaze. It was one of the 
men—the one who had been impatient to leave, of 
course. 
   "Go?" Nicholas asked as he swept in close to the 
man. "You wish to go?" 
The man stood with his back bent, leaning away from 
Nicholas. 
"Well, sir, I was only wondering when we would be 
going." 
   Nicholas stooped in even more, peering deeply 
into the man's eyes. "Wonder in silence," he 
hissed. 
   Returning to the windows, Nicholas rested his 
hands on the sill, his weight on his arms, as he 
breathed in deeply the gathering night while taking 
in the sweep of crimson sky. 
Soon, he would be there, be free. 
Soon, he would soar as no one else but he could. 

Impulsively, he sought them. 
   Eyes bulging with the effort, he cast his senses 
where none but his could go. 
   "There!" he screeched, throwing his arm out, 
pointing a long black nail at what none but he 
could see. "There! One has taken to wing." 
   Nicholas spun around, strips of cloth lifting, 
floating up. Panting through a rush of fluttering 
excitement, he gazed at the eyes staring at him. 
They could not know. They could not understand one 
such as he, understand what he felt, what he 
needed. He hungered to be on the hunt, to be with 
them, ever since he had imagined such a use for his 
ability. 
   He had reveled in the experience, dedicating 
himself to it as he learned his new abilities. He 
had been off with those glorious creatures as often 
as he could afford the time, ever since he had come 
here and discovered them. 
   How ironic it now seemed that he had resisted. 
How odd that he once had feared what those gruesome 
women, those Sisters of the Dark, had conspired to 
do to him ... what they had done to him. 
His duty, they had called it. 
   Their vile magic had cut like a red-hot blade 
through him. He had thought his eyes might burst 
from his head from the pain that had seared through 
him. Tied spread-eagled to stakes in the ground in 
the center of their wicked circle, he had dreaded 
what they were going to do to him. 
He had feared it. 
Nicholas smiled. 
Hated it, even. 
He had been afraid because of the pain, the pain of 
what they were doing to him, and the even greater 
pain of not knowing what more they intended to do 
to him. His duty, they had called it, to a greater 
good. His ability bore responsibilities, they had 
insisted. 
   He watched through glazed eyes as Najari bound 

the hands of the five people behind each of their 
backs. 
"Thank you, Najari," he said when the man had 
finished. 
   Najari approached. "The men will have them by 
now, Nicholas. I told them to send enough men to 
insure that they would not escape." Najari grinned 
at the prospect. "There's no need to worry. They 
should all be on their way back to us." 
Nicholas narrowed his eyes. "We will see. We will 
see." 
   He wanted to see it himself. With his own 
vision—even if his own vision was through another's 
eyes. 
   Najari yawned on his way to the door. "See you 
tomorrow, then, Nicholas." 
   Nicholas opened his mouth wide, mimicking the 
yawn, even though he didn't yawn. It felt good to 
stretch his jaws wide. Sometimes he felt trapped 
inside himself and he wanted out. 
   Nicholas closed the door behind Najari and 
bolted it. It was a perfunctory act, done more to 
add to the aura of peril than out of necessity. 
Even with their hands tied behind their backs, 
these people could, together, probably overpower 
him—knock him down and kick in his head, if nothing 
else. But for that, they would have to think, to 
decide what they ought to do and why, to commit to 
act. Easier not to think. Easier not to act. Easier 
to do as you are told. 
Easier to die than to live. 
Living took effort. Struggle. Pain. 
Nicholas hated it. 
   "Hate to live, live to hate," he said to the 
silent, ghostly white faces watching him. 
   Out the window the streaks of clouds had gone 
dark gray as the touch of the sun passed beyond 
them and night crept in to embrace them. Soon, he 
would be among them. 
   He turned back from the window, taking in the 

faces watching him. Soon, they would all be out 
there, among them. 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 27 
 
 
   
  Nicholas seized one of the nameless men. Powered 
by muscles crafted of the Sisters' dark art, he 
hoisted the man into the air. The man cried out in 
surprise at being lifted so easily. He struggled 
hesitantly against muscle he would not be able to 
resist were he even to put daring into it. These 
people were immune to magic, or Nicholas would have 
used his power to easily lift them aloft. Absent 
the necessary spark of the gift, they had to be 
manhandled. 
   It made little difference to Nicholas. How they 
got to the stakes was unimportant. What happened to 
them once there was all that mattered. 
   As the man in his arms cried out in terror, 
Nicholas carried him across the room. The other 
people withdrew into a far corner. They always went 
to the far corner, like chickens about to be 
dinner. 
   Nicholas, his arms around the man's chest, 
lifted him high in the air, judging the distance 
and angle as he raced ahead. 
   The man's eyes went wide, his mouth did 
likewise. He gasped with the shock, then grunted as 
Nicholas, hugging the man tight in his arms, drove 
him down onto the stake. 
   The man's breath came in short sharp gasps as 
the sharpened stake penetrated up through his 
insides. He went still in Nicholas's powerful arms, 
fearing to move, fearing to believe what was 

happening to him, fearing to know it was true ... 
trying to deny to himself that it could be true. 
   Nicholas straightened to his full height before 
the man. The man's back was as straight and stiff 
as a board as he sat impaled on the sharpened 
stake. His eyebrows pushed his sweat-beaded brow up 
in furrows as he writhed in slow agony, his legs 
trying to touch the ground that was too far away. 
   Into that confusion of sensation, Nicholas 
reached out with his mind, at the same time clawing 
his hands before the man with the effort as he slid 
his own being, his own spirit, into the core of 
this living creature, slid into this man's open 
mind, into the cavernous cracks between his abrupt 
and disconnected thoughts, there to feel his agony 
and fright. There to take control. Once he had 
slipped his own mind in there with this man, seeped 
through his consciousness, Nicholas drew his 
essence out and into himself. 
   With a staggering fusion of destructive and 
creative power dealt by those women that day, 
Nicholas had been born into a new being, part him, 
and yet more. He had become what no man had ever 
been before—what others wished to make of him, what 
others wished him to be. 
   What had been unleashed in him by those Sisters 
all linked in their ability to harness powers they 
could never have touched alone and should never 
have invoked together, they instilled in him. They 
engendered in him powers few could ever have 
imagined: the power to slide into another living 
person's thoughts, and withdraw their spirit. 
   He drew his closed fists back toward his own 
abdomen with the effort of drawing with him the 
spirit of this man on the cusp of life and death, 
drew onward the marrow of this man's soul. Nicholas 
felt the slick heat of this other spirit slide into 
his, the hot rush of sensation at feeling himself 
filled with another spirit. 
   Nicholas left the body there, impaled on the 

first stake, as he rushed to the windows, his head 
spinning with the first intoxicating wave of 
excitement at the journey only now just begun, at 
what was to come, at what power he would control. 
   He opened his mouth wide again in a yawn that 
was not a yawn, but a call carrying more than just 
his silent voice. 
   His eyes swam with wavering images. He gasped in 
the first scent of the forests out beyond, where 
his intent had been cast. 
   He rushed back and seized a woman. She begged as 
she wept, begged to be spared as he bore her to her 
stake. 
   "But this is nothing," he told her. "Nothing 
compared to what I have endured. Oh, you cannot 
imagine what I have endured." 
   He had been staked naked to the ground, in the 
center of a circle of those smug women. He had been 
nothing to them. He had not been a man, a wizard. 
He had been nothing but the raw material, the flesh 
and blood innervated by the gift, that they needed 
for what they wanted, that they used in yet another 
of their trials, all to be twisted by their 
tinkering at creation. 
He had the ability, so duty required he sacrifice 
it. 
   Nicholas had been the first to live through 
their tests, not because they took care—not because 
they cared—but because they had learned what didn't 
work, and so avoided their past errors. 
   "Scream, my dear. Scream all you want. It will 
help you no more than it helped me." 
"Why!" she screamed. "Why!" 
   "Oh, but I must, if I am to have your spirit to 
soar on the wings of my distant friends. You will 
go on a glorious journey, you and I." 
"Please!" she wailed. "Dear Creator, no!" 
   "Oh, yes, dear Creator," he mocked. "Come and 
save her—like you came and saved me." 
   Her wailing did her no good. His hadn't either. 

She had no idea how immeasurably worse his agony 
had been than hers would be. Unlike her, he had 
been condemned to live. 
   "Hate to live, live to hate," he murmured in a 
comforting whisper. "You will have the glory and 
the reward that is death." 
   He drove her down onto the stake. He reckoned 
her not far enough onto the stake, and shoved her 
down another six inches, until he judged it deep 
enough within her, deep enough to produce the 
necessary pain and terror, but not deep enough to 
lance anything inside that would kill her right 
off. She thrashed, trying desperately, hands 
helpless behind her back, to somehow remove 
herself. 
   He was only dimly aware of her cries, her 
worthless words. She thought they might somehow 
make a difference. 
   Pain was his goal. Their complaints of it only 
confirmed that he was achieving his goal. 
   Nicholas stood before the woman, hands clawed, 
as he slid his own spirit through her sundered 
thoughts and into the core of her being. With 
mental strength far superior to his physical 
strength, he pulled her back. He gasped as he felt 
her spirit slide into his. 
   For now, he slipped those spirits out of 
tortured, dying bodies while those spirits existed 
in the netherworld between the worldly form they 
knew was lost to them, but still alive, and the 
world of the dead already calling them in from 
beyond. Life could no longer hold them, but death 
could not yet have them. In that time of spiritual 
transition, they were his, and he could use those 
spirits for things only he could imagine. 
And he had not yet really even begun to imagine. 
   Such ability as he possessed was not something 
that could be taught by another—there was no other 
but he. He was still learning the extent of his 
powers, the things he could do with the spirit of 

another. He had only scratched the surface. 
   Emperor Jagang had sought to create something 
akin to himself, a dream walker, a brother, of 
sorts. One who could enter another's mind. He had 
gotten far more than he could have ever have 
imagined. Nicholas didn't simply slide into 
another's thoughts, as Jagang did; he could slide 
into their very soul, and draw their spirit back 
into himself. 
   The Sisters hadn't counted on that aberration of 
their tinkering with his ability. 
   Rushing to the window, his mouth pulled open as 
wide as it would go in a yawn that wasn't a yawn. 
The room swam behind him. It was only partly there, 
now. Now, he was beginning to see other places. 
Glorious places. See them with new vision, with 
spirits no longer bound to their paltry bodies. 
   He rushed to the third person, no longer aware 
even if they were man or woman. Their soul was all 
that mattered—their spirit. 
   He drove them onto a stake with urgent effort, 
slid into them and drew their spirit into his, 
shuddering with the power of it entering him. 
   He rushed to the window again, opening wide his 
mouth again, twisting his head side to side again 
with the thrill of it, the slick, silken, sliding 
ecstasy of it... the loss of physical orientation, 
the exaltation of being above his corporeal 
existence, the former bounds of his mere worldly 
form—carried aloft not simply with his own efforts, 
but by the spirits of others that he had freed from 
their bodies. 
What a glorious thing it was. 
It was almost like the joy he imagined death would 
be. 
   He seized the fourth weeping person and with 
delirious expectation ran with them across the 
room, to the stakes, to the fourth stake, and drove 
them screaming onto it. 
   As he lurched back from them, he thrust himself 

into their wildly racing, confused, swirling 
thoughts, and took what was there for the taking. 
He took their spirit into himself. 
   When he controlled a person's spirit, he 
controlled their very existence. He became life and 
death for them. He was their savior, their 
destroyer. 
   He was in many ways like those spirits he took, 
trapped in a worldly form, hating to live, to 
endure the pain and agony that was life, yet 
fearing to die even while longing for the promise 
of its sweet embrace. 
   With four spirits swirling through him, Nicholas 
staggered to the fifth person, cowering in the 
corner. 
   "Please!" the man wailed, trying to ward what he 
would not commit to warding. "Please, don't!" 
   The thought occurred to Nicholas that the stakes 
were really a hindrance; using them required him to 
carry people around like woolly sheep to have their 
souls sheared. Yes, he was still learning what he 
could do and how to control what he did, but to 
have to use the stakes was limiting. When he 
thought about it, it was actually insulting that a 
wizard of his ability would have to use so crude a 
device. 
   What he really wanted to do was to slide into 
another's spirit and take it without any warning—
without needing to bring people to the stakes. 
   When he was fully able to do that—to simply walk 
up to another, say "Good day," and slide like the 
thrust of a dagger into the heart of their spirit, 
there to draw it into his—then he would be 
invincible. When he was able to do that, then no 
one could challenge him. No one would be able to 
deny him anything. 
   As the man shrank down before him, Nicholas, 
before he fully realized what it was he was doing, 
driven by an angry need, by hatred, thrust out his 
hand as he thrust his own mind into this man, into 

the spaces between thought. 
   The man stiffened, just as those on the stakes 
stiffened, when Nicholas had impaled them with his 
ability. 
   He drew back his closed fist toward his middle 
as he drew in this man's spirit. He gasped with the 
heat of it, with the silky slick feel of it sliding 
into him. 
   They stared at each other, each in shock, each 
considering what this meant for them. 
   The man slumped back against the wall, sliding 
down, in soundless, silent, terrible empty agony. 
   Nicholas realized that he had just done what he 
had never done before. He had just taken a soul by 
his will alone. 
   He had just freed himself to take what he 
wanted, when he wanted, where he wanted. 
 
 
 
 
 
           
CHAPTER 28 
 
      Nicholas, his vision a blur, staggered to the 
window. 
All five were his, now. 
   This time, as his mouth opened wide, a cry at 
last came forth, a cry of the five spirits joining 
his as he drew them together into one force guided 
by his will alone. Their worldly agony was a 
distant concern to them. Five spirits gazed out of 
the windows along with him, five spirits now 
waiting to soar out into the night, to where he 
chose to send them. 
   Those Sisters had not known what they unleashed 
that night. They could not have known the power 
they fused into him, the ability they burned into 
him. 

   They had achieved what none had achieved for 
thousands of years— the altering of a wizard into 
something more, honing him into a weapon of 
specific intent. They had imbued him with power 
beyond that of anyone living. They had given him 
dominion over the spirits of others. 
Most had escaped, but he had killed five of them. 
   The five were enough. After he had slid into 
their souls and pulled their spirits back into his 
that night, he had appropriated their Han, their 
force of life, their power, for himself. 
   It was only fitting, as their Han was not 
natural to them, but was male Han they had stolen 
from young wizards—a birthright they had sucked 
from those to whom it belonged in order to give 
themselves abilities they had not been born with, 
could not be born with. Yet more nameless people 
with ability to be sacrificed to those who needed 
it, or simply wanted it. 
   Nicholas had taken it all back from their 
trembling bodies, pulled it out of them as he had 
clawed their living insides open. They had been 
sorry that they had done Jagang's bidding, that 
they had twisted him into something Creation never 
intended. 
   Not only had they made him into a Slide, they 
had given up their Han to him, and made him that 
much more powerful for it. 
   After each of those five women had died, the 
world had gone darker than dark for an instant when 
the Keeper had come and taken them to his realm. 
The Sisters had destroyed him that day, and they 
had created him. 
   He had a lifetime to explore and discover what 
he could do with his new abilities. 
   And, to be sure, Jagang would grant him payment 
for that night. Jagang would pay, but he would pay 
gladly, for Nicholas would give him something none 
but Nicholas the Slide could give him. 
   Nicholas would be rewarded with things enough to 

repay him for what had been done to him.... He 
hadn't decided, yet, what that reward would be, but 
it would be worthy of him. 
   He would use his ability to hold sway over 
lives—important lives. He no longer needed to cart 
people to the stakes. He knew how to take what he 
wanted, now. 
   Now he knew how to slip into their minds at the 
time of his choosing and take their souls. 
   He would trade those lives for what he would 
have in power, wealth, splendor. It would have to 
be something appropriate.... 
He would be an emperor. 
   It would have to be more than this petty empire 
of sheep, though. He would frolic in rule. He would 
have his every whim fulfilled, once he was given 
dominion over... over something important. He 
hadn't decided just what, yet. It was an important 
decision, what he would have as his reward. No need 
to rush it. It would come to him. 
   He turned from the window, the five spirits 
swirling within his, soaring through him. 
   It was time to use what he had pulled together. 
Time to get down to business, if he was to have 
what he wanted. 
   He would get closer, this time. He was 
frustrated from not being closer, from not seeing 
better. It was dark, now. He would get closer, this 
time, under cover of the darkness. 
   Nicholas took the broad bowl from the table and 
placed it on the floor before the five who still 
owned the spirits within him. They writhed in 
otherworldly agony, even the man not on a stake, an 
agony of both body and soul. 
   Nicholas sat cross-legged on the floor before 
the bowl. Hands on his knees, he threw his head 
back, eyes closed, as he gathered the power within, 
the power created by those wicked women, those 
wonderful wicked women. 
   They had considered him a pathetic wizard of 

little worth except as flesh and blood and gift to 
toy with—a sacrifice to a greater need. 
When he had time, he would go after the rest of 
them. 
   With a more immediate task at hand, Nicholas 
dismissed those Sisters from his mind. 
   Tonight, he would not merely watch through other 
eyes. Tonight, he would again go with the spirits 
he cast. 
   Tonight, he would not merely watch through other 
eyes. Tonight, his spirit would travel to them. 
   Nicholas opened his mouth as wide as it would 
go, his head rocking from side to side. The joined 
spirits within released a part of themselves into 
the bowl, whirling in a silken, silvery swirl lit 
with the soft glow of their link to the life behind 
him, placekeepers for their journey, a stitch in 
the world holding the knot in the thread of their 
travels. 
   His spirit, too, let slip a small portion to 
remain with his body, to drift in the bowl with the 
others. 
   Fragments of the five spirits revolved with the 
fragment of his, their light of life glowing softly 
in this safe place as he prepared to journey. He 
cast his own spirit away, then, leaving behind the 
husk of a body sitting on the floor behind him as 
he fled out into the dark sky, borne on the wings 
of his invested power. 
   No wizard before had ever been able to do as he, 
to leave his body and have his spirit soar to where 
his mind would send him. He raced through the 
night, fast as thought, to find what he hunted. 
   He felt the rush of air flowing over feathers. 
As quick as that, he had raced away through the 
night and was with them, pulling the five spirits 
along with him. 
   He summoned the dark forms into a circle with 
him, and, as they gathered around, cast the five 
spirits into them. His mouth was still open in a 

yawn that was not a yawn that back in a room 
somewhere distant let forth a cry to match the 
five. 
   As they circled, he felt the rush of air beneath 
their wings, felt their feathers working the wind 
to direct them as effortlessly as his own thought 
directed not only his spirit but the other five as 
well. 
   He sent those five racing through the night, to 
the place where he had sent the men. They raced 
over hills, turning to scan the open country, to 
look out over the barren land. The cloak of 
darkness felt cool, encasing him in obscure black 
night, obscure black feathers. 
   He caught the scent of carrion, sharp, cloying, 
tantalizing, as the five spiraled down toward the 
ground. Through their eyes that saw in the darkness 
Nicholas saw then the scene below, a place littered 
with the dead. Others of their kind had gathered to 
feed in a frenzy of ripping and gorging. 
No. This was wrong. He didn't see them. 
He had to find them. 
   He willed his charges up from the gory feast, to 
search. Nicholas felt a pang of urgency. This was 
his future that had slipped away from him—his 
treasure slipping through his grasp. He had to find 
them. Had to. 
He spurred his charges onward. 
   This way, that way, over there. Look, look, 
look. Find them, find them. Look. Must find them. 
Look. 
   This was not supposed to be. There had been 
enough men. No one could escape that many 
experienced men. Not when they came by stealth and 
attacked with surprise. They had been selected for 
their talents. They knew their business. 
   Their bodies lay sprawled all about. Beak and 
claw ripped at them. Screeches of excitement. 
Hunger. 
No. Must find them. 

Up, up, up. Find them. He had to find them. 
   He had suffered the agony of a new birth in 
those dark woods, those terrible woods, with those 
terrible women. He would have his reward. He would 
not be denied. Not now. Not after all that. 
Find them. Look, look, look. Find them. 
   On powerful wings, he soared into the night. 
With eyes that saw in the dark, he searched. With 
creatures that could catch the scent of prey at 
great distance, he tried for a whiff of them. 
Through the night they went, hunting. Hunting. 
   There, there he saw their wagon. He recognized 
their wagon. Their big horses. He had seen it 
before—seen them with it before. His minions 
circled in close on nearly silent wings, dropping 
in closer to see what Nicholas sought. 
   Not there. They weren't there. A trick. It had 
to be a trick. A diversion. Not there. They had 
sent the wagon away to trick him, to send him off 
their trail. 
   With wings powered by anger, he soared up, up, 
up to search the countryside. Hunt, hunt. Find 
them. He flew with his five in an ever wider 
pattern to search the ground beneath the night. 
They flew on, searching, searching. His hunger was 
their hunger. Hunt for them. Hunt. 
   The wings grew weary as he drove them onward. He 
had to find them. He would not allow rest. Not 
allow failure. He hunted in expanding swaths, 
searching, hunting, hunting. 
There, among the trees, he saw movement. 
   It was only just dark. They wouldn't see their 
pursuers—not in the dark—but he could see them. He 
forced the five down, circling, circling, forced 
them in close. He would not fail this time to see 
them, to get close enough. Circling, holding him 
there, circling, watching, circling, watching, 
seeing them there. 
   It was her! The Mother Confessor! He saw others. 
The one with red hair and her small four-legged 

friend. Others, too. He must be there, too. Had to 
be there, too. He would be there, too, as the small 
group moved west. 
   West. They moved west. They had traveled to the 
west of where he had seen them last. 
Nicholas laughed. They were coming west. The 
captors sent for them all lay dead, but here they 
came anyway. They were coming west. 
Toward where he waited. 
He would have them. 
He would have Lord Rahl and the Mother Confessor. 
Jagang would have them. 
   It came to him, then—his reward. What he would 
have in return for the prizes he would deliver. 
D'Hara. 
   He would have the rule of D'Hara in return for 
these two paltry people. Jagang would reward him 
with the rule of D'Hara, if he wanted those two. He 
would not dare deny Nicholas the Slide what he 
wanted. Not when he had what Jagang wanted most, 
more than any other prize. Jagang would pay any 
price for these two. 
   Pain. A scream. Shock, terror, confusion raged 
through him. He felt the wind, the wind that 
carried him so effortlessly, now ripping at him 
like fists snatching at feathers as he tumbled in 
helpless pain. 
One of the five falling at blinding speed smacked 
the ground. 
   Nicholas screamed. One of the five spirits had 
been lost with its host. Back somewhere distant, in 
some far-off room with wooden walls and shutters 
and bloody stakes, back, back, back in another 
place he had almost forgotten existed, back, back, 
back far away, a spirit was ripped from his 
control. 
   One of the five back there had died at the same 
instant the race had crashed to the ground. 
   Scream of hot pain. Another tumbled out of 
control. Another spirit escaped his grasp into the 

waiting arms of death. 
   Nicholas struggled to see in the confusion, 
forcing the remaining three to hold his vision in 
place so he could see. Hunt, hunt, hunt. Where was 
he? Where was he? Where? He saw the others. Where 
was Lord Rahl? 
A third scream. 
   Where was he? Nicholas fought to hold his vision 
despite the hot agony, the bewildering plummet. 
Pain ripped through a fourth. 
Before he could gather his senses, hold them 
together, force them with the power of his will to 
do his bidding, two more spirits were yanked away 
into the void of the underworld. 
Where was he? 
Talons at the ready, Nicholas searched. 
There! There! 
   With violent effort, he forced the race over 
into a dive. There he was! There he was! Up high. 
Higher than the rest. Somehow up high. Up on a 
ledge of rock above the rest. He wasn't down there 
with them. He was up high. 
Dive for him. Dive down for him. 
There he was, bow drawn. 
   Ripping pain tore through the last race. The 
ground rushed up at him. Nicholas cried out. He 
tried frantically to stop the spinning. He felt the 
race slam into the rock at frightening speed. But 
only for an instant. 
   With a gasp, Nicholas drew a desperate breath. 
His head spun with the burning torture of the 
abrupt return, an uncontrolled return not of his 
doing. 
   He blinked, his mouth open wide in an attempt to 
let out a cry, but no sound came. His eyes bulged 
with the effort, but no cry came. He was back. 
Whether or not he wanted to be, he was back. 
   He looked around at the room. He was back, that 
was the reason no cry came. No screech of a race 
joined his own. They were dead. All five. 

   Nicholas turned to the four impaled on stakes 
behind him. All four were slumped. The fifth man 
lay slouched in the far corner. All five limp and 
still. All five dead. Their spirits gone. 
   The room was as silent as a crypt. The bowl 
before him glowed only with the fragment of his own 
spirit. He drew it back in. 
   He sat in the stillness for a long time, waiting 
for his head to stop spinning. It had been a shock 
to be in a creature as it was killed—to have a 
spirit of a person in him as they died. As five of 
them died. It had been a surprise. 
   Lord Rahl was a surprising man. Nicholas hadn't 
thought, back that first time, that he would be 
able to get all five. He had thought it was luck. A 
second time was not luck. Lord Rahl was a 
surprising man. 
   Nicholas could cast his spirit out again if he 
wanted, seek out new eyes, but his head hurt and he 
didn't feel up to it; besides, it didn't matter. 
Lord Rahl was coming west. He was coming to the 
great empire of Bandakar. 
Nicholas owned Bandakar. 
The people here revered him. 
   Nicholas smiled. Lord Rahl was coming. He would 
be surprised at the kind of man he found when he 
arrived. Lord Rahl probably thought he knew all 
manner of men. 
He did not know Nicholas the Slide. 
   Nicholas the Slide, who would be emperor of 
D'Hara when he gave Jagang the prizes he sought 
most: the dead body of Lord Rahl, and the living 
body of the Mother Confessor. 
Jagang would have them both for himself. 
And in return, Nicholas would have their empire. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 29 
 

 
 
 
Ann heard the distant echo of footsteps coming down 
the long, empty, dark corridor outside the far door 
to her forgotten vault under the People's Palace, 
the seat of power in D'Hara. She was no longer sure 
if it was day or night. She'd lost track of time as 
she sat in the silent darkness. She saved the lamp 
for times when they brought food, or the times she 
wrote to Verna in the journey book. Or the times 
she felt so alone that she needed the company of a 
small flame, if nothing else. 
   In this place, within this spell of a palace for 
those born Rahl, her power was so diminished that 
it was all she could do to light that lamp. 
   She feared to use the little lamp too often and 
run out of oil; she didn't know if they would give 
her more. She didn't want to run out and only then 
find they would give her no more. She didn't want 
not to have at least the possibility of that small 
flame, that small gift of light. 
   In the dark she could do nothing but consider 
her life and all she had worked so hard to 
accomplish. For centuries she had led the Sisters 
of the Light in their effort to see the Creator's 
light triumph in the world, and see the Keeper of 
the underworld kept where he belonged, in his own 
realm, the world of the dead. For centuries she had 
waited in dread of the time that prophecy said was 
now upon them. 
   For five hundred years she had waited for the 
birth of the one who had the chance to succeed in 
leading them in the struggle to see the Creator's 
gift, magic, survive against those who would cast 
that light out of the world. For five hundred years 
she had worked to insure that he would have a 
chance to do what he must if he was to have a 
chance to stop the forces that would extinguish 
magic. 

   Prophecy said that only Richard had the chance 
to preserve their cause, to keep the enemy from 
succeeding in casting a gray pall over mankind, the 
only one with a chance to prevent the gift from 
dying out. Prophecy did not say that he would 
prevail; prophecy said only that Richard was the 
only one to have a chance to bring them victory. 
Without Richard, all hope was lost—that much was 
sure. For this reason, Ann had been devoted to him 
long before he was born, before he rose up to 
become their leader. 
   Kahlan saw all of Ann's efforts as meddling, as 
tinkering with the lives of others. Kahlan believed 
that Ann's efforts were in fact the cause of the 
very thing she feared most. Ann hated that she 
sometimes thought that maybe Kahlan was right. 
Maybe it was meant to be that Richard would be born 
and by his free will alone would choose to do those 
things that would lead them to victory in their 
battle to keep the gift among men. Zedd certainly 
believed that it was only by Richard's mind, by his 
free will, but his conscious intent, that he could 
lead them. 
   Maybe it was true, and Ann, in trying to direct 
those things that could not be and should not be 
directed, had brought them all to the brink of 
ruin. 
   The footsteps were coming closer. Maybe it was 
time to eat and they were bringing dinner. She 
wasn't hungry. 
   When they brought her food, they put it on the 
end of a long pole and then threaded that pole 
through the little opening in the outer door, all 
the way across the outer shielded room, through the 
opening in the second, inner door, and finally in 
to Ann. Nathan would risk no chance for escape by 
having her guards have to open her cell door merely 
to give her food. 
They passed in a variety of breads, meats, and 
vegetables along with waterskins. Although the food 

was good, she found no satisfaction in it. Even the 
finest fare could never be satisfying eaten in a 
dungeon. 
   At times, as Prelate, she had felt as if she 
were a prisoner of her post. She had rarely gone to 
the dining hall where the Sisters of the Light had 
eaten—especially in the later years. It put 
everyone on edge having the Prelate among them at 
dinner. Besides, done too often it took the edge 
off their anxiety, their discomposure, around 
authority. 
   Ann believed that a certain distance, a certain 
worried respect, was necessary in order to maintain 
discipline. In a place that had been spelled so 
that time slowed for those living there, it was 
important to maintain discipline. Ann appeared to 
be in her seventies, but with her aging process 
slowed dramatically while living under the spell 
that had covered the Palace of the Prophets, she 
had lived close to a thousand years. 
   Of course, a lot of good her discipline had done 
her. Under her watch as Prelate the Sisters of the 
Dark had infested her flock. There were hundreds of 
Sisters, and there was no telling just how many of 
them had taken dark oaths to the Keeper. The lure 
of his promises were obviously effective. Such 
promises were an illusion, but try to tell that to 
one so pledged. Immortality was seductive to women 
who watched everyone they knew outside the palace 
grow old and die while they remained young. 
   Sisters who had children saw those children sent 
out of the palace to be raised where they could 
have a normal life, saw those children grow old and 
die, saw their grandchildren grow old and die. To a 
woman who saw such things, saw the constant 
withering and death of those she knew while she 
herself all the time seemed to remain young, 
attractive, and desirable, the offer of immortality 
grew increasingly tempting when her own petals 
began to wilt. 

   Growing old was a final stage, the end of a 
life. Growing old in the Palace of the Prophets was 
a very long ordeal. Ann had been old for centuries. 
Being young for a very long time was a wonderful 
experience, but being old for a very long time was 
not—at least it was not for some. For Ann, it was 
life itself that was wonderful, not so much her 
age, and all she had learned. But not everyone felt 
that way. 
Now that the palace had been destroyed, they would 
all age at the same rate as everyone else. What had 
only a short time ago been a future of maybe 
another hundred years of life for Ann was suddenly 
perhaps no more than a blink of a decade—certainly 
not much more. 
   But she doubted she would live all that long in 
such a dank hole, away from light and life. 
   Somehow, it didn't seem as if she and Nathan 
were close to a thousand years old. She didn't know 
what it felt like to age at the normal rate outside 
the spell, but she believed she felt little 
different than those outside the palace felt as 
they aged. She believed that the spell that slowed 
their aging also altered their perception of time—
to a degree, anyway. 
   The footsteps were getting closer. Ann wasn't 
looking forward to another meal in this place. She 
was beginning to wish they would let her starve and 
get it over with. Let her die. 
   What good had her life been? When she really 
thought about it, what good had she really 
accomplished? The Creator knew how she tried to 
guide Richard in what needed to be done, but in the 
end it seemed that it was Richard's choice to act 
as he did, in most cases against what she thought 
needed to be done, that turned out to be correct. 
Had she not tried to guide events, bring him to the 
Palace of the Prophets in the Old World, maybe 
nothing would have changed and that would have been 
the way he was to save them all—by not having to 

act and letting Jagang and the Imperial Order 
eventually wither and die in the Old World, unable 
to spread their virulent beliefs beyond. Maybe 
she'd brought it all to ruin with her efforts 
alone. 
   She heard the door at the end of the passageway 
to her cell scrape open. She decided that she 
wouldn't eat. She wouldn't eat again until Nathan 
came to speak with her, as she had requested. 
   Sometimes, with the food, they sent in wine. 
Nathan sent it in to vex her, she was sure of that. 
From his confinement in the Palace of the Prophets, 
Nathan had sometimes requested wine. Ann always saw 
the report when such a request was made; she 
declined every such request. 
   Wizards were dangerous enough, prophets—who were 
wizards with the talent of prophecy—were 
potentially vastly more dangerous, and drunken 
prophets were the most dangerous of all. Prophecy 
given out willy-nilly was an invitation to 
calamity. Even simple prophecy escaping the 
confines of the stone walls of the Palace of the 
Prophets had started wars. 
   Nathan had sometimes requested the company of 
women. Ann hated those requests the most, because 
she sometimes granted them. She felt she had to. 
Nathan had little of life, confined as he was to 
his apartments, his only real crime being the 
nature of his birth, his abilities. The palace 
could easily afford the price of a woman to 
sometimes visit him. 
   He made a mockery of that, often enough—giving 
out prophecy that sent the woman fleeing before 
they could speak with her, before they could 
silence her. 
   Those without the proper training were not meant 
to see prophecy. Prophecy was easily misinterpreted 
by those without an understanding of its 
intricacies. To divulge prophecy to the uninitiated 
was like casting fire into dry grass. 

Prophecy is not meant for the unenlightened. 
   At the thought of the prophet being loose, Ann's 
stomach tightened into a knot. Even so, she had 
sometimes secretly taken Nathan out herself, to go 
on important journeys with her—mostly journeys 
having to do with guiding some aspect of Richard's 
life, or, more accurately, trying to insure that 
Richard would be born and have a life. Besides 
being trouble on two feet, Nathan was also a 
remarkable prophet who did have a sincere interest 
in seeing their side triumph. After all, he saw in 
prophecy the alternative, and when Nathan saw 
prophecy, he saw it in all its terrible truth. 
   Nathan always wore a Rada'Han—a collar—that 
enabled her, or any Sister, to control him, so 
taking him on those journeys wasn't actually 
putting the world at risk of the man. He had to do 
as she said, go where she said. Whenever she had 
taken him out on a mission with her, he was not 
really free, since he wore a Rada'Han and she could 
thus control him. 
Now he was without a Rada'Han. He was truly free. 
   Ann didn't want any supper. She resolved to turn 
it away when they passed the pole in to her. Let 
Nathan fret that she might refuse food altogether 
and die while under his fickle control. Ann folded 
her arms. 
   Let him have that on his conscience. That would 
bring the man down to see her. 
   Ann heard the footsteps come to a halt outside 
the far door. Muffled voices drifted in to her. Had 
she ready access to her Han, she would have been 
able to concentrate her hearing toward those voices 
and easily hear their words. She sighed. Even that 
ability was useless to her here, in this place, 
under the power invoked by the spell form of the 
layout of the palace. It would hardly make sense to 
create such elaborate plans to curtail another's 
magic and allow them to hear secrets whispered 
inside the walls. 

   The outer door squealed in protest as it was 
pulled open. This was new. No one had opened the 
outer door since the day they shut her in the 
place. 
   Ann rushed to the door to her small room, to the 
faint square of light that was the opening in the 
iron door. She grabbed hold of the bars and pulled 
her face up close, trying to see who was out there, 
what they were doing. 
   Light blinded her. She staggered back a few 
steps, rubbing her eyes. She was so used to the 
dark that the harsh lantern light felt as if it had 
burned her vision with blazing light. 
   Ann backed away from the door when she heard a 
key clattering in the lock. The bolt threw back 
with a reverberating clang. The door grated open. 
Cool air, fresher than the stale air she was used 
to breathing, poured in. Yellow light flooded 
around the room as the lantern was thrust into the 
room at the end of an arm encased in red leather. 
Mord-Sith. 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 30 
 
 
 
 
Ann squinted in the harsh glare as the Mord-Sith 
stepped over the sill and ducked in through the 
doorway into the room. Unaccustomed to the lantern 
light, Ann at first could only discern the red 
leather outfit and the blond braid. She didn't like 
to contemplate why one of the Lord Rahl's elite 
corps of torturers would be coming down to the 
dungeon to see her. She knew Richard. She could not 
imagine that he would allow such a practice to 

continue. But Richard wasn't here. Nathan seemed to 
be in charge. 
   Squinting, Ann at last realized that it was the 
woman she had seen before: Nyda. 
   Nyda, appraising Ann with a cool gaze, said 
nothing as she stepped to the side. Another person 
was following her in. A long leg wearing brown 
trousers stepped over the sill, followed by a bent 
torso folding through the opening. Rising up to 
full height, Ann saw with sudden surprise who it 
was. 
   "Ann!" Nathan held his arms open wide, as if 
expecting a hug. "How are you? Nyda gave me your 
message. They are treating you well, I trust?" 
   Ann stood her ground and scowled at the grinning 
face. "I'm still alive, no thanks to you, Nathan." 
She of course remembered how tall Nathan was, how 
broad were his shoulders. Now, standing before her, 
the top of his full head of long gray hair nearly 
touching the stone chisel marks in the ceiling, he 
looked even taller than she remembered. His 
shoulders, filling up so much of the small room, 
looked even broader. He wore high boots over his 
trousers and a ruffled white shirt beneath an open 
vest. An elegant green velvet cape was attached at 
his right shoulder. At his left hip a sword in an 
elegant scabbard glimmered in the lamplight. 
   His face, his handsome face, so expressive, so 
unlike any other, made Ann's heart feel buoyant. 
   Nathan grinned as no one but a Rahl could grin, 
a grin like joy and hunger and power all balled 
together. He looked like he needed to sweep a 
damsel into his powerful arms and kiss her without 
her permission. 
   He waved a hand casually around at her 
accommodations. "But you are safe in here, my dear. 
No one can harm you while under our care. No one 
can bother you. You have fine food—even wine now 
and again. What more could you want?" 
   Fists at her side, Ann stormed forward at a pace 

that brought the Mord-Sith's Agiel up into her 
fist, even though she stayed where she was. Nathan 
held his ground, held his smile, as he watched her 
come. 
   "What more could I want!" Ann screamed. "What 
more could I want? I want to be let out! That's 
what more I could want!" 
   Nathan's small, knowing smile cut her to her 
core. "Indeed," he said, a single word of quiet 
indictment. 
   Standing in the stony silence of the dungeon, 
she could only stare up at him, unable to bring 
forth an argument that he would not throw back at 
her. 
   Ann turned a glare on the Mord-Sith. "What 
message did you give him?" 
   "Nyda said that you wanted to see me," Nathan 
answered in her place. He spread his arms. "Here I 
am, as requested. What is it you wanted to see me 
about, my dear?" 
   "Don't patronize me, Nathan. You know very well 
what I wanted to see you about. You know why I'm 
here, in D'Hara—why I've come to the People's 
Palace." 
   Nathan clasped his hands behind his back. His 
smile had finally lost its usefulness. 
   "Nyda," he said, turning to the woman, "would 
you leave us alone for now. There's a good girl." 
   Nyda appraised Ann with a brief glance. No more 
was needed; Ann was no threat to Nathan. He was a 
wizard—no doubt he had told her that he was the 
greatest wizard of all time—and was within the 
ancestral home of the House of Rahl. He had no need 
to fear this one old sorceress—not anymore, anyway. 
   Nyda gave Nathan a if-you-need-me-I'll-be-right-
outside kind of look before contorting her perfect 
limbs through the doorway with fluid grace, the way 
a cat went effortlessly through a hedge. 
   Nathan stood in the center of the cell, hands 
still clasped behind his upright back, waiting for 

Ann to say something. 
   Ann went to her pack, sitting on the far end of 
the stone bench that had been her bed, her table, 
her chair. She flipped back the flap and reached 
inside, feeling around. Her fingers found the cold 
metal of the object she sought. Ann drew it out and 
stood over it, her shadow hiding it. 
Finally, she turned. "Nathan, I have something for 
you." 
   She lifted out a Rada'Han she had intended to 
put around his neck. Right then, she didn't quite 
know how she had thought she could accomplish such 
a feat. She would have, though, had she put her 
mind to it; she was Annalina Aldurren, Prelate of 
the Sisters of the Light. Or, at least, she once 
had been. She had given that job to Verna before 
feigning her and Nathan's death. 
   "You want me to put that collar around my neck?" 
Nathan asked in a calm voice. "That's what you 
expect?" 
   Ann shook her head. "No, Nathan. I want to give 
this to you. I've been doing a lot of thinking 
while I've been down here. Thinking about how I'd 
probably never leave my place of confinement." 
   "What a coincidence," Nathan said. "I used to 
spend a great deal of time thinking that very same 
thought." 
   "Yes," Ann said, nodding. "I expect you did." 
She handed him the Rada'Han. "Here. Take this. I 
never want to see one of these again. 
   While I did what I thought best, I hated every 
minute of it, Nathan. I hated to do it to you, 
especially. I've come to think that my life has 
been a misguided mess. I'm sorry I ever put you 
behind those shields and kept you a prisoner. If I 
could live my life over again, I'd not do it the 
same way. 
"I expect no leniency; I showed you none." 
"No," Nathan said. "You didn't." 
   His azure eyes seemed to be looking right into 

her. He had a way of doing that. Richard had 
inherited that same penetrating Rahl gaze. 
   "So, you are sorry you kept me a prisoner all my 
life. Do you know why it was wrong, Ann? Are you 
even aware of the irony?" 
   Almost against her better judgment, she heard 
herself ask, "What irony?" 
"Well," he said as he shrugged, "what is it we're 
fighting for?" 
"Nathan, you know very well what we're fighting 
for." 
   "Yes, I do. But do you? Tell me, then, what it 
is we're struggling to protect, to preserve, to 
insure remains alive?" 
   "The Creator's gift of magic, of course. We 
fight to see that it continues to exist in the 
world. We struggle for those who are born with it 
to live, for them to learn to use their ability to 
its full extent. We fight for each to have and to 
celebrate their unique ability." 
   "I think that's kind of ironic, don't you? The 
very thing you think is worth fighting for is what 
you feared. The Imperial Order proclaims that it's 
not in the best interest of mankind for a gifted 
individual to possess magic, so that unique ability 
must be stripped away from them. They claim that, 
since all do not have this ability in identical and 
equal measure, it's dangerous for some to have it—
that man must cast aside the belief that a man's 
life is his own to live. That those who were born 
with magic must therefore be expunged from the 
world in order to make the world a better place for 
those who don't have such ability. 
   "And yet, you worked under that very premise, 
acted on those same wicked beliefs. You locked me 
away because of my ability. You saw what I am able 
to do, that others cannot do, as an evil birthright 
that could not be allowed to be among mankind. 
   "And yet, you work to preserve that very thing 
which you fear in me—my unique ability—in others. 

You work to allow everyone born with magic to have 
the inalienable right to their own life, to be the 
best of what they can be with their own ability .. 
. and yet you locked me away to deny me that very 
same right." 
   "Just because I want the Creator's wolves to run 
free to hunt, as they were intended, doesn't mean 
that I want to be their dinner." 
   Nathan leaned toward her. "I am not a wolf. I am 
a human being. You tried, convicted, and sentenced 
me to life in your prison for being who I was born, 
for what you feared I might do, simply because I 
had the ability. You then soothed your own inner 
conflict by making that prison plush in an attempt 
to convince yourself that you were kind— all the 
while professing to believe that we must fight to 
allow future people to be who they are. 
   "You qualified your prison as right because it 
was lavish, in order to mask from yourself the 
nature of what you were advocating. Look around, 
Ann." He swept his arm out at the stone. "This is 
what you were advocating for those you decided did 
not have the right to their own life. You decided 
the same as the Order, based on an ability you did 
not like. You decided that some, because of their 
greater potential, must be sacrificed to the good 
of those less than they. No matter how you 
decorated your dungeon, this is what it looks like 
from the inside." 
   Ann gathered her thoughts, as well as her voice, 
before she spoke. "I thought I had come to 
understand something like that while I sat all 
alone down here, but I realize now that I hadn't, 
really. All those years I felt bad for locking you 
away, but I never really examined my rationale for 
doing so. 
   "You're right, Nathan. I believed you held the 
potential for great harm. I should have helped you 
to understand what was right so you could act 
rationally, rather than expect the worst from you 

and lock you away. I'm sorry, Nathan." 
He put his hands on his hips. "Do you really mean 
it, Ann?" 
   She nodded, unable to look up at him, as her 
eyes filled with tears. She always expected honesty 
from everyone else, but she had not been honest 
with herself. "Yes, Nathan, I really do." 
   Confession over, she went to her bench and 
slumped down. "Thank you for coming, Nathan. I'll 
not trouble you to come down here again. I will 
take my just punishment without complaint. If you 
don't mind, 
   I think I'd like to be alone right now to pray 
and consider the weight on my heart."  
   "You can do that later. Now get up off your 
bottom, on your feet, and pick up your things. We 
have matters to attend to and we have to get 
going." 
Ann looked up with a frown. "What?" 
   "We have important things to do. Come on, woman. 
We're wasting time. We need to get going. We're on 
the same side in this struggle, Ann. We need to act 
like it and work together toward preserving our 
causes." He leaned down toward her. "Unless you've 
decided to retire to sit around the rest of your 
life. If not, then let's be on our way. We have 
trouble." 
   Ann hopped down from the stone bench. "Trouble? 
What sort of trouble." 
"Prophecy trouble." 
   "Prophecy? There is trouble with a prophecy? 
What trouble? What prophecy?" 
   Fists on his nips, Nathan fixed her with a 
scowl. "I can't tell you about such things. 
Prophecy is not meant for the unenlightened." 
   Ann pursed her lips, about to launch into 
scolding him up one side and down the other, when 
she caught the smile working at the edges of his 
mouth. It caught her up in a smile of her own. 
   "What's happened?" she asked in the tone of 

voice friends used when they had decided that past 
wrongs were recognized and matters now set on a 
correct path. 
   "Ann, you'll not believe it when I tell you," 
Nathan complained. "It's that boy, again." 
"Richard?" 
   "What other boy do you know who can get in the 
kind of trouble only Richard can get into." 
"Well, I no longer think of Richard as a boy." 
   Nathan sighed. "I suppose not, but it's hard 
when you're my age to think of one so young as a 
man." 
"He's a man," Ann assured him. 
"Yes, I guess he is." Nathan grinned. "And, he's a 
Rahl." 
"What sort of trouble has Richard gotten himself 
into this time?" 
Nathan's good humor evaporated. "He's walked off 
the edge of prophecy." 
   Ann screwed up her face. "What are you talking 
about? What's he done?" 
   "I'm telling you, Ann, that boy has walked right 
off the edge of prophecy itself—walked right off 
into a place in prophecy where prophecy itself 
doesn't exist." 
   Ann recognized that Nathan was sincerely 
troubled, but he was making no sense. In part, that 
was why some people were afraid of him. He often 
gave people the impression he was talking gibberish 
when he was talking about things that no one but he 
could even understand. Sometimes no one but a 
prophet could truly understand completely what he 
grasped. With his eyes, the eyes of a prophet, he 
could see things that no one else could. 
   She had spent a lifetime working with prophecy, 
though, and so she could understand, perhaps better 
than most, at least some of his mind, some of what 
he could grasp. 
   "How can you know of such a prophecy, Nathan, if 
it doesn't exist? I don't understand. Explain it to 

me." 
   "There are libraries here, at the People's 
Palace, that contain some valuable books of 
prophecy that I've never had a chance to see 
before. While I had reason to suspect that such 
prophecies might exist, I was never certain they 
actually did, or what they might say. I've been 
studying them since I've been here and I've come 
across links to other known prophecy we had down in 
the vaults at the Palace of the Prophets. These 
prophecies, here, fill in some important gaps in 
those we already know about. 
   "Most importantly, I found an altogether new 
branch of prophecy I've never seen before that 
explains why and how I've been blind to some of 
what's been going on. From studying the forks and 
inversions off of this branch, I've discovered that 
Richard has taken a series of links that follow 
down a particular pathway of prophecy that leads to 
oblivion, to something that, as far as I can tell, 
doesn't even exist." 
   One hand on a hip, the other tracing invisible 
lines in the air, Nathan paced the small room as he 
talked. "This new link alludes to things I've never 
seen before, branches that I've always known must 
be there, but were missing. These branches are 
exceedingly dangerous prophecies that have been 
kept here, in secret. I can see why. Even I, had I 
seen them years ago, might have misinterpreted 
them. These new branches refer to voids of some 
sort. Since they are voids, their nature can't be 
known; such a contradiction can't exist. 
   "Richard has gone into this area of void, where 
prophecy can't see him, can't help him, and worse, 
can't help us. But more than not seeing him with 
prophecy, it's as if where he is and what he is 
doing do not exist. 
   "Richard is dealing in something that is capable 
of ending everything we know." 
   Ann knew that Nathan would not exaggerate about 

something of this nature. While she was in the dark 
about precisely what he was talking about, the 
essence of it gave her the cold sweats. 
"What can we do about it?" 
   Nathan threw up his arms. "We have to go in 
there and get him. We have to bring him back into 
the world that exists." 
"You mean, the world that prophecy says exists." 
   Nathan's scowl was back. "That's what I said, 
isn't it? We have to somehow get him back on the 
thread of prophecy where he shows up." 
Ann cleared her throat. "Or?" 
   Nathan snatched up the lamp, then her pack. "Or, 
he will cease to be part of viable lines of 
prophecy, never to be involved with matters of this 
world again." 
   "You mean, if we don't get him back from 
wherever his is, he will die?" 
   Nathan gave her a curious look. "Have I been 
talking to the walls? Of course he will die! If 
that boy isn't in prophecy, if he breaks all the 
links to prophecy where he plays a role, then he 
voids all those lines of prophecy where he exists. 
If he does that, then they become false prophecy 
and those branches with word of him will never come 
to pass. None of the other links contain any 
reference to him—because in the origin of those 
links, he dies, first." 
"And what happens on those links that don't contain 
him?" 
Nathan took up her hand as he pulled her toward the 
door. "On those links, a shadow falls over 
everyone. Everyone who lives, anyway. It will be a 
very long and very dark age." 
"Wait," Ann said, pulling him to a halt. 
   She returned to the stone bench and placed the 
Rada'Han in the center. "I don't have the power to 
destroy this. I think maybe it should be locked 
away." 
   Nathan nodded his approval. "We will lock the 

doors and instruct the guards that it is to remain 
in here, behind the shields, for all time." 
   Ann held a warning finger up before him. "Don't 
get the idea that just because you're not wearing a 
collar I will tolerate misbehavior." 
   Nathan's grin returned. He didn't come right out 
and agree. Before he went through the door, he 
turned back to her. 
   "By the way, have you been talking to Verna 
through your journey book?" 
   "Yes, a little. She's with the army and pretty 
busy, right now. They're defending the passes into 
D'Hara. Jagang has begun his siege." 
   "Well, from what I've been able to gather from 
military commanders here, at the palace, the passes 
are formidable and will hold for a while, at 
least." He leaned toward her. "You have to send a 
message to her, though. Tell her that when an empty 
wagon rolls into their line, to let it through." 
Ann made a face. "What does that mean?" 
"Prophecy is not meant for the unenlightened. Just 
tell her." 
   "All right," Ann said with breathless difficulty 
as Nathan pulled her through the tight doorway. 
"But I'd best not tell her you're the one who said 
it, or she will likely ignore the advice. She 
thinks you're daft, you know." 
   "She just never got a chance to come to know me 
very well, that's all." He glanced back. "What with 
me being unjustly locked away, and all." 
   Ann wanted to say that perhaps Verna knew Nathan 
all too well, but decided better of it right then. 
As Nathan started to turn toward the outer door, 
Ann snatched his sleeve. 
   "Nathan, what else about this prophecy you found 
aren't you telling me? This prophecy where Richard 
disappears into oblivion." 
   She knew Nathan well enough to know by his 
agitation that he hadn't told her everything, that 
he thought he was being gallant by sparing her 

worry. With a sober expression, he gazed into her 
eyes for a time before he finally spoke. 
"There is a Slide on that fork of prophecy." 
   Ann frowned as she turned her eyes up in 
thought. "A Slide. A Slide," she muttered to 
herself, trying to recall the name. It sounded 
familiar. "A Slide . . ." She snapped her fingers. 
"A Slide." Her eyes went wide. "Dear Creator." 
"I don't think the Creator had anything to do with 
this." 
   Ann impatiently waved in protest. "That can't 
be. There has to be something wrong with this new 
prophecy you found. It has to be defective. Slides 
were created in the great war. There couldn't be a 
Slide on this link of prophecy—don't you see? The 
prophecy must be out of phase and long ago 
expired." Ann chewed her lower lip as her mind 
raced. 
   "It isn't out of phase. Don't you think that was 
my first thought, too? You think me an amateur at 
this? I worked through the chronology a hundred 
times. I ran every chart and calculation I ever 
learned—even some I invented for the task. They all 
came out with the same root. Every link came out in 
order. The prophecy is in phase, chronology, and 
all its aspects are aligned." 
   "Then it's a false link," Ann insisted. "Slides 
were conjured creatures. They were sterile. They 
couldn't reproduce." 
   "I'm telling you," Nathan growled, "there is a 
Slide on this fork with Richard and it's a viable 
prophetic link." 
   "They couldn't have survived to be here." Ann 
was sure of what she was saying. Nathan knew more 
about prophecy than she, there was no doubt of 
that, but this was one area where she knew exactly 
what she was talking about—this was her area of 
expertise. "Slides weren't able to beget children." 
   He was giving her one of those looks she didn't 
like. "I'm telling you, a Slide walks the world 

again." 
Ann tsked. "Nathan, soul stealers can't reproduce." 
"The prophecy says he wasn't born, but born again a 
Slide." 
Ann's flesh began to tingle. She stared at him a 
time before finding her voice. "For three thousand 
years there have been no wizards born with both 
sides of the gift but Richard. There is no way 
anyone ..." 
   Ann paused. He was watching her, watching her 
finally realize what had to be. "Dear Creator," she 
whispered. 
   "I told you, the Creator had nothing to do with 
this. The Sisters of the Dark mothered him." 
Shaken to her core, Ann could think of nothing to 
say. 
There was no worse news she could have heard. 
There was no defense against a Slide. 
Every soul was naked to a Slide's attack. 
   Outside the second door, Nyda waited in the 
hall, her face as grim as ever, but not as grim as 
Ann's. The hall was dark but for the dim light 
coming from the still flames of a few candles. No 
breath of wind ever made it this deep into the 
palace. The only color among the dark rock soaking 
up that small bit of light was the blood red of 
Nyda's red leather. 
   Being pulled along by the hand, feeling a jumble 
of emotions, Ann leaned toward the woman and vented 
a pent-up fiery scowl. "You told him what I said to 
tell him, didn't you?" 
   "Of course," Nyda answered as she fell into step 
behind the two of them. 
   Turning halfway around, Ann shook a finger at 
the Mord-Sith. "I'll make you sorry you told him." 
Nyda smiled. "Oh, I don't think so." 
   Ann rolled her eyes and turned back to Nathan. 
"By the way, what are you doing wearing a sword? 
You, of all people—a wizard. Why are you wearing a 
sword?" 

   Nathan looked hurt. "Why, Nyda thinks I look 
dashing with a sword." 
   Ann fixed her eyes on the dark passageway ahead. 
"I just bet she does." 
 
          
 
 
 
 
          CHAPTER 31 
 
 
 
 
 
Standing at the edge of a narrow rim of rock, 
Richard looked down on the ragged gray wisps of 
clouds below. Out in the open, the cool damp air 
that drifted over him carried the aromas of balsam 
trees, moss, wet leaves, and saturated soil. He 
inhaled deeply the fragrant reminders of home. The 
rock, mostly granite, cracked and weather-worn into 
pillowed blocks, looked much the same as that in 
his Hartland woods. The mountains, however, were 
far larger. The slope rising up behind him was 
dizzying. 
   To the west before him, far below, lay a vast 
stretch of fractured ground and ever-rising rugged 
hills carpeted in forests. To his left and right, 
because he knew what he was looking for, he could 
just make out the strip of ground, devoid of trees, 
where the boundary had been. Farther off to the 
west rose up the lesser mountains, mostly barren, 
that bordered the wasteland. That wasteland, and 
the place called the Pillars of Creation, was no 
longer visible. Richard was happy to have left it 
far behind. 
   The sky was empty of black-tipped races—for the 
moment, anyway. The huge birds most likely knew 

that Richard, Kahlan, Cara, Jennsen, Tom, and Owen 
were heading west. 
   Richard had shot the last five races as they had 
begun gathering in their circling behavior, 
surprising them by being high up the side of the 
mountain above the others in his group, closer to 
where the races flew. After killing the races, 
Richard had led the rest of his small company into 
denser woods. He didn't think that the races they'd 
been seeing up until then had spotted them since. 
Now that they were traveling through forests of 
towering trees Richard thought that, if he was 
careful, they might be able to lose their watchers. 
   If this man, Nicholas, had seen them through the 
eyes of those five races, then he knew they had 
been headed west. But, now that they were hidden, 
he couldn't assume that they would continue west. 
If Richard could disappear from where the birds 
would look for him, and failed to appear where they 
would expect him, then Nicholas might have second 
thoughts. He might realize they could have changed 
direction and gone north, or south. Nicholas might 
then begin to realize that they had used that 
period of confusion to run away somewhere else, to 
flee him. 
   It was possible that Richard could keep them 
hidden under the cover of the trees and in so doing 
keep Nicholas from discovering them. Richard didn't 
want the man to know where they'd gone, or to have 
any idea where they were at any given time. It was 
hardly a certainty that he could deceive Nicholas 
in this way, but Richard intended to try. 
   Shielding his eyes with the flat of his hand, 
Richard scanned the rise of dense forest before 
them in order to get the lay of the land fixed in 
his mind before he headed back in under the thick 
vegetation where the others waited. The trailers of 
clouds below were but the tattered castoffs of the 
churning blanket of gloom above them. The 
mountainside ascended sharply into that wet 

overcast. 
   As Richard evaluated the rock, the slope, and 
the trees, he finally found what he sought. He 
studied the ascent of the mountain one last time 
before scanning the sky again to make sure it was 
clear. Seeing no races—or any other birds, for that 
matter—he headed in to where the others waited. He 
knew that just because he didn't see any birds 
didn't mean that they weren't there watching him. 
There could be a few dozen races sitting in trees 
where he would likely never spot them. But, for the 
moment, he was still where they would expect him, 
so he wasn't greatly concerned. 
He was about to do what they would not expect. 
Richard climbed back up the slick bank of moss, 
leaves, and wet roots. If he fell, he would have 
only the one chance to grab the small ledge where 
he'd been standing before he would tumble out into 
the clear air and a drop of several thousand feet. 
The thought of that drop made him hold tighter to 
the roots to help him climb, and made him test 
carefully every score in the rock where he placed 
his boot before committing his weight to it. 
   At the top of the bank he ducked under 
overhanging branches of scrawny mountain maple that 
grew in the understory of hardwoods leaning out 
beside the towering pines in an effort to capture 
the light. Leaves of the ash and birch rising above 
the mountain maple collected the drixzle, until 
their leaves had as much as they could hold and 
released it to patter down in fat drops that 
slapped the lower leaves above Richard's head. When 
a light breeze caught those upper leaves, they 
released their load to rain down in sudden but 
brief torrents. 
   Stooping under low-spreading branches of fir 
trees, Richard followed his track back through 
thickets of huckleberry into the more open ground 
of the hushed woods beneath the thick canopy of 
ancient evergreens. Pine needles had been woven by 

the wind into sprawling mats that cushioned his 
steps. Spiraling webs hung by spiders to catch the 
small bugs that zigzagged all about had instead 
netted the mist and were now dotted with shimmering 
drops of water, like jeweled necklaces on display. 
   Back in the sheltering cover of rock and the 
thick growth of young spruce, Kahlan stood when she 
saw Richard coming. When she stood, everyone else 
then saw him, and came to their feet as well. 
Richard ducked in under the wispy green branches. 
   "Did you see any races, Lord Rahl?" Owen asked, 
clearly nervous about the predators. 
   "No," Richard told him as he picked up his pack 
and slung it over a shoulder. He slipped his other 
arm beneath the second strap as he pulled the pack 
up onto his back. "That doesn't mean they didn't 
see me, though." 
   Richard hooked his bow over the back of his left 
shoulder, along with a waterskin. 
   "Well," Owen said, wringing his hands, "we can 
still hope they won't know where we are." 
Richard paused to look at the man. "Hope is not a 
strategy." 
   As the rest of them all started collecting their 
things from the brief break, hooking gear on belts 
and shouldering packs, Richard drew Cara by the arm 
out of the cover of small trees and pulled her 
close. 
   "See that rise through there?" he asked as he 
held her near him so she could see where he was 
pointing. "With the strip of open ground that 
passes in front of the young oak with the broken 
dead limb hanging down?" 
   Cara nodded. "Just after where the ground rises 
and goes over that trickle of water running down 
the face of the rock, staining it green?" 
   "That's the spot. I want you to follow up over 
that area, then cut to the right, taking that cleft 
up—that one there beyond the split in the rock, 
there—and see if you can scout a trail up to the 

next shelf up above these trees here." 
Cara nodded. "Where will you be?" 
   "I'm going to take the rest of us up to the 
first break in the slope. We'll be there. Come back 
and tell us if you find a way over the projection." 
   Cara hoisted up her pack onto her back and then 
picked up the stout staff Richard had cut for her. 
"I didn't know that Mord-Sith could cut trails," 
Tom said. 
"Mord-Sith can't," Cara said. "I, Cara, can. Lord 
Rahl taught me." 
   As she vanished into the trees, Richard watched 
her walk. She moved gracefully, disturbing little 
as she made her way into the trackless woods. She 
moved with an economy of effort that would conserve 
her energy. It had not always been so; she had 
learned well the lessons he had given her. Richard 
was pleased to see that the lessons had stuck and 
his efforts had not been wasted. 
   Owen came forward, looking agitated. "But Lord 
Rahl, we can't go that way." He waggled a hand back 
over his shoulder. "The trail goes that way. That 
is the only way up and through the pass. There lies 
the way down, and with it the way back up, now that 
the boundary is gone. It's not easy, but it's the 
only way." 
   "It's the only way you know of. By how well that 
trail looks to be traveled, I think it's the only 
way Nicholas knows of as well. It appears to be the 
way the Order troops move in and out of Bandakar. 
   "If we go that way the races will be watching. 
If, on the other hand, we don't show up, then/he 
won't know where we went. I want to keep it that 
way from now on. I'm tired of playing mouse to his 
owl." 
   Richard let Kahlan lead them up through the 
woods, following the natural route of the land when 
the way ahead was reasonably evident. When she was 
in doubt she would glance back at him for 
direction. Richard would look where she was to go, 

or nod in the direction he wanted her to take, or, 
in a few cases, he needed to give her instruction. 
   By the lay of the land, Richard was pretty sure 
that there was an ancient trail up through the 
mountain pass. That pass, that from afar looked 
like a notch in the wall of mountains, was in 
reality no mere notch but a broad area twisting as 
it rose back up between the mountains. Richard 
didn't think that the path that the Bandakar people 
used to banish people through the boundary was the 
only way through that pass. With the boundary in 
place it may well have been, but the boundary was 
no longer there. 
   From what he'd seen so far, Richard suspected 
that there once had been a route that in ancient 
times had been the main way in and out. Here and 
there he was able to discern depressions that he 
believed were remnants of that ancient, abandoned 
route. 
   While it was always possible that the old 
passage had been abandoned for good reason, such as 
a landslide that made it impassable, he wanted to 
know if that once traveled way was still usable. It 
would, at the least, since it was in a different 
part of the mountains than the known path, take 
them away from where the races were likely to be 
looking for them. 
   Jennsen walked up close beside Richard when the 
way through towering pines was open enough. She 
tugged Betty along by her rope, keeping her from 
stopping to sample plants along the way. 
   "Sooner or later the races will find us, don't 
you think?" Jennsen asked. "I mean, if we don't 
show up where they expect to find us, then don't 
you think they will search until they do find us? 
You were the one who said that from the sky they 
could cover great distances and search us out." 
   "Maybe," Richard said. "But it will be hard to 
spot us in the woods if we use our heads and stay 
hidden. In forests they can't search nearly as much 

area as they could in the same amount of time out 
in the wasteland. In open ground they could spot us 
miles away. Here, they will have a hard time of it 
unless they're really close and we are careless. 
   "By the time we don't show up where the known 
trail makes it up into Bandakar, they will have a 
vast area they suddenly will need to search and 
they won't have any idea which direction to look. 
That compounds the problem for them in finding us. 
   "I don't think that the viewing Nicholas gets 
through their eyes can be very good, or he wouldn't 
need to gather the races now and again to circle. 
If we can stay out of sight long enough, then we'll 
be among the people up in Bandakar and then 
Nicholas, through the eyes of the races, will have 
a hard, if not impossible, time picking us out from 
others." 
   Jennsen thought it over as they entered a stand 
of birch. Betty went the wrong way around a tree 
and Jennsen had to stop to untangle her rope. They 
all hunched their shoulders against the wet when a 
breeze brought down a soaking shower. 
   "Richard," Jennsen asked in a voice barely above 
a whisper as she caught back up with him, "what are 
you going to do when we get there?" 
"I'm going to get the antidote so I don't die." 
   "I know that." Jennsen pulled a sodden ringlet 
of red hair back from her face. "What I mean is, 
what are you going to do about Owen's people?" 
   Each breath he drew brought a slight stitch of 
pain deep in his lungs. "I'm not sure, yet, just 
what I can do." 
   Jennsen walked in silence for a moment. "But you 
will try to help them, won't you?" 
   Richard glanced over at his sister. "Jennsen, 
they're threatening to kill me. They've proven that 
it isn't an empty threat." 
   She shrugged uncomfortably. "I know, but they're 
desperate." She glanced ahead to make sure that 
Owen wouldn't hear. "They didn't know what else to 

do to save themselves. They aren't like you. They 
never fought anyone before." 
   Richard took a deep breath, the pain pulling 
tight across his chest when he did so. "You'd never 
fought anyone before, either. When you thought I 
was trying to kill you, as our father had, and you 
believed that I was responsible for your mother's 
death, what did you do? I don't mean were you 
correct about me, but what did you do in response 
to what you believed was happening?" 
   "I resolved that if I wanted to live I would 
have to kill you before you killed me." 
   "Exactly. You didn't poison someone and tell 
them to do it or they would die. You decided that 
your life was worth living and that no one else had 
the right to take it from you. 
   "When you are willing to meekly sacrifice your 
ultimate value, your life, the only one you will 
ever have, to any thug who on a whim decides to 
take it from you, then you can't be helped. You may 
be able to be rescued for one day, but the next day 
another will come and you will again willingly 
prostrate yourself before him. You have placed the 
value of the life of your killer above your own. 
   "When you grant to anyone who demands it the 
right of life or death over you, you have already 
become a willing slave in search of any butcher who 
will have you." 
   She walked in silence for a time, thinking about 
what he'd said. Richard noticed that she moved 
through the woods as he had taught Cara to move. 
She was nearly as at home in the woods as he was. 
   "Richard." Jennsen swallowed. "I don't want 
those people to be hurt any more. They've already 
suffered enough." 
"Tell that to Kahlan if I die from their poison." 
   When they reached the meeting place, Cara wasn't 
there yet. They all were ready for a brief rest. 
The spot, a break in the slope back against granite 
that rose up steeply to the next projection in the 

mountain, was protected high overhead by huge pines 
and closer down by brush. After so long out in the 
heat of the desert, none of them were yet 
accustomed to the wet chill. While they spread out 
to find rocks for seats so they wouldn't have to 
sit in the wet leaf litter, Betty happily sampled 
the tasty weeds. Owen sat to the far side, away 
from Betty. 
   Kahlan sat close to Richard on a small lump of 
rock. "How are you doing? You look like you have a 
headache." 
"Nothing to be done about it for now," he said. 
Kahlan leaned closer. The warmth of her felt good 
against his side. 
"Richard," she whispered, "remember Nicci's 
letter?" 
"What about it?" 
   "Well, we assumed that this boundary into 
Bandakar being down was the reason for the first 
warning beacon. Maybe we're wrong." 
"What makes you think so?" 
   "No second beacon." She pointed with her chin 
off to the northwest. "We saw the first way back 
down there. We're a lot closer to the place where 
the boundary was and we haven't spotted a second 
beacon." 
   "Just as well," he said. "That was where the 
races were waiting for us." 
   He remembered well when they found the little 
statue. The races were perched in trees all around. 
Richard hadn't known what they were at the time, 
other than they were large birds he'd never seen 
before. The instant Cara picked up the statue, the 
black-tipped races had all suddenly taken to wing. 
There had been hundreds. 
   "Yes," Kahlan said, "but without the second 
beacon, maybe this isn't the problem that we 
thought caused the first." 
   "You're assuming that the second beacon will be 
for me—that I'm the one it will be meant for and so 

we would have seen it. Nicci said that the second 
beacon is for the one who has the power to fix the 
breach in the seal. Maybe that's not me." 
   Looking at first startled by the idea, Kahlan 
thought it over. "I'm not sure if I'd be pleased 
about that or not." She leaned tighter against him 
and hooked an arm around his thigh. "But no matter 
who is meant to be the one who can seal the breach 
again, the one who's supposed to restore the 
boundary, I don't think they will be able to do 
so." 
   Richard ran his fingers back through his wet 
hair. "Well, if I'm the one this dead wizard once 
believed could restore the boundary, he's wrong. I 
don't know how to do such a thing." 
   "But don't you see, Richard? Even if you did 
know how, I don't think you could." 
   Richard looked at her out of the corner of his 
eye. "Jumping to conclusions and letting your 
imagination get carried away, again?" 
   "Richard, face it, the boundary failed because 
of what I did. That's why the warning beacon was 
for me—because I caused the seal to fail. You 
aren't going to try to deny that, are you?" 
   "No, but we have a lot to learn before we know 
what's really going on." 
   "I freed the chimes," she said. "It's not going 
to do us any good to try to hide from that fact." 
   Kahlan had used ancient magic to save his life. 
She had freed the chimes in order to heal him. 
She'd had no time to spare; he would have died 
within moments if she had not acted. 
   Moreover, she'd had no idea that the chimes 
would unleash destruction upon the world. She 
hadn't known they had been created three thousand 
years before from underworld powers as a weapon 
designed to consume magic. She had been told only 
that she must use them to save Richard's life. 
   Richard knew what it felt like to be convinced 
of the facts behind events and to have no one 

believe him. He knew she was now feeling that same 
frustration. 
   "You're right that we can't hide from it—if it 
is a fact. But right now we don't know that it is. 
For one thing, the chimes have been banished back 
to the underworld." 
   "And what about what Zedd told us, about how 
once the destructive cascade of magic begins—which 
it did—then there is no telling if it can be 
stopped even if the chimes are banished. There is 
no experience in such an event upon which to base 
predictions." 
   Richard didn't have an answer for her, and was 
at a disadvantage because he didn't have her 
education in magic. He was saved from having to 
speculate when Cara came in through a tight patch 
of young balsam trees. She pulled her pack off her 
shoulders and let it slip to the ground as she sat 
on a rock facing Richard. 
   "You were right. We can get through there. It 
looks to me like I can see a way to continue on up 
from the ledge." 
   "Good," Richard said as he stood. "Let's get 
going. The clouds are getting darker. I think we 
need to find a place to stop for the night." 
   "I spotted a place under the ledge, Lord Rahl. I 
think it might be a dry place to stay." 
   "Good." Richard hoisted her pack. "I'll carry 
this for you for a while, let you have a break." 
   Cara nodded her appreciation, falling into line 
as they moved through the tight trees and 
immediately had to start to climb up the steeply 
rising ground. There was enough exposed rock and 
roots to provide good steps and handholds. Where 
some of those steps were tall, Richard stretched 
down to give Kahlan a hand. 
   Tom helped Jennsen and passed Betty up a few 
times, even though the goat was better at 
scrambling up over rock than they were. Richard 
thought he was doing it more for Jennsen's peace of 

mind than Betty's. Jennsen finally told Tom that 
Betty could climb on her own. 
   Betty proved her right, bleating down at Tom 
after effortlessly clambering up a particularly 
trying spot. 
"Why don't you help me up, then," Tom said to the 
goat. 
   Jennsen smiled along with Richard and Kahlan. 
Owen just watched as he skirted the other way 
around the rock. He was afraid of Betty. Cara 
finally asked for her pack back, having entertained 
long enough the possibility of being considered 
frail. 
   Shortly after the rain started, they found the 
low slit of an opening under a prominent ledge, 
just as Cara had said they would. It wasn't a cave, 
but a spot where a slab from the face of the 
mountain above had broken off and fallen over. 
Boulders on the ground held the slab up enough to 
create a pocket beneath. It wasn't large, but 
Richard thought they would all fit under it for the 
night. 
   The ground was dirty, scattered with collected 
leaf litter and forest debris of bark, moss, and a 
lot of bugs. Tom and Richard used branches they'd 
cut to quickly sweep the place out. They then laid 
down a clean bed of evergreen boughs to keep them 
up off the water that did run in. 
   The rain was starting to come down harder, so 
they all squatted down and hurried to move in under 
the rock. It wasn't a comfortable-looking spot, 
being too low for them to stand in, but it was 
fairly dry. 
Richard dared not let them have a fire, now that 
they had left the regular trail, lest the smoke be 
spotted by the races. They had a cold supper of 
meats, leftover bannock, and dried goods. They were 
all exhausted from climbing all day, and while they 
ate engaged in only a bit of small talk. Betty was 
the only one with enough room to stand. She pushed 

up against Richard until she got his attention and 
a rub. 
   As darkness slowly enveloped the woods, they 
watched the rain fall outside their cozy shelter, 
listening to the soft sound, all no doubt wondering 
what lay ahead in a strange empire that had been 
sealed away for three thousand years. Troops from 
the Imperial Order would be there, too. 
   As Richard sat watching out into the dark rain, 
listening to the sounds of the occasional animal in 
the distance, Kahlan cuddled up beside him, laying 
her head on his lap. Betty went deeper into the 
shelter and lay down with Jennsen. 
   Kahlan, under the comfort of his hand resting 
tenderly on her shoulder, was asleep in moments. As 
weary as he was from the day's hard journey, 
Richard wasn't sleepy. 
   His head hurt and the poison deep within him 
made each breath catch. He wondered what would 
strike him down first, the power of his gift that 
was giving him the headaches, or Owen's poison. 
   He wondered, too, just how he was going to 
satisfy the demands of Owen and his men to free 
their empire so that he could have the antidote. 
The five of them, he, Kahlan, Cara, Jennsen, and 
Tom, hardly seemed the army needed to drive the 
Order out of Bandakar. 
   If he didn't, and if he couldn't get to the 
antidote, his life was coming to a close. This very 
well could be his final journey. 
   It seemed like he had just gotten back together 
with Kahlan after being separated from her for half 
his life. He wanted to be with her. He wanted the 
two of them to be able to be alone. 
   If he didn't think of something, all they had in 
each other, all they had ahead of them, was just 
about over. And that was without even considering 
the headaches of the gift. 
Or the Imperial Order capturing the Wizard's Keep. 
 

 
 
 
          CHAPTER 32 
 
 
 
 
Richard gripped the edge of the rock at the face of 
the opening to help pull himself up and out from 
the dark hole in the abrupt rise of granite before 
them. Once out, he brushed the sharp little 
granules of rock from his hands as he turned to the 
others. 
"It goes through. It isn't easy, but it goes 
through." 
   He saw a dubious look on Tom's face, and a look 
of consternation on Owen's. Betty, her floppy ears 
perked ahead in what Richard thought could only be 
a goat frown, peered down into the narrow chasm and 
bleated. 
"But I don't think we can," Owen complained. "What 
if..." 
"We get stuck?" Richard asked. 
Owen nodded. 
   "Well, you have an advantage over Tom and me," 
Richard said as he picked up his pack from nearby 
to the side where he'd left it. "You're not quite 
as big. If I made it through and back, then you can 
make it, Owen." 
   Owen waved a hand up the steep ascent to his 
right. "But what about that way? Couldn't we just 
go around?" 
   "I don't like going into dark, narrow places 
like this, either," Richard said. "But if we go 
around that way we have to go out on the ledges. 
   You heard what Cara said; it's narrow and 
dangerous. If it were the only way it would be 
another matter, but it's not. 
   "The races could spot us out there. Worse, if 

they wanted, they could attack us and we could 
easily fall or be forced over the edge. I don't 
like going in places like this, but I don't think 
I'd like to be out there on a windblown ledge no 
wider than the sole of my boot, with a fall of 
thousands of feet straight down if I make one slip, 
and then have one of those races suddenly show up 
to rip into me with their talons or those sharp 
beaks of theirs. Would you prefer that?" 
   Owen licked his lips as he bent at the waist and 
looked into the narrow passageway. "Well, I guess 
you're right." 
   "Richard," Kahlan asked in a whisper as the rest 
of them started taking off their packs so they 
could more easily fit through, "if this was a 
trail, as you suspect, why isn't there a better way 
through?" 
   "I think that sometime only in the last few 
thousand years this huge section of the mountain 
broke away and slid down, coming to rest at this 
angle, leaving a narrow passageway beneath it." He 
pointed up. "See up there? I think this entire 
portion down here used to be up there. I think it's 
now sitting right where the trail used to be." 
"And there's no other way but this cave or the 
ledges?" 
   "I'm not saying that. I believe there's other 
old routes, but we would have to backtrack for most 
of a day to take the last fork I saw, and then 
there isn't any guarantee with that one, either. If 
you really want, though, we can go back and try." 
   Kahlan shook her head. "We can't afford to lose 
any time. We need to get to the antidote." 
   Richard nodded. He didn't know how he was 
supposed to rid an entire empire of the Imperial 
Order so they could get to the antidote, but he had 
a few ideas. He needed to get the antidote; he saw 
no reason he had to play by Owen's rules—or the 
Order's. 
   Kahlan gave the narrow, dark tunnel another 

look. "You're sure there aren't any snakes in 
there?" 
"I didn't see any." 
   Tom handed Richard his sword. "I'll go last," he 
said. "If you make it through, I can." 
Richard nodded as he laid the baldric over his 
shoulder. He turned the scabbard at his hip in 
order to clear the rock and then started in. He 
hugged his pack to his abdomen as he crouched to 
make it into the small space. The slab of rock 
above him lay at an angle, so that he couldn't 
remain upright, but had to twist sideways and back 
as he went into the darkness. The farther in he 
went, the darker it became. As the others followed 
him into the narrow passage, it blocked much of the 
light, making it even darker. 
   The rains of recent days had finally ended, but 
runnels and runoff continued to flow from the 
mountain. Their wading through ankle-deep water 
standing in the bottom of the cavern sent echoes 
through the narrow confines. The waves in the water 
played gloomy light along the wet walls, providing 
at least some illumination. 
   The thought occurred to him that if he was a 
snake, this would make a good spot to call home. 
The thought also occurred to him that if Kahlan, 
right behind him, happened upon a snake in such 
cramped quarters, she would not be pleased with him 
in the least for taking her in. 
   Things that were frightening outside were 
different when you couldn't maneuver, couldn't run. 
Panic always seemed to lurk in tight places. 
   As it became darker, Richard had to feel his way 
along the cold stone. In places where water seeped 
down the rock, the walls were slimy. In some spots 
there was mud, in other places dry rock to walk on. 
Most of it, though, was wet muck. Spongy leaves had 
collected in some of the irregular low places. 
   By the smell, it was obvious that some animal 
had died and was decomposing somewhere in the 

sodden grotto. He heard moans and complaints from 
behind when the rest of them encountered the 
stench. Betty bleated her unhappiness. Jennsen's 
echoing whisper told the goat to be quiet. 
   Even the displeasure of the smell was forgotten 
as they worked their way under the immense curtain 
of rock draped over where the trail used to be. 
This wasn't a true cave, like underground caves 
Richard had encountered before. It was only a 
narrow crack under what was, in essence, a big 
rock. There were no chambers and different routes 
to worry about; there was only one narrow void 
under the rock, so lighting their way wasn't 
critical. He knew, too, that it wasn't all that 
long. It only felt that way in the dark. 
   Richard reached the spot where the way ahead 
abruptly started up at a steep angle. Feeling the 
walls all around to find places to grab, he started 
the difficult climb. In places he had to wedge his 
back against one wall and use his feet against the 
opposite wall to brace himself while grappling for 
any ledge or crack in the rock he could find to 
help pull himself up. He had to balance his pack in 
his lap as he went, and keep his sword from getting 
wedged. It was slow going. 
   Richard finally reached the high table where the 
rock from above had first come down. The hollow 
left under the mountain of rock was basically 
horizontal, rather than vertical, as it had been. 
Rock rested along the edge of most of the shelf, 
but there was one place with ample room for them to 
make it through, over the edge and then in under 
the slab above them. Once up onto the flat, he 
leaned over as far as he could, extending a hand 
down to help Kahlan. 
   He heard the grunts of effort from below Kahlan 
as the rest of the small company worked their way 
up the precipitous passage. 
   From his place atop the table of rock, Richard 
could finally see light ahead and light above. He 

had scouted the route and knew that they were close 
to being out the other side, but first they had to 
make it across the shelf of rock where the slab 
left little room above them. It was uncomfortably 
confining. 
   Richard didn't like such places. He knew, 
though, that there was no other way through. This 
was the place he worried most about. Tight as it 
was, it was fortunately close to the end. 
   "We have to crawl on our bellies from here," he 
told Kahlan. "Hold my ankle. Have everyone behind 
do the same." 
   Kahlan peered ahead toward the light coming from 
the opening. The glare of that light made it 
difficult to see to the sides. "Richard, it doesn't 
look big enough. It's just a crack." 
   Richard pushed his pack out onto the rock. 
"There's a way. We'll be out soon." 
Kahlan let out a deep breath. "All right. The 
sooner the better." 
"Listen to me," he called back into the darkness. 
"We're almost out." 
"If you make us walk through any more rotting 
animals, I'll clobber you," Jennsen called up to 
him. Everyone laughed. 
   "No more of that," Richard said. "But there is a 
difficult spot ahead. I've been through it, so I 
know we can all make it. But you have to listen to 
me and do as I say. Crawl on your stomach, pushing 
your pack ahead of you. Hold the ankle of the 
person in front of you. That way you'll all follow 
in the right place. 
   "You'll see the light ahead of you. You can't go 
toward the light. That isn't the way out. The 
ceiling drops down too low and the slope of the 
rock starts pitching down to the left. If you slip 
down in there it gets even tighter; you'll not be 
able to get out. We have to go around the low place 
in the ceiling. We have to go around on the right 
side, where it's dark, but not as low. Does 

everyone understand?" 
Agreement echoed up from the darkness. 
   "Richard," Jennsen called in a small voice, "I 
don't like being in here. I want out." 
Her voice carried a thread of panic. 
   "I don't either," he told her. "But I've been 
through and out the other side. I made it through 
and back. You'll be fine. Just follow me and you 
won't have a problem." 
Her voice drifted up to him from the darkness. "I 
want to go back." 
   Richard couldn't let her go back. The ledges, 
where they were exposed to the races, were too 
dangerous. 
   "Here," Kahlan told her, "you come ahead of me. 
Take hold of Richard's ankle and you'll be out 
before the rest of us." 
   "I'll see that Betty watches you go through and 
follows," Tom offered. 
   That seemed to break the impasse. Jennsen moved 
up to the ledge and handed her pack up. Richard, 
lying on his stomach in the low slit of the shelf, 
took her hand to help her up. 
   When she saw in the light how low and tight it 
was, that Richard had to lie on his stomach, she 
started to tremble. When Richard helped pull her 
up, and her face came up close to him, he could see 
her tears in the dim light. 
Her wide blue eyes took in the way ahead, how low 
it was. 
Please, Richard, I'm afraid. I don't want to go in 
under there." 
   He nodded. "I know, but it's not far. I won't 
let you stay in here. I'll see that you get out." 
He cupped a hand to the side of her face. "I 
promise." 
"How do I know you'll keep your promise?" 
Richard smiled. "Wizards always keep their 
promises." 
"You said you don't know much about being a 

wizard." 
"But I know how to keep promises." 
   She at last agreed and let him help her the rest 
of the way up. When he pulled her all the way up 
onto the shelf of the mountainside, and she 
actually felt how the roof of rock didn't allow her 
any room to get up and that she had to lie flat 
just to fit, and worse, that the roof of rock was 
only scant inches above her back, she started to 
shiver with terror. 
   "I know how you feel," he told her. "I do, 
Jennsen. I hate this, too, but we have no choice. 
It's not dangerous if you just follow me through 
the place where there's room. Just follow me and 
we'll be out before you know it." 
   "What if it comes down and crushes us? Or what 
if it comes down just enough to pin us so we can't 
move or breathe?" 
   "It won't," he insisted. "It's been here for 
ages. It isn't going to come down. It's not." 
   She nodded but he didn't know if she really 
heard him. She began to whimper as he turned 
himself around so he could lead her out. 
   "Take my ankle," he called back to her. "Here, 
push your pack up to me and I'll take care of it 
for you. Then you'll only have to worry about 
holding on to my ankle and following behind." 
   "What if it gets too tight and I can't breathe? 
Richard, what if I can't breathe?" 
   Richard kept his voice calm and confident. "I'm 
bigger than you, so if I fit, you will." 
   She only nodded as she shivered. He extended his 
hand back and had to tell her again to pass her 
pack forward before she did as he instructed. Once 
he had her pack, he tied the straps to his and 
pushed them both on ahead. She seized his ankle as 
if it were the only thing keeping her from falling 
into the arms of the Keeper of the underworld. 
   He didn't complain, though, about how hard she 
held him; he knew her fear. 

   Richard pushed the packs out ahead and started 
inching his way forward. He tried not to think 
about the rough ceiling of rock only a hand-width 
above his back. He knew it would become ftarrower 
before they got out. The shelf of rock sloped 
upward to the right slightly, into the dark. The 
light was to the left, and down. 
   It looked like the easiest way out was to go 
straight toward the opening. It wasn't far. They 
had to go, instead, up into the darkness and around 
the narrowing of the cleft in order to get around 
to a place where they could fit through. Forcing 
himself to go up, into the dark where it felt 
tighter and more closed in, rather than toward the 
light of the opening, felt wrong, but he had 
already scouted the route and he knew that his 
feelings were wrong about this. 
   As he moved deeper into the darkness, going 
around the impassable area in the center of the 
chamber, he reached the spot where the rock above 
lowered. Advancing in farther, it came down until 
it pressed against his back. He knew it wasn't far, 
not more than a dozen feet, but, without being able 
to take a full breath, the cramped passage was 
daunting. 
   Richard pushed the packs ahead as he wriggled 
and wormed his way along. He had to push with the 
toes of his boots and, with his fingers finding any 
purchase available, pull his chest through, force 
himself to make headway into the dark, away from 
the light. 
   Jennsen's fingers had an iron grip on his ankle. 
That was fine with Richard, because he could then 
help pull her through with him. He wanted to be 
able to help pull her through when she reached the 
spot that would compress her chest. 
And then she suddenly let go of his ankle. 
 
 
 

 
         CHAPTER 33 
 
 
 
          Off behind him, Richard could hear 
Jennsen scrambling away. "Jennsen? What's going on? 
What are you doing?" She was crying out, whining in 
terror, as she bolted toward the light at the 
opening. 
"Jennsen!" Richard called to her. "Don't go that 
way! Stay with me!" Wedged in as he was, he 
couldn't easily turn to see. He forced himself 
ahead, crabbing sideways, trying to spot her. 
Jennsen was clambering toward the light, ignoring 
him as he called to her. Kahlan wormed her way up 
to him. "What's she doing?" "She's trying to get 
out. She sees the opening, the light, and won't 
listen." 
   Richard shoved the packs and frantically worked 
his way ahead, moving into the area beyond the 
tight spot, to where it was open enough that he 
could at last get a full breath and almost get up 
on his hands and knees. 
   Jennsen screamed. Richard could see her clawing 
frantically at the rock, but she wasn't making any 
headway. In a frenzy of effort, she tried to push 
herself forward, but, instead, she'd slipped 
sideways farther down the slope, wedging herself in 
tighter. 
   Each exaggerated, panting breath as she strained 
and stretched ratcheted her in deeper. 
   Richard called to her, trying to get her to 
listen, to do as he said. In her desperation, she 
wasn't responding to any of his instructions. She 
saw the opening, wanted out, and would not listen 
to him. 
   Fast as he could, Richard scrambled through the 
darkness and around toward the opening, guiding 
Kahlan, Owen, Cara, and Tom through the only way he 

knew they could make it. Kahlan held tight to his 
ankle and he could hear by the panting of effort 
that the rest of them were all following in a line 
behind her. 
   Jennsen screamed in terror. She struggled madly, 
but couldn't move. Wedged in as she was, with rock 
compressing her rib cage top and bottom, it was 
becoming difficult for her to breathe. 
   "Jennsen! Take a slow breath! Slow down!" 
Richard called to her as he scurried around toward 
the opening. "Breathe slow! Breathe!" 
   Richard finally reached the opening. He emerged 
from the dark crevasse, squinting in the sudden 
light. On his knees, he leaned in and helped pull 
Kahlan out. Betty scrambled out, somehow having 
passed the rest of the people. As Owen and then 
Cara clambered out of the opening, Richard pulled 
the baldric over his head and handed his sword to 
Kahlan. 
Tom called out that he was going back in to try to 
reach Jennsen. 
   As soon as the rest were safely out, Richard 
dove back into the fissure. Headfirst, on his hands 
and knees, he scuttled into the dark. He could see 
that Tom, from his angle of approach, had no chance 
to get to her. 
"Tom, I'll get her." 
   "I can reach her," the man said even as he was 
getting himself wedged tight. 
   "No you can't," Richard said in a stern tone. 
"Wishing won't make it so. You'll just get yourself 
stuck. Listen to me. Back out, now, or your weight 
will help push you downhill and get you stuck so 
hard that we won't be able to get you out. Back up, 
now, while you're still able to. Go. Let me get 
her." 
   Tom watched Richard moving around behind him, 
and then, making a face that showed how unhappy he 
was to be doing it, he started pushing himself back 
up into the darkness, where there was a few 

precious inches' more room that would let him make 
it back out. 
   Richard worked his way through the tight spot 
and then moved down the slope so that he wouldn't 
be facing downhill as he tried to help Jennsen and 
possibly wedge himself in tighter than he wanted. 
If he wasn't careful, he would do the same thing 
Tom had been about to do. Down in the darkness, 
Jennsen cried in panic. 
   Richard, flat on his belly, wiggled and snaked 
his way deeper, all the while moving to his left, 
down the pitch in the shelf of rock. "Jennsen, 
breathe. I'm coming. It's all right." 
"Richard! Please don't leave me here! Richard!" 
   Richard spoke in a calm, quiet voice as he moved 
around behind her down into the tighter part of the 
cave. "I'm not going to leave you. You'll be fine. 
Just wait for me." 
   "Richard! I can't move!" She grunted with 
effort. "I can't breathe! The ceiling is coming 
down! It's moving—I can feel it coming down. It's 
squeezing me! Please help me! Richard—please don't 
leave me!" 
   "You're fine, Jennsen. The ceiling isn't moving. 
You're just stuck. I'll have you out in a minute." 
   Even as he worked his way into the low spot, 
trying to get up close behind her, she was still 
struggling to move forward, making it worse— there 
was no way she could go forward and make it out. As 
she kept struggling, though, she was slowly 
slipping deeper down the slope and with every 
frantic breath wedging herself in tighter. He could 
hear how desperately she was trying to breathe, to 
draw each shallow breath against the immovable 
compression of rock. 
   Finally all the way back around behind her, 
Richard started pushing himself in the way she'd 
gone. She had gone into a narrow channel that 
closed down on the uphill side of her, so there 
could be no moving her sideways up the slope; he 

had to get her to back up the way she'd gone in. He 
had to get her to go away from the light and back 
into what she feared. 
   The roof of rock scraped against his back, 
making it difficult to draw a full breath. He had 
to take shallow breaths as he moved deeper. The 
farther he went, he could not even breathe that 
deeply. 
   The need for air, for a deep breath, made the 
pain of the poison feel like knives twisting in his 
ribs. Arms stretched forward, Richard used his 
boots to force himself in deeper, trying to ignore 
his own rising sense of panic. He reasoned with 
himself that there were others who knew where he 
was, that he wasn't alone. With the powerful 
feeling that a mountain of rock was crushing him, 
reasoning with himself was difficult, especially 
when the shallow split of rock he was pressed into 
hardly let him get any air as it was and he was 
desperately working himself deeper trying to reach 
Jennsen. He knew that he had to help pull her out 
of where she was stuck or she would die there. 
   "Richard," she cried, "it hurts. I can't 
breathe. I'm stuck. Dear spirits, I can't breathe. 
Please, Richard, I'm scared." 
   Richard stretched, trying to reach her ankle. It 
was too far away. He had to turn his head sideways 
to advance. Both ears scraped against rock. He 
wiggled, inching in tighter even though his better 
judgment was telling him that he was already in 
trouble. 
   "Jennsen, please, I need you to help me. I need 
you to push back. Push back with your hands. Push 
back toward me." 
"No! I have to get out! I'm almost there!" 
   "No, you're not almost there. You can't make it 
that way. You have to trust me. Jennsen, you've got 
to push back so I can reach you." 
"No! Please! I want out! I want out!" 
"I'll get you out, I promise. Just push back so I 

can reach you." 
   With her blocking the light he couldn't tell if 
she was doing as he instructed or not. He squirmed 
in another inch, then another. His head was almost 
stuck. He couldn't imagine how she had gotten in as 
far as she had. 
   "Jennsen, push back." His voice was strained. He 
couldn't get enough of a breath to talk and to 
breathe, too. 
   His fingers stretched forward, reaching, 
stretching, reaching. His lungs burned for air. He 
just wanted to take a deep breath. He desperately 
needed a breath. Not being able to draw one was not 
only painful, but frightening. His heartbeat 
pounded in his ears. 
   As high as they were in the mountains, the air 
was already thin and it was difficult to get enough 
air the way it was. Limited to taking shallow 
breaths was making him light-headed. If he didn't 
get back to where he could breathe soon, the two of 
them were going to be forever in this terrible 
place. 
The tips of Richard's fingers caught the edge of 
the sole of Jennsen's boot. He couldn't get a good 
grip on her foot, though. 
   "Push back," he whispered into the dark. It was 
all he could do to keep his own panic in check. 
"Jennsen, do as I say. Push back. Do it." 
   Jennsen's boot moved back into his hand. He 
snatched it in a tighter grip and immediately 
worked his way back a few inches. Pulling with all 
his might, he strained to drag her back with him. 
Try as he might, she wouldn't budge. She was either 
stuck tight, or was fighting to go forward. 
   "Push back," he whispered again. "Use your 
hands, Jennsen. Push back toward me. Push." 
   She was sobbing and crying something he couldn't 
make out. Richard wedged his boots, top and bottom, 
in the tight cleft and then pulled with all his 
might. His arm shook with the effort. He managed to 

draw her back a few inches. 
   He wiggled himself back an equal distance and 
pulled again. With agonizing effort, he slowly, 
painstakingly, started drawing her out of the dead 
end she had fled into in a panicked attempt to get 
out. 
   At times, she tried to squirm back toward the 
light. Richard, the rock compressing him tight, 
kept a firm hold of her boot and muscled her back 
yet more, not allowing her to take back any of the 
distance he gained. 
   He couldn't straighten his head. That made it 
more difficult to use his muscles to move the both 
of them. With his head lying on the right, he 
reached back with his left arm and gripped a small 
lip of rock in the ceiling, using it to help haul 
them back. With his right arm, stretched forward 
and holding her by the boot, he drew her back inch 
by inch. 
   As he reached back again for another handhold, 
Richard saw something not far to his left, down the 
slope, wedged where the rock narrowed. At first he 
thought it was a rock. As he struggled to draw 
Jennsen back, he stared at the thing also stuck in 
the rock. He reached to the side and touched it. It 
was smooth and didn't feel at all like the granite. 
   As he began to make good progress backward he 
stretched to the side and managed to get his 
fingers around the thing. He pulled it to his side 
and continued to wiggle back. 
   With great relief, he was finally back far 
enough to where he was able to get enough air. He 
lay still for a time, just catching his breath. 
Almost as much as air, though, he wanted out. 
   While he talked to Jennsen, distracting her with 
instructions she only intermittently followed, he 
began forcing her back and to the right, where 
there was more room. Finally, he managed to move up 
beside her and seize her wrist. Once he had her, he 
started moving her back up the slope, into the 

darkness, into the tight place that he knew was the 
only true way out. 
   With him up beside her, she was a little more 
cooperative. All the while, he kept reassuring her. 
"This is the way, Jennsen. This is the way. I'll 
not leave you. I'll get you out. This is the way. 
Just come with me and we'll be out in a few 
minutes." 
   When they worked their way up into the dark, 
tight spot, she began struggling again, trying 
again to scramble for the light of the opening, but 
he was blocking her way. He stayed close at her 
side as he kept them both moving forward. She 
seemed to find strength in his constant assurances 
and his firm grip on her wrist. He was not about to 
let her get away from him again. 
   When they pushed through to the place where the 
roof rose up a bit, she started weeping with 
expectant joy. He knew the feeling. Once the 
ceiling rose up a foot or two, he hurried as fast 
as he could to get her to the opening, to the 
light. 
   The others were waiting right at the entrance to 
help pull them out. Richard held the thing he'd 
retrieved under his left arm as he helped push 
Jennsen out first. She rushed into Tom's waiting 
arms, but only until Richard crawled out and got to 
his feet. Then, crying with relief, Jennsen fled 
into his arms, clinging to him for dear life. 
   "I'm so sorry," she said over and over as she 
cried. "I'm so sorry, Richard. I was so afraid." 
"I know," he comforted as he held her. 
   He'd been in a similar situation before where he 
thought he might never get himself out of such a 
terrifying place, so he did understand. In such a 
stressful circumstance, where you feared you were 
about to die, it was easy to be overpowered by the 
blind need to escape—to live. 
   "I feel so confused." 
"I don't like such tight places, either," he said. 

"I understand." 
   "But I don't understand. I've never been afraid 
of places like that. Ever since I was very young 
I've hid in tight little places. Such places always 
made me feel safe because no one could find me or 
get to me. When you spend your life running and 
hiding from someone like Darken Rahl, you come to 
appreciate small, dark, concealed places. 
   "I don't know what came over me. It was the 
strangest thing. It was like these thoughts that I 
wouldn't get out, that I couldn't breathe, that I 
would die, just started coming into my head. 
Feelings I've never had before just started to seep 
into me. They just seemed to overwhelm me. I've 
never done anything like that before." 
"Do you still feel these strange feelings?" 
   "Yes," she said as she wept, "but they're 
starting to fade, now that I'm out, now that it's 
over." 
   Everyone else had moved off a ways to give her 
the time she needed to set herself straight. They 
sat not far off waiting on an old log turned silver 
in the weather. 
   Richard didn't try to rush her. He just held her 
and let her know she was safe. 
"I'm so sorry, Richard. I feel like such a fool." 
"No need. It's over, now." 
"You kept your promise," she said through her 
tears. 
Richard smiled, happy that he had. 
   Owen, his face tense with worry, looked like he 
couldn't help himself from asking a question. "But 
Jennsen?" he asked as he stepped forward. "Why 
didn't you do magic to help yourself?" 
"I can't do magic any more than you can." 
   He rubbed his palms on his hips. "You could if 
you let yourself. You are one who is able to touch 
magic." 
   "Other people might be able to do magic, but I 
can't. I don't have any ability for it." 

   "What others think is magic is only themselves 
tricking their senses and only blinds them to real 
magic. Our eyes blind us, our senses deceive us—as 
I explained before. Only those who have never seen 
magic, only those who have never used, sensed, 
perceived it, only those who do not have any 
ability or faculty for it, can actually understand 
it and therefore only they can be true 
practitioners of real magic. Magic must be based 
entirely on faith, if it is to be real. You must 
believe, and then you truly can see. You are one 
who can do magic." 
Richard and Jennsen stared at the man. 
   "Richard," Kahlan said in an odd voice before he 
could say anything to Owen. "What's that." 
Richard blinked at her. "What?" 
She pointed. "That, there, under your arm. What is 
it?" 
   "Oh," he said. "Something I found wedged in the 
rock near Jennsen, back in where she was stuck. In 
the dark, I couldn't tell what it was other than 
that it wasn't rock." 
He pulled it out to have a look. 
It was a statue. 
   A statue in his likeness, wearing his war 
wizard's outfit. The cape was fixed in place as it 
swirled to the side of the legs, making the base 
wider than the waist. 
   The lower portion of the figure was a 
translucent amber color, and through it could be 
seen a falling trickle of sand that had nearly 
filled the bottom half. 
   The statue was not all amber, though, as 
Kahlan's had been. Near the middle, obscuring the 
narrowing where the sand dribbled through, the 
translucent amber of the bottom began darkening. 
The higher up the figure, the darker it became. 
The top—the shoulders and head—were as black as a 
night stone. 
   A night stone was an underworld thing, and 

Richard remembered all too well what that wicked 
object had looked like. The top of the statue 
looked to be made of the same sinister material, 
all glossy and smooth and so black that it looked 
as if it might suck the light right out of the day. 
   Richard's heart sank at seeing himself 
represented in such a way, as a talisman touched by 
death. 
   "She made it," Owen said, shaking an 
accusatorial finger at Jennsen still sheltered 
under Richard's right arm. "She made it with magic. 
I told you she could. She spun it of evil magic 
back in that cave when she wasn't thinking. The 
magic took over and came out of her, then, when she 
wasn't thinking about how she couldn't do magic." 
   Owen didn't have any idea what he was talking 
about. This was not a statue Jennsen made. 
   This was the second warning beacon, meant to 
warn the one who could seal the breach. 
"Lord Rahl..." 
Richard looked up. It was Cara's voice. 
   She was standing off a ways, her back to them, 
looking up at a small spot of sky off through the 
trees. Jennsen turned in his arms to see what had 
put the odd tone in Cara's voice. Holding his 
sister close, he stepped up behind Cara and peered 
up through the trees where she was looking. 
   Through a thin area in the canopy of pine, he 
could see the rim of the mountain pass above them. 
Silhouetted against iron gray clouds stealing past 
was something man-made. 
It looked like a huge statue sitting atop the pass. 
 
 
 
 
 
           CHAPTER 
34 
 
 

 
 
 
Icy wind tore at Richard's and Kahlan's clothes as 
they huddled close together at the edge of a thick 
stand of spruce trees. Low, ragged clouds raced by 
as if to escape the colossal, dark, swirling clouds 
building above them. Fat flakes of snow danced in 
the cold gusts. Richard's ears burned in the 
numbing cold. 
"What do you think?" Kahlan asked. 
   Richard shook his head. "I don't know." He 
glanced behind them, back into the shelter of the 
trees. "Owen, are you sure you don't know what it 
is? You don't have any idea at all?" 
   The roiling clouds made an ominous backdrop for 
the imposing statue sitting up on the ridge. 
   "No, Lord Rahl. I've never been here before; 
none of us ever traveled this route. I don't know 
what it could be. Unless .. ." His words trailed 
off into the moan of the wind. 
"Unless what?" 
   Owen shrank back, twisting the button on his 
coat as he glanced to the Mord-Sith on one side of 
him and Tom and Jennsen on the other. "There is a 
foretelling—from the ones who gave us our name and 
protected us by sealing the pass. It is taught that 
when they gave our empire its name, they also told 
us that one day a savior would come to us." 
   Richard wanted to ask the man just what exactly 
it was he thought they needed saving from—if they 
had lived in such an enlightened culture where they 
were safe from the unenlightened "savages" of the 
rest of the world. Instead, he asked a simpler 
question he thought Owen might be able to answer. 
"So you think that maybe that's a statue of him, 
your savior?" 
   Owen fidgeted, his shoulders finally working 
into a shrug. "He is not just a savior. The 
foretelling also says that he will destroy us." 

   Richard frowned at the man, hoping this was not 
going to be another of his convoluted beliefs. 
"This savior of yours is going to destroy you. That 
makes no sense." 
Owen was quick to agree. "I know. No one 
understands it." 
   "Maybe it's meant to say that someone will come 
to save your people," Jennsen suggested, "but he 
will fail and so only end up destroying them in the 
attempt." 
   "Maybe." Owen's face twisted with the 
displeasure of having to contemplate such an 
outcome. 
   "Maybe," Cara suggested in a grim tone, "it 
means this man will come, and after seeing your 
people, decide they aren't worth saving"— she 
leaned toward Owen—"and decide to destroy them 
instead." 
   Owen, as he stared up at Cara, seemed to be 
considering her words as a real possibility, rather 
than the sarcasm Richard knew them to be. 
   "I don't think that is the meaning," Owen 
finally told her after earnest consideration. He 
turned back to Richard. "The foretelling, as it has 
been taught to us, you see, says, first, that a man 
will come who will destroy us. It then goes on to 
say that he is the one who will save us. 'Your 
destroyer will come and he will redeem you,' " Owen 
quoted. "That is how we have been taught the words, 
how they were told to my people when we were put 
here, beyond this pass." 
   " 'Your destroyer will come and he will redeem 
you,' " Richard repeated. He took a patient breath. 
"Whatever it originally said has probably been 
confused and all jumbled up as it's been passed 
down. It probably no longer resembles the original 
saying." 
   Rather than disagree, as Richard expected, Owen 
nodded. "Some believe, as you say, that over the 
time since we were protected and given our name, 

maybe the true words have been lost, or confused. 
Others believe that it has been passed down intact 
and must have important meaning. Some believe that 
the foretelling was meant to say only that a savior 
will come. Others think it means only that a 
destroyer will come." 
"And what do you believe?" Richard asked. 
   Owen twiddled the button on his coat until 
Richard thought it might come off. "I believe that 
the foretelling is meant to say that a destroyer 
will come—and I believe that he is this man 
Nicholas, of the Order— and then that a savior will 
come and save us. I believe that man is you, Lord 
Rahl. Nicholas is our destroyer. You are our 
savior." 
   Richard knew from the book that prophecy didn't 
function with these people, with pillars of 
Creation. 
   "What your people think is a foretelling," 
Richard said, "is probably nothing more than an old 
adage that people have gotten mixed up." 
   Owen held his ground, if hesitantly. "We are 
taught that this is a foretelling. We are taught 
that those who named us told us this foretelling 
and that they wanted it passed down so all might 
know of it." 
   Richard sighed, the wind pulling out a long 
cloud of his breath. "So you think that up there is 
a statue of me, put there thousands of years ago by 
the ones who protected you behind the boundary? How 
would they know, long before I was born, what I 
would look like in order to make a statue of me?" 
   "The true reality knows everything that will 
be," Owen said by rote. He forced a half smile as 
he shrugged again. "After all, it made that little 
statue that you found look like you." 
   Unhappy to be reminded of that, Richard turned 
away from the man. The small figure had been made 
to look like him by magic tied to the boundary, 
and, possibly, to a dead wizard in the underworld. 

   Richard scanned the sky, the rocky slopes all 
around, the tree line. He didn't see any sign of 
life. The statue—they still couldn't quite make out 
what it was—sat distant up a treeless, rocky rise. 
It was yet quite a climb up to that rim of the 
pass, to that statue. 
   Richard was not going to like it if it did 
indeed turn out to be a statue of him beneath the 
gathering gloom. 
   He already didn't like it one bit that the 
second warning beacon was meant for him. It bound 
him to a responsibility, a duty, he neither wanted 
nor could accomplish. 
   He had no idea how to restore the seal on 
Bandakar. Zedd had once created boundaries that 
were probably similar to the one that had been down 
here in the Old World, but even Zedd had used 
constructed magic he had found in the Keep. Such 
constructed spells had been created by ancient 
wizards with vast power and knowledge of such 
things. Zedd had told him that there were no more 
such spells. 
   Richard certainly had no idea how to call forth 
a spell that could create such a boundary. More to 
the point, he didn't see how it would do any good 
even if he knew how. What had really been freed 
from Bandakar when the boundary failed was the 
trait of being born without any trace of the gift—
that was why they had all been banished here in the 
first place. The Imperial Order was already 
breeding women from Bandakar in order to breed the 
gift out of mankind. There was no telling how far 
that trait had already spread. Breeding the women, 
as it sounded like they were doing, now, would gain 
them more children who were pristinely ungifted, 
children who would be indoctrinated in the 
teachings of the Order. 
   When they started using the men for breeding, 
the number of such children would vastly increase. 
A woman could have a child every year. In the same 

time, a man could sire a great number of children 
bearing his pristinely ungifted trait. 
   Despite the Order's creed of self-sacrifice, 
they had not yet, it would seem, been willing to 
sacrifice their women to such an undertaking. 
Raping the women in Bandakar and proclaiming it for 
the good of mankind was fine with the men of the 
Order. For the men ruling the Imperial Order to 
give over their own women to be bred, however, was 
quite another matter. 
   Richard had no doubt that they eventually would 
start using their own women to this purpose, but 
that would come later. In the meantime, the Order 
would probably soon start using all the women 
captured and held as slaves for this purpose, 
breeding them to men from Bandakar. The Order's 
conquest of the New World would provide them with 
plenty more women for breeding stock. 
   Whereas in ancient times those in the New World 
tried to limit the trait from spreading in man, the 
Imperial Order would do whatever they could to 
accelerate it. 
   "Richard," Kahlan asked in a low voice, so the 
others farther back in the trees wouldn't hear, 
"what do you think it means that the second warning 
beacon, the one for you, is turning black like the 
night stone? Do you think it means to show you the 
time you have left to get the antidote?" 
   Since he had only just found it, he hadn't given 
it much thought. Even so, he could interpret it 
only as a dire warning. The night stone was tied to 
the spirits of the dead—to the underworld. 
   It could be, as Kahlan suggested, that the 
darkening was meant to show him how the poison was 
taking him, and that he was running out of time. 
For a number of reasons, though, he didn't believe 
that was the explanation. 
   "I don't know for sure," he finally told her, 
"but I don't think it's a warning about the poison. 
I think that the way the statue is turning black is 

meant to represent, materially, how the gift is 
failing in me, how it's slowly beginning to kill 
me, how the underworld, the world of the dead, is 
slowly enshrouding me." 
   Kahlan's hand slipped up on his arm, a gesture 
of comfort as well as worry. "That was my thought, 
too. I was hoping you would argue against it. This 
means that the gift might be more of a problem than 
the poison—if, after all, this dead wizard used the 
beacon to warn you about it." 
   Richard wondered if the statue up on the ridge 
of the pass would hold any answers. He certainly 
didn't have any. To make it up there and see, they 
would have to leave the shelter of the forest and 
travel out in the open. 
Richard turned and signaled the others forward. 
   "I don't think the races would be expecting us 
here," he said as they gathered around him. "If we 
really did manage to lose them they won't know 
where we went, what direction, so they won't know 
to look for us, here. I think we can make it up 
there without the races, and therefore Nicholas, 
knowing." 
   "Besides," Tom said, "with those low clouds 
hugging most of the mountains, they may not be able 
to search." 
"Maybe," Richard said. 
   It was getting late. In the distant mountains a 
wolf howled. On another slope across a deep cleft 
in the mountains, a second wolf answered. There 
would be more than two. 
   Betty's ears perked toward the howls as she 
crowded against Jenn-sen's legs. 
"What if Nicholas uses something else?" Jennsen 
asked. 
   Cara gripped the blond braid lying over the 
front of her shoulder as she scanned the woods to 
the sides. "Something else?" 
   Jennsen pulled her cloak tighter around herself 
as the wind tried to lift it open. "Well, if he can 

look through a race's eyes, then maybe he can look 
through the eyes of something else." 
   "You mean a wolf?" Cara asked. "You think that 
wolf you heard might be him." 
"I don't know," Jennsen admitted. 
   "For that matter," Richard said, "if he can look 
through the black eyes of the races, maybe he could 
just as easily look through the eyes of a mouse." 
   Tom swiped his windblown blond hair back from 
his forehead as he cast a wary glance at the sky. 
"Why do you think he always seems to use the races, 
then?" 
   "Probably because they're better able to cover 
great distances," Richard said. "After all, he'd 
have a lot of trouble finding us with a mouse. 
   "More than that, though, I think he likes the 
imagery of being with such creatures, likes 
thinking of himself as being part of a powerful 
predator. He is, after all, hunting us." 
   "So you think we only have to worry about the 
races, then?" Jennsen asked. 
   "I think he would prefer to watch through the 
races, but that isn't his end, only the means," 
Richard said. "He's after Kahlan and me. Since 
getting us is his end, I think he will turn to 
whatever means he must, if necessary. He very well 
might look through even the eyes of a mouse if it 
would help him get us." 
   "If his end is having you," Cara said, "then 
Owen is helping his ends by bringing you right to 
him." 
   Richard couldn't argue with that. For the 
moment, though, he had to go along with Owen's 
wishes. Soon enough, Richard intended to start 
doing things his own way. 
   "For now," Richard said, "he's still trying to 
find us, so I expect that he will stick to the 
races, since they can cover great distances. But, 
since I've killed races with arrows, he must 
realize that we at least suspect someone is 

watching us through their eyes. As we get closer to 
him, I see no reason that in the future he might 
not use something else so we won't know he's 
watching us." 
   Kahlan looked to be alarmed by the idea. "You 
mean, something like a wolf, or, or ... I don't 
know, maybe an owl?" 
   "Owl, pigeon, sparrow. If I had to guess, then 
I'd guess that at least until he finds us he will 
use a bird." 
   Kahlan huddled close beside him, using his body 
to block the wind. They were up high enough in the 
mountains that they were just beginning to 
encounter snow. From what Richard had seen of the 
Old World, it generally appeared too warm for snow. 
For there to be snow this time of year it could 
only be in the most imposing of mountains. 
   Richard gestured to the icy flakes swirling in 
the air. "Owen, does it get cold in winter in 
Bandakar? Do you get snow?" 
   "Winds come down from the north, following down 
our side of the mountains, I believe. In winter it 
gets cold. Every couple of years, we get a bit of 
snow, but it does not last long. Usually in the 
winter it rains more. I do not understand why it 
snows here, now, when it is summer." 
   "Because of the elevation," Richard answered 
idly as he studied the rising slopes to each side. 
   Higher yet, the snowpack was thick, and in 
places, where the wind blew drifts into overhangs, 
it would be treacherous. Trying to cross such 
precipitous, snow-covered slopes would be perilous, 
at best. Fortunately, they were nearing the highest 
point they would have to climb to make it over the 
pass, so they wouldn't have to traverse heavy snow. 
The bitterly cold wind, though, was making them all 
miserable. 
   "I want to know what that thing is," Richard 
finally said, gesturing up at the statue on the 
rise. He looked around at the others to see if 

anyone objected. No one did. "And, I want to know 
why it's there." 
   "Do you think we should wait for dark?" Cara 
asked. "Darkness will hide us better." 
   Richard shook his head. "The races must be able 
to see pretty well in the dark—after all, that's 
when they hunt. If given a choice, I'd rather be in 
the open during the daylight, when I can see them 
coming." 
   Richard hooked his bow under his leg and bent it 
enough to attach the bowstring. He drew an arrow 
from the leather quiver over his shoulder and 
nocked it, holding it at rest against the bow with 
his left hand. He scanned the sky, checking the 
clouds, and looking for any sign of the races. He 
wasn't entirely sure about the shadows among the 
trees, but the sky was clear of races. 
   "I think we'd better be on our way." Richard's 
gaze swept across all their faces, first, making 
sure they were paying attention. "Walk on the rocks 
if at all possible. I don't want to leave a trail 
behind in the snow that Nicholas could spot through 
the eyes of the races." 
   Nodding their understanding, they all followed 
after him, in single file, out onto the rocks. 
Owen, in front of the ever-watchful Mord-Sith, kept 
a wary eye toward the sky. Jennsen and Betty 
watched the woods to the sides. In the strong 
gusts, they all hunched against the wind and the 
stinging bite of icy crystals hitting their faces. 
In the thin air it was tiring climbing up the steep 
incline. Richard's legs burned with the effort. His 
lungs burned with the poison. 
   By the look of the sheer walls of rock rising up 
into broken clouds to either side, Richard didn't 
see any way, other than the pass, for people to 
make it over the imposing mountains, at least, not 
without a journey of tremendous difficulty, 
hardship, and probably a great loss of life. Even 
then, he wasn't really certain that it was even 

possible. 
   In places, as they trudged up the edge of the 
steep rise, he could see back through gaps in the 
rock walls of the mountains, under the dark bottom 
of clouds, to sunlight beyond the pass. 
   None of them spoke as they climbed. From time to 
time they had to pause to catch their breath. They 
all kept an eye to the churning sky. 
   Richard spotted a few small birds in the 
distance, but nothing of any size. 
   As they approached the top, following a 
zigzagging course so they could more easily make it 
up without having to scale rock faces of jutting 
ledges, Richard caught glimpses of the statue 
sitting on a massive base of granite. 
   From the high vantage point in the pass, he 
could now see that the rock on either side of the 
rise fell away in precipitous drops. The gorge at 
the bottom of either side dead-ended at vertical 
climbs of what would have to be thousands of feet. 
Whatever routes might have branched off lower down, 
they would have to converge before going up this 
rise; by the lay of the land, it became clear to 
him that this was the only way to make it through 
this entire section of the pass. 
   He realized that anyone approaching Bandakar by 
this route would have to climb this ridge in the 
rise, and they would unavoidably come upon the 
monument. 
   As he mounted the final cut between the snow-
dusted boulders standing twice his height, Richard 
was able at last to take in the entire statue 
guarding the pass. 
And guarding the pass it was. This was a sentinel. 
   The noble figure sitting atop a vast stone base 
was seated as he watchfully guarded the pass. In 
one hand the figure casually held a sword at the 
ready, its point resting on the ground. He appeared 
to be wearing leather armor, with his cape resting 
over his lap. The vigilant pose of the sentinel 

gave it a resolute presence. The clear impression 
was that this figure was set to ward what was 
beyond. 
   The stone was worn by centuries of weather, but 
that weathering failed to wear away the power of 
the carving. This figure was carved, and it was 
placed, with great purpose. That it was out in the 
middle of nowhere, at the summit of a mountain pass 
no longer traveled and a trail possibly abandoned 
after this was set here, made it, to Richard, all 
the more arresting. 
   He had carved stone, and he knew what had gone 
into this. It was not what he would call fine work, 
but it was powerfully executed. Just looking at it 
gave him goose bumps. 
   "At least it doesn't look like you," Kahlan 
said. 
At least there was that. 
   But this thing being there all alone for what 
very well might have been thousands of years was 
worrisome. 
   "What I'd like to know," Richard said to her, 
"is why this second beacon was down there, down the 
hill, in that cave, and not up here." 
   Kahlan shared a telling look with him. "If 
Jennsen hadn't done what she did, you would never 
have found it." 
   Richard walked around the base of the statue, 
searching—for what he didn't know. Almost as soon 
as he started looking, he saw, on the front of the 
base, on the top of one of the decorative moldings, 
an odd void in the snow. It looked as if something 
had been sitting there and had then been taken 
away. It was a track, of sorts, a telltale. 
   Richard thought the barren spot looked familiar. 
He pulled the warning beacon from his pack and 
checked the shape of the bottom. His thought 
confirmed, he placed the figure of himself in the 
void in the snow collected on the rim of the base. 
It was a perfect fit. 

The little figure had been here, with this statue. 
   "How do you think it came to be down in the 
cave?" Cara asked in a suspicious voice. 
   "Maybe it fell," Jennsen offered. "It's pretty 
windy up here. Maybe the wind blew it off and it 
tumbled down the hill." 
   "And just managed to roll through the woods 
without being stopped by a tree, and then, neat as 
can be," Richard said, "roll right into the small 
opening of the cave, and then just happened to come 
to be stuck in the rock right near where you, by 
coincidence, ended up stuck. Stuck, I might add, in 
a terrifying place you aren't terrified of." 
Jennsen blinked in wonder. "When you put it like 
that. . ." 
   Standing at the crown of the pass, in front of 
the statue right where the warning beacon would 
have rested, and now again rested, Richard could 
see that the spot held a commanding view of the 
approach to Bandakar. The mountains blocking off 
the view to either side were as formidable as 
anything he'd ever seen. The rise where the 
sentinel sat overlooked the approach into the pass 
back between those towering, snowcapped peaks. As 
high as they were, they were still only at the 
foothills of those mountains. 
   The statue was not looking ahead, as might be 
expected of a guardian, but rather, its unflinching 
gaze was fixed a little to the right. Richard 
thought that was a bit odd. He wondered if maybe it 
was meant to show this sentinel keeping a vigilant 
eye on everything, on every potential threat. 
   Standing as he was, directly in front of the 
statue's base, in front of where the warning beacon 
sat, Richard looked to the right, in the direction 
the man in the statue was looking. 
   He could see the approach of the pass up through 
the mountains. Farther out, in the distance, he 
could see vast forests to the west, and beyond 
that, the low, barren mountains they had crossed. 

And, he could see a gap in those mountains. 
   The eyes of the man in the statue were 
resolutely fixed upon what Richard now saw. 
"Dear spirits," he whispered. 
"What is it?" Kahlan asked. "What do you see?" 
"The Pillars of Creation." 
 
 
 
 
          CHAPTER 35 
 
 
 
 
Kahlan, standing beside Richard, squinted into the 
distance. From the base of the statue they had a 
commanding view of the approaches from the west. It 
seemed as if she could see half a world away. But 
she couldn't see what he saw. 
"I can't see the Pillars of Creation," she said. 
   Richard leaned close, having her sight down his 
arm where he pointed. "There. That darker 
depression in the expanse of flat ground." 
   Richard's eyes were better at seeing distant 
things than were hers. It was all rather hazy-
looking, being so far away. 
   "You can recognize where it lies by the 
landmarks, there"—he pointed off to the right, and 
then a little to the left—"and there. Those darker 
mountains in the distance that are a little higher 
than the rest have a unique shape. They serve as 
good reference points so you can find things." 
   "Now that you point them out, I can see the land 
where we traveled from. I recognize those 
mountains." 
   It seemed amazing, looking back on where they'd 
been, how high they were. She could see, spread out 
into the distance, the vast wasteland beyond the 
barren mountain range and, even if she couldn't 

make out the details of the dreadful place, she 
could see the darker depression in the valley. That 
depression she knew to be the Pillars of Creation. 
   "Owen," Richard asked, "how far is this pass 
from your men—the men who were hiding with you in 
the hills?" 
   Owen looked baffled by the question. "But Lord 
Rahl, I have never been up this portion of the pass 
before. I have never seen this statue. I have never 
been anywhere close to here before. It would be 
impossible for me to tell such a thing." 
   "Not impossible," Richard said. "If you know 
what your home is like, you should be able to 
recognize landmarks around it—just as I was able to 
look out to the west and see the route we traveled 
to get here. Look around at those mountains back 
through the pass and see if you recognize 
anything." 
   Owen, looking skeptical, walked the rest of the 
way up behind the statue and peered off to the 
east. He stood in the wind for a time, staring. He 
pointed at a mountain in the distance, through the 
pass. 
   "I think I know that place." He sounded 
astonished. "I know the shape of that mountain. It 
looks a little different from this spot, but I 
think it's the same place I know." He shielded his 
eyes from the gusts of wind as he gazed to the 
east. He pointed again. "And that place! I know 
that place, too!" 
   He rushed back to Richard. "You were right, Lord 
Rahl. I can see places I know." He stared off then 
as he whispered to himself. "I can tell where my 
home is, even though I've not been here. Just by 
seeing places I know." 
Kahlan had never seen anyone so astounded by 
something so simple. 
   "So," Richard finally prompted, "how far do you 
think your men are from here?" 
   Owen looked back over his shoulder. "Through 

that low place, then around that slope coming from 
the right..." He turned back to Richard. "We have 
been hiding in the land near where the seal on our 
empire used to be, where no one ever goes because 
it is near the place where death stalks, near the 
pass. I would guess maybe a full day's steady walk 
from here." He suddenly turned hesitant. "But I am 
wrong to be confident of what my eyes tell me. I 
may just be seeing what my mind wants me to see. It 
may not be real." 
   Richard folded his arms and leaned back against 
the granite base of the statue as he gazed out 
toward the Pillars of Creation, ignoring 
   Owen's doubt. Knowing Richard as she did, Kahlan 
imagined that he must be considering his options. 
   Standing beside him, she was about to lean back 
against the stone of the statue's base, but instead 
paused to first brush the snow off from beside 
where the warning beacon rested. As she brushed the 
snow away, she saw that there were words carved in 
the top of the decorative molding. 
"Richard . .. look at this." 
   He turned to see what she saw, and then started 
hurriedly brushing away more of the snow. The 
others crowded around, trying to see what was 
written in the stone of the statue's base. Cara, on 
the other side of Richard, ran her hand all the way 
to the end to clean off the entire ledge. 
   Kahlan couldn't read it. It was in another 
language she didn't know, but thought she 
recognized. 
"High D'Haran?" Cara asked. 
   Richard nodded his confirmation as he studied 
the words. "This must be a very old dialect," he 
said, half to himself as he scrutinized it, trying 
to figure it out. "It's not just an old dialect, 
but one with which I'm not familiar. Maybe because 
this is so distant a place." 
   "What does it say?" Jennsen wanted to know as 
she peered around Richard, between him and Kahlan. 

"Can you translate it?" 
   "It's difficult to work it out," Richard 
mumbled. He swiped his hair back with one hand as 
he ran the fingers of his other lightly over the 
words. 
   He finally straightened and glanced up at Owen, 
standing to the side of the base, watching. 
   Everyone waited while Richard looked down at the 
words again. "I'm not sure," he finally said. "The 
phraseology is odd. . .." He looked up at Kahlan. 
"I can't be sure. I've not seen High D'Haran 
written this way before. I feel like I should know 
what it says, but I can't quite get it." 
   Kahlan didn't know if he really couldn't be 
sure, or if he didn't want to speak the translation 
in front of the others. 
"Well, maybe if you think it over for a while, it 
might come to you," she offered, trying to give him 
a way of putting it off for the time being if he 
wanted to. 
   Richard didn't take her offer. Instead, he 
tapped a finger to the words on the left of the 
warning beacon. "This part is a little more clear 
to me. I think it says something like Tear any 
breach of this seal to the empire beyond ...' " 
   He wiped a hand across his mouth as he 
considered the rest of the words. "I'm not so sure 
about the rest of it," he finally said. "It seems 
to say, 'for beyond is evil: those who cannot see.' 
" 
"Of course," Jennsen muttered in angry 
comprehension. 
   Richard raked his fingers back through his hair. 
"I'm not at all sure I have it right. Something 
about it still doesn't make sense. I'm not sure I 
have it right." 
   "You have it perfectly right," Jennsen said. 
"Those who cannot see magic. This was placed by the 
gifted who sealed those people away from the rest 
of the world because of how they were born." Her 

fiery eyes filled with tears. "Fear any breach of 
this seal to the empire beyond, for beyond is evil—
those who cannot see magic. That's what it means, 
those who cannot see magic." 
   No one argued with her. The only sound was the 
rush of the wind across the open ground. 
Richard spoke softly to her. "I'm not sure that's 
it, Jenn." 
   She folded her arms and turned away, glaring out 
toward the Pillars of Creation. 
   Kahlan could understand how she felt. Kahlan 
knew what it was like to be shunned by almost 
everyone except those who were like you. Confessors 
were thought of as monsters by many people. Given 
the chance, Kahlan was sure that much of the rest 
of humanity would be happy to seal her away for 
being a Confessor. 
   But just because she could understand how 
Jennsen felt, that didn't mean Kahlan thought the 
young woman was right. Jennsen's anger at those who 
banished these people was justified, but her anger 
at Richard and the rest of them for having the same 
spark of the gift, which made them in that way the 
same, was not. 
   Richard turned his attention to Owen. "How many 
men do you have waiting in the hills for you to 
return?" 
   "Not quite a hundred." 
   Richard sighed in disappointment. "Well, if 
that's all you have, then that's all you have. 
We'll have to see to getting more later. 
   "For now, I want you to go get those men. Bring 
them here, to me. We'll wait here for you to 
return. This will be our base from where we work a 
plan to get the Order out of Bandakar. We'll set up 
a camp down there, in those trees, where it's well 
protected." 
   Owen looked down the incline to where Richard 
pointed, and then off toward his homeland. His 
confused frown returned to Richard. "But, Lord 

Rahl, it is you who must give us freedom. Why not 
just come with me to the men, if you want to see 
them?" 
   "Because I think this will be a safer place than 
where they are now, where the Order probably knows 
they're hiding." 
   "But the Order does not know that there are men 
hiding, or where they are." 
   "You're deluding yourselves. The men in the 
Order are brutal, but they aren't stupid." 
   "If they really know where the men are, then why 
hasn't the Order come to call them in?" 
   "They will," Richard said. "When it suits them, 
they will. Your men aren't a threat, so the men of 
the Order are in no hurry to expend any effort to 
capture them. Sooner or later they will, though, 
because they won't want anyone to think they can 
escape the Order's rule. 
   "I want your men away from there, to a place 
they've not been: here. I want the Order to think 
they're gone, to think they've run away, so they 
won't go after them." 
"Well," Owen said, thinking it over, "I guess that 
would be all right." 
   Tom stood watch near the far corner of the 
statue's base, giving Jennsen room to be alone. She 
looked angry and he looked like he thought it best 
just to leave her be. Tom looked as if he felt 
guilty for having been born with the spark of the 
gift that allowed him to see magic, that same spark 
possessed by those who had banished people like 
Jennsen. 
"Tom," Richard said, "I want you to go with Owen." 
   Jennsen's arms came unfolded as she turned 
toward Richard. "Why do you want him to go?" She 
suddenly sounded a lot less angry. 
   "That's right," Owen said. "Why should he go?" 
   "Because," Richard said, "I want to make sure 
that you and your men get back here. I need the 
antidote, remember? The more men I have back here 

with me who know where it is, the better. I want 
them safely away from the Order for now. With blond 
hair and blue eyes, Tom will fit in with your 
people. If you run into any soldiers from the Order 
they will think he's one of you. Tom will make sure 
you all get back here." 
"But it could be dangerous," Jennsen objected. 
   Richard fixed her in his challenging stare. He 
didn't say anything. He simply waited to see if she 
would dare to attempt to justify her objections. 
Finally, she broke eye contact and looked away. 
"I guess it makes sense, though," she finally 
admitted. 
   Richard turned his attention back to Tom. "I 
want you to see if you can bring back some 
supplies. And I'd like to use your hatchet while 
you're gone, if that's all right." 
   Tom nodded and pulled his hatchet from his pack. 
As Richard stepped closer to take the axe, he 
started ticking off a list of things he wanted the 
man to look for—specific tools, yew wood, hide 
glue, packthread, leather, and a list of other 
things Kahlan couldn't hear. 
   Tom hooked his thumbs behind his belt. "All 
right. I doubt I'll find it all right off. Do you 
want me to search out what I can't find before I 
return?" 
   "No. I need it all, but I need those men back 
here more. Get what's readily available and then 
get back here with Owen and his men as soon as 
possible." 
"I'll get what I can. When do you want us to 
leave?" 
"Now. We don't have a moment to lose." 
   "Now?" Owen sounded incredulous. "It will be 
dark in an hour or two." 
   "Those couple of hours may be hours I need," 
Richard said. "Don't waste them." 
   Kahlan thought that he meant because of the 
poison, but he could have had the gift in mind. She 

could see how much pain he was in because of the 
headache caused by the gift. She ached to hold him, 
to comfort him, to make him better, but she 
couldn't make it all just go away; they had to find 
the solutions. She glanced at the small figure of 
Richard standing on the base of the statue. Half of 
that figure was as dark as a night stone, as dark 
and dead as the deepest part of the underworld 
itself. 
   Tom swung his pack up over his shoulder. "Take 
care of them for me, will you, Cara?" he asked with 
a wink. She smiled her agreement. "I'll see you all 
in a few days, then." He waved his farewell, his 
gaze lingering on Jennsen, before shepherding Owen 
around the statue and toward the man's homeland. 
   Cara folded her arms and leveled a look at 
Jennsen. "You're a fool if you don't go kiss him a 
good journey." 
Jennsen hesitated, her eyes turning toward Richard. 
"I've learned not to argue with Cara," Richard 
said. 
   Jennsen smiled and ran over the ridge to catch 
Tom before he was gone. Betty, at the end of a long 
rope, scampered to follow after. 
   Richard stuffed the small figure of himself into 
his pack before picking up his bow from where it 
leaned against the statue. "We'd better get down 
into the trees and set up a camp." 
   Richard, Kahlan, and Cara started down the rise 
toward the concealing safety of the huge pines. 
They had been long enough out in the open, as far 
as Kahlan was concerned. It was only a matter of 
time before the races came in search of them—before 
Nicholas came looking for them. 
   As cold as it was up in the pass, Kahlan knew 
they didn't dare build a fire; the races could spot 
the smoke and then find them. They needed instead 
to build a snug shelter. Kahlan wished they could 
find a wayward pine to protect and hide them for 
the night, but she had not seen any of those down 

in the Old World and wishing wasn't going to grow 
one. 
   As she stepped carefully on dry patches of rock, 
avoiding the snow so as not to leave tracks, she 
checked the dark clouds. It was always possible 
that it might warm just a little and that the 
precipitation could turn to rain. Even if it 
didn't, it still would be a miserably cold night. 
   Jennsen, Betty following behind, returned, 
catching up with them as they zigzagged down 
through the steep notches of ledge. The wind was 
getting colder, the snow a little heavier. 
   When they reached a flatter spot, Jennsen caught 
Richard's arm. "Richard, I'm sorry. I don't mean to 
be angry with you. I know you didn't banish those 
people. I know it's not your fault." She gathered 
up the slack on Betty's rope, looping it into 
coils. "It just makes me angry that those people 
were treated like that. I'm like them, and so it 
makes me angry." 
   "The way they were treated should make you 
angry," Richard said as he started away, "but not 
because you share an attribute with them." 
   Taken aback by his words, even looking a little 
hurt, Jennsen didn't move. "What do you mean?" 
   Richard paused and turned back to her. "That's 
how the Imperial Order thinks. That's how Owen's 
people think. It's a belief in granting disembodied 
prestige, or the mantle of guilt, to all those who 
share some specific trait or attribute. 
   "The Imperial Order would like you to believe 
that your virtue, your ultimate value, or even your 
wickedness, arises entirely from being born a 
member of a given group, that free will itself is 
either impotent or nonexistent. They want you to 
believe that all people are merely interchangeable 
members of groups that share fixed, preordained 
characteristics, and they are predestined to live 
through a collective identity, the group will, 
unable to rise on individual merit because there 

can be no such thing as independent, individual 
merit, only group merit. 
   "They believe that people can only rise above 
their station in life when selected to be awarded 
recognition because their group is due an 
indulgence, and so a representative, a stand-in for 
the group, must be selected to be awarded the badge 
of self-worth. Only the reflected light off this 
badge, they believe, can bring the radiance of 
self-worth to others of their group. 
   "But those granted this badge live with the 
uneasy knowledge that it's only an illusion of 
competence. It never brings any sincere self-
respect because you can't fool yourself. 
Ultimately, because it is counterfeit, the sham of 
esteem granted because of a connection with a group 
can only be propped up by force. 
   "This belittling of mankind, the Order's 
condemnation of everyone and everything human, is 
their transcendent judgment of man's inadequacy. 
   "When you direct your anger at me for having a 
trait borne by someone else, you pronounce me 
guilty for their crimes. That's what happens when 
people say I'm a monster because our father was a 
monster. If you admire someone simply because you 
believe their group is deserving, then you embrace 
the same corrupt ethics. 
   "The Imperial Order says that no individual 
should have the right to achieve something on his 
own, to accomplish what someone else cannot, and so 
magic must be stripped from mankind. They say that 
accomplishment is corrupt because it is rooted in 
the evil of self-interest, therefore the fruits of 
that accomplishment are tainted by its evil. This 
is why they preach that any gain must be sacrificed 
to those who have not earned it. They hold that 
only through such sacrifice can those fruits be 
purified and made good. 
   "We believe, on the other hand, that your own 
individual life is the value and its own end, and 

what you achieve is yours. 
   "Only you can achieve self-worth for yourself. 
Any group offering it to you, or demanding it of 
you, comes bearing chains of slavery." 
   Jennsen stared at him for a long moment. A smile 
finally overcame her. "That's why, then, I always 
wanted to be accepted for who I was, for myself, 
and always thought it unfair to be persecuted 
because of how I was born?" 
   "That's why," Richard said. "If you want to be 
proud of yourself because of what you accomplish, 
then don't allow yourself to be chained to some 
group, and don't in turn chain other individuals to 
one. Let your judgment of individuals be earned. 
   "This means I should not be hated because my 
father was evil, nor should I be admired because my 
grandfather is good. I have the right to live my 
own life, for my own benefit. You are Jennsen Rahl, 
and your life is what you, alone, make of it." 
   They made the rest of the way down the hill in 
silence. Jennsen still had a faraway look as she 
thought about what Richard had said. 
   When they reached the trees, Kahlan was relieved 
to get in under the sheltering limbs of the ancient 
pines and even more so when they entered the 
secluded protection of the lower, thicker balsam 
trees. They made their way through dense thickets 
into the quiet solitude of the towering trees, and 
farther down the slope, to a place where an 
outcropping of rock offered protection from the 
elements. It would be easier to construct a shelter 
in such a place by leaning boughs against it in 
order to make a relatively warm shelter. 
   Richard used Tom's hatchet to cut some stout 
poles from young pines in the understory which he 
placed against the rock wall. While he lashed the 
poles together with wiry lengths of pine roots he 
pulled up from the mossy ground, Kahlan, Jennsen, 
and Cara started collecting boughs to make dry 
bedding and to cover over the shelter. 

   "Richard," Jennsen asked as she dragged a bundle 
of balsam close to the shelter, "how do you think 
you are going to rid Bandakar of the Imperial 
Order?" 
   Richard laid a heavy bough up high on the poles 
and tied it in place with a length of the wiry pine 
root. "I don't know that I can. My primary concern 
is to get to the antidote." 
   Jennsen looked a bit surprised. "But aren't you 
going to help those people?" 
   He glanced back over his shoulder at her. "They 
poisoned me. No matter how you dress it up, they're 
willing to murder me if I don't do as they wish—if 
I don't do their dirty work for them. They think 
we're savages, and they're above us. They don't 
think our lives are worth as much—because we are 
not members of their group. My first responsibility 
is to my own life, to getting that antidote." 
   "I see what you mean." Jennsen handed him 
another balsam bough. "But I still think that if we 
eliminate the Order there, and this Nicholas, we'll 
be helping ourselves." 
   Richard smiled. "I can agree with that, and 
we're going to do what we can. But to truly help 
them, I need to convince Owen and his men that they 
must help themselves." 
   Cara snorted a derisive laugh. "That will be a 
good trick, teaching the lambs to become the 
wolves." 
   Kahlan agreed. She thought that convincing Owen 
and his men to defend themselves would be more 
difficult than the five of them ridding Bandakar of 
the Imperial Order by themselves. She wondered what 
Richard had in mind. 
"Well," Jennsen said, "since we're all in this, all 
going to face the Order up in Bandakar, don't you 
think that I have a right to know everything? To 
know what you two are always making eyes at each 
other about and whispering about?" 
Richard stared at Jennsen a moment before he looked 

back at Kahlan. 
   Kahlan laid her bundle of branches down near the 
shelter. "I think she's right." 
   Richard looked unhappy about it, but finally 
nodded and set down the balsam bough he was 
holding. "Almost two years ago, Jagang managed to 
find a way to use magic to start a plague. The 
plague itself was not magic; it was just the 
plague. It swept through cities killing people by 
the tens of thousands. Since the firestorm had been 
started with a spark of magic, I found a way to 
stop the plague, using magic." 
   Kahlan did not believe that such a nightmare 
could be reduced to such a simple statement and 
even begin to adequately convey the horror they had 
gone through. But by the look on Jennsen's face, 
she at least grasped a little bit of the terror 
that had gripped the land. 
   "In order for Richard to return from the place 
where he had to go to stop the plague," Kahlan 
said, leaving out terrible portions of the story, 
"he had to take the infection of plague. Had he 
not, he would have lived, but lived alone for the 
rest of his life and died alone without ever seeing 
me or anyone else again. He took the plague into 
himself so that he could come back and tell me he 
loved me." 
Jennsen stared, wide-eyed. "Didn't you know he 
loved you?" 
   Kahlan smiled a small bitter smile. "Don't you 
think your mother would come back from the world of 
the dead to tell you she loves you, even though you 
know she does?" 
   "Yes, I suppose she would. But why would you 
have to become infected just to return? And return 
from where?" 
   "It was a place, called the Temple of the Winds, 
that was partially in the underworld." Richard 
gestured up the pass. "Something like that boundary 
was part of the world of the dead but was still 

here, in this world. You might say that the Temple 
of the Winds was something like that. It was hidden 
within the underworld. Because I had to cross a 
boundary of sorts, through the underworld, the 
spirits set a price for me to return to the world 
of life."  
   "Spirits? You saw spirits there?" Jennsen asked. 
When Richard nodded, she asked, "Why would they set 
such a price?" 
"The spirit who set the price of my return was 
Darken Rahl." 
Jennsen's jaw dropped. 
   "When we found Lord Rahl," Cara said, "he was 
almost dead. The Mother Confessor went on a 
dangerous journey through the sliph, all alone, to 
find what would cure him. She succeeded in bringing 
it back, but Lord Rahl was moments away from 
death." 
   "I used the magic I recovered," Kahlan said. "It 
was something that had the power to reverse the 
plague that the magic had given him. The magic I 
invoked to do this was the three chimes." 
"Three chimes?" Jennsen asked. "What are they?" 
   "The chimes are underworld magic. Summoning 
their assistance keeps a person from crossing over 
into the world of the dead. 
   "Unfortunately, or perhaps fortunately, at the 
time I didn't know anything else about the chimes. 
It turns out that they were created during the 
great war to end magic. The chimes are beings of 
sorts, but without souls. They come from the 
underworld. They annul magic in this world." 
   Jennsen looked confused. "But how can they 
accomplish such a thing?" 
   "I don't know how they work, exactly. But their 
presence in this world, since they are part of the 
world of the dead, begins the destruction of 
magic." 
   "Can't you get rid of the chimes? Can't you find 
a way to send them back?" 

   "I already did that," Richard said. "But while 
they were here, in this world, magic began to 
fail." 
   "Apparently," Kahlan said, "what I began that 
day when I called the chimes into the world of life 
began a cascade of events that continues to 
progress, even though the chimes have been sent 
back to the underworld." 
"We don't know that," Richard said, more to Kahlan 
than to Jennsen. 
   "Richard is right," Kahlan told Jennsen, "we 
don't know it for sure, but we have good reason to 
believe it's true. This boundary locking away 
Bandakar failed. The timing would suggest that it 
failed not long after I freed the chimes. One of 
those mistakes I told you about, before. Remember?" 
   Jennsen, staring at Kahlan, finally nodded. "But 
you didn't do it to hurt people. You didn't know it 
would happen. You didn't know how this boundary 
would fail, how the Order would go in there and 
abuse those people." 
   "Doesn't really make any difference, does it? I 
did it. I caused it. Because of me, magic may be 
failing. I accomplished what the Order is working 
so hard to bring about. As a result of what I did, 
all those people in Bandakar died, and others are 
now out in the world where they will once again do 
as they did in ancient times—they will begin 
breeding the gift out of mankind. 
   "We stand at the brink of the end times of 
magic, all because of me, because of what I did." 
   Jennsen stood frozen. "And so you regret what 
you caused? That you may have done something that 
will end magic?" 
   Kahlan felt Richard's arm around her waist. "I 
only know a world with magic," she finally said. "I 
became the Mother Confessor—in part—to help protect 
people with magic who are unable to protect 
themselves. I, too, am a creature of magic—it's 
inextricably bound into me. I know profoundly 

beautiful things of magic that I love; they are a 
part of the world of life." 
"So you fear you may have caused the end of what 
you love most." 
   "Not love most." Kahlan smiled. "I became the 
Mother Confessor because I believe in laws that 
protect all people, give all individuals the right 
to their own life. I would not want an artist's 
ability to sculpt to be stopped, or a singer's 
voice to be silenced, or a person's mind to be 
stilled. Nor do I want people's ability to achieve 
what they can with magic to be stripped from them. 
   "Magic itself is not the central issue, not what 
this is about. I want all the flowers, in all their 
variety, to have a chance to bloom. You are 
beautiful, too, Jennsen. I would not choose to lose 
you, either. Each person has a right to life. The 
idea that there must be a choice of one over 
another is counter to what we believe." 
   Jennsen smiled at Kahlan's hand on her cheek. 
"Well, I guess that in a world without magic, I 
could be queen." 
   On her way by with balsam boughs, Cara said, 
"Queens, too, must bow to the Mother Confessor. 
Don't forget it." 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
          CHAPTER 36 
 
 
 
    
   Light flooded in as the lid of the box suddenly 
lifted. The rusty hinges groaned in protest of 
every inch the lid rose. Zedd squinted at the 

abrupt, blinding light of day. Beefy arms flipped 
the hinged lid back. If there had been any slack in 
the chain around his neck, Zedd would have jumped 
at the booming bang when the heavy cover flopped 
back, showering him in dirt and rusty grit. 
   Between the bright light and the dust swirling 
through the air, Zedd could hardly see. It didn't 
help, either, that the short chain around his neck 
was bolted to the center of the floor of the box, 
leaving only enough slack for him to be able to 
lift his head a few inches. With his arms bound in 
iron behind his back, he could do little more than 
lie on the floor. 
   While Zedd was forced to lie there on his side, 
his neck near the iron bolt, he at least could 
breathe in the sudden rush of cooler air. The heat 
in the box had been sweltering. On a couple of 
occasions, when they had stopped at night, they had 
given him a cup of water. It had not been nearly 
enough. He and Adie had been fed precious little, 
but it was water he needed more than food. Zedd 
felt like he might die of thirst. He could hardly 
think of anything but water. 
   He had lost track of the number of days he had 
been chained to the floor of the box, but he was 
somewhat surprised to find himself still alive. The 
box had been bouncing around in the back of a wagon 
over the course of a long, rough, but swift 
journey. He could only assume that he was being 
taken to Emperor Jagang. He was also sure that he 
would be sorry if he was still alive at the end of 
the journey. 
   There had been times, in the stifling heat of 
the box, when he had expected that he would soon 
fade into unconsciousness and die. There were times 
when he longed to die. He was sure that falling 
into such a fatal sleep would be far preferable to 
what was in store for him. He had no choice, 
though; the control the Sister exerted through the 
Rada'Han prevented him from strangling himself to 

death with the chain, and it was pretty hard, he 
had discovered, to will himself to die. 
   Zedd, his head still held to the floor of the 
box by the stub of chain, tried to peer up, but he 
could see only sky. He heard another lid bang open. 
He coughed as another cloud of dust drifted over 
him. When he heard Adie's cough, he didn't know if 
he was relieved to know that she, too, was still 
alive, or sorry that she was, knowing what she, 
like he, would have to endure. 
   Zedd was, in a way, ready for the torture he 
knew he would be subjected to. He was a wizard and 
had passed tests of pain. He feared such torture, 
but he would endure it until it finally ended his 
life. In his weakened condition, he expected that 
it wouldn't take all that long. In a way, such a 
time under torture was like an old acquaintance 
come back to haunt him. 
   But he feared the torture of Adie far more than 
his own. He hated above all else the torture of 
others. He hated to think of her coming under such 
treatment. 
   The wagon shuddered as the front of the other 
box dropped open. A cry escaped Adie's throat when 
a man struck her. 
"Move, you stupid old woman, so I can get at the 
lock!" 
   Zedd could hear Adie's shoes scraping the wooden 
crate as, hands bound behind her back, she tried to 
comply. By the sounds of fists on flesh, the man 
wasn't happy with her efforts. Zedd closed his 
eyes, wishing he could close his ears as well. 
   The front of Zedd's confining box crashed open, 
letting in more light and dust. A shadow fell 
across him as a man approached. Because his face 
was pinned to the floor by the chain, Zedd couldn't 
see the man. 
   A big hand reached in, fitting a key to the 
lock. Zedd kept his head stretched as far away as 
possible to give the man all the room available to 

let him do his work. Such effort earned Zedd a 
heavy punch in the side of his head. The blow left 
his ears ringing. 
   The lock finally sprang open. The man's big fist 
seized Zedd by the hair and dragged him, like a 
sack of grain, out of the box and toward the rear 
of the wagon. Zedd pressed his lips together, to 
keep from crying out as his bones bumped over 
protruding wooden runners in the wagon bed. At the 
back edge of the wagon he was summarily dumped off 
the back to slam down onto the ground. 
   Ears ringing, head spinning, Zedd tried to sit 
up when he was kicked, knowing it was a command. He 
spat out dirt. With his hands tied behind his back 
he was having difficulty complying. After three 
kicks, a big man grabbed him by the hair and lifted 
him upright. 
   Zedd's heart sank to see that they sat among an 
army of astounding size. The dark mass of humanity 
blighted the land as far as he could see. So, it 
would seem, they had arrived. 
   Out of the corner of his eye, he saw Adie 
sitting in the dirt beside him, her head hanging. 
She had a livid bruise on her cheek. She didn't 
look up when a shadow fell across her. 
   A woman in a long drab skirt moved in before 
them, distracting him from his appraisal of the 
enemy forces. Zedd recognized the brown wool dress. 
It was the Sister of the Dark who had put the 
collar around their necks. He didn't know her name; 
she'd never offered it. In fact, she hadn't spoken 
to them since they were chained in their boxes. She 
stood over them, now, like the strict governess of 
incorrigible children. 
   The ring through her lower lip, marking her as a 
slave, in Zedd's mind irrevocably tarnished her air 
of authority. 
   The ground was covered with horse manure, most, 
but not all, old and dried. Out beyond the Sister, 
horses stood picketed seemingly without any order 

among the soldiers. Horses that looked like they 
might belong to the cavalry were well kept. 
Workhorses were not so healthy. Among the horses 
and men, wagons and stacks of supplies dotted the 
late-day landscape. 
   The place had the foul stink of shallow 
latrines, horses, manure, and the filthy smell of 
crowded human habitation failing to meet common 
sanitary needs. Zedd blinked when acrid woodsmoke 
from one of the thousands of cook fires drifted 
across him, burning his eyes. 
   The air was also thick with mosquitoes, gnats, 
and flies. The flies were the worst. The mosquito 
bites would itch later, but the flies stung the 
instant they bit, and with his arms bound behind 
his back, there wasn't much he could do about it 
other than shake his head to try to keep them out 
of his eyes and nose. 
   The two soldiers who had freed Zedd and Adie 
from their boxes stood patiently to the sides. 
Beyond the woman's skirts a vast encampment spread 
out as far as the eye could see. There were men 
everywhere, men engaged in work, at rest, and at 
recreation. They were dressed in every variety of 
clothing, from leather armor, chain mail, and 
studded belts to hides, dirty tunics, and trousers 
in the process of rotting into rags. Most of the 
men were unshaven, and all were as filthy as feral 
recluses living in mad seclusion. The mass 
encampment generated a constant din of yells, 
whistles, men hollering and laughing, the jangle 
and rattle of metal, the ring of hammers or rhythm 
of saws, and, piercing through it all, the 
occasional cry of someone in agonizing pain. 
   Tents by the thousands, tents of all sorts, like 
leaves after a big wind, lay littering the gently 
rolling landscape at the foothills of towering 
mountains to the east. Many a tent was decorated 
with loot; gingham curtains hung at an entrance, a 
small chair or table sat before a tent, here and 

there an item of women's personal clothing flew as 
a flag of conquest. Wagons and horses and gear were 
all jammed together among the rabble in no seeming 
plan. The ground had been churned to a fine dust by 
the masses in this mock city devoid of skeletal 
order. 
   The place was a nightmare of humanity reduced to 
the savagery of a mob on the loose, the scope of 
their goals no more than the impulse of the moment. 
Though their leaders had ends, these men did not. 
   "His Excellency has requested you both," the 
Sister said down to them. 
   Neither Zedd nor Adie said anything. The men 
hauled them both to their feet. A sharp shove 
started them moving behind the Sister after she 
marched away. Zedd noticed, then, that there were 
more soldiers, close to a dozen, escorting them. 
The wagon had delivered them to the end of a road, 
of sorts, that ran a winding course through the 
sprawling encampment. The end of the road, where 
wagons sat in a row, appeared to be the entrance to 
an inner camp, probably a command area. The regular 
soldiers outside a ring of heavily armed guards 
ate, played dice, gambled, bartered loot, joked, 
talked, and drank as they watched the prisoners 
being escorted. 
   The thought occurred to Zedd that if he called 
out, proclaiming that he was the one who was 
responsible for the light spell that had killed or 
wounded so many of their chums, maybe the men would 
riot, set upon them, and kill them before Jagang 
had a chance to do his worst. 
   Zedd opened his mouth to try out his plan, but 
saw the Sister glance back over her shoulder. He 
discovered that his voice was muted through her 
control of the collar around his neck. There would 
be no speaking unless she allowed it. 
   Following the Sister, they walked past the 
standing row of wagons in front of the one that had 
brought them. There were well over a dozen freight 

wagons all lined up before the cordoned-off area 
with the larger tents. None of the wagons were 
empty, but all were loaded with crates. 
   With sinking realization, Zedd understood. These 
were wagons with goods looted from the Wizard's 
Keep. These were all wagons that had made the 
journey with them. They were all full of the things 
those ungifted men, at the Sister's orders, had 
taken out of the Keep. Zedd feared to think what 
priceless items of profound danger sat in these 
crates. There were things in the Keep that became 
hazardous to anyone should they be removed from the 
shields that guarded them. There were rare items 
that, if removed from their protective environment, 
such as darkness, for even a brief time, would 
cease to be viable. 
   Guards in layered hides, mail, leather, and 
armed with pikes set with long steel points flanked 
by sharpened winged blades, huge crescent axes, 
swords, and spiked maces prowled the restricted 
area. These grim soldiers were bigger and more 
menacing-looking than the regular men out in the 
camp—and those were fearsome enough. While the 
special guards patrolled, ever watchful, the 
unconcerned regular soldiers just outside the 
perimeter carried on with their business. 
   The guards led the Sister, Zedd, and Adie 
through an opening in a line of spiked barricades. 
Beyond were the smaller of the special tents. Most 
were round and the same size. Zedd thought that 
these were probably the tents of the staff the 
emperor would keep close, his attendants and 
personal slaves. Zedd wondered if the Sisters were 
all held within the emperor's compound. 
   Up ahead, the palatial vision of the grand tents 
of an emperor and his entourage rose up in the 
late-afternoon light. No doubt some of these 
comfortable tents set about the center compound, 
within the ring of tents for servants and 
attendants, were accommodations for high-ranking 

officers, officials, and the emperor's most trusted 
advisors. 
   Zedd wished he had a light spell and the ability 
to ignite it. He could probably decapitate the 
Imperial Order right then and there. 
   But he knew that such confusion and turmoil 
would only be a temporary setback for the Imperial 
Order. They would provide another brute to enforce 
their message. It would take more than killing 
Jagang to end the threat of the Order. He wasn't 
even sure anymore just what it would take to free 
the world of the oppression and tyranny of the 
Imperial Order. 
   Despite the seductively simplistic notions held 
by most people, the Emperor Jagang was not the 
driving force of this invasion. The driving force 
was a vicious ideology. To exist, it could not 
permit successful lives to be lived in sight of the 
suffering masses produced as a result of the 
beliefs and dictates of the Imperial Order. The 
freedom and resulting success of the people living 
in the New World put the lie to all the Order 
preached. It was blasphemy to succeed on your own; 
since the Order taught that it could not be done, 
it could only be sinful. Sin had to be eliminated 
for the greater good. Therefore, the freedom of the 
New World had to be crushed. 
   "These the ones?" a guard with short-cropped 
hair asked. The rings hanging from his nose and 
ears reminded Zedd of a prized pig decorated for 
the summer fair. Of course, prized pigs would have 
been washed and clean and would have smelled 
better. 
"Yes," the Sister said. "Both of them, as 
instructed." 
   With deliberate care the man's dark-eyed gaze 
took in Adie and then Zedd. By his scowl, he 
apparently thought himself a righteous man who was 
displeased with what he saw: evil. After noting the 
collars they both wore, showing that they would be 

no danger to the emperor, he stepped aside and 
lifted a thumb, directing them through a second 
barricade beyond the tents of the attendants, 
servants, and slaves. The guard's glare followed 
the sinners on their way to meet their proper fate. 
   Other men, from inside the inner compound, swept 
in to surround them. Zedd saw that these men wore 
more orderly outfits. They were layered in similar 
leather and mail, wearing heavy leather weapon 
belts, their chests crisscrossed with studded 
straps. There was a uniformity to them, a sameness, 
that showed these were special guards. The weapons 
hung on those wide belts were better made, and they 
carried more of them. By the way they moved, Zedd 
knew that these were not typical men rounded up to 
be soldiers, but trained men with highly developed 
talents for warfare. 
These were the emperor's elite bodyguards. 
   Zedd looked longingly at the nearly full water 
bucket set out for the men standing guard in the 
heat. It wouldn't do, if you were an emperor, to 
have your elite guards falling over from lack of 
water. Knowing what the response was likely to be, 
Zedd didn't ask for a drink. A sidelong glance 
showed Adie licking her cracked lips, but she, too, 
remained silent. 
   Up a slight rise sat by far the largest and 
grandest of the tents, among the impressive but 
lesser quarters of the emperor's retinue. The 
emperor's tent appeared more a traveling palace, 
actually, than a tent. It boasted a tri-peaked roof 
pierced by high poles bearing colorful standards 
and flags. Brightly embroidered panels adorned the 
exterior walls. Red and yellow banners flapped 
lazily in the hot, late-day air. Tassels and 
streamers all around it made it look like a central 
gathering tent at a festival. 
   A guard flanking a doorway met Zedd's gaze 
before he lifted aside the lambskin covered with 
shields of gold and hammered medallions of silver, 

allowing them entrance. One of the other guards 
stiff-armed Zedd's shoulder, nearly knocking him 
sprawling. Zedd staggered through the doorway into 
the dimly lit interior, Adie stumbling in after 
him. 
   Inside, the raucous noise of the encampment was 
muted by layers of rich carpets placed haphazardly. 
Hundreds of silk and brocade pillows lined the edge 
of the floor. Colorfully decorated hangings divided 
up the murky interior space and covered the outer 
walls. Openings overhead, screened with gauzy 
material, let in little light but did allow some 
air to move through the quiet gloom of the grand 
tent. It was so dim, in fact, that lamps and 
candles were needed. 
   In the middle of the room, toward the back, sat 
an ornate chair draped with rich, red silks. If 
this was Emperor Jagang's throne, he was not in it. 
   While guards surrounded Zedd and Adie, keeping 
them restricted in place, one of the men went off 
behind the fabric walls from where a glow of light 
came. The guards standing close around Zedd stank 
of sweat. Their shoes were caked with manure. For 
all the sumptuous surroundings doing their best to 
simulate a reverent aura, a sacred setting, an 
abiding barnyard stench permeated the place. The 
horse manure and human sweat of the men who had 
entered the tent with Zedd and Adie were only 
making it worse. 
   The man who had gone behind the walls poked his 
head back out, signaling the Sister forward. He 
whispered to her and then she, too, disappeared 
behind the walls. 
   Zedd stole a look at Adie. Her completely white 
eyes stared ahead. He shifted his weight as an 
excuse to lean toward her and stealthily touched 
her shoulder with his, a message of comfort where 
there could be none. She returned a slight push; 
message received, and appreciated. He longed to 
embrace her, but knew he probably never would 

again. 
   Muffled words could be heard, but the heavy wall 
hangings muted them so that Zedd couldn't 
understand any of it. Had he access to his gift, he 
would have been able to hear it all, but the collar 
cut him off from his ability. Even so, the nature 
of the Sister's report, the words, were short and 
businesslike. 
   Those slaves working in the tent at brushing 
carpets, or polishing fine vases, or waxing 
cabinets paid no attention to the people the guards 
had brought in, but the sudden, low tone of menace 
that came from beyond the wall caused them all to 
put markedly more attention into their work. While 
no doubt prisoners were brought before the emperor 
often enough, Zedd was sure that it would not be 
wise for those working in the grand tent to pay any 
notice to the emperor's business. 
From beyond the walls composed of woven scenes also 
came the warm smell of food. The variety of scents 
Zedd was able to detect was astonishing. The stink 
of the place, though, tended to make the fragrant 
aromas of meats, olive oil, garlic, onions, and 
spices somewhat repugnant. 
   The Sister stepped out from behind the wall of 
colorful hangings. The ring through her lower lip 
stood out in stark relief against her ashen skin. 
She gave a slight nod to the men to either side of 
the prisoners. 
   Powerful fingers gripping their arms, Zedd and 
Adie were ushered toward the opening and the glow 
of light beyond. 
 
 
 
 
 
         CHAPTER 37 
 
 

 
 
      Dragged to an abrupt halt, Zedd, at last, 
stood shackled before the intent glower of the 
dream walker himself, Emperor Jagang.  
Enthroned in an ornately carved high-backed chair 
behind a grand dining table, Jagang leaned on both 
elbows, a goose leg spanning his fingers as he 
chewed. Points of candlelight reflecting off the 
sides of his shaved head danced as the tendons all 
the way up through his temples rippled with his 
chewing. A thin mustache, growing down from the 
corners of his mouth and at the center under his 
lower lip, moved rhythmically in time with his jaw, 
as did the fine chain connected to gold loops in 
his ear and nose. Greasy goose fat covering his 
meaty, ringed fingers glistened in the candlelight 
and ran down his bare arms. 
   From his place behind his table, Jagang casually 
studied his latest captives. 
   Despite the candles set about the table and on 
stands to either side, the inside of the tent had 
the murky feel of a dungeon. 
   To each side of him on the broad table sat 
plates of food, goblets, bottles, candles, bowls, 
and, here and there, books and scrolls. There being 
no room for all of the silver platters among the 
multitude, some of them had to be strategically 
balanced atop small decorated pillars. There looked 
to be enough food for a small army. 
For all the Order's talk of sacrifice for the 
betterment of mankind being their noble cause, Zedd 
knew that such abundance at the emperor's table was 
meant to send a contradictory message, even when 
there was no one but the emperor himself to see it. 
   Slaves stood lined up along the wall behind 
Jagang, some holding additional platters, some in 
stiff poses, all awaiting command. Some of those in 
back were young men—young wizards, from what Zedd 
had heard—dressed in loose-fitting white trousers 

and nothing else. This was where wizards in 
training at the Palace of the Prophets had ended 
up, along with the captured Sisters who had been 
their teachers. All were now captives of the dream 
walker. The most accomplished of men, men with 
enormous potential, were used as houseboys to 
perform menial tasks. This, too, was a message sent 
by the emperor of the Imperial Order to show 
everyone that the best and the brightest were to be 
used to clean chamber pots, while brutes ruled 
them. 
   The younger women, Sisters of both the Dark and 
the Light, Zedd assumed, wore outfits that ran from 
neck to wrist to ankle, but were so transparent 
that the women might as well have been naked. This, 
too, was meant to show that Emperor Jagang thought 
little of these women's talents, and valued them 
only for his pleasure. The older, less attractive 
women standing off to the sides wore drab clothes. 
These were probably Sisters who served the emperor 
in other menial ways. 
   Jagang delighted in having under his control, as 
slaves, some of the most gifted people in the 
world. It suited the nature of the Order to demean 
those with ability, rather than to celebrate them. 
   Jagang watched Zedd taking in the house slaves, 
but showed no emotion. The dream walker's bull neck 
made him look almost other than human. The muscles 
of his chest, as well as his massive shoulders, 
were displayed by an open, sleeveless lamb's-wool 
vest. He was as powerful and brawny a man as Zedd 
had seen, an intimidating presence even at rest. 
   As Zedd and Adie stood mute, Jagang's teeth tore 
off another chunk of meat from the goose leg. In 
the tense silence, he watched them as he chewed, as 
if deciding what he might do with his newest 
plunder. 
   More than anything, it was his inky black eyes, 
devoid of any pupils, irises, or whites, that 
threatened to halt the blood in Zedd's veins. The 

last time he had seen those eyes, Zedd had not been 
shackled, but that ungifted girl had prevented Zedd 
from finishing the man. That was going to turn out 
to be the missed opportunity that Zedd would most 
regret. His chance to kill Jagang had slipped 
through his ringers that day, not because of the 
vast power of all the skilled Sisters and troops 
arrayed against him, but all because of a single 
ungifted girl. 
   Those black eyes, the eyes of a mature dream 
walker, glistened in the candlelight. Across their 
dark voids, dim shapes shifted, like clouds on a 
moonless night. 
   The directness of the dream walker's gaze was as 
obvious as was Adie's when she looked at Zedd with 
her pure white eyes. Under Ja-gang's direct glare, 
Zedd had to remind himself to relax his muscles, 
and remember to breathe. 
   The thing about those eyes that most terrified 
him, though, was what he saw in them: a keen, 
calculating mind. Zedd had fought against Jagang 
long enough to have come to understand that one 
underestimated this man at great peril. 
   "Jagang the Just," the Sister said, holding an 
introductory hand out to the nightmare before them. 
"Excellency, this is Zeddicus Zu'l Zo-rander, First 
Wizard, and a sorceress by the name of Adie." 
   "I know who they are," Jagang said in a deep 
voice as heavy with threat as with distaste. 
   He leaned back, hanging one arm over the back of 
the chair and one leg over a carved arm. He 
gestured with the goose leg. 
"Richard Rahl's grandfather, as I hear told." 
Zedd said nothing. 
   Jagang tossed the partially eaten leg on a 
platter and picked up a knife. With one hand he 
sawed a chunk of red meat off a roast and stabbed 
it. Elbow on the table, he waved the knife as he 
spoke. Red juice ran down the blade. 
"Probably not the way you had hoped to meet me." 

   He laughed at his own joke, a deep, resonating 
sound alive with menace. 
   With his teeth, Jagang drew the chunk of meat 
off the knife and chewed as he watched them, as if 
unable to decide on a wealth of delightfully 
terrible options parading through his thoughts. 
He washed the meat down with a gulp from a jeweled 
silver goblet, his gaze never leaving them. "I 
can't tell you how pleased I am that you have come 
to visit me." 
His grin was like death itself. "Alive." 
   He rolled his wrist, circling the knife. "We 
have a lot to talk about." His laugh died out, but 
the grin remained. "Well, you do, anyway. I'll be a 
good host and listen." 
   Zedd and Adie remained silent as Jagang's black-
eyed gaze went from one to the other. 
   "Not so talkative, just yet? Well, no matter. 
You will be babbling soon enough." 
   Zedd didn't waste the effort telling Jagang that 
torture would gain him nothing. Jagang would not 
believe any such boast, and even if he did, it 
would hardly stay his wish to see it done. 
   Jagang fingered a few grapes from a bowl. "You 
are a resourceful man, Wizard Zorander." He popped 
several grapes in his mouth and chewed as he spoke. 
"All alone there in Aydindril, with an army 
surrounding you, you managed to gull me into 
thinking I had trapped Richard Rahl and the Mother 
Confessor. Quite a trick. I must give you credit 
where credit is due. 
   "And the light spell you ignited among my men, 
that was remarkable." He put another grape in his 
mouth. "Do you have any idea how many hundreds of 
thousands of them were caught up in your wizardry?" 
   Zedd could see the corded muscles in the man's 
hairy arm draped over the back of the chair stand 
out as he flexed the fist. He relaxed the hand then 
and leaned forward, using his thumb to gouge out a 
long chunk of ham. 

   He waved the meat as he went on. "It's that kind 
of magic I need you to do for me, good wizard. I 
understand, from the stupid bitches I have who call 
themselves the Sisters of the Light, or the Sisters 
of the Dark, depending on who they've decided can 
offer better favors in the afterlife, that you 
probably didn't conjure that little bit of magic on 
your own, but, rather, you used a constructed spell 
from the Wizard's Keep and simply ignited it among 
my men with some kind of trick, or trigger—probably 
some small curiosity that one of them picked up and 
in the act of having a look, they set it off."  
   Zedd was somewhat alarmed that Jagang had been 
able to learn so much. The emperor took a big bite 
off the end of the piece of ham as he watched them. 
His indulgent look was beginning to wear thin. 
   "So, since you can't do such marvelous magic 
yourself, I've had a few items brought from the 
Keep so you can tell me how they work, what they 
do. I'm sure there must be a great number of 
intriguing items among the inventory. I'd like to 
have some of those conjured spells so they can blow 
open a few of the passes into D'Hara for us. It 
would save me some time and trouble. I'm sure you 
can understand my eagerness to be into D'Hara and 
have this petty resistance finally over with." 
   Zedd heaved a deep breath and finally spoke. 
"For most of those items, you could torture me to 
the end of time and I still wouldn't be able to 
tell you anything because I don't have any 
knowledge of them. Unlike you, I know my own 
limits. I simply don't know what such a spell might 
look like. Even if I did, that doesn't mean I would 
know how to work it. I was simply lucky with that 
one I used." 
   "Maybe, maybe, but you do know about some of the 
items. You are, after all, as I hear told, First 
Wizard; it is your Keep. To claim ignorance of the 
things in it is hardly credible. Despite your claim 
of luck, you managed to know enough about that 

constructed light web to ignite it among my men, so 
you obviously have knowledge about the most 
powerful of the items." 
   "You don't know the first thing about magic," 
Zedd snapped. "You have a head full of grand ideas 
and you think all you have to do is command they be 
done. Well, they can't. You're a fool who doesn't 
know the first thing about real magic or its 
limits." 
   An eyebrow lifted over one of Jagang's inky 
eyes. "Oh, I think I know more than you might 
think, wizard. You see, I love to read, and I, 
well, I have the advantage of perusing some of the 
most remarkably gifted minds you can imagine. I 
probably know a great deal more about magic than 
you give me credit for." 
"I give you credit for bold self-delusion." 
   "Self-delusion?" He spread his arms. "Can you 
create a Slide, Wizard Zorander?" 
   Zedd froze. Jagang had heard the name; that was 
all. The man liked to read. He'd read that name 
somewhere. 
"Of course not, and neither can anyone else alive 
today." 
   "You can't create such a being, Wizard Zorander. 
But you have no idea how much I know about magic. 
You see, I've learned to bring lost talents back to 
life—arts that have long been believed to be dead 
and vanished." 
   "I give you the grandiosity of your dreaming, 
Jagang, but dreaming is easy. Your dreams can't be 
made real just because you dream them and decide 
that you wish them to come alive." 
   "Sister Tahirah, here, knows the truth of it." 
Jagang gestured with his knife. "Tell him, darlin. 
Tell him what I can dream and what I can bring to 
life." 
   The woman hesitantly stepped forward several 
paces. "It is as His Excellency says." She looked 
away from Zedd's frown to fuss with her wiry gray 

hair. "With His Excellency's brilliant direction, 
we were able to bring back some of the old 
knowledge. With the expert guidance of our emperor, 
we were able to invest in a wizard named Nicholas 
an ability not seen in the world for three thousand 
years. It is one of His Excellency's greatest 
achievements. I can personally assure you that it 
is as His Excellency says; a Slide again walks the 
world. It is no fancy, Wizard Zorander, but the 
truth. 
   "The spirits help me," she added under her 
breath, "I was there to see the Slide born into the 
world." 
   "You created a Slide?" Fists still bound behind 
his back, Zedd took an angry stride toward the 
Sister. "Are you out of your mind, woman!" She 
retreated to the back wall. Zedd turned his fury on 
Jagang. "Slides were a catastrophe! They can't be 
controlled! You would have to be crazy to create 
one!" 
   Jagang smiled. "Jealous, wizard? Jealous that 
you are unable to accomplish such a thing, can't 
create such a weapon against me, while I can create 
one to take Richard Rahl and his wife from you?" 
"A Slide has powers you couldn't possibly control." 
   "A Slide is no danger to a dream walker. My 
ability is quicker than his. I am his better." 
"It doesn't matter how quick you are—it isn't about 
being quick! A Slide can't be controlled and he 
isn't going to do what you want!" 
   "I seem to be controlling him just fine." Jagang 
leaned in on an elbow. "You think magic is 
necessary to control those you would master, but I 
don't need magic. Not with Nicholas nor with 
mankind. 
   "You seem to be obsessed with control, I am not. 
I managed to find a people those like you didn't 
want to walk freely among their fellow man, a 
people cast out by the gifted, a people reviled for 
not having any spark of your precious gift of 

magic—a people hated and banished because your kind 
wasn't able to control them. That was their crime: 
being outside the control of your magic." 
   Jagang's fist slammed the table. The slaves all 
jumped with the platters. 
   "This is how your kind wants mankind's future to 
be; your kind wants only those with a spark of the 
gift to be allowed to walk free. This, so you can 
use your gift to control them! Like that collar 
around your neck, your lust is to collar all of 
mankind with magic. 
   "I found those outcast ungifted people and have 
brought them back into the fold of their fellow 
man. Much to your disapproval and the loathing of 
your kind, they can't be touched by your vile 
magic." 
   Zedd couldn't imagine where Jagang had found 
such people. "And so now you have a Slide to 
control them for you." 
   "Your kind condemned and banished them; we have 
welcomed them among us. In fact, we wish to model 
man himself after them. Our cause is theirs by 
their very nature—purity of mankind without any 
taint of magic. In this way the world will be one 
and at last at peace. 
   "I have the advantage over you, wizard; I have 
right on my side. I don't need magic to win; you 
do. I have mankind's best future in mind and have 
set our irreversible course. 
   "With the help of these people, I took your 
Keep. With their help, I have recovered invaluable 
treasures from within. You couldn't do a thing to 
stop them, now could you? Man will now set his own 
course, without the curse of magic darkening his 
struggle. 
   "I now have a Slide to help us to that noble 
end. He is working with those people for the 
benefit of our cause. In doing so, Nicholas has 
already proved invaluable. 
"What's more, that Slide, which your kind could 

never control, has vowed to deliver to me the two I 
want most: your grandson and his wife. I have great 
things planned for them—well, for her, anyway." His 
red-faced rage melted into a grin. "For him, not so 
great things." 
   Zedd could hardly contain his own rage. Were it 
not for the collar stifling his gift, he would have 
reduced the entire place to ash by now. 
   "Once this Nicholas becomes adept at what he can 
do, you will find that he will want revenge of his 
own, and a price you may find far too high." 
   Jagang spread his arms. "There, you are wrong, 
wizard. I can afford whatever Nicholas wants for 
Lord Rahl and the Mother Confessor. There is no 
such thing as a price too high. 
   "You may think me greedy and selfish, but you 
would be wrong. While I enjoy the spoils, I most 
relish the role I play in bringing heathens to 
heel. It is the end that truly concerns me, and in 
the end I will have mankind bow as they should to 
our just cause and the Creator's ways." 
   Jagang seemed to have spent his flash of 
intensity. He leaned back and scooped walnuts from 
a silver bowl. 
   "Zedd be wrong," Adie finally spoke up. "You 
have shown us that you know what you be doing. You 
will be able to control your Slide just fine. May I 
suggest you keep him close, to aid you in your 
efforts." 
   Jagang smiled at her. "You, too, my dried-up old 
sorceress, will be telling me all you know about 
what is in those crates." 
   "Bah," Adie scoffed. "You be a fool with 
worthless treasures. I hope you pull a muscle 
carrying them with you everywhere." 
   "Adie's right," Zedd put in. "You are an 
incompetent oaf who is only going to—" 
   "Oh, come, come, you two. Do you think you will 
throw me into a fit of rage and I'll slaughter the 
both of you on the spot?" His wicked grin returned. 

"Spare you the proper justice of what is to come?" 
Zedd and Adie fell silent. 
   "When I was a boy," Jagang said in a quieter 
tone as he stared off into the distance, "I was 
nothing. A street tough in Altur'Rang. A bully. A 
thief. My life was empty. My future was the next 
meal. 
"One day, I saw a man coming down the street. He 
looked like he might have some money and I wanted 
it. It was getting dark. I came up silently behind 
him, intending to bash in his head, but just then 
he turned and looked me in the eye. 
   "His smile stopped me in my tracks. It wasn't a 
kindly smile, or a weak smile, but the kind of 
smile a man gives you when he knows he can kill you 
where you stand if it pleases him. 
   "He pulled a coin from his pocket and flipped it 
to me, and then, without a word, turned and went on 
his way. 
   "A few weeks later, in the middle of the night, 
I woke up in an alley, where I slept under old 
blankets and crates, and I saw a shadowy form out 
by the street. I knew it was him before he flipped 
me the coin and moved off into the darkness. 
   "The next time I saw him, he was sitting on a 
stone bench at the edge of an old square that some 
of the less fortunate men of Altur'Rang frequented. 
Like me, no one would give these men a chance in 
life. People's greed had sucked the life out of 
these men. I used to go there to look at them, to 
tell myself I didn't want to grow up to be like 
them, but I knew I would, a nobody, human refuse 
waiting to pass into the shadow of oblivion in the 
afterlife. A soul without worth. 
   "I sat down on the bench beside the man and 
asked him why he'd given me money. Instead of 
giving me some answer that most people would give a 
boy, he told me about mankind's grand purpose, the 
meaning of life, and how we are here only as a 
brief stop on the way to what the Creator has in 

store for us—if we are strong enough to rise to the 
challenge. 
   "I'd never heard such a thing. I told him that I 
didn't think that such things mattered in my life 
because I was only a thief. He said that I was only 
striking back from the injustice of my lot in life. 
He said that mankind was evil for making me the way 
I was and only through sacrifice and helping those 
like me could man hope to be redeemed in the 
afterlife. He opened my mind to man's sinful ways. 
   "Before he left, he turned back and asked me if 
I knew how long eternity was. I said no. He said 
that our miserable time in this world was but a 
blink before we entered the next world. That really 
made me think, for the first time, about our 
greater purpose. 
   "Over the next months, Brother Narev took the 
time to talk to me, to tell me about Creation and 
eternity. He gave me a vision of a possible better 
future where before I had none. He taught me about 
sacrifice and redemption. I thought I was doomed to 
an eternity of darkness until he showed me the 
light. 
"He took me in, in return for helping him with 
life's chores. 
   "For me, Brother Narev was a teacher, a priest, 
an advisor, a means to salvation"—Jagang's gaze 
rose to Zedd—"and a grandfather, all rolled into 
one. 
   "He gave me the fire of what mankind can and 
should be. He showed me the true sin of selfish 
greed and the dark void of where it would lead 
mankind. Over time, he made me the fist of his 
vision. He was the soul; I was the bone and muscle. 
   "Brother Narev allowed me the honor of igniting 
the revolution. He placed me at the fore of the 
rise of mankind over the oppression of sinfulness. 
We are the new hope for the future of man, and 
Brother Narev himself allowed me to be the one to 
carry his vision in the cleansing flames of 

mankind's redemption." 
   Jagang leaned back in his chair, fixing Zedd 
with as grim a look as Zedd had ever seen. 
   "And then this spring, while carrying Brother 
Narev's noble challenge to mankind, to those who 
had never had a chance to see the vision of what 
man can be, of the future without the blight of 
magic and oppression and greed and groveling to be 
better than others, I came to Aydindril... and what 
do I find? 
   "Brother Narev's head on a pike, with a note, 
'Compliments of Richard Rahl.' 
   "The man I admired most in the world, the man 
who brought to us all the hallowed dream of 
mankind's true purpose in this life as charged by 
the Creator himself, was dead, his head stuck on a 
pike by your grandson. 
   "If ever there was a greater blasphemy, a 
greater crime against the whole of mankind, I don't 
know of it." 
   Sullen shapes shifted across Jagang's black 
eyes. "Richard Rahl will be dealt justice. He will 
suffer such a blow, before I send him to the 
Keeper. I just wanted you to know your fate, old 
man. Your grandson will know something of that kind 
of pain, and the additional torment of knowing that 
I have his bride and will make her pay dearly for 
her own crimes." A ghost of the grin returned. 
"After he has paid this price, then I will kill 
him." 
   Zedd yawned. "Nice story. You left out all the 
parts where you slaughter innocent people by the 
tens of thousands because they don't want to live 
under your vile rule or Narev's sick, twisted 
vision. 
   "On second thought, don't bother with the sorry 
excuses. Just cut off my head, put it on a pike, 
and be done with it." 
   Jagang's smile returned in its full glory. "Not 
as easily as that, old man. First you have some 

talking to do." 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
         CHAPTER 38 
  
 
 
 
 
Ah, yes," Zedd said. "The torture. I almost 
forgot." 
"Torture?" 
   With two fingers Jagang signaled a woman to the 
side. The older Sister standing wringing her hands 
flinched at seeing his gaze on her and immediately 
rushed off behind a curtain of wall hangings. Zedd 
could hear her whispering urgent instructions to 
people beyond, and then the thump of feet rushing 
across the carpets and out of the tent. 
   Jagang went back to his leisurely meal while 
Zedd and Adie stood before him, starving, dying of 
thirst. The dream walker finally set his knife 
across a plate. Seeing this, the slaves sprang into 
action, clearing away the variety of dishes, most 
having been tasted, but that hardly made a dent in 
them. In a matter of moments the entire table was 
emptied of the food and drink, leaving only the 
books, the scrolls, the candles, and the silver 
bowl of walnuts. 
   Sister Tahirah, the Sister who had captured Zedd 
and Adie at the Keep, stood to the side, her hands 
clasped before her as she watched them. Despite her 
obvious fear of Jagang, and her servile fawning 
over the man, the knowing smirk at Zedd and Adie 
betrayed the pleasure she was deriving from what 

was to come. 
   When half a dozen grisly men entered the room 
and stood off to the side, Zedd began to understand 
what it was that pleased Sister Tahirah. 
   They were unkempt, brawny, and as merciless-
looking as any men Zedd had ever seen. Their hair 
was wildly tangled and greasy. Their hands and 
forearms were spattered with sooty smears, their 
fingernails ragged and foul. Their filthy clothes 
were stained dark with dried blood from the labor 
of their profession. 
These men worked at torture. 
   Zedd looked away from the Sister's steady gaze. 
She hoped to see fear, panic, or perhaps sobbing. 
   Then a group of men and women were ushered into 
the dim room in the emperor's tent. They looked to 
be farmers or humble working folk, probably picked 
up by patrols. The men embraced their wives as 
children huddled around the women's skirts like 
chicks around hens. The people were herded over to 
the side of the room, opposite the line of 
torturers. 
   Zedd's eyes suddenly turned to Jagang. The dream 
walker's black eyes were watching him as he chewed 
a walnut. 
   "Emperor," said the Sister who had brought the 
families in, "these are some of the local people, 
people from the countryside, as you requested." She 
held an introductory hand out. "Good people, this 
is our revered emperor, Jagang the Just. He brings 
the light of the Imperial Order to the world, 
guided by the Creator's wisdom, that we might all 
lead better lives and find salvation with the 
Creator in the afterlife." 
   Jagang surveyed the cluster of Midlanders as 
they awkwardly bowed and curtsied. 
   Zedd felt sick at seeing the timid terror on 
their faces. They would have had to walk through 
the encampment of Order soldiers. They would have 
seen the size of the force that had overrun their 

homeland. 
   Jagang lifted his arm toward Zedd. "Perhaps you 
know this man? This is First Wizard Zorander. He is 
one who has ruled you with his command of magic. As 
you can see, he is now shackled before us. We have 
freed you from the wicked rule of this man and 
those like him." 
   The people's eyes darted between Zedd and 
Jagang, unsure of their role in the emperor's tent, 
or what they were supposed to do. They finally 
bobbed their heads, mumbling their thanks for their 
liberation. 
   "The gifted, like these two, could have used 
their ability to help mankind. Instead, they used 
it for themselves. Where they should have 
sacrificed for those in need, they were selfish. It 
is criminal to behave as they have, live as they 
have, with all they have. It makes me angry to 
think of all they could do for those in need, those 
like you poor people, were it not for their selfish 
ways. People suffer and die without the help they 
could have had, without the help these people could 
have given, were they not so self-centered. 
   "This wizard and his sorceress are here because 
they have refused to help us free the rest of the 
people of the New World by telling us the function 
of the vile things of magic we have captured along 
with them—things of magic they scheme to use to 
slaughter untold numbers of people. This selfish 
wizard and sorceress do this out of spite that they 
could not have their way." 
All the wide eyes turned to Zedd and Adie. 
   "I could tell you people of the vast numbers of 
deaths this man is responsible for, but I fear you 
would be unable to fathom it. I can tell you that I 
simply cannot allow this man to be responsible for 
tens of thousands more deaths." 
   Jagang smiled at the children then and gestured 
with both hands, urging them to come to him. The 
children, a dozen or so, from six or seven to maybe 

twelve, clung to their parents. Jagang's gaze rose 
to those parents as he again motioned the children 
to come to him. The parents understood and 
reluctantly urged their children to do as the 
emperor bid of them. 
   The clump of innocence haltingly approached 
Jagang's outstretched arms and wide grin. He 
embraced them woodenly as they shuffled in close 
around him. He tousled the blond hair of a boy, and 
then the straight sandy hair of a girl. Several of 
the younger ones peered pleadingly back at parents 
before cringing at Jagang's meaty hand on their 
backs, his jovial pat on their cheek. 
Silent terror hung thick in the air. 
It was as frightening a sight as Zedd had ever 
witnessed. 
   "Well, now," the smiling emperor said, "let me 
get to the reason I have called upon you people." 
   His powerful arms gathered the children before 
him. As a Sister blocked a boy wanting to return to 
his parents, Jagang put his huge hands on a young 
girl's waist and set her upon his knee. The girl's 
wide eyes stared up at the smiling face, the bald 
head, but mostly at the nightmare void of the dream 
walker's inky eyes. 
   Jagang looked from the girl back to the parents. 
"You see, the wizard and sorceress have refused to 
offer their help. In order to save a great many 
lives, I must have their cooperation. They must 
answer honestly all my questions. They refuse. I'm 
hoping you good people can convince them to tell us 
what we need to know in order to save the lives of 
a great many people, and free a great many more 
from the oppression of their magic." 
   Jagang looked toward the row of men standing 
silently against the opposite wall. With a single 
tilt of his head, he commanded them forward. 
   "What are you doing?" a woman asked, even as her 
husband tried to restrain her. "What do you 
intend?" 

   "What I intend," Jagang told the crowd of 
parents, "is for you good people to convince the 
wizard and the sorceress to talk. I'm going to put 
you in a tent alone with them so that you can 
persuade them to do their duty to mankind—persuade 
them to cooperate with us." 
   As the men began seizing the children, they 
finally burst out in frightened crying. The 
parents, seeing their red-faced children bawling in 
terror, cried out themselves and rushed forward to 
retrieve them. The big men, each holding one or two 
little arms in a fist, shoved the parents back. 
The parents fell to hysterical screaming for the 
children to be freed. 
   "I'm sorry, but I can't do that," Jagang said 
over the wails of the children. He tilted his head 
again and the men started carting the twisting, 
screaming children out of the tent. The parents 
were wailing as well, trying to reach in past big 
filthy arms to touch what was to them most precious 
in the world. 
   The parents were bewildered and horrified, 
fearing to cross a line that would bring wrath down 
on their children, yet not wanting them to be 
carted away. Against their urgent pleading, the 
children were swiftly whisked away. 
   As the children were taken out, the Sisters 
immediately blocked the doorway behind them, 
keeping the parents from following. The tent fell 
to pandemonium. 
   With the single word "silence" from Jagang, and 
his fist on the table, everyone fell silent. 
   "Now," Jagang said, "these two prisoners are 
going to be confined to a tent. All of you are 
going to be in there, alone, with them. There will 
be no guards, no watchers." 
   "But what about our children?" a woman in tears 
begged, caring nothing about Zedd and Adie. 
   Jagang pulled a squat candle toward him on the 
table. "This will be the tent with these two, and 

you good people." He circled a finger around the 
candle. "All around this tent with you and the 
criminals, there will be other tents close." 
   Everyone stared at his ringed finger going round 
and round the candle. "Your children will be close 
by, in these tents." Jagang scooped up a handful of 
walnuts from the silver bowl. He dribbled some onto 
the table around the candle and put the rest into 
his mouth. 
   The room was silent as they all stared at him, 
watching him chew the walnuts, afraid to ask a 
question, afraid to hear what he might say next. 
   Finally a woman could no longer hold her tongue. 
"Why will they be there, in those tents?" 
   Jagang's black eyes took them all in before he 
spoke, making sure none would miss what he had to 
tell them. 
   "Those men who took your children to those tents 
will be torturing them." 
   The parents' eyes widened. Blood drained from 
their faces. One woman fainted. Several others bent 
to her. Sister Tahirah squatted beside the woman 
and touched a hand to the woman's forehead. The 
woman's eyes popped open. The Sister told the women 
to get her to her feet. 
   When Jagang was satisfied that he had everyone's 
attention, he circled a finger around the candle 
again, over the walnuts around it. "The tents will 
be close around so you can all clearly hear your 
children being tortured, to be sure that you 
understand that they will not be spared the worst 
those men can do." 
   The parents stood frozen, staring, seemingly 
unable to believe the reality of what they were 
hearing. 
   "Every few hours, I will come to see if you good 
people have convinced the wizard and the sorceress 
to tell us what we need to know. If you have not 
succeeded, then I will go off to other business and 
when I have the time I will return again to check 

if these two have decided to talk. 
   "Just be sure that this wizard and sorceress do 
not die while you convince them to be reasonable. 
If they die, then they can't answer our questions. 
Only when and if they answer questions will the 
children be released." 
   Jagang turned his nightmare eyes on Zedd. "My 
men have a great deal of experience at torturing 
people. When you hear the screams coming from the 
tents all around, you will have no doubt as to 
their skill, or their determination. I think you 
should know that they can keep their guests alive 
under torture for days, but they cannot work 
miracles. People, especially such young, tender 
souls, cannot survive indefinitely. But, should 
these children die before you agree to cooperate, 
there are plenty more families with children who 
can take their place." 
   Zedd could not halt the tears that ran down his 
face to drip off his chin as Sister Tahirah took 
his arm and pulled him toward the doorway. The 
crowd of parents fell on him, clawing at his 
clothes, screaming and crying for him to do as the 
emperor asked. 
   Zedd dug in his heels and struggled to a stop 
before the table. Desperate hands clutched at his 
robes. As he looked around at their tear-stained 
faces, meeting the eyes of each, they fell silent. 
   "I hope you people can now understand the nature 
of what it is we are fighting. I am so sorry, but I 
cannot dull the pain of this darkest hour of your 
lives. If I were to do as this man wants, countless 
more children would be subjected to this tyrant's 
brutality. I know that you will not be able to 
weigh this against the precious lives of your 
children, but I must. Pray the good spirits take 
them quickly, and take them to a place of eternal 
peace." 
   Zedd could not say more to them, to their 
desperate gazes. He turned his watery eyes to 

Jagang. "This will not work, Jagang. I know you 
will do it anyway, but it will not work." 
Behind the heavy table, Jagang slowly rose. 
"Children in this land of yours are plentiful. How 
many are you prepared to sacrifice before you allow 
mankind to be free? How long are you willing to 
persist in your stubborn refusal to allow them to 
have a future free from suffering, want, and your 
uninspired morals?" 
   The heavy gold and silver chains around his 
neck, the looted medallions and ornaments resting 
against his muscled chest, and the rings of kings 
on his fingers all sparkled in the candlelight. 
   Zedd felt the numb weight of a hopeless future 
under the yoke of the monstrous ideals of this man 
and his ilk. 
   "You cannot win in this, wizard. Like all those 
who fight on your side to oppress mankind, to allow 
the common people to be left to cruel fate, you are 
not even willing to sacrifice for the sake of the 
lives of children. You are brave with words, but 
you have a cold soul and a weak heart. You don't 
have the will to do what must be done to prevail. I 
do." 
   Jagang tilted his head and the Sister shoved 
Zedd toward the door. The screaming, crying, 
begging crowd of people closed in around Zedd and 
Adie, clawing and pawing at them in wild 
desperation. 
   In the distance, Zedd could hear the horrifying 
screams of their terrified children  
 
           
 
 
 
         CHAPTER 39 
 
 
    They aren't far," Richard said as he stepped 

back in among the trees. He stood silently watching 
as Kahlan straightened the shoulders of her dress. 
The dress showed no ill effects from its long 
confinement in their packs. The almost white, 
satiny smooth fabric glistened in the eerie light 
of the churning overcast. The flowing lines of the 
dress, cut square at the neck, bore no lace or 
frills, nothing to distract from its simple 
elegance. The sight of Kahlan in that dress still 
took his breath away. 
   She looked out through the trees when they heard 
Cara's whistle. The warning signal Richard had 
taught Cara was the plaintive, high, clear whistle 
of a common wood pewee, although Cara didn't know 
that's what it was. When he'd first told Cara that 
he wanted to teach her a pewee birdcall as a 
warning signal, she said she wasn't going to learn 
the call of any bird named a pewee. Richard gave in 
and told her that he would instead teach her the 
call of the small, fierce, short-tailed pine hawk, 
but only if she would be willing to work hard at 
getting it right, since it was more difficult. 
Satisfied to have her way, Cara had agreed and 
readily learned the simple whistle. She was good at 
it and used it often as a signal. Richard never 
told her that there was no such thing as a short-
tailed pine hawk, or that hawks didn't make 
whistles like that. 
   Out through the screen of branches, the dark 
form of the statue stood guard over an area of the 
pass that for thousands of years had been deserted. 
Richard wondered again why the people back then 
would have put such a statue in a pass no one was 
likely to ever again visit. He thought about the 
ancient society that had placed it, and at what 
they must have thought, sealing people away for the 
crime of not having a spark of the gift. 
   Richard brushed pine needles off the back of the 
sleeve of Kahlan's dress. "Here, hold still; let me 
look at you." 

   Kahlan turned back, arms at her sides, as he 
smoothed the fabric at her upper arms. Her unafraid 
green eyes, beneath eyebrows that had the graceful 
arch of a raptor's wings in flight, met his gaze. 
Her features seemed to have only grown more 
exquisite since he had first met her. Her look, her 
pose, the way she gazed at him as if she could see 
into his soul, struck a chord in him. Clearly 
evident in her eyes was the intelligence that had 
from the first so captivated him. 
"Why are you looking at me like that?" 
   Despite everything, he couldn't hold back his 
smile. "Standing there like that, in that dress, 
your long hair so beautiful, the green of the trees 
behind you... it just suddenly reminded me of the 
first time I saw you." 
   Her special smile, the smile she gave no one but 
him, spread radiantly through her bewitching eyes. 
She put her wrists on his shoulders and locked her 
fingers behind his neck, pulling him into a kiss. 
   As it always did, her kiss so completely 
consumed him with his need of her that he 
momentarily lost track of the world. She melted 
into his embrace. For that moment there was no 
Imperial Order, no Bandakar, no D'Haran Empire, no 
Sword of Truth, no chimes, no gift turning its 
power against him, no poison, no warning beacons, 
no black-tipped races, no Jagang, no Nicholas, no 
Sisters of the Dark. Her kiss made him forget 
everything but her. In that moment there was 
nothing but the two of them. Kahlan made his life 
complete; her kiss reaffirmed that bond. 
   She pulled back, gazing up into his eyes again. 
"Seems like you've had nothing but trouble ever 
since that day you found me." 
   Richard smiled. "My life is what I've had since 
that day I found you. When I found you, I found my 
life." 
Holding her face in both hands, he kissed her 
again. 

Betty nudged his leg and bleated. 
   "You two about ready?" Jennsen called down the 
hill. "They'll be here, soon. Didn't you hear 
Cara's whistle?" 
"We heard," Kahlan called up to Jennsen. "We'll be 
right there." 
   Turning back, she smiled as she looked him up 
and down. "Well, Lord Rahl, you certainly don't 
look the way you did the first time I saw you." She 
straightened the tooled leather baldric lying over 
the black tunic banded in gold. "But you look 
exactly the same, too. Your eyes are the same as I 
saw that day." She cocked her head as she smiled up 
at him. "I don't see the headache of the gift in 
your eyes." 
   "It's been gone for a while, but after that 
kiss, it would be impossible to have a headache." 
   "Well, if it comes back," she said with intimate 
promise, "just tell me and I'll see what I can do 
to make it go away." 
   Richard ran his fingers through her hair and 
gazed one last time into her eyes before slipping 
his arm around her waist. Together they walked 
through the cathedral of trees that was their cover 
off to the side near the crown of the ridge, and 
out toward the open slope. Between the trunks of 
the pines, he could see Jennsen running down the 
hill, leaping from rock to rock, avoiding the 
patches of snow. She rushed in to meet them just 
within the small cluster of trees. 
   "I spotted them," she said, breathlessly. "I 
could see them down in the gorge on the far side. 
They'll be up here soon." A grin brightened her 
face. "I saw Tom leading them." 
   Jennsen took in the sight of both of them, then—
Kahlan in the white dress of the Mother Confessor 
and Richard in the outfit he had in part found in 
the Keep that had once been worn by war wizards. By 
the surprise on Jennsen's face, he thought she 
might curtsy. 

   "Wow," she said. "That sure is some dress." She 
looked Richard up and down again. "You two look 
like you should rule the world." 
"Well," Richard said, "let's hope Owen's people 
think so." 
Cara pushed a spruce bough aside as she ducked in 
under the limbs of trees. Dressed again in her 
skintight red leather outfit, she looked as 
intimidating as she had the first time Richard had 
seen her in the grand halls of the People's Palace 
in D'Hara. 
   "Lord Rahl once confided in me that he intended 
to rule the world," Cara said, having heard 
Jennsen's pronouncement. 
"Really?" Jennsen asked. 
   Richard sighed at her awe. "Ruling the world has 
proven more difficult than I thought it would be." 
   "If you would listen more to the Mother 
Confessor and to me," Cara advised, "you would have 
an easier time of it." 
   Richard ignored Cara's cockiness. "Would you get 
everything together? I want to be up there with 
Kahlan before Tom arrives with Owen and his men." 
   Cara nodded and started collecting the things 
they'd been working so hard to make, stacking some 
and taking a count of others. Richard laid a hand 
on Jennsen's shoulder. 
   "Tie Betty up so that she'll stay here for now. 
All right? We don't need her in the way." 
   "I'll see to it," Jennsen said as she fussed 
with ringlets of her red hair. "I'll make sure she 
won't be able to bother us or wander off." 
   It was plainly evident how eager she was to see 
Tom again. "You look beautiful," Richard assured 
her. Her grin returned to overpower the anxious 
expression. 
   Betty's tail was a blur as she peered up at 
them, eager to go wherever the rest of them were 
going. "Come on," Jennsen said to her friend, 
"you're staying here for a while." 

   Jennsen snatched Betty's rope, holding her back, 
as Richard, with Kahlan close at his side, made his 
way out past the last of the trees and onto the 
open ledge. Somber clouds hung low against the face 
of surrounding mountains. With the towering 
snowcapped peaks hidden by the low, ominous clouds, 
Richard thought it felt like they were near the 
roof of the world. 
   The wind down at the ground had died, leaving 
the trees motionless and, by contrast, making the 
boiling movement of the cloud masses seem almost 
alive. The flurries of the day before had ended and 
then the sun had made a brief appearance to shrink 
the patches of snow on the pass. He didn't think 
there was much chance of seeing the sun this day. 
   The towering stone sentinel waited at the top of 
the trail, watching forever over the pass and out 
toward the Pillars of Creation. As they approached 
it, Richard scanned the surrounding sky but saw 
only some small birds—flycatchers and white-
breasted nuthatches—flitting among the nearby stand 
of spruce trees. He was relieved that the races had 
remained absent ever since they had taken this 
ancient trail up through the pass. 
   The first night up in the pass, farther back 
down the slope in the heavier forests, they had 
worked hard to build a snug shelter, just managing 
to get it done as darkness had settled into the 
vast woods. Early the next day, Richard had cleared 
snow off the statue and all around the ledges of 
the base. 
He had discovered more writing. 
   He now knew more about this man whose statue had 
been placed there in the pass. Another small flurry 
had since dusted snow over the writing, burying 
again the long-dead words. 
   Kahlan placed a comforting hand on his back. 
"They will listen, Richard. They will listen to 
you." 
   With every breath, pain pulled at him from deep 

inside. It was getting worse. "They'd better, or 
I'll have no chance to get the antidote to this 
poison." 
   He knew he couldn't do it alone. Even if he knew 
how to call upon his gift and command its magic, he 
still would not be able to wave a hand or perform 
some grand feat of conjuring that would cast the 
Imperial Order out of the Bandakaran Empire. He 
knew that such things were beyond the scope of even 
the most powerful magic. Magic, properly used, 
properly conceived, was a tool, much like his 
sword, employed to accomplish a goal. 
   Magic was not what would save him. Magic was not 
a panacea. If he was to succeed, he had to use his 
head to come up with a way to prevail. 
He no longer knew if he could even depend on the 
magic of the Sword of Truth. Nor did he know how 
long he had before his own gift might kill him. At 
times, it felt as if his gift and the poison were 
in a race to see which could do him in first. 
   Richard led Kahlan the rest of the way up and 
around to the back of the statue, to a small 
prominence of rock at the very top of the pass 
where he wanted to wait for the men. From that spot 
they could see through the gaps in the mountains 
and back into Bandakar. Out at the edge of the 
level area, Richard spotted Tom down below leading 
the men through the trees and up the switchback 
trail. 
   Tom peered up as he ascended the trail and 
spotted Richard and Kahlan. He saw how they were 
dressed, where they stood, and gave no familiar 
wave, realizing that doing so would be 
inappropriate. Through breaks in the trees, Richard 
could see men following Tom's gaze up above them. 
   Richard lifted his sword a few inches, checking 
that it was clear in its scabbard. Overhead, the 
dark, towering clouds all around seemed to have 
gathered, as if they were all crowding into the 
confines of the pass to watch. 

   Standing tall as he gazed off to the unknown 
land beyond, to an unknown empire, Richard took 
Kahlan's hand. 
   Hand in hand, they silently awaited what would 
be the beginning of a challenge that would change 
forever the nature of the world, or would be the 
end of his chance at life. 
    
 
 
 
 
          CHAPTER 40 
 
 
 
 
    As the men following Tom emerged from the trees 
below and into the open, Richard was dismayed to 
see that their numbers were far less than Owen said 
had been hiding with him in the hills. Rubbing the 
furrows on his brow with his fingertips, Richard 
stepped back up to the short plateau where Kahlan 
waited. 
Her own brow drew down with concern. "What's 
wrong?" 
"I doubt they brought fifty men." 
   Kahlan took up his hand again, her voice coming 
in gentle assurance. "That's fifty more than we 
had." 
   Cara came up behind them, dropping her load off 
to the side. She took up station behind Richard to 
his left, on the opposite side from Kahlan. Richard 
met her grim gaze. He wondered how the woman always 
managed to look as if she fully expected everything 
to happen just as she wished it to happen, and that 
was the end of it. 
   Tom stepped up over the edge of the rock, the 
men following. He was sweating from the exertion of 
the climb, but a tight smile warmed his face when 

he saw Jennsen just coming up the other side of the 
rise. She returned the brief smile and then stood 
in the shadows beside the base of the statue, back 
out of the way. 
   When the unkempt band of men caught sight of 
Richard in his black pants and boots, black tunic 
trimmed in a band of gold around the edge, the 
broad leather belt, the leather-padded silver 
wristbands with ancient symbols circling them, and 
the gleaming silver-and-gold-wrought scabbard, they 
seemed to lose their courage. When they saw Kahlan 
standing beside him, they cowered back toward the 
edge, bowing hesitantly, not knowing what they were 
supposed to do. 
   "Come on, then," Tom told them, prompting them 
all to come up onto the expanse of flat rock in 
front of Richard and Kahlan. 
   Owen whispered to the men as he moved among 
them, urging them to come forward as Tom was 
gesturing. They complied timidly, shuffling in a 
little closer, but still leaving a wide safety 
margin between themselves and Richard. 
   As the men all gazed about, unsure as to what 
they were supposed to do next, Cara stepped forward 
and held an arm out toward Richard. 
   "I present Lord Rahl," she said in a clear tone 
that rang out over the men gathered at the top of 
the pass, "the Seeker of Truth and wielder of the 
Sword of Truth, the bringer of death, the Master of 
the D'Haran Empire, and husband to the Mother 
Confessor herself." 
   If the men had looked timid and unsure before, 
Cara's introduction made them all the more so. When 
they looked from Richard and Kahlan back to Cara's 
penetrating blue eyes, seeing her waiting, they all 
went to a knee in a bow before Richard. 
   When Cara stepped deliberately to the fore, in 
front of the men, turned, and went to her knees, 
Tom got the message and did the same. Both bent 
forward and touched their foreheads to the ground. 

   In the silent, late-morning air, the men waited, 
still unsure what it was they were to do. 
   "Master Rahl, guide us," Cara said in a clear 
voice so the men could all hear her. She waited. 
   Tom looked back over his shoulder at all the 
blond-headed men watching. When Tom frowned with 
displeasure, the men understood that they were 
expected to follow the lead. They all finally went 
to both knees and bowed forward, imitating Tom and 
Cara, until their foreheads touched the cold 
granite. 
   "Master Rahl, guide us," Cara began again, never 
lifting her forehead from the ground. 
This time, led by Tom, the men all repeated the 
words after her. 
"Master Rahl, guide us," they said with a decided 
lack of unity. 
   "Master Rahl, teach us," Cara said when they all 
had finished the beginning of the oath. They 
followed her lead again, but still hesitantly and 
without much coordination. 
"Master Rahl, protect us," Cara said. 
   The men repeated the words, their voices coming 
a little more in union. 
"In your light we thrive." 
The men mumbled the words after her. 
"In your mercy we are sheltered." 
They repeated the line. 
"In your wisdom we are humbled." 
Again they spoke the words after her. 
"We live only to serve." 
   When they finished repeating the words, she 
spoke the last line in a clear voice: "Our lives 
are yours." 
   Cara rose up on her knees when they finished and 
glared back at the men all still bowed forward but 
peeking up at her. "Those are the words of the 
devotion to the Lord Rahl. You will now speak it 
together with me three times, as is proper in the 
field." 

Cara again put her forehead to the ground at 
Richard's feet. 
   "Master Rahl, guide us. Master Rahl, teach us. 
Master Rahl, protect us. In your light we thrive. 
In your mercy we are sheltered. In your wisdom we 
are humbled. We live only to serve. Our lives are 
yours." 
   Richard and Kahlan stood above the people as 
they spoke the second and third devotion. This was 
no empty show put on by Cara for the benefit of the 
men; this was the devotion as it had been spoken 
for thousands of years and Cara meant every word of 
it. 
"You may rise now," she told the men. 
   The men cautiously returned to their feet, 
hunched in worry, waiting silently. Richard met all 
their eyes before he began. 
   "I am Richard Rahl. I am the man you men decided 
to poison so as to enslave me and thus force me to 
do your bidding. 
   "What you have done is a crime. While you may 
believe that you can justify your action as proper, 
or think of it as merely a means of persuasion, 
nothing can give you the right to threaten or take 
the life of another who has done you no harm nor 
intended none. That, along with torture, rape, and 
murder, is the means by which the Imperial Order 
rules." 
   "But we meant you no harm," one of the men 
called out in horror that Richard would accuse them 
of such a ghastly crime. Other men spoke up in 
agreement that Richard had it all wrong. 
   "You think I am a savage," Richard said in a 
tone of voice that silenced them and put them back 
a step. "You think yourselves better than me and so 
that somehow makes it all right to do this to me—
and to try to do it to the Mother Confessor—because 
you want something and, like petulant children, you 
expect us to give it to you. 
   "The alternative you give me is death. The task 

you demand of me is difficult beyond your 
imagination, making my death from your poison a 
very real possibility, and likely. That is the 
reality of it. 
   "I already came close to dying from your poison. 
At the last possible instant I was granted a 
temporary stay of my execution when one of you gave 
me a provisional antidote. My friends and loved 
ones believed I would die that night. You were the 
cause of it. You men consciously decided to poison 
me, thereby accepting the fact that you might be 
killing me." 
   "No," a man insisted, his hands clasped in 
supplication, "we never intended to harm you." 
   "If there was not a credible threat to my life, 
then why would I do as you wish? If you truly mean 
me no harm and are not committed to killing me if I 
don't go along with you, then prove it and give me 
the antidote so that I can have my life back. It's 
my life, not yours." 
This time no one spoke up. 
   "No? So you see, then, it is as I say. You men 
are committed to either murder or enslavement. The 
only choice I have in it is which of those two it 
will be. I will hear no more of your feelings about 
what you intended. Your feelings do not absolve you 
of your very real deeds. Your actions, not your 
feelings, speak the truth of your intent." 
   Richard clasped his hands behind his back as he 
paced slowly before the men. "Now, I could do as 
you people are fond of doing, and tell myself that 
I can't know if any of it is true. I could do as 
you would do, declare myself inadequate to the task 
of knowing what's real and refuse to face reality. 
   "But I am the Seeker of Truth because I do not 
try to hide from reality. The choice to live 
demands that the truth be faced. I intend to do 
that. I intend to live. 
   "You men must today decide what you will do, 
what will be the future of your lives and the lives 

of the ones you love. You are going to have to deal 
with reality, the same as I must, if you are to 
have a chance at life. Today you will have to face 
a great deal of the truth, if you are to have that 
which you seek." 
   Richard gestured to Owen. "I thought you said 
there were more men than this. Where are the rest?" 
   Owen took a step forward. "Lord Rahl, to prevent 
violence, they turned themselves over to the men of 
the Order." 
   Richard stared at the man. "Owen, after all 
you've told me, after all those men have seen from 
the Order, how could they possibly believe such a 
thing?" 
   "But how are we to know that this time it will 
not stop the violence? We can't know the nature of 
reality or—" 
   "I told you before, with me you will confine 
yourself to what is, and not repeat meaningless 
phrases you have memorized. If you have real facts 
I want to hear them. I'm not interested in 
meaningless nonsense." 
   Owen pulled his small pack off his back. He 
fished around inside and came up with a small 
canvas pouch. Tears welled up in his eyes as he 
gazed at it. 
   "The men of the Order found out that there were 
men hiding out in the hills. One of those men 
hiding with us has three daughters. In order to 
prevent a cycle of violence, someone in our town 
told the men of the Order which girls were his 
daughters. 
   "Every day the men of the Order tied a rope to a 
finger of each one of these three girls. One man 
held the girl while another pulled on the rope 
until her finger tore off. The men of the Order 
told a man from our town to go to the hills and 
give the three fingers to our men. Every day he 
came." 
   Owen handed the bag to Richard. "These are the 

fingers from each of his daughters." 
   "The man who brought them to our men was in a 
daze. They said he no longer seemed human. He 
talked in a dead voice. He repeated what he had 
been bidden to say. He had decided that since 
nothing was real, he would see nothing and do as he 
was told. 
   "He said that the men of the Order told him that 
some of the people from our town had given the 
names of the men in the hills and that they had the 
children of those other men, as well. They said 
that unless the men returned and gave themselves 
up, they would do the same to the other children. 
   "A little more than half the men hiding in the 
hills could not stand to think of themselves being 
the cause of such violence, and so they went back 
to our town and gave themselves over to the men of 
the Order." 
"Why are you giving me this?" Richard asked. 
   "Because," Owen said, his voice filled with 
tears, "I wanted you to know why our men had no 
choice but to turn themselves in. They could not 
stand to think of their loved ones suffering such 
terrible agony because of them." 
   Richard looked out at the mournful men watching 
him. He felt his anger boiling up inside, but he 
kept it in check as he spoke. 
   "I can understand what those men were trying to 
do by giving themselves up. I can't fault them for 
it. It won't help, but I couldn't fault them for 
desperately wanting to spare their loved ones from 
harm." 
   Despite his rage, Richard spoke in a soft voice. 
"I'm sorry that you and your people are suffering 
such brutality at the hands of the Imperial Order. 
But understand this: it is real, and the Order is 
the cause of it. Those men of yours, if they did as 
the Order commanded or if they failed to, were not 
the cause of violence. The responsibility for 
causing violence is entirely the Order's. You did 

not go out and attack them. They came to you, they 
attacked you, they enslave and torture and murder 
you." 
Most of the men stood in slumped poses, staring at 
the ground. 
"Do any of the rest of you have children?" 
A number of the men nodded or mumbled that they 
did. 
Richard ran his hand back through his hair. "Why 
haven't the rest of you turned yourselves in, then? 
Why are you here and not trying to stop the 
suffering in the same way the others did?" 
   The men looked at one another, some seeming 
confused by the question while others appearing 
unable to put their reasons into words. Their 
sorrow, their distress, even their hesitant 
resolve, were evident on their faces, but they 
could not come up with words to explain why they 
would not turn themselves in. 
   Richard held up the small canvas bag with the 
gruesome treasure, not allowing them to avoid the 
issue. "You all knew about this. Why did you not 
return as well?" 
   Finally one man spoke up. "I sneaked to the 
fields at sunset and talked to a man working the 
crops, and asked what happened to those men who had 
returned. He said that many of their children had 
already been taken away. Others had died. All the 
men who had come in from the hills had been taken 
away. None were allowed to return to their homes, 
to their families. What good would it do for us to 
go back?" 
   "What good, indeed," Richard murmured. This was 
the first sign that they grasped the true nature of 
the situation. 
   "You have to stop the Order," Owen said. "You 
must give us our freedom. Why have you made us make 
this journey?" 
   Richard's initial spark of confidence dimmed. 
While they might have in part grasped the truth of 

their troubles, they certainly weren't facing the 
nature of any real solution. They simply wanted to 
be saved. They still expected someone to do it for 
them: Richard. 
   The men all looked relieved that Owen had at 
last asked the question; they were apparently too 
timid to ask it themselves. As they waited, some of 
the men couldn't help stealing glances at Jennsen, 
standing to the rear. Most of the men also appeared 
troubled by the statue looming behind Richard. They 
could only see the back of it and didn't really 
know what it was meant to be. 
   "Because," Richard finally told them, "in order 
for me to do as you want, it's important that you 
all come to understand everything involved. You 
expect me to simply do this for you. I can't. You 
are going to have to help me in this or you and all 
of your loved ones are lost. If we are to succeed, 
then you men must help the rest of your people come 
to understand the things I have to tell you. 
   "You have gone this far, you have suffered this 
much, you have made this much of a commitment. You 
realize that if you do the same as your friends 
have been trying to do, if you apply those same 
useless solutions, you, too, will be enslaved or 
murdered. You are running out of options. You all 
have made a decision to at least try to succeed, to 
try to rid yourselves of the brutes killing and 
enslaving your people. 
"You men here are their last chance .. . their only 
chance. 
   "You must now hear the rest of what I have to 
tell you and then make up your minds as to what 
will be your future." 
   The haggard, ragtag men, all dressed in worn and 
dirty clothes, all looking like they'd had a very 
difficult time of living in the hills, either spoke 
up or nodded that they would hear him out. Some 
even looked as if they might be relieved by how 
directly and honestly he spoke to them. A few even 

looked hungry for what he might say. 
 
 
 
 
 
        CHAPTER 41 
 
 
        
       Three years ago from the coming autumn," 
Richard began, "I lived in a place called Hartland. 
I was a woods guide. I had a peaceful life in a 
place I loved among those I loved. I knew very 
little about the places beyond my home. In some 
ways I was like you people before the Order came, 
so I can understand some of what you felt about how 
things changed. 
   "Like you, I lived beyond a boundary that 
protected us from those who would do us harm." 
   The men broke out in excited whispering, 
apparently surprised and pleased that they could 
relate to him in this way, that they had something 
so basic in common with him. 
"What happened, then?" one of the men asked. 
   Richard couldn't help himself; he couldn't hold 
back the smile that overwhelmed him. 
   "One day, in my woods"—he held his hand out to 
the side—"Kahlan showed up. Like you, her people 
were in desperate trouble. She needed help. Rather 
than poison me, though, she told me her story and 
how trouble was coming our way. Much like you, the 
boundary protecting her people had failed and a 
tyrant had invaded her homeland. She also came 
bearing a warning that this man would soon come to 
my homeland, too, and conquer my people, my 
friends, my loved ones." 
   All the faces turned toward Kahlan. The men 
stared openly, as if seeing her for the first time. 
It looked to be astonishing to them that this 

statuesque woman before them could be a savage, as 
they thought of outsiders, and have the same kind 
of trouble they'd had. Richard was leaving out vast 
chunks of the story, but he wanted to keep it 
simple enough to be clear to these men. 
   "I was named the Seeker of Truth and given this 
sword to help me in this important struggle." 
Richard lifted the hilt clear of the scabbard by 
half the length of the blade, letting the men all 
see the polished steel. Many grimaced at seeing 
such a weapon. 
   "Together, side by side, Kahlan and I struggled 
to stop the man who sought to enslave or destroy us 
all. In a strange land, she was my guide, not only 
helping me to fight against those who would kill 
us, but helping me to come to understand the wider 
world I had never before considered. She opened my 
eyes to what was out there, beyond the boundary 
that had protected me and my people. She helped me 
to see the approaching shadow of tyranny and know 
the true stakes involved—life itself. 
   "She made me live up to the challenge. Had she 
not, I would not be alive today, and a great many 
more people would be dead or enslaved." 
   Richard had to turn away, then, at the flood of 
painful memories, at the thought of all those lost 
in the struggle. At the victories so hard won. 
   He put his hand to the statue for support as he 
remembered the gruesome murder of George Cypher, 
the man who had raised him, the man who, until that 
struggle, Richard had always believed was his 
father. The pain of it, so distant and far away, 
came rushing back again. He remembered the horror 
of that time, of suddenly realizing that he would 
never again see the man he dearly loved. He had 
forgotten until that moment how much he missed him. 
   Richard gathered his composure and turned back 
to the men. "In the end, and only with Kahlan's 
help, I won the struggle against that tyrant I had 
never known existed until the day she had come into 

my woods and warned me. 
"That man was Darken Rahl, my father, a man I had 
never known." 
   The men stared in disbelief. "You never knew?" 
one asked in an astonished voice. 
   Richard shook his head. "It's a very long story. 
Maybe another time I will tell you men all of it. 
For now, I must tell you the important parts that 
are relevant to you and those you love back there 
in your homes." 
   Richard looked at the ground before him, 
thinking, as he paced in front of the disorderly 
knot of men. 
   "When I killed Darken Rahl, I did it to keep him 
from killing me and my loved ones. He had tortured 
and murdered countless people and that alone earned 
him death, but I had to kill him or he would have 
killed me. I didn't know at the time that he was my 
real father or that in killing him, since I was his 
heir, I would become the new Lord Rahl. 
   "Had he known who I was, he might not have been 
trying to kill me, but he didn't know. I had 
information he wanted; he intended to torture it 
out of me and then kill me. I killed him first. 
   "Since that time, I have come to learn a great 
deal. What I learned connects us"—Richard gestured 
to the men and then placed the hand on his own 
chest as he met their gazes—"in ways you must come 
to understand, as well, if you are to succeed in 
this new struggle. 
   "The land where I grew up, Kahlan's land, and 
the land of D'Hara, all make up the New World. As 
you have learned, this vast land down here outside 
where you grew up is called the Old World. After I 
became Lord Rahl, the barrier protecting us from 
the Old World failed, much as your own boundary 
failed. When it did, Emperor Jagang of the Imperial 
Order, down here in the Old World, used the 
opportunity to invade the New World, my home, much 
as he invaded your home. We've been fighting him 

and his troops for over two years, trying to defeat 
them or at least to drive them back to the Old 
World. 
   "The barrier that failed had protected us from 
the Order, or men like them, for around three 
thousand years, longer, even, than you were 
protected. Before that barrier was placed at the 
end of a great war, the enemy at the time, from the 
Old World, had used magic to create people called 
dream walkers." 
   The men fell to whispering. They had heard the 
name, but they didn't really understand it and 
speculated on what it could mean. 
   "Dream walkers," Richard explained, when they 
had quieted, "could enter a person's mind in order 
to control them. There was no defense. Once a dream 
walker took over your mind, you became his slave, 
unable to resist his commands. The people back then 
were desperate. 
   "A man named Alric Rahl, my ancestor, came up 
with a way to protect people's minds from being 
taken over by the dream walkers. He was not only 
the Lord Rahl who ruled D'Hara at the time, but he 
was also a great wizard. Through his ability he 
created a bond that when spoken earnestly or given 
in a more simple form with heartfelt sincerity, 
protected people from dream walkers entering their 
minds. Alric Rahl's link of magic to his people, 
through this bond, protected them. 
   "The devotion you men all gave is the formal 
declaration of that bond. It has been given by the 
D'Haran people to their Lord Rahl for three 
thousand years." 
   Some of the men in front stepped forward, their 
faces etched with anxiety. "Are we protected, then, 
from the dream walkers, Lord Rahl, because we gave 
this oath? Are we protected from the dream walkers 
entering our minds and taking us?" 
   Richard shook his head. "You and your people 
need no protection. You are already protected in 

another way." 
   Relief swept through the crowd of men. Some 
gripped the shoulder of another, or placed a hand 
in relief on a friend's back. They looked as if 
they feared that dream walkers were stalking them, 
and they had just been spared at the last instant. 
"But how is it that we can be protected?" Owen 
asked. 
   Richard took a deep breath, letting it out 
slowly. "Well, that's the part that in a way 
connects us. You see, as I understand it, magic 
needs balance in order to function." 
   There were knowing nods all around, as if these 
pristinely ungifted men all had an intimate 
understanding of magic. 
   "When Alric Rahl used magic to create this bond 
in order to protect his people," Richard went on, 
"there needed to always be a Lord Rahl to complete 
the bond, to maintain its power. Not all wizards 
bear children who also possess this gifted ability, 
so part of what Alric Rahl did when he created this 
bond was to make it so that the Lord Rahl would 
always bear one son who had magic, who had the 
gift, and could complete this bond with the people 
of D'Hara. In this way they would always be 
protected." 
   Richard held up a finger to make his point as he 
swept his gaze over the crowd of men. "What they 
didn't know at the time was that this magic 
inadvertently created its own balance. While the 
Lord Rahl always produced a gifted heir—a wizard 
like him—it was only discovered later that he also 
occasionally produced offspring who were entirely 
without any magic." 
   Richard could see by the blank looks that the 
men didn't grasp what he was telling them. He 
imagined that for people living such isolated 
lives, his story must seem rather confusing, if not 
far-fetched. He remembered his own confusion about 
magic before the boundary had come down and he'd 

met Kahlan. He hadn't been raised around magic and 
he still didn't understand most of it himself. He'd 
been born with both sides of the gift, and yet he 
didn't know how to control it. 
   "You see," he said, "only some people have 
magic—are gifted, as it's called. But all people 
are born with at least a very tiny spark of the 
gift, even though they can't manipulate magic. 
Until just recently, everyone thought of these 
people as ungifted. You see? The gifted, like 
wizards and sorceresses, can manipulate magic, and 
the rest of the people can't, so they were believed 
to be ungifted. 
   "But it turns out that this isn't accurate, 
since there is an infinitesimal spark of the gift 
in everyone born. This tiny spark of the gift is 
actually what allows people to interact with the 
magic in the world around them, that is, with 
things and creatures that have magical properties, 
and with people who are gifted in a more 
comprehensive sense—those who do have the ability 
to manipulate magic." 
   "Some people in Bandakar have magic, too," a man 
said. "True magic. Only those who have never seen—" 
   "No," Richard said, cutting him off. He didn't 
want them losing track of his account. "Owen told 
me about what you people believe is magic. That's 
not magic, that's mysticism. That's not what I'm 
talking about. I'm talking about real magic that 
produces real results in the real world. Forget 
what you've been taught about magic, about how 
faith supposedly creates what you believe in and 
that is real magic. It's not real. It's just the 
fanciful illusion of magic in people's 
imaginations." 
   "But it is real," someone said in a respectful 
but firm voice. "More real than what you see and 
feel." 
   Richard turned a harsh look on the men. "If it's 
so real, then why did you have to use a known 

poison on me that was mixed by a man who had worked 
his whole life with herbs? Because you know what's 
real, that's why; when it was vital to your self-
interest, to your lives, you resorted to dealing in 
reality, to what you know really works." 
   Richard pointed back at Kahlan. "The Mother 
Confessor has real magic. It's no fanciful curse 
put on someone and when they die ten years later 
people believe the curse was the cause. She has 
real magic that is in elemental ways linked to 
death, so it affects even you. She can touch 
someone, with this real magic, and in an instant 
they will be dead. Not ten years from now—right 
now, on the spot." 
   Richard stood resolutely in front of the men, 
gazing from eye to eye. "If someone doesn't believe 
that is real magic, then let's have a test. Let 
them perform their faith-based magic and put a 
spell on me—to kill me right here and now. After 
they've done that, then they will come forward and 
be touched by the Mother Confessor's very real, 
lethal power. Then everyone else will be able to 
see the results and judge for themselves." He 
looked from face to face. "Anyone willing to take 
up the test? Any magicians among all you ungifted 
people willing to try it?" 
When the men remained silent, no one moving, 
Richard went on. 
   "So, it would seem that you men do have some 
understanding of what's real and what isn't. Keep 
that in mind. Learn from it. 
   "Now, I told you how the Lord Rahl always bore a 
son with magic so he could pass on the rule of 
D'Hara and his gifted ability in order to make the 
bond work. But, as I said, the bond that Alric Rahl 
created may have had an unintended consequence. 
   "Only later was it discovered that the Lord 
Rahl, possibly as a means of balance, also 
sometimes produced offspring that were entirely 
without any magic—not just ungifted in the way most 

people are, but unlike any people ever born before: 
they were pristinely ungifted. These pristinely 
ungifted people had absolutely no spark of the gift 
whatsoever. 
"Because of that, because they were pristinely 
ungifted, they were unable to interact with the 
real magic in the world. They were unable to be 
touched by magic at all. For them, magic might as 
well not exist because they were not born with the 
ability to see it or to interact with it. You might 
say they were like a bird that could not fly. They 
looked like a bird, they had feathers, they ate 
bugs, but they couldn't fly. 
   "Back then in that time, three thousand years 
ago, after the bond had been created to protect 
people from dream walkers in the war, the wizards 
finally succeeded in placing a barrier between the 
Old and the New World. Because those in the Old 
World could no longer come to the New World to wage 
war, the great war ended. Peace finally came. 
   "The people of the New World discovered, though, 
that they had a problem. These pristinely ungifted 
offspring of the Lord Rahl passed this trait on to 
their children. Every offspring of a marriage with 
at least one of these pristinely ungifted partners 
bears pristinely ungifted children—always, every 
time. As these offspring married and had children 
and then grandchildren and then great-
grandchildren, as there were more and more of them, 
that pristinely ungifted trait began spreading 
throughout the population. 
   "People, at the time, were frightened because 
they depended on magic. Magic was part of their 
world. Magic was what had saved them from the dream 
walkers. Magic had created the barrier that 
protected them from the horde from the Old World. 
Magic had ended the war. Magic healed people, found 
lost children, produced beautiful creations of art 
that inspired and brought joy. Magic could help 
guide people in the course of future events. 

   "Some towns grew up around a gifted person who 
could serve people's needs. Many gifted people 
earned a living performing such services. In some 
things, magic gave people control over nature and 
thus made the lives of everyone better. Things 
accomplished with the aid of magic improved the 
living conditions of nearly everyone. Magic was a 
force of individual creation and thus individual 
accomplishment. Nearly everyone derived some 
benefit from it. 
   "This is not to say that magic was or is 
indispensable, but that it was a useful aid, a 
tool. Magic was like their right arm. Yet it's the 
mind of man, not his magic, that is indispensable—
much like you could survive without your right arm, 
but you couldn't survive without your mind. But 
magic had become intertwined in the lives of 
everyone, so many believed that it was absolutely 
indispensable. 
   "The people came to feel that this new threat—
the pristinely ungifted trait spreading through the 
population—would be the end of everything they 
knew, everything that they thought was important, 
that it would be the end of their most vital 
protection—magic." 
   Richard gazed out at all the faces, waiting to 
make sure that the men had grasped the essence of 
the story, that they understood how desperate the 
people must have been, and why. 
   "So, what did the people do about these new 
pristinely ungifted people among them?" a man in 
the back asked. 
In a quiet tone, Richard said, "Something 
terrible." 
   He pulled the book from a leather pouch on his 
belt and held it up for all the men to see as he 
again paced before them. The clouds, laden with 
storms of snow, rolled silently through the frigid 
valley pass, bound for the peaks above them. 
   "This book is called The Pillars of Creation. 

That's what the wizards back then called these 
pristinely ungifted people—pillars of Creation— 
because they had the power, with this trait that 
they passed along to their offspring, to alter the 
very nature of mankind. They were the foundation of 
an entirely new kind of people—people without any 
connection to magic. 
   "I only just a short time ago came across this 
book. It's meant for the Lord Rahl, and others, so 
that they will know about these pristinely ungifted 
people who are unaffected by magic. The book tells 
the history of how these people came about—through 
those born to the Lord Rahl—along with the history 
of what was discovered about them. It also reveals 
what the people back then, thousands of years ago, 
did about these pillars of Creation." 
   Men rubbed their arms in the cold air as Richard 
slowly paced before them. They all looked caught up 
in the story. 
"So," Owen asked, "what did they do?" 
   Richard came to a stop and stood watching their 
eyes before he spoke. 
"They banished them." 
Astonished whispering broke out among the men. They 
were stunned to hear the final solution. These 
people understood banishment, they understood it 
all too well, and they could sympathize with these 
banished people of so long ago. 
"That's terrible," a man in front said, shaking his 
head. 
   Another frowned and held up a hand. "Weren't 
these pillars of Creation related to some of the 
other people? Weren't they part of the towns? 
Didn't the people feel sorrow at banishing these 
ungifted people?" 
   Richard nodded. "Yes. They were friends and 
family. Those banished people were intimately 
intertwined in the lives of nearly everyone. The 
book tells how heavy hearted the people felt at the 
decision that had been reached about these 

pristinely ungifted people. It must have been an 
awful time, a dreadful choice that no one liked, 
but those in charge at the time decided that in 
order for them to preserve their way of life, to 
preserve magic and all it meant to them, to 
preserve that attribute of man, rather than value 
the lives of individuals for who they were, they 
had to banish these pristinely ungifted people. 
   "What's more, they also decreed that all future 
offspring of the Lord Rahl, except his gifted heir, 
should be put to death to insure that no pillar of 
Creation ever again came among them." 
   This time there was no whispering. The men 
looked saddened by the story of these mysterious 
people and the terrible solution of how to deal 
with them. Heads hung as the men thought about what 
it must have been like back in such a grim time. 
   Finally, a man's head came up. His brow 
twitched. He finally asked the question Richard 
expected to be asked, the question he had been 
waiting for. 
   "But where were these pillars of Creation 
banished to? Where were they sent?" 
   Richard watched the men as other eyes turned up, 
curious about the historic mystery, waiting for him 
to go on. 
   "These people were not affected by magic," 
Richard reminded them. "And the barrier holding 
back the Old World was a barrier created of magic." 
"They sent them through the barrier!" a man guessed 
aloud. 
Richard nodded. "Many wizards had died and given 
their power into that barrier so that their people 
would be protected from those in the Old World who 
wanted to rule them and to end magic. That was a 
large part of what the war had been fought over—
those in the Old World had wanted to eradicate 
magic from mankind. 
   "So, those people in the New World sent these 
pristinely ungifted people, these people without 

any magic, through the barrier to the Old World. 
   "They never knew what became of them, those 
friends and family and loved ones they had 
banished, because they had been sent beyond a 
barrier that none of them could cross. It was 
thought that they would establish new lives, would 
make a new beginning. But, because the barrier was 
there, and it was enemy territory beyond, the 
people of the New World never knew what became of 
those banished people. 
   "Finally, a few years ago, that barrier came 
down. If these banished people had made a life for 
themselves in the Old World, they would have had 
children and spread their pristinely ungifted 
attribute"— Richard lifted his arms in a shrug—"but 
there is no trace of them. The people down here are 
just the same as the people up in the New World—
some born gifted but all born with at least that 
tiny spark of the gift that enables them to 
interact with magic. 
"Those people from ancient times seemed just to 
have vanished." 
   "So now we know," Owen reasoned as he stared off 
in thought, "that all those people sent to the Old 
World so long ago tragically died out... or maybe 
were killed." 
   "I had thought as much myself," Richard said. He 
turned and faced the men, waiting until all eyes 
were on him before going on. 
"But then I found them. I found those long-lost 
people." 
   Excited whispering broke out again. The men 
appeared inspired by the prospect of such people 
surviving against all odds. 
   "Where are they, then, Lord Rahl," a man asked, 
"these people with whom you share ancestry? These 
people who had to endure such cruel banishment and 
hardship?" 
   Richard leveled a cutting gaze at the men. "Come 
with me, and I will tell you what became of these 

people." 
   Richard led them around the statue, to the 
front, where, for the first time, they could see 
the full view of the sentinel in stone. The men 
were awestruck at finally seeing the statue from 
the front. They talked excitedly among themselves 
about how real it looked, about how they could 
clearly see the stalwart features of the man's 
face. 
   By the utter shock in their voices and by what 
the men were saying, Richard got the distinct 
impression that they'd never seen a statue before, 
at least no statue as monumental as this one. It 
appeared that for these men the statue must be 
something akin to a manifestation of magic, rather 
than, as Richard knew it to be, a manifestation of 
man's ability. 
   Richard placed a hand on the cold stone of the 
base. "This is an ancient statue of an Old World 
wizard named Kaja-Rang. It was carved, in part, as 
a tribute to the man because he was a great and 
powerful wizard." 
   Owen lifted a hand to interrupt. "But I thought 
the people in the Old World wanted to be without 
magic? Why would they have a great wizard—and why, 
especially, would they pay a tribute to such a man 
of magic?" 
   Richard smiled at Owen catching the 
contradiction. "People don't always act in a 
consistent manner. What's more, the more irrational 
are your beliefs, the more glaring the 
inconsistencies. You men, for example, try to gloss 
over incongruities in your behavior by applying 
your convictions selectively. You claim that 
nothing is real, or that we cannot know the true 
nature of reality, and yet you fear what the Order 
does to you—you believe firmly enough in the 
reality of what they're doing that you want it to 
stop. 
   "If nothing were real, then you would have no 

reason to want to stop the Imperial Order. In fact, 
it's counter to your professed beliefs to try to 
stop them, or to even feel that their presence is 
real, much less detrimental, since you assert that 
man is inadequate at the task of knowing reality. 
   "Yet you grasp the reality of what's happening 
at the hands of the men of the Order, and know very 
well that it's abhorrent, so you selectively 
suspend the precepts of your beliefs in order to 
send Owen to poison me in an attempt to get me to 
rid you of your very real problem." 
Some of the men looked confused by what Richard 
said while others looked to be embarrassed. A few 
looked astonished. None looked willing to challenge 
him, so they let him go on without interrupting. 
   "The people in the Old World were the same way—
they still are. They claimed they didn't want 
magic, and yet when faced with that reality, they 
didn't want to do without it. The Imperial Order is 
like this. They've come to the New World claiming 
to be a champion of freeing mankind of magic, 
proclaiming themselves to be noble for holding such 
a goal, and yet they use magic in the pursuit of 
this professed goal. They contend that magic is 
evil, and yet they embrace it. 
   "Their leader, Emperor Jagang, uses those with 
magic to help accomplish his ends, among which, he 
claims, is the eradication of magic. Jagang is a 
dream walker descended from those dream walkers of 
so long ago. His ability as a dream walker is 
magic, yet he does not disqualify himself from 
leading his empire. Even though he has magic, which 
he claims makes people unfit to have any say in the 
future, he calls himself Jagang the Just. 
   "Despite what they declare they believe, their 
goal is to rule people, plain and simple. They seek 
power but dress it up in noble-sounding robes. 
Every tyrant thinks he is different. They are all 
the same. They all rule by brute force." 
   Owen was frowning, trying to grasp it all. "So, 

those in the Old World did not live by their word, 
by what they claimed they believed. They lived in 
conflict. They preached that man was better without 
magic, but they continued to want to use magic." 
"That's right." 
   Owen gestured up at the statue. "What of this 
man, then? Why is he here, if he is against what 
they preached?" 
   Dark clouds roiled above the towering statue. 
The still air hung cold, heavy, and damp. It felt 
as if a storm were holding back its onslaught, 
waiting to hear the rest. 
   "This man is here because he fought to save the 
people of the Old World from something they feared 
more than magic itself," Richard said. 
   He gazed up at the resolute face with its eyes 
fixed forever on the place called the Pillars of 
Creation. 
"This man," Richard said in a quiet voice, "this 
wizard, Kaja-Rang, collected all of those 
pristinely ungifted people, those pillars of 
Creation, who had been banished down here from the 
New World, along with any people who while they 
lived here had joined with them, and he sent them 
all there." 
Richard pointed off into the distance behind the 
statue. 
   "He put all those people in that place, 
protected by the mountains all around, and then he 
placed a boundary of death before them, across this 
pass, so that they could never again come out to be 
among the rest of the people of the world. 
   "Kaja-Rang gave these people their name: the 
Bandakar. The name, bandakar, is from a very old 
language called High D'Haran. It means 'the 
banished.' This man, Kaja-Rang, is the one who 
sealed them in and saved his people from the 
pristinely ungifted, from those without magic." 
   "You," Richard said to the men before him, "are 
the descendants of those banished people. You are 

the descendants of Alric Rahl, of the people sent 
into exile in the Old World. You are all 
descendants of the House of Rahl. Your ancestors 
and mine are the same men. You are the banished 
people." 
   The top of the pass before the statue of Kaja-
Rang was dead silent. The men stared in shock. 
   And then pandemonium broke out. Richard made no 
effort to stop them, to bring them to be quiet. 
Rather, he stood close beside Kahlan as he let them 
take it in. He wanted to give them the time they 
needed to come to grasp the enormity of what he had 
told them. 
   Arms in the air, some men cried out with the 
outrage at what they'd heard, others wailed with 
the horror of the story, some wept in sorrow, many 
argued, a few protested various points that others 
answered, while yet others repeated key elements to 
one another almost as if to hear the words again so 
they could test them, agreeing finally that it 
might very well be so. 
   But through it all, they all slowly began to 
grasp the enormity of what they'd heard. They all 
began to hear the ring of truth in the story. 
Chattering like magpies, all talking at once, they 
expressed disbelief, outrage, wonder, and even 
fear, as they came to the heady comprehension of 
who they really were. 
   At the whispered urging of some among the group, 
after having gotten over the initial shock, the men 
all quieted and at last turned back to Richard, 
hungry to know more. 
   "You are this gifted man, the favored heir, the 
Lord Rahl, and we are the ones banished by your 
kind," one of the men said, expressing what looked 
to be a common fear, the unspoken question of what 
this would mean for them. 
   "That's right," Richard said. "I am the Lord 
Rahl, the leader of the D'Haran Empire, and you are 
the descendants of the pillars of Creation who were 

banished. I am gifted as have been my ancestors, 
every Lord Rahl before me. You are ungifted as were 
your ancestors." 
   Standing before the statue of Kaja-Rang, the man 
who had banished them, Richard looked out at all 
the tense faces. 
   "That banishment was a grievous wrong. It was 
immoral. As Lord Rahl, I denounce the banishment 
and declare it forever ended. You are no longer the 
Empire of Bandakar, the banished ones, you are now 
once again, as you once were, D'Harans, if you 
choose to be." 
   Every man seemed to hold his breath, waiting to 
see if he meant it, or would add more, or if he 
might even recant it. 
   Richard put his arm around Kahlan's waist as he 
calmly gazed out at all the hopeful expressions. 
Richard smiled. "Welcome home." 
   And then they were all falling at his feet, 
kissing his boots, his pants, his hands, and, for 
those who couldn't crowd in close enough, the 
ground before him. In short order, they were 
kissing the hem of Kahlan's dress. 
   They had found a relation, and were in turn 
welcoming him among them. 
 
 
 
 
 
         CHAPTER 42 
 
 
 
 
 
     As the men crowded around their feet, openly 
offering their gratitude for ending their sentence 
of banishment, Richard shared a sidelong glance 
with Kahlan. Cara looked decidedly displeased by 

the display but didn't interfere. 
   Trying to bring a halt to the tearful tribute, 
Richard gestured for the men to get up. "There is 
much more to tell you. Listen to me, now." 
   The smiling, tearful men drew back, hands 
clasped while gazing at him as if he were a long-
lost brother. There were a few older men among the 
crowd and some of middle age, but most ranged from 
young, like Owen, to a little older, like Richard. 
They were all men who had been through terrible 
times. 
   The most difficult part still lay ahead; Richard 
had to make them face up to what was to come. 
   Looking over at Jennsen, standing alone off to 
the side, he gestured for her to come forward. 
   Jennsen emerged from the shadows of the statue, 
catching the attention of all eyes as she made her 
way toward Richard. The men all watched her coming 
into the light. She looked so beautiful that 
Richard couldn't help smiling as she stepped across 
the rocks. Pulling on a red ringlet, she cast a shy 
glance at the men. 
When Richard held an arm out, she sought protection 
under the shelter of that arm as she gazed 
nervously out at men who were like her in one 
important way. 
   "This is my sister, Jennsen Rahl," Richard said. 
"She was born pris-tinely ungifted, just like all 
of you. Our father tried to kill her, as has been 
done for thousands of years with ungifted 
offspring." 
"And you?" a man asked, still skeptical. "You will 
not reject her?" 
   Richard hugged Jennsen with the one arm. "For 
what? For what crime should I reject her? Because 
she was born a woman, instead of a man like me? 
Because she isn't as tall as me? Because she has 
red hair, instead of hair like mine? Because her 
eyes are blue and not gray? ... Because she is 
ungifted?" 

   The men shifted their weight to the other foot 
or folded their arms. Some, after all he had 
already said, averted their eyes, looking 
embarrassed to have even asked the question. 
   "She's beautiful, smart, and uses her head. She, 
too, fights for her right to live, and does so 
through reasoned means. She is as you men, 
pristinely ungifted. Because she shares an 
understanding of the value of life, I embrace her." 
   Richard heard the bleat and turned. Betty, her 
rope trailing behind, trotted up the rise. Jennsen 
rolled her eyes as Betty came close, peering up, 
her tail wagging in a blur. 
   Jennsen snatched up the rope, inspecting the 
end. Richard could see that it had been chewed 
through. 
   "Betty," she scolded, shaking the end of the 
rope at the unrepentant goat, "what did you do?" 
Betty bleated her answer, clearly proud of herself. 
Jennsen heaved a sigh as she shrugged an apology at 
Richard. 
   The men had all taken several steps back, 
murmuring their dread to one another. 
   "I'm not a witch," Jennsen told them in a heated 
tone. "Just because I have red hair that doesn't 
mean I'm a witch." 
The men looked thoroughly unconvinced. 
   "I've had dealings with a very real witch 
woman," Richard told them. "I can assure you, red 
hair is no mark of a witch. It just isn't true." 
   "It is true," one of the men insisted. He 
pointed at Betty. "There is her attendant spirit." 
Richard's brow wrinkled. "Attendant spirit?" 
   "That's right," another told him. "A witch 
always has a familiar with her. She called her 
attendant spirit and it came to her." 
   "Called her?" Jennsen brandished the frayed end 
of the rope at the men. "I tied her to a tree and 
she chewed through her rope." 
   Another man shook his finger at her. "You called 

her with magic and she came." 
   Fists at her sides, Jennsen took a step toward 
the men. They took a collective step back. 
   "You men all had family and friends—a community 
of people. I had no friends and could have none 
because my mother and I had to run from my father 
my whole life to keep from being caught. He would 
have tortured and murdered me had he caught me—the 
same as he would have done with you. I could have 
no childhood friends, so my mother gave me Betty. 
Betty was just newborn; we grew up together. Betty 
chewed through her rope because I'm the only family 
she's ever known and she simply wanted to be close 
to me. 
   "I was banished from everyone for my crime of 
birth, just like your ancestors. You all know the 
injustice of such banishment and you know its pain. 
And now you foolish men would banish me from your 
acceptance because I have red hair and a goat as a 
pet? You are spineless cowards and hypocrites! 
   "First you poison the only person in the world 
brave enough to end our banishment from the rest of 
mankind and now you fear me and reject me because 
of silly superstitions. If I did have magic, I'd 
burn you all to a cinder for your cruel attitudes!" 
   Richard put a hand on her shoulder and drew her 
back. "It will be all right," he whispered to her. 
"Just let me talk to them." 
   "You tell us that you're a wizard," an older man 
in the back called out, "and then you expect us to 
believe it's so—on faith—because you say it is, 
while you claim that we should not hold to our 
beliefs, such as our fear that she could be a witch 
with her familiar, because it's held only on 
faith." 
   "That's right," another said. "You claim your 
belief is in real magic, while you dismiss our 
belief. A lot of what you say makes sense, but I 
don't agree with all of it." 
   There could be no partial agreement. To reject 

part of the truth was to reject it all. Richard 
considered his options, how he could convince 
people without magic, who could not see magic, that 
real magic existed. From their perspective, he 
seemed guilty of the same error he was telling them 
they were making. How could he demonstrate a 
rainbow of color to the blind? 
   "You have a point," Richard said. "Give me a 
moment and I will show you the reality of the magic 
I talk about." 
   He motioned Cara closer. "Get me the warning 
beacon," he said in a confidential tone. 
   Cara immediately took off down the hill. He saw 
that Jennsen's angry blue eyes were filled with 
tears but she didn't cry. Kahlan pulled her back 
farther as Richard addressed the men. 
   "There is more I must tell you—some things you 
need to understand. I have ended the banishment, 
but that does not mean that I unconditionally 
accept you back as one of our people." 
"But you said that we were welcomed home," Owen 
said. 
   "I'm stating the obvious—that you have a right 
to your own life. Out of goodwill I welcome you all 
to be part of D'Hara if you wish— part of what 
D'Hara now stands for. But by welcoming you back, 
that does not mean that I welcome people 
unconditionally. 
   "All men should be free to live their own lives, 
but make no mistake, there is a vast difference 
between that freedom and anarchy. 
   "If we triumph in our struggle, you are welcome 
to be free people of a D'Haran Empire which holds a 
belief in specific values. For example, you can 
think whatever you wish and try to persuade others 
of the value of your beliefs, but you cannot act on 
a view that those who fight to gain that freedom 
are savages or criminals, even though you expect to 
enjoy the fruits of their struggle. At minimum, 
they have earned your respect and gratitude. Their 

lives are no less than yours and are not expendable 
for your benefit. That is slavery." 
   "But you have savage ways and engage in violence 
for a land we have never even seen," one of the 
younger men said. He pointed an arm back toward 
Bandakar. "The only land we have ever known is here 
and we unconditionally reject your love of 
violence." 
   "Land?" Richard spread his arms. "We do not 
fight for land. We are loyal to an ideal—an ideal 
of liberty wherever man lives. We do not guard 
territory, bleed for a piece of dirt. We don't 
fight because we love violence. We fight for our 
freedom as individuals to live our own lives, to 
pursue our own survival, our own happiness. 
   "Your unconditional rejection of violence makes 
you smugly think of yourselves as noble, as 
enlightened, but in reality it is nothing less than 
abject moral capitulation to evil. Unconditional 
rejection of self-defense, because you think it's a 
supposed surrender to violence, leaves you no 
resort but begging for mercy or offering 
appeasement. 
   "Evil grants no mercy, and to attempt to appease 
it is nothing more than a piecemeal surrender to 
it. Surrender to evil is slavery at best, death at 
worst. Thus, your unconditional rejection of 
violence is really nothing more than embracing 
death as preferable to life. 
"You will achieve what you embrace. 
   "The right, the absolute necessity, of vengeance 
against anyone who initiates force against you is 
fundamental to survival. The morality of a people's 
self-defense is in its defense of each individual's 
right to life. It's an intolerance of violence, 
made real by an unwavering willingness to crush any 
who would launch violence against you. The 
unconditional determination to destroy any who 
would initiate force against you is an exaltation 
of the value of life. Refusing to surrender your 

life to any thug or tyrant who lays claim to it is 
in fact embracing life itself. 
   "If you are unwilling to defend your right to 
your own lives, then you are merely like mice 
trying to argue with owls. You think their ways are 
wrong. They think you are dinner. 
   "The Imperial Order preaches that mankind is 
corrupt and evil, and therefore life is of little 
value. Their actions certainly bear this out. They 
moralize that you can only win salvation and 
happiness in some other world, and then only by 
sacrificing your life in this one. 
   "Generosity is fine, if it's by your free 
choice, but a belief in the primacy of self-
sacrifice as a moral requisite is nothing less than 
the sanctioning of slavery. Those who tell you that 
it is your responsibility and duty to sacrifice are 
trying to blind you to the chains they are slipping 
around your neck. 
   "As D'Harans, you will not be required to 
sacrifice your life to another, and by the same 
token you cannot demand that others sacrifice 
themselves to you. You may believe as you wish, you 
may even feel that you cannot take up arms and 
fight directly for our survival, but you must help 
support our cause and you may not contribute 
materially or spiritually to the destruction of our 
values and therefore our lives— that is treason and 
will be treated as such. 
   "The Imperial Order has violently invaded 
innocent lands, like yours. They have enslaved, 
tortured, raped, and murdered in order to seize 
rule. They have done no less in the New World. They 
have forfeited their right to be heard. There is no 
moral dilemma involved, no ethical question open to 
debate; they must be ground into dust." 
   A man stepped forward. "But common decency in 
dealing with our fellow man requkes that we must 
show them mercy for their misguided ways." 
   "There is no greater value than life—and that's 

what you partially recognize by your confused 
notion of granting mercy. Their conscious, 
deliberate act of murder takes the irreplaceable 
value of life from another. A murderer, by his own 
choice to kill, forfeits the right to his own life. 
Mercy for such evil is nothing short of excusing it 
and thus allowing evil to prevail—it codifies the 
taking of innocent life by not making the murderer 
forfeit their own guilty life. 
   "Mercy grants value to the life of a killer, 
while, at the same time, it strips away the value 
of the life of the innocent victim. It makes the 
life of a killer more important than the life of an 
innocent. It is thus a trade of the good to the 
evil. It is the victory of death over life." 
   "So," Owen wondered aloud, "because the Order 
has attacked your land and murdered its people, you 
intend to try to kill every living person in the 
Old World?" 
   "No. The Order is evil and from the Old World. 
That does not mean that the people of the Old World 
are evil simply because they happen to have been 
born on a patch of ground ruled by evil men. Some 
actively support these rulers and therefore embrace 
evil, but not everyone does. Many of the people in 
the Old World are also the victims of the rule of 
the Imperial Order and suffer greatly under its 
brutality. Many struggle against this evil rule. As 
we speak, many risk their lives to rid themselves 
of these evil men. We fight for the same thing: 
liberty. 
   "Where those who seek liberty were born is 
irrelevant. We believe in the value of the 
individual's life. That means that where someone 
lives does not make them evil—it's their beliefs 
and actions that matter. 
   "But make no mistake—many people are an active 
part of the Imperial Order and its murderous ways. 
Actions must have consequences. The Order must be 
eradicated." 

   "Surely, you would allow some compromise," one 
of the older men said. 
   "If, hoping to appease it, you willingly 
compromise with unrepentant evil, you only allow 
such evil to sink its fangs into you; from that day 
on its venom will course through your veins until 
it finally kills you." 
   "But that's too harsh a sentiment," the man 
said. "It's just being stubborn and obstructing a 
constructive path. There is always room for 
compromise." 
   Richard tapped his thumb against his chest. "You 
men decided to give me poison. That poison will 
kill me; that makes it evil. How would you suggest 
I compromise with poison?" 
No one had an answer. 
   "In trade between willing parties who share 
moral values and who deal fairly and honestly with 
one another, compromise over something like price 
is legitimate. In matters of morality or truth, 
there can be no compromise. 
   "Compromising with murderers, which is precisely 
what you are suggesting, grants them moral 
equivalence where none can rightfully exist. Moral 
equivalence says that you are no better than they; 
therefore, their belief—that they should be able to 
torture, rape, or murder you— is just as morally 
valid as your view—that you have the right to live 
free of their violence. Moral compromise rejects 
the concept of right and wrong. It says that 
everyone is equal, all desires are equally valid, 
all action is equally valid, so everyone should 
compromise to get along. 
"Where could you compromise with those who torture, 
rape, and murder people? In the number of days a 
week you will be tortured? In the number of men to 
be allowed to rape your loved ones? In how many of 
your family are to be murdered? 
   "No moral equivalence exists in that situation, 
nor can it exist, so there can be no compromise, 

only suicide. 
   "To even suggest compromise can exist with such 
men is to sanction murder." 
   Most of the men appeared shocked and startled to 
hear someone speaking to them in such a 
straightforward manner. They seemed to be losing 
interest in their supply of empty adages. Some of 
the men looked to be moved by Richard's words. A 
few even looked inspired by their clarity; he could 
see it in their eyes, as if they were seeing things 
for the first time. 
   Cara came up behind Richard and handed him the 
warning beacon. Richard wasn't sure, but it seemed 
as if the inky black had taken over more of the 
surface of the small figure than the last time he'd 
seen it. Inside, the sand continued to trickle down 
onto the accumulated pile in the bottom. 
   "Kaja-Rang placed the boundary across this pass 
to seal your people in. He is the one who named 
you. He knew your people shunned violence and he 
feared you might end up being prey to criminals. He 
is the one who gave you a way to banish them from 
your land so that you could continue to have the 
kind of life you wanted. He told your people of the 
passage through the boundary so that you could rid 
yourselves of criminals if you rallied the will." 
   Owen looked troubled. "If this great wizard, 
Kaja-Rang, didn't want our people among the 
population of the Old World because we would mix 
with them and spread our pristinely ungifted trait, 
as you call it, then what about the criminals we 
banish? Sending those men out into the world would 
cause the thing they feared. Making this pass 
through the boundary and telling our ancestors 
about it would seem to defeat the whole purpose of 
the boundary." 
   Richard smiled. "Very good, Owen. You are 
beginning to think for yourself." 
Owen smiled. Richard gestured up at the statue of 
Kaja-Rang. 

"You see where he's looking? It's a place called 
the Pillars of Creation. It's a deathly hot place 
where nothing lives—a land stalked by death. The 
boundary that Kaja-Rang placed had sides to it. 
When you sent people out of your land, through the 
boundary, the walls of death to the sides prevented 
those banished people from escaping into the world 
at large. They had only one way they could go: the 
Pillars of Creation. 
   "Even with water and supplies, and knowing where 
you must go to get past it, trying to go through 
the valley known as the Pillars of Creation is 
almost certain death. Without water and supplies, 
without knowing the land, without knowing how to 
travel it and where you must go to escape such a 
place, those you banished faced certain death." 
   The men stared, wide-eyed. "Then, when we 
banished a criminal, we were actually executing 
them," one of the men said. 
"That's right." 
   "This Kaja-Rang tricked us, then," the man 
added. "Tricked us into what was actually the 
killing of those men." 
   "You think that a terrible trick?" Richard 
asked. "You people were deliberately setting known 
criminals loose on the world to prey on 
unsuspecting people. You were knowingly setting 
free violent men, and condemning unsuspecting 
people outside your land to be victims of violence. 
Rather than put murderers to death, you were, as 
far as you knew— had you given it any thought—
knowingly assisting them in going on to kill 
others. In the blind attempt to avoid violence at 
all cost, you actually championed it. 
   "You told yourselves that those other people 
didn't matter, because they weren't enlightened, 
like you, that you were better than they because 
you were above violence, that you unconditionally 
rejected violence. If you even thought about it, 
you considered these people beyond the boundary to 

be savages, their lives unimportant. For all 
intents and purposes, you were sacrificing their 
innocent lives for the lives of those men you knew 
to be evil. 
   "What Kaja-Rang was doing, besides keeping the 
pristinely ungifted from being at large in the 
world, was executing those criminals you banished 
before they could harm other people. You think 
yourselves noble in rejecting violence, but your 
actions would have fostered it. Only Kaja-Rang's 
actions prevented it." 
   "Dear Creator. It is far worse than that." Owen 
sank down, sitting heavily. "Far worse than you 
even realize." 
   Other men, too, looked to be stricken with 
horror. Some had to lower themselves to the ground 
as Owen had. Others, their faces in their hands, 
turned away, or walked off a few paces. 
"What do you mean?" Richard asked. 
   Owen looked up, his face ashen. "The story I 
told you about our land ... about our town and the 
other great cities? How in my town we all lived 
together and were happy with our lives?" Richard 
nodded. "Not all were." 
   Kahlan crossed her arms and leaned toward Owen. 
"What do you mean, not all were?" 
   Owen lifted his hands in a helpless gesture. 
"Some wanted more than our simple joyful life. Some 
people ... well, they wanted to change things. They 
said they wanted to make things better. They wanted 
to improve our life, to build places for 
themselves, even though this is against our ways." 
   "Owen is right," an older man said in a grim 
tone. "In my time I have seen a great many of these 
people who were unable to endure what some called 
the chafing principles of our empire." 
   "And what happened when people wanted to make 
these changes, or could not endure the principles 
of your empire?" Richard asked. 
   Owen looked to each side, to the other 

dispirited faces. "The great speakers renounced 
their ideas. The Wise One said they would only 
bring strife among us. Their hopes for new ways 
were turned aside and they were denounced." Owen 
swallowed. "So these people decided they would 
leave Bandakar. They went out of our land, taking 
the path through the opening in the boundary, to 
find a new life for themselves. Not a single one 
ever returned to us." 
   Richard wiped a hand across his face. "Then they 
died looking for their new life, a better life than 
what you had to offer." 
   "But you don't understand." Owen rose to his 
feet. "We are like those people." He swept his arm 
back at his men. "We have refused to go back and 
give ourselves over to the men of the Order, even 
though we know that people are being tortured 
because we hide. We know it will not stop the 
Order, so we don't go back. 
   "We have gone against the wishes of our great 
speakers, and the Wise One, to try to save our 
people. We have been denounced for what we choose 
to do. We have gone out of the pass to seek 
information, to find a way to rid ourselves of the 
Imperial Order. Do you see? We are much the same as 
those others throughout our history. Like those 
others, we chose to leave and try to change things 
rather than to endure the way things were." 
   "Then perhaps you are beginning to see," Richard 
said, "that everything you were taught showed you 
only how to embrace death, not life. Perhaps you 
see that what you called the teaching of 
enlightenment was no more than blinders pulled over 
your eyes." 
   Richard put his hand on Owen's shoulder. He 
gazed down at the statue of himself in his other 
hand and then looked around at the tense faces. 
   "You men are the ones left after all the rest 
have failed the tests. You alone got this far. You 
alone have started to use your minds to try to find 

a solution for you and your loved ones. You have 
much more to learn, but you have at least started 
to make some of the right choices. You must not 
stop now; you must meet with courage what I will 
call upon you to do, if you are to truly have a 
chance to save your loved ones." 
   For the first time they looked at least a little 
proud. They had been recognized, not for how well 
they repeated meaningless sayings, but for the 
decisions they reached on their own. 
   Jennsen was frowning in thought. "Richard, why 
couldn't people get back in through the passage out 
through the boundary? If they wanted to go off and 
have a new life but then discovered that they would 
have to go through the Pillars of Creation, why 
wouldn't they go back, at least to get supplies, to 
get what they needed so they could make it 
through?" 
   "That's right," Kahlan said. "George Cypher went 
through the boundary at Kings' Port and then 
returned. Adie said that the boundary had to have a 
passage, a vent, like where these people banished 
criminals, so why couldn't people come back in? 
There was a pass out, so why did they never 
return?" 
The men nodded, curious to hear why no one ever 
came back. 
   "From the first, I've wondered the same thing." 
Richard rubbed a thumb along the glossy black 
surface of the statue of himself. "I think that the 
boundaries in the Midlands had to have an opening 
through them because they were so big—so long. This 
boundary, here, is nothing compared to those; I 
doubt that the same kind of vent would be needed. 
   "Because it was just one bent section of a 
boundary and not very long, I suspect that Kaja-
Rang was able to put in a pass that allowed 
criminals to be banished through it, but would not 
allow passage back in. After all, if a criminal was 
banished and found he couldn't escape, he would 

return. Kaja-Rang wouldn't have wanted that to 
happen." 
"How could such a thing work?" Jennsen asked. 
   Richard rested his left hand on the hilt of his 
sword. "Certain snakes can swallow prey much larger 
than themselves. Their teeth are angled back so 
that as the prey is devoured, it's impossible for 
it to come back out, to escape. I suppose that the 
pass through the boundary could have been somehow 
like that—only able to be traversed in one 
direction." 
"Do you think such a thing is possible?" Jennsen 
asked. 
"There is precedent for such safeguards," Kahlan 
said. 
   Richard nodded his agreement. "The great barrier 
between the New and the Old World had defenses to 
allow certain people, under specific conditions, 
one passage through and back, but not two." He 
pointed the warning beacon up at the statue. "A 
wizard of Kaja-Rang's ability would surely have 
known how to craft a pass through the boundary that 
did not allow any return. After all, he called it 
up out of the underworld itself and it remained 
viable for nearly three thousand years." 
"So then anyone who went out of this boundary 
died," Owen said. 
   Richard nodded. "I'm afraid so. Kaja-Rang 
appeared to have made elaborate plans that 
functioned as he intended for all this time. He 
even made contingencies should the boundary fail." 
   "That's something I don't understand," a young 
man said. "If this wizard was so great, and his 
magic was so powerful that he could make a wall of 
death to keep us separated from the world for three 
thousand years, then how could it possibly fail? In 
the last two years it simply went away. Why?" 
"I believe it was because of me," Kahlan said. 
   She took a step closer to the men. Richard 
didn't try to stop her. At this point, it wouldn't 

do to appear as if he were withholding information 
from them. 
   "A couple of years ago, in a desperate act to 
save Richard's life, I inadvertently called forth 
underworld power that I believe may be slowly 
destroying magic in our world. Richard banished 
this evil magic, but it had been here in the world 
of life for a time, so the effects may be 
irreversible." 
   Worried looks passed among the men. This woman 
before them had just admitted that because of 
something she'd done, their protection had failed. 
Because of her, horrifying violence and brutality 
had befallen them. Because of her, their way of 
life had ended. 
 
 
 
 
 
         CHAPTER 43 
 
 
 
 
        You still have not shown us your magic," 
one of the men finally said. 
   Richard's hand slipped away from the small of 
Kahlan's back as he stepped toward the men. 
   "Kaja-Rang devised a facet to his magic, linked 
to the boundary he placed here, to help protect 
it." Richard held up the small figure of himself 
for all the men to see. "This was sent to warn me 
that the boundary to your land had failed." 
   "Why is the top part of it that strange black?" 
asked a man standing in the front. 
   "I believe that it's an indication of how I'm 
running out of time, how I may be dying." 
   Worried whispering swept through the group of 
men. Richard held up a hand, urging them to listen 

to him as he went on. 
"This sand inside—can you all see this sand?" 
   Stretching their necks, they all tried to get a 
look, but not all were close enough, so Richard 
walked among them, holding up the statue so that 
they could all see that it looked like him, and see 
the sand falling inside. 
"This is not really sand," he told them. "It's 
magic." 
Owen's face twisted with skepticism. "But you said 
we couldn't see magic." 
   "You are all pristinely ungifted and aren't 
touched by magic, so you can't see regular magic. 
The boundary, however, still prevented you from 
going out into the world, didn't it? Why do you 
suppose that was so?" 
   "It was a wall of death," an older man spoke up, 
seeming to think that it was self-evident. 
   "But how could it harm people who are not 
affected by magic? Going into the boundary itself 
meant death for you the same as anyone else. Why? 
   "Because the boundary is a place in this world 
where the underworld also existed. The underworld 
is the world of the dead. You may be ungifted, but 
you are mortal; since you are linked to life, so, 
too, are you linked to death." 
   Richard again held the statue up. "This magic, 
as well, is tied to the underworld. Since you are 
all mortal, you have a connection to the 
underworld, to the Keeper's power, to death. That's 
why you can see the sand that shows how my time 
trickles away." 
   "I don't see anything magical about sand 
trickling down," a man grumbled. "Just because you 
say it's magic, or that it's your life trickling 
away, that doesn't seem to prove anything." 
   Richard turned the statue sideways. The sand 
continued to flow, but sideways. 
   Gasps and astonished whispering broke out among 
the men as they watched the sand flowing laterally. 

   They crowded in close like curious children to 
see the statue as Richard held it up, on its side, 
so they could see magic. Some reached out and 
tentatively touched the inky black surface as 
Richard held the figure of himself out for them to 
inspect. Others leaned close, peering in to see the 
sand flowing askew in the lower part, where the 
figure was still transparent. 
   The men spoke of what a wonder it was, but they 
weren't sure about his explanation of underworld 
magic. 
"But we all see this," one of the men said. "This 
doesn't show us that we're really different from 
you or anyone else, as you say we are. This shows 
us only that we are all able to see this magic, the 
same as you. Maybe we aren't this pristinely 
ungifted people you seem to think we are." 
   Richard thought about it a moment, thought about 
what he could do to show them the true aspects of 
magic. Even though he was gifted, he didn't know a 
great deal about controlling his own gift, except 
that it was in part powered by anger linked to 
need. He couldn't simply demonstrate some bit of 
magic the way Zedd could, and besides, even if he 
could do something magical, they wouldn't be able 
to see it. 
   Out of the corner of his eye, Richard saw Cara 
standing with her arms folded. An idea came to him. 
   "The bond between the Lord Rahl and his people 
is a bond of magic," Richard said. "That same magic 
powers other things, besides the protection that 
the bond affords against the dream walker." 
   Richard gestured for Cara to come forward. "In 
addition to being my friend, Cara is also a Mord-
Sith. For thousands of years Mord-Sith have been 
fierce protectors of the Lord Rahl." Richard lifted 
Cara's arm for the men to see the red rod hanging 
from the fine gold chain at her wrist. "This is an 
Agiel, the weapon of a Mord-Sith. The Agiel is 
powered by a Mord-Sith's connection to the Lord 

Rahl—to me." 
   "But it has no blade on it," a man said as he 
looked closely at the Agiel swinging on the end of 
the gold chain. "It has nothing of any use as a 
weapon." 
   "Take a closer look at it," Richard suggested as 
he held Cara's elbow and guided her forward, among 
the men. "Look at it closely to satisfy yourself 
that what this man has observed, that it has no 
blade, that it is nothing more than this slender 
rod, is true." 
   The men leaned in close as Cara walked among 
them, holding her arm up, letting the men touch and 
inspect her Agiel as it dangled from its chain. 
When they had all had a look, inspecting the length 
of it, looking at the end, hefting it to see that 
it wasn't heavy and couldn't really be used as a 
club, Richard told Cara to touch it to the men. The 
Agiel spun up into her fist. Men flinched back at 
the grim look on her face as she came at them with 
the thing that Richard had told them was a weapon. 
   Cara touched her Agiel to Owen's shoulder. 
   "She touched me with this red rod before," he 
assured his men. "It does nothing." 
   Cara pressed the Agiel to every man close enough 
for her to reach. A few cringed back, fearful of 
being harmed, even though it had harmed none of 
their fellows. Many of the men, though, felt the 
touch of her Agiel and were satisfied that there 
was no ill effect. 
   Richard rolled up his sleeve. "Now, I will show 
you that this really is a powerful weapon of 
magic." 
   He held his arm out to Cara. "Draw blood," he 
said in a calm voice that did not betray what he 
really thought of being touched by an Agiel. 
Cara stared at him. "Lord Rahl, I don't—" 
"Do it," Richard commanded as he held his arm out. 
   "Here," Tom said, thrusting his bared arm in 
front of her. "Do it to me, instead." 

Cara immediately saw this as a preferable test. 
"No!" Jennsen objected, but too late. 
   Tom cried out as Cara touched the end of her 
Agiel to his arm. He staggered back a step, a 
trickle of blood running down his arm. The men 
stared, unsure what they were seeing. 
"It must be a trick of some kind," one suggested. 
As Jennsen comforted Tom, Richard held his arm out 
again. 
   "Show them," he told Cara. "Show them what a 
Mord-Sith's Agiel can do with magic alone." 
Cara looked into his eyes. "Lord Rahl..." 
   "Do it. Show them, so they understand." He 
turned to the men. "Gather around closer so you can 
see that it does its terrible task with no visible 
means. Watch closely so that you can all see that 
it's magic alone doing its grisly work." 
   Richard clenched his fist as he held the inside 
of his arm up for her to touch. "Do it so that they 
can clearly see what it will do; otherwise it will 
be for nothing. Don't make me do this for nothing." 
   Cara pressed her lips tight with the displeasure 
of his command. She looked once more at the resolve 
in his eyes. When she did, he could see in her blue 
eyes the pain it gave her to hold the Agiel. He 
clenched his teeth and nodded that he was ready. 
With an iron visage, she laid the Agiel against the 
inside of his forearm. 
It felt like lightning hit him. 
   The touch of the Agiel was out of all proportion 
to what it would appear it should feel like. The 
thunderous jolt of pain shot up his arm. The shock 
of it slammed into his shoulder. It felt like the 
bones in his entire arm shattered. Teeth gritted, 
he held his trembling arm out as Cara slowly 
dragged the Agiel down toward his wrist. Blood-
filled blisters rose in its wake. Blood gushed down 
his arm. 
   Richard held his breath, kept his abdominal 
muscles tight, as he went to one knee, not because 

he intended to, but because he couldn't remain 
standing under the weight of pain as he held his 
arm up for Cara as she pressed the Agiel to it. The 
men gasped as they watched, shocked at the blood, 
the obvious pain. They whispered their 
astonishment. 
   Cara withdrew the weapon. Richard released the 
rigid tension in his muscles, bending forward as he 
panted, trying to catch his breath, trying to 
remain upright. Blood dripped off his fingers. 
   Kahlan was there beside him with a small scarf 
Jennsen pulled from a pocket. "Are you out of your 
mind?" she hissed heatedly as she wrapped his 
bleeding arm. 
   "Thanks," he said in response to her care, not 
wanting to address her question. 
   He couldn't make his fingers stop trembling. 
Cara had held little back. He was sure that she 
hadn't broken any bones, but it felt as if she had. 
He could feel tears of pain running down his face. 
   When Kahlan finished, Cara put a hand under his 
arm and helped him to his feet. "The Mother 
Confessor is right," she growled under her breath. 
"You are out of your mind." 
   Richard didn't argue the need of what he'd had 
her do, but instead turned to the men. He held his 
arm out. A wet crimson stain slowly grew along the 
length of the scarf bandage. 
   "There is powerful magic for you. You can't see 
the magic, but you can see the results. That magic 
can kill, should Cara wish it." The men cast 
worried glances her way, viewing her with newfound 
respect. "But it could not harm you men because you 
have no ability to interact with such magic. Only 
those born with the spark of the gift can feel the 
touch of an Agiel." 
The mood had changed. The sight of blood had 
sobered everyone. 
   Richard paced slowly before the men. "I've given 
you the truth in all that I've told you. I've kept 

nothing important or relevant from you, nor will I. 
I've told you who I am, who you are, and how we've 
come to this point. If there is anything you wish 
to know, I will give you my truthful answer." 
   When Richard paused, the men looked around at 
one another, seeing if anyone would ask a question. 
No one did. 
   "The time has come," Richard said, "for you men 
to decide your future and the future of your loved 
ones. Today is the day upon which that future 
hinges." 
   Richard gestured toward Owen. "I know that Owen 
had a woman he loved, Marilee, who was taken away 
by the Order. I know that each of you has suffered 
great loss at the hands of the men of the Imperial 
Order. I don't know all your names, yet, or the 
names of the loved ones taken from you, but please 
believe me when I tell you that I know such pain. 
   "While I understand how you came to the point 
where you thought you had no options but to poison 
me, it wasn't right for you to have done so." Many 
men looked away from Richard's gaze, casting their 
own downward. "I'm going to give you a chance to 
set the proper course for yourselves and your loved 
ones." 
   He let them consider this a moment before going 
on. "You men have passed many tests to make it this 
far, to have survived this long in such a brutal 
situation as you have all faced, but now you must 
make a choice." 
   Richard rested a hand on the hilt of his sword. 
"I want to know where you've hidden the antidote to 
the poison you've given me." 
   Worried looks spread through the crowd. Men 
glanced to the side, trying to judge the feelings 
of their fellows, trying to see what they would do. 
   Owen, too, tried to gauge the reaction of his 
friends, but being just as uncertain as he, they 
offered no firm indication of what they wanted to 
do. Finally he licked his lips and timidly asked a 

question. 
   "If we say that we will tell you where the 
antidote is, will you agree to first give us your 
word that you will help us?" 
   Richard resumed his measured pacing. The men 
nervously waited for his answer as they watched 
blood drip off his fingers, leaving a trail of 
crimson drops on the stone. 
   "No," Richard said. "I will not allow you to 
link two separate issues. It was wrong to poison 
me. This is your chance to reverse that wrong. 
Linking it to any concession perpetuates the 
fallacy that it can somehow be justified. Telling 
me where you've hidden the antidote is the only 
proper thing for you to do, now, and must be 
without condition. This is the day you must decide 
how you will live your future. Until you give me 
your decision, I will tell you nothing more." 
   Some of the men looked on the verge of panic, 
some on the verge of tears. Owen prodded them all 
back, away from Richard, so that they could discuss 
it among themselves. 
   "No," Richard said, his pacing coming to a halt. 
The men all fell silent and turned back toward him. 
"I don't want any of you coming to a decision 
because of what another says. I want each of you to 
give me your own personal decision." 
   The men stared. A number spoke up all at once, 
wanting to know what he meant. 
   "I want to know, without any preconditions, what 
each individual chooses to do—to free me of the 
poison, or to use it as a threat on my life to gain 
my cooperation. I want to know each man's choice." 
"But we must reach a consensus," one man said. 
"For what purpose?" Richard asked. 
   "In order for our decision to be correct," he 
explained. "No proper decision about the right 
course of action in any important situation can be 
made without a consensus." 
   "You are attempting to give moral authority to 

mob rule," Richard said. 
   "But a consensus points to the proper moral 
judgment," another man insisted, "because it is the 
will of the people." 
"I see," Richard said. "So what you're saying is 
that if all of you men decide to rape my sister, 
here, then it's a moral act because you have a 
consensus to rape her, and if I oppose you, I'm 
immoral for standing alone and failing to have a 
consensus behind me. That about the way you men see 
it?" 
The men shrank back in confused revulsion. One 
spoke up. 
"Well... no, not exactly—" 
   "Right and wrong are not the product of 
consensus," Richard said, cutting him off. "You are 
trying to make a virtue of mob rule. Rational moral 
choices are based on the value of life, not a 
consensus. A consensus can't make the sun rise at 
midnight, nor can it change a wrong into a right, 
or the other way around. If something is wrong, it 
matters not if a thousand other men are for it; you 
must still oppose it. If something is just, no 
amount of popular outcry should stay you from your 
course. 
   "I'll not hear any more of this empty gibberish 
about a consensus. You are not a flock of geese; 
you are men. I will know the mind of each of you." 
He gestured to the ground at their feet. "Everyone, 
pick up two pebbles." 
   Richard watched as the bewildered men hesitantly 
bent and did his bidding. 
   "Now," Richard said, "you will put either one or 
both pebbles in a closed fist. Each of you will 
come up to me, to the man you poisoned, and you 
will open your fist so that I can see your decision 
but the others can't. 
   "One pebble will mean no, you will not tell me 
where the antidote is located unless I first pledge 
to try to free your people. Two pebbles in your one 

fist will mean yes, you agree to tell me, without 
any precondition, where to find the antidote to the 
poison you've given me." 
   "But what will happen if we agree to tell you?" 
one of the men asked. "Will you still give us our 
freedom?" 
   Richard shrugged. "After each of you has given 
me your answer, you will all find out mine. If you 
tell me the location of the antidote, I may help 
you, or once I'm free of your poison, I may leave 
you and return to taking care of my own urgent 
problems. You will only find out after you've given 
me your answer. 
"Now, turn away from your friends and put either 
one pebble in your fist for no or two pebbles to 
agree to reveal the location of the poison. When 
you've finished, come forward one at a time and 
open your hand to show me your own individual 
decision." 
   The men milled around, casting sidelong glances 
at one another, but as he'd instructed, they 
refrained from discussing the matter. Each man 
finally set about privately slipping pebbles into 
his fist. 
   As the men were occupied, Cara and Kahlan moved 
in close around Richard. It looked like the two of 
them had been reaching conclusions of their own. 
   Cara seized his arm. "Are you crazy?" she 
whispered in an angry tone. 
"You've both already asked me that today." 
   "Lord Rahl, need I remind you that you once 
before called for a vote and it only got you into 
trouble? You said you would not do such a foolish 
thing again." 
   "Cara is right," Kahlan argued in a low voice so 
the men couldn't hear. 
"This time is different." 
"It's not different," Cara snapped. "It's trouble." 
   "It's different," he insisted. "I've told them 
what's right and why; now they must decide if they 

will choose to do the right thing or not." 
   "You're allowing others to decide your future," 
Kahlan said. "You're placing your fate in their 
hands." 
   Richard let out a deep breath as he gazed into 
Kahlan's green eyes and then the icy blue eyes of 
the Mord-Sith. "I have to do this. Now, let them 
come up and show me their decision." 
   Cara stormed off to stand back by the statue of 
Kaja-Rang. Kahlan gave his arm a squeeze, offering 
her silent support, accepting his decision even if 
she didn't understand his reasons. A brief smile of 
appreciation was all he could manage before she 
turned and walked back to stand by Cara, Jennsen, 
and Tom. 
   Richard turned away, not wanting to let Kahlan 
see how much pain he was in. The ache from the 
poison was slowly creeping back up his chest. Every 
breath hurt. His arm still trembled with the 
lingering ache of being touched by an Agiel. The 
worst, though, was the headache. He wondered if 
Cara could see it in his eyes. After all, the 
business of Mord-Sith was pain. 
   He knew he couldn't wait until after helping 
these men fight off the Order before getting the 
antidote to the poison. He had no idea how to rid 
their empire of the Imperial Order. He couldn't 
even rid his own empire of the invaders. 
   Worse, though, he could feel that he was running 
out of time. His gift was giving him the headaches 
and, if not attended to, would eventually kill him, 
but worse, it was weakening him, allowing the 
poison to work faster. With each passing day he was 
having more and more difficulty working past the 
poison. 
   If he could get these men to agree to do this, 
to tell him where they'd hidden the antidote, then 
he might be able to recover it in time. 
If not, then his chance to live was as good as 
over. 

 
 
 
 
         CHAPTER 44 
  
  
  
  
         The men milled around the top of the pass, 
some staring off into their own thoughts, some 
gazing up at the statue of Kaja-Rang, the man who 
had banished their people. Some of the men snatched 
glimpses at their companions. Richard could see 
that they were aching to ask friends what they 
would do, but they kept to Richard's orders and 
didn't speak. 
   Finally, when Richard stepped up before them, 
one of the younger men came forward. He had been 
one of the men eager to hear Richard's words. He'd 
looked as if he had listened carefully and 
considered the things Richard had told them. 
Richard knew that if this man said no, then there 
was no chance that any of the others would agree. 
   When the young, blond-headed man opened his 
fist, two pebbles lay in his palm. Richard let out 
an inner sigh that at least one of the men had 
actually chosen to do the right thing. 
   Another man came forward and opened his fist, 
showing two pebbles sitting in his palm. Richard 
nodded in acknowledgment, without showing any 
reaction, and let him move aside. The rest of the 
men had lined up. Each stepped forward in turn and 
silently opened his hand. Each showed him two 
pebbles, showing that he would recant their death 
threat, and then moved off so that the next man 
could show his choice. 
Owen was the last in line. He looked up at Richard, 
pressed his lips tight, and then thrust out his 
hand. "You have done us no harm," he said as he 

opened his fist. There in his palm lay two pebbles. 
   "I don't know what will happen to us, now," Owen 
said, "but I can see that we must not cause you 
harm because we are desperate for your help." 
   Richard nodded. "Thank you." The sincerity in 
his voice brought smiles to many of the faces 
watching. "You have all showed two pebbles. I'm 
encouraged that you've all chosen to do the right 
thing. We now have common ground upon which to find 
a future course." 
   The men looked around one another in surprise. 
They each cheerfully gathered in close to their 
friends, talking excitedly to one another about how 
they had all made the same decision. They looked 
gleeful that they were united in their decision. 
Richard moved back to where Kahlan, Cara, Jennsen, 
and Tom stood. 
"Satisfied?" he asked Kahlan and Cara. 
   Cara folded her arms. "What would you have done 
had they all chosen to keep the antidote's location 
a secret until after you helped them?" 
   Richard shrugged. "I'd be no better off than I 
was, but no worse off, either. I'd have to help 
them, but at least I would know that I dare not 
trust any of them." 
   Kahlan still didn't look pleased. "And what if 
most of them would have said yes, but some stuck to 
their ways and said no?" 
   Richard looked into her resolute green eyes. 
"Then, after the ones who agreed had told me where 
to find the antidote, I would have had to kill 
those who said no." 
   Understanding the seriousness of his 
explanation, Kahlan nodded. Cara smiled her 
satisfaction. Jennsen looked shocked. 
   "If any would have said no," he explained to 
Jennsen, "then they would have been choosing to 
continue to enslave me, to hold a sentence of death 
over my head in order to manipulate my life to get 
what they wanted from me. I would never be able to 

trust them in what I must ask the rest of them to 
do. I couldn't trust our lives to such treachery. 
But, now, that's one less problem we have to worry 
about." 
   Richard turned to the waiting men. "Each of you 
has decided to return my life to me." 
   The faces watching him turned serious as they 
waited to hear what he would do now. Richard gazed 
down at the small figure of himself, at the sand 
trickling down, at the eerie black surface that had 
already descended over the top of the statue, like 
the underworld itself slowly claiming his life. His 
fingers left smears of blood across the surface of 
the figure. 
   The clouds had lowered in around them, 
thickening so that the afternoon light seemed more 
like the gloom of dusk. 
   Richard lowered the statue and looked back up at 
the men. "We will do our best to see if we can help 
you get rid of the Order." 
   A cheer rose into the thin, cold air. The men 
hooted their excitement as well as their relief. He 
hadn't yet seen any of them smile quite this 
broadly before. Those smiles, more than anything, 
revealed the depth of their wish to be free of the 
men of the Order. Richard wondered how they would 
feel about it when he finally told them their part. 
   He knew that as long as Nicholas the Slide was 
able to seek them out through the eyes of the 
races, he would remain a threat that would haunt 
them wherever they went and endangered all of their 
work to get the Old World to rise up and overthrow 
the Imperial Order. More than that, though, 
Nicholas would be able to direct killers to find 
them. The thought of Nicholas seeing Kahlan and 
knowing where to find her gave Richard chills. He 
had to eliminate Nicholas. It was possible that in 
doing so, in eliminating their leader, he would 
also help these people drive the Order from their 
homes. 

   Richard gestured for the men to gather in 
closer. "First, before we get to the matter of 
freeing your people, you need to show me where 
you've hidden the poison." 
   Owen squatted down and selected a stone from 
nearby. With it, he scratched a chalky oval on the 
face of a flat spot in the rock. "Say that this 
line is the mountains surrounding Bandakar." He set 
the stone at the end of the oval closest to 
Richard. "Then this is the pass into our land, 
where we are now." 
   He plucked three pebbles from the ground. "This 
is our town, With-erton, where we lived," he said 
as he set the first pebble down not far from the 
rock that represented the pass. "There is antidote 
there." 
"And this is where all of you men were hiding?" 
Richard asked as he circled a finger over the first 
pebble. "In the hills surrounding With-erton?" 
   "Mostly to the south," Owen said, pointing to 
the area. He placed the second pebble near the 
middle of the oval. "Here there is another vial of 
antidote, in this city, here, called Hawton." He 
placed the third pebble near the edge of the oval. 
"Here is the third vial, in this city, Northwick." 
   "So then," Richard summed up, "I just need to go 
to one of those three places and recover the 
antidote. Since your town is the smallest, that 
would probably be our best chance." 
Some of the men shook their heads; others looked 
away. 
   Owen, looking troubled, touched each of the 
three pebbles. "I'm sorry, Lord Rahl, but one of 
these is not enough. Too much time has passed. Even 
two will be insufficient by now. The man who made 
the poison said that if too much time passed, all 
four would be necessary to insure a remedy. 
   "He said that if you did not immediately take 
the first antidote I brought, then it would only 
halt the poison for a while. He said that then the 

other three vials would all be needed. He said that 
in this case, the poison would possibly go through 
three states. If you are to be free of the poison, 
you must drink all of the three remaining 
antidotes. If you don't, you will die." 
"Three states? What does that mean?" 
   "The first state will be pain in your chest. The 
second state will be dizziness that makes standing 
difficult." Owen looked away from Richard's gaze. 
"In the third state the poison makes you blind." He 
looked up and touched a hand to Richard's arm, as 
if to dispel his worry. "But taking three vials of 
the antidote will cure you, make you well." 
   Richard wiped a weary hand across his brow. The 
pain in his chest told him that he was in the 
poison's first state. 
"How much time do I have?" 
   Owen looked down as he straightened his sleeve. 
"I'm not sure, Lord Rahl. We have already taken a 
lot of time traveling this far since you had that 
first vial. I think we have no time to lose." 
   "How much time?" Richard asked in as calm a 
voice as he could manage. 
   Owen swallowed. "To be truthful, Lord Rahl, I'm 
surprised that you are able to stand the pain from 
the first state of the poison. From what I was 
told, the pain would grow as time passed." 
Richard simply nodded. He didn't look up at Kahlan. 
   With soldiers of the Imperial Order occupying 
Bandakar, getting in to recover the antidote from 
one place sounded difficult enough, but retrieving 
it from all three places sounded beyond difficult. 
   "Well, since time is short, I have a better 
idea," Richard said. "Make me more of the antidote. 
Then we won't have to worry about getting what 
you've hidden and we can simply worry about how 
best to take on the men of the Order." 
Owen shrugged one shoulder. "We can't." 
   "Why not?" Richard leaned in. "You made it 
before—you made the antidote that you hid. Make it 

again." 
Owen shrank back. "We can't." 
Richard took a patient breath. "Why not?" 
   Owen pointed off at the small bag he'd brought, 
now lying to the side—the bag containing the 
fingers of three girls. "The father of those girls 
was the man who made the poison and made the 
antidote. He is the only one among us who knew how 
to make such complex things with herbs. We don't 
know how—we don't even know many of the ingredients 
he used. 
   "There may be others in the cities who could 
make an antidote, but we don't know who they are, 
or if they are still alive. With men of the Order 
in those places we wouldn't even be able to find 
these people. Even if we could, we don't know what 
was used to make up the poison, so they would not 
know how to make an antidote. The only chance you 
have to live is to recover the three vials of 
antidote." 
   Richard's head was hurting so much that he 
didn't know if he could stand much longer. With 
only three vials in existence, and all three needed 
if he was to live, he had to get to them before 
anything happened to any one of them. Someone could 
find one and throw it out. They could be moved. 
They could be broken, the antidote draining away 
into the ground. With every breath, he felt 
stitches of pain pull inside his chest. Panic 
gnawed at the edges of his thoughts. 
   When Kahlan rested her hand on his shoulder, 
Richard laid a grateful hand over hers. 
"We will help you get the antidote, Lord Rahl," one 
of the men said. 
Another nodded. "That's right. We will help you get 
it." 
   The men all spoke up, then, saying that they 
would all help to get the antidote so that Richard 
could rid himself of the poison. 
   "Most of us have been to at least two of these 

places," Owen said. "Some of us have been to all 
three. I hid the antidote, but I told the others 
the places, so we all know where it is. We know 
where we have to get in to recover it. We will tell 
you, too." 
   "Then that's what we'll do." Richard squatted 
down as he studied the stone map. "Where is 
Nicholas?" 
   Owen leaned in and tapped the pebble in the 
center. "Here, in Haw-ton, is this man Nicholas." 
   Richard looked up at Owen. "Don't tell me. You 
hid the antidote in the building where you saw 
Nicholas." 
   Owen shrugged self-consciously. "At the time, it 
seemed like a good idea. Now, I wish I had thought 
better of it." 
   Standing behind Richard, Cara rolled her eyes in 
disgust. "I'm surprised you didn't hand it to 
Nicholas and ask him to hold on to it for you." 
   Appearing eager to change the subject, Owen 
pointed at the pebble representing Northwick. "In 
this city is where the Wise One is hiding. Maybe we 
can get help from the great speakers. Maybe the 
Wise One will give us his blessing and then people 
will help us in our effort to rid our land of the 
Imperial Order." 
   After all he'd learned about the people who 
lived beyond the boundary in Bandakar, Richard 
didn't think he could count on any meaningful help 
from them; they wanted to be free of marauding 
brutes, but condemned their only real means to be 
free. These men had at least proven a degree of 
resolve. These men would have to work to change 
other people's attitudes, but Richard had his 
doubts that they would garner much immediate help. 
   In order to accomplish what you men rightfully 
want—to eradicate the Order, or at least make them 
leave your homes—you are going to have to help. 
Kahlan, Cara, Jennsen, Tom, and I aren't going to 
be able to do it alone. If it's to work, you men 

must help us." 
   "What is it you wish us to do?" Owen asked. "We 
already said we will take you to these places where 
the antidote is hidden. What more can we do?" 
"You are going to have to help us kill the men of 
the Order." 
   Instantly, heated protests erupted. All of the 
men talked at once, shaking his head, warding the 
notion with his hands. Although Richard couldn't 
make out all their words, their feelings about what 
he said were obvious enough. What words he did hear 
were all objections that they couldn't kill. 
   Richard rose up. "You know what these men have 
done," he said in a powerful voice that brought 
them to silence. "You ran away so you wouldn't also 
be killed. You know how your people are being 
treated. You know what's being done to your loved 
ones in captivity." 
"But we can't harm another," Owen whined. "We 
can't." 
"It's not our way," another man added. 
   "You banished criminals through the boundary," 
Richard said. "How did you make them go through if 
they refused?" 
   "If we had to," one of the older men said, "a 
number of us would hold him, so that he could harm 
no one. We would tie his hands and bear him to the 
boundary. We would tell such a banished man that he 
must go out of our land. If he still refused, we 
would carry him to a long steep place in the rock 
where we would lay him down and push him feet first 
so that he would slide down the rock and go beyond. 
Once we did this, they weren't able to return." 
   Richard wondered at the lengths these people 
went to not to harm the worst animals among them. 
He wondered how many had to suffer or die at the 
hands of such criminals before the people of 
Bandakar were sufficiently motivated to take what 
were to them extreme measures. 
   "We understand much of what you have told us," 

Owen said, "but we cannot do what you ask. We would 
be doing wrong. We have been raised not to harm 
another." 
   Richard snatched up the bag with the girls' 
fingers and shook it at the men. "Every one of your 
loved ones back there is thinking of nothing but 
being saved. Can any of you even imagine their 
terror? I know what it's like to be tortured, to 
feel helpless and alone, to feel like you will 
never escape. In such a situation you want nothing 
more than for it to stop. You would do anything for 
it to stop." 
   "That's why we needed you," an older man said. 
"You must do this. You must rid us of the Order." 
   "I told you, I can't do it alone." With an arm 
wrapped in a bloody bandage, Richard gestured 
emphatically. "Surrendering your will to men of the 
Order who would do such things as this solves 
nothing. It simply adds more victims. The men of 
the Order are evil; you must fight back." 
   "But if only you would talk to those men like 
you talked to us, they would see their misguided 
ways. They would change, then." 
   "No, they won't. Life doesn't matter to them. 
They've made their choice to torture, rape, and 
kill. Our only chance to survive, our only chance 
to have a future is to destroy them." 
"We can't harm another person," one of the men 
said. 
"It's wrong to harm another," Owen agreed. 
   "It's always immoral to hurt, much less kill, 
another person," a middle-aged man said to the 
mumbled agreement of his fellows. "Those who do 
wrong are obviously in pain and need our 
understanding, not our hate. Hate will only invite 
hate. Violence will only begin a cycle of violence 
that never solves anything." 
   Richard felt as if the ground he had gained with 
these men was slipping away from him. He was about 
to run his fingers back through his hair when he 

saw that they were covered in blood. He dropped his 
arm and shifted his approach. 
   "You poisoned me to get me to kill these men. By 
that act, you've already proven that you accept the 
reality that it's sometimes necessary to kill in 
order to save innocent lives—that's why you wanted 
me. You can't hold a belief that it's wrong to harm 
another and at the same time coerce me to do it for 
you. That's simply killing by proxy." 
   "We need our freedom," one of them said. "We 
thought that maybe because of your command as a 
ruler you could convince these men, for fear of 
you, to leave us be." 
"That's why you have to help me. You just said it—
for fear of me.You must help me in this so that the 
threat, the fear, is credible. If they don't 
believe the threat is real then why would they 
leave your land?" 
   One of the others folded his arms. "We thought 
you might rid us of the Order without violence, 
without killing, but it is up to you to do such 
killing if that is your way. We cannot kill. From 
our very beginning, our ancestors have taught us 
that killing is wrong. You must do this." 
   Another, nodding his agreement, said, "It's your 
duty to help those who cannot bring themselves to 
do what you can do." 
Duty. The polite name put to the chains of 
servitude. 
   Richard turned away, closing his eyes as he 
squeezed his temples between fingers and thumb. 
He'd thought that he was beginning to get through 
to these men. He'd thought he would be able to get 
them to think for themselves—in their own best 
interest—rather than to function spontaneously 
according to the rote dictates of their 
indoctrination. 
   He could hardly believe that after all he'd told 
them, these men would still rather have their loved 
ones endure torture and brutal murder than harm the 

men committing the crimes. By refusing to face the 
nature of reality, these men were willingly giving 
the good over to evil, life over to death. 
   He realized then that it was even more basic 
than that. In the most fundamental sense, they were 
willfully choosing to reject the reality of evil. 
   Deep inside him, every breath pulled a stitch of 
pain. He had to get the antidote. He was running 
out of time. 
   But that alone would not solve his problems; his 
gift was killing him just as surely as the poison. 
He felt so sick from the pounding pain of his 
headache that he thought he might throw up. Even 
the magic of his sword was failing him. 
   Richard feared the poison, but in a more central 
way, he feared the encroaching death from within, 
from his gift. The poison, as dangerous as it was, 
had a clearly defined cause and cure. With his 
gift, he felt lost. 
   Richard looked back into Kahlan's troubled eyes. 
He could see that she had no solution to offer. She 
stood in a weary pose, her arm hanging straight 
with the weight of the warning beacon that seemed 
to tell him only that he was dying, but offered no 
answers. Its whole reason for being was to call him 
to a proclaimed duty to help replace the boundary, 
as if his life was not his own, but belonged to 
anyone who laid claim to it by shackling him with a 
declaration of duty. 
   That concept—duty—was no less a poison than that 
which these men had given him ... a call to 
sacrifice himself. 
   Richard took the small statue from Kahlan's hand 
and stared down at it. The inky black had already 
enveloped half the length of the figure. His life 
was being consumed. The sand continued to trickle 
away. His time was running out. 
   The stone figure of Kaja-Rang, the long-dead 
wizard who had summoned him with the warning beacon 
and charged him with an impossible task, loomed 

over him as if in silent rebuke. 
   Behind him, the men huddled close, affirming to 
one another their beliefs, their ways, their 
responsibility to their ancient ideals, that the 
men of the Order were acting as they were because 
they were misguided and could still be reformed. 
They spoke of the Wise One and all the great 
speakers who had committed them to the path of 
peace and nonviolence. They all reaffirmed the 
belief that they must follow the path that had been 
laid down for them from the very beginning by their 
land's founders, their ancestors, who had given 
them their customs, their beliefs, their values, 
their way of living. 
   Trying to elevate these men to understand what 
was right and necessary seemed as difficult as 
trying to lift them by a slender thread. That 
thread had broken. 
   Richard felt trapped by the deluded convictions 
of these people, by their poison, by the headaches, 
by Nicholas hunting them, and by a long-dead wizard 
who had reached out from the underworld to try to 
enslave him to a long-dead duty. 
   Anger welling up inside him, Richard cocked his 
arm and heaved the warning beacon at the statue of 
Kaja-Rang. 
   The men ducked as the small figure shot by just 
over their heads to shatter against the stone base 
of the statue. Amber fragments and inky black 
shards flew in every direction. The sand from 
inside splattered in a stain across the front of 
the granite pedestal. 
The cowering men fell silent. Overhead, wisps 
trailing from the sullen clouds drifted by, almost 
close enough to reach up and touch. A few icy 
flakes of snow floated along in the still air. All 
around, a frigid fog had moved in to envelop the 
surrounding mountains, leaving the top of the pass 
with the stone sentinel seeming isolated and 
otherworldly, as if this were all there was to 

existence. Richard stood in the dead quiet at the 
center of everyone's attention. 
   The words written in High D'Haran on the 
statue's base echoed through Richard's mind. 
   Fear any breach of this seal to the empire 
beyond... for beyond is evil: those who cannot see. 
   The High D'Haran words streamed again and again 
through bis mind. The translation of those words 
just didn't feel right. 
   "Dear spirits," Richard whispered in sudden 
realization. "I had it wrong. That's not what it 
says." 
 
                        
 
 
 
 
                                   C     H      A      
P      T      E      R     4 5 
  
 
 
 
Khalan felt as if her heart were being crushed by 
the ordeal these men were putting Richard through. 
Just when she'd thought he had gotten them to 
understand the truth of what was needed, it seemed 
to have slipped away as the men reverted to their 
willful blindness. 
   Richard, though, seemed almost to have forgotten 
the men. He stood staring at where the warning 
beacon had shattered against the statue. Kahlan 
stepped closer to him and whispered. 
   "What do you mean, you had it wrong, and that's 
not what it says? What are you talking about?" 
   "The translation," he said in what sounded like 
startled comprehension. He stood motionless, facing 
the towering statue of Kaja-Rang. "Remember how I 
told you that it was an odd way to phrase what it 

said?" 
Kahlan glanced to the statue and then back to 
Richard. "Yes." 
   "It wasn't odd at all; I just had it wrong. I 
was trying to make it say what I thought it would 
say—that those beyond couldn't see magic— instead 
of just seeing what was before me. What I told you 
before isn't what it says...." 
   When his voice trailed off, Kahlan reached up 
and gripped his arm to draw his attention. "What do 
you mean, that's not what it says?" 
Richard gestured toward the statue. "I see what I 
did wrong with the phrasal sequence, why I was 
having trouble with it. I told you I wasn't sure of 
the translation. I was right to have doubts. It 
doesn't say, 'Fear any breach of this seal to the 
empire beyond... for beyond is evil: those who 
cannot see.' " 
Jennsen leaned in close beside Kahlan. "Are you 
sure?" 
Richard looked back at the statue, his voice 
distant. "I am now." 
   Kahlan pulled on his arm, making him look at 
her. "So what does it say?" 
   His gray eyes met her gaze briefly before 
turning to the eyes of the statue of Kaja-Rang 
staring out at the Pillars of Creation, at his 
final safeguard protecting the world from these 
people. Instead of answering her, he started away. 
   The men parted as Richard strode toward the 
statue. Kahlan stayed close on his heels, Cara 
following in her wake. Jennsen gathered up Betty's 
rope and pulled her along. The men, already backing 
out of the way for Richard, kept a wary eye on the 
goat and her mistress as they passed. Tom stayed 
where he was, keeping a careful but unobtrusive 
watch over all the men. 
   At the statue, Richard swiped the dusting of 
snow off the ledge, revealing again the words 
carved in High D'Haran. Kahlan watched his eyes 

moving along the line of words, reading them to 
himself. He had a kind of excitement in his 
movements that told her he was racing after an 
important quarry. 
   For the moment, she could also see that his 
headache was gone. She couldn't understand the way 
it ebbed from time to time, but she was relieved to 
see strength in the way he moved. Hands spread on 
the stone, leaning on his arms, he looked up from 
the words. Without the headache, there was a 
vibrant clarity in his gray eyes. 
   "Part of this story has been puzzling," he said. 
"I understand now. It doesn't say, 'Fear any breach 
of this seal to the empire beyond... for beyond is 
evil: those who cannot see.' " 
   Jennsen's nose wrinkled. "It doesn't? You mean 
it wasn't meant to be about these pristinely 
ungifted people?" 
   "Oh, it was about them, all right, but not in 
that respect." Richard tapped a finger to the 
carved words. "It doesn't say 'for beyond is evil: 
those who cannot see,' but something profoundly 
different. It says, 'Fear any breach of this seal 
to the empire beyond . . . for beyond are those who 
cannot see evil.' " 
Kahlan's brow drew down. "... those who cannot see 
evil." 
   Richard lifted his bandaged arm up toward the 
figure towering over them. "That's what Kaja-Rang 
feared most—not those who couldn't see magic, but 
those who could not see evil. That's his warning to 
the world." He aimed a thumb back over his 
shoulder, indicating the men behind them. "That's 
what this is all about." 
   Kahlan was taken aback, and a little perplexed. 
"Do you think it might be that because these people 
can't see magic they also can't recognize evil," 
she asked, "or that because of the way they're 
different they simply don't have the ability to 
conceive of evil, in much the same way they can't 

conceive of objective magic as having nothing to do 
with mysticism?" 
   "That might in part be what Kaja-Rang thought," 
Richard said. "But I don't." 
"Are you so sure?" Jennsen asked. 
"Yes." 
   Before Kahlan could make him explain, Richard 
turned to the men. "Here, in stone, Kaja-Rang left 
a warning for the world. Kaja-Rang's warning is 
about those who cannot see evil. Your ancestors 
were banished from the New World because they were 
pristinely ungifted. But this man, this powerful 
wizard, Kaja-Rang, feared them for something else: 
their ideas. He feared them because they refused to 
see evil. That's what made your ancestors so 
dangerous to the people of the Old World." 
"How could that be?" a man asked. 
   "Thrown together and banished to a strange 
place, the Old World, your ancestors must have 
clung desperately to one another. They were so 
afraid of rejection, of banishment, that they 
avoided rejecting one of their own. It developed 
into a strong belief that no matter what, they 
should try not to condemn anyone. For this reason, 
they rejected the concept of evil for fear they 
would have to judge someone. Judging someone as 
evil meant they would have to face the problem of 
removing them from their midst. 
"In their flight from reality, they justified their 
practices by settling on the fanciful notion that 
nothing is real and so no one can know the nature 
of reality. That way, they wouldn't have to admit 
that someone was evil. Better to deny the existence 
of evil than have to eliminate the evildoer in 
their midst. Better to turn a blind eye to the 
problem, ignore it, and hope it went away. 
   "If they admitted the reality of evil, then 
eliminating the evildoer was the only proper 
action, so, by extension, since they had been 
banished, they thought that they must have been 

banished because they were evil. Their solution was 
to simply discard the entire concept of evil. An 
entire belief structure developed around this core. 
   "Kaja-Rang may have thought that because they 
were pristinely un-gifted and couldn't see magic, 
they also couldn't see evil, but what he feared was 
the infection of their beliefs spreading to others. 
Thinking requires effort; these people offered 
beliefs that needed no thought, but merely adopting 
some noble-sounding phrases. It was, in fact, an 
arrogant dismissal of the power of man's mind—an 
illusion of wisdom that spurned the requirement of 
any authentic effort to understand the world around 
them or the nuisance of validation. Such simplistic 
solutions, such as unconditionally rejecting all 
violence, are especially seductive to the 
undeveloped minds of the young, many of whom would 
have eagerly adopted such disordered reasoning as a 
talisman of enlightenment. 
   "When they began fanatically espousing these 
empty tenets to others, it probably set off the 
alarm for Kaja-Rang. 
   "With the spread of such ideas, with the kind of 
rabid hold it has over some people, such as it has 
over you men, Kaja-Rang and his people saw how, if 
such beliefs ran free, it would eventually bring 
anarchy and ruin by sanctioning evil to stalk among 
their people, just as it leaves you men defenseless 
against the evil of the Imperial Order now come 
among you. 
   "Kaja-Rang saw such beliefs for what they were: 
embracing death rather than life. The regression 
from true enlightenment into the illusion of 
insight spawned disorder, becoming a threat to all 
of the Old World, raising the specter of a descent 
into darkness." 
Richard tapped his finger on the top of the ledge. 
"There is other writing up here, around the base, 
that suggests as much, and what became the eventual 
solution. 

   "Kaja-Rang had those who believed these 
teachings collected, not only all the pristinely 
ungifted banished from the New World, but also the 
rabid believers who had fallen under their 
delusional philosophy, and banished the whole lot 
of them. 
   "The first banishment, from the New World down 
to the Old, was unjust. The second banishment, from 
the Old World to the land beyond here, had been 
earned." 
   Jennsen, twiddling the frayed end of Betty's 
rope, looked dubious. "Do you really think there 
were others banished along with those who were 
pristinely ungifted? That would mean there were a 
great many people. How could Kaja-Rang have made 
all these people go along? Didn't they resist? How 
did Kaja-Rang make them all go? Was it a bloody 
banishment?" 
   The men were nodding to her questions, 
apparently wondering the same thing. 
   "I don't believe that High D'Haran was a common 
language among the people, not down here, anyway. I 
suspect that it was a dying language only used 
among certain learned people, such as wizards." 
Richard gestured to the land beyond. "Kaja-Rang 
named these people Bandakar—the banished. I don't 
think the people knew what it meant. Their empire 
was not called the Pillars of Creation, or some 
name referring only to the ungifted. The writing 
here suggests that it was because it was not only 
the pristinely ungifted who were banished, but all 
those who believed as they did. They all were 
Bandakar: the banished. 
   "They thought of themselves, of their beliefs, 
as enlightened. Kaja-Rang played on that, 
flattering them, telling them that this place had 
been set aside to protect them from a world not 
ready to accept them. He made them feel that, in 
many ways, they were being put here because they 
were better than anyone else. Not given to reasoned 

thinking, these people were easily beguiled in this 
fashion and duped into cooperating with their own 
banishment. According to what's hinted at in the 
writing here around the statue's base, they went 
happily into their promised land. Once confined to 
this place, marriage and subsequent generations 
spread the pristinely ungifted trait throughout the 
entire population of Bandakar." 
   "And Kaja-Rang really believed they were such a 
terrible threat to the rest of the people of the 
Old World?" Jennsen asked. Again, men nodded, 
apparently in satisfaction that she had asked the 
question. Kah-lan suspected that Jennsen might have 
asked the question on behalf of the men. 
   Richard gestured up at the statue of Kaja-Rang. 
"Look at him. What's he doing? He's symbolically 
standing watch over the boundary he placed here. 
He's guarding this pass, watching over a seal 
keeping back what lies beyond. In his eternal 
vigilance his hand holds a sword, ever at the 
ready, to show the magnitude of the danger. 
   "The people of the Old World felt such gratitude 
to this important man that they built this monument 
to honor what he had done for them in protecting 
them from beliefs they knew would have imperiled 
their society. The threat was no trifling matter. 
   "Kaja-Rang watches over this boundary even in 
death. From the world of the dead he sent me a 
warning that the seal had been breached." 
   Richard waited in the tense silence until all 
the men looked back at him before he quietly 
concluded. 
   "Kaja-Rang banished your ancestors not only 
because they couldn't see magic, but, more 
importantly, because they couldn't see evil." 
   In restless disquiet, the men glanced about at 
their companions. "But what you call evil is just a 
way of expressing an inner pain," one of them said, 
more as a plea than as an argument. 
   "That's right," another told Richard. "Saying 

someone is evil is prejudiced thinking. It's a way 
of belittling someone already in pain for some 
reason. Such people must be embraced and taught to 
shed their fears of their fellow man and then they 
will not strike out in violent ways." 
   Richard swept his glare across all the watching 
faces. He pointed up at the statue. 
   "Kaja-Rang feared you because you are dangerous 
to everyone—not because you are ungifted, but 
because you embrace evil with your teachings. In so 
doing, in trying to be kind, to be unselfish, in 
trying to be nonjudgmental, you allow evil to 
become far more powerful than it otherwise would. 
You refuse to see evil, and so you welcome it among 
you. You allow it to exist. You give it power over 
you. You are a people who have welcomed death and 
refused to denounce it. "You are an empire naked to 
the shadow of evil." 
After a moment of thick silence, one of the older 
men finally spoke up. "This belief in evil, as you 
call it, is a very intolerant attitude and is far 
too simplistic a judgment. It's nothing less than 
an unfair condemnation of your fellow man. None of 
us, not even you, can judge another." 
   Kahlan knew that Richard had a great deal of 
patience, but very little tolerance. He had been 
very patient with these men; she could see that he 
had reached the end of his tolerance. She half 
expected him to draw his sword. 
   He walked among the men, his raptor glare moving 
individuals back as he passed. "Your people think 
of themselves as enlightened, as above violence. 
You are not enlightened; you are merely slaves 
awaiting a master, victims awaiting killers. They 
have finally come for you." 
   Richard snatched up the small bag and stood 
before the last man who had spoken. "Open your 
hand." 
   The man glanced to those at his sides. Finally, 
he held his hand out, palm up. 

   Richard reached into the bag and then placed a 
small finger, its flesh withered and stained with 
dried blood, in the man's hand. 
   The man obviously didn't want the little finger 
sitting in the palm of his hand, but after he 
looked up into Richard's withering glower, he said 
nothing and made no attempt to rid himself of the 
gory trophy. 
   Richard walked among the men, ordering random 
men to open their hands. Kahlan recognized the ones 
he selected as men who had objected to the things 
he was trying to do to help them. He placed a 
finger in each upturned hand until the bag was 
empty. 
   "What you hold in your hand is the result of 
evil," Richard said. "You men all know the truth of 
it. You all knew evil was loose in your land. You 
all wanted that to change. You all wanted to be rid 
of evil. 
   You all wanted to live. You all wanted your 
loved ones to live. 
"You all had hoped to do it without having to face 
the truth. 
   "I have tried to explain things to you so that 
you could understand the true nature of the battle 
we all face." 
Richard straightened the baldric over his shoulder. 
"I am done explaining. 
   "You wanted me brought to your land. You have 
accomplished your goal. Now, you are going to 
decide if you will follow through with what you 
know to be right." 
   Richard again stood before them, his back 
straight, his chin held high, his scabbard gleaming 
in the gloomy light, his black tunic trimmed in 
gold standing out in sharp contrast against the 
fog-shrouded mountains behind him. He looked like 
nothing so much as the Lord Rahl. He was as 
commanding a figure as Kahlan had ever seen. 
   After Richard and Kahlan's beginning so long 

ago, when they had struck out from those secluded 
woods of his, Richard had turned the world upside 
down. From the beginning, he had always been at the 
heart of their struggle, and was now the ruler of 
an empire—even if that endangered empire was 
largely a mystery to him, as was his gift. 
His cause, though, was crystal clear. 
   Together, Kahlan and Richard were at the center 
of the storm of a war that had engulfed their 
world. It had now engulfed these men and their 
land. 
   Many people saw Richard as their only salvation. 
Richard seemed forever trying to prove them wrong. 
For many others, though, he was the single most 
hated man alive. For them, Richard sought to give 
them cause; he told people that their life was 
their own. The Imperial Order wanted him dead for 
that more than for any blow he had dealt them. 
   "This is the way things are going to be," 
Richard finally said in a voice of quiet authority. 
   "You will surrender your land and your loyalty 
to the D'Haran Empire, or you will be the subjects 
of the Imperial Order. Those are your only two 
choices. There are no others. Like it or not, you 
must choose. If you refuse to make a choice, events 
will decide for you and you will likely end up in 
the hands of the Imperial Order. Make no mistake, 
they are evil hands. 
   "With the Order, if you are not murdered, you 
will be slaves and treated as such. I think you 
know very well what that entails. Your lives will 
have no value to them except as slaves, called upon 
to help them spread their evil. 
   "As part of the D'Haran Empire, your lives will 
be your own. I will expect you to rise up and live 
them as the individuals you are, not as some speck 
of dirt in a pit of filth you have dug yourselves 
into. 
   "The seal to your hiding place, to the 
Bandakaran Empire, has failed. I don't know how to 

repair it, nor would I if I could. There is no more 
Empire of Bandakar. 
   "There is no way to allow you to be who you were 
and to protect you. Maybe the Order can be thrown 
out of your land, but they cannot be effortlessly 
kept out, for it is their ideas that have come to 
destroy you. 
   "So choose. Slaves or free men. Life as either 
will not be easy. I think you know what life as 
slaves will be like. As free men you will have to 
struggle, work, and think, but you will have the 
rewards that brings, and those rewards will be 
yours and no one else's. 
   "Freedom must be won, but then it has to be 
guarded lest those like the Order come again to 
enslave those wishing for someone else to do their 
thinking. 
   "I am the Lord Rahl. I intend to go get the 
antidote to the poison you've given me. If you men 
choose to be part of this struggle, to rid 
yourselves and your loved ones of evil, then I will 
help you. 
   "If you choose not to stand with us, then you 
may go back and let the Order do with you what they 
will, or you can run. If you run, you may survive 
for a time, as you have been doing, but, because 
that is not the way you wish to live, you will die 
as frightened animals, never having lived what life 
has to offer. 
   "So choose, but if you choose to stand with me 
against evil, then you will have to relinquish your 
self-imposed blindness and open your eyes to look 
around at life. You will have to see the reality of 
the world around you. There is good and bad in the 
world. You will have to use your minds to judge 
which is which so that you can seek the good and 
reject the bad. 
"If you choose to stand with me, I will do my best 
to answer any honest question and try to teach you 
how to triumph against the men of the Order and 

those like them. But I will not suffer your 
mindless teachings that are nothing more than a 
calculated rejection of life. 
   "Take a look at the bloody fingers you or your 
friends hold. Look at what was done to children by 
evil men. You should hate such men who would do 
this. If you don't, or can't, then you have no 
business being with those of us who embrace life. 
   "I want each of you to think about those 
children, about their terror, their pain, their 
wish not to be hurt. Think of what it was like for 
them to be alone and in the hands of evil men. You 
should rightfully hate the men who would do such 
things. Hold tight to that righteous hatred, for 
that is the hatred of evil. 
   "I intend to recover the antidote so that I can 
live. In the process, I also intend to kill as many 
of those evil men as I can. If I go alone, I may 
succeed in getting the antidote, but alone I will 
not succeed in liberating your homes from the 
Imperial Order. 
   "If you choose to go with me, to help me in this 
struggle, we may have a chance. 
   "I don't know what I face there, so I can't 
honestly tell you that we have a good chance. I can 
only tell you that if you don't help me, then there 
is likely no chance." 
   Richard held up a finger. "Make no mistake. If 
you choose to join us and we take up this struggle, 
some of us will probably die. If we do not, all of 
us will die, not necessarily in body, but in 
spirit. Under such rule as the Order has shown you, 
no one lives, even though their bodies might for a 
time endure the misery of life as slaves. Under the 
Order, every soul withers and dies." 
   The men were silent as Richard paused to meet 
their gazes. Most could not look away, while some 
seemed shamed and so they stared at the ground. 
   "If you choose to side with me in this 
struggle," Richard said with deliberate care, "you 

will be called upon to kill men of the Order, evil 
men. If you once thought that I enjoyed killing, 
let me assure you that you are very wrong. I hate 
it. I do it to defend life. I would never expect 
you to relish killing. It is a necessity to do it, 
not to enjoy doing it. I expect you to relish life 
and do what is necessary to preserve it." 
   Richard picked up one of the items, lying off to 
the side, that they had made while waiting for Tom 
and Owen to bring the men up into the pass. It 
looked like little more than a stout stick. It was 
in fact made of oak limbs. It was rounded at the 
back to fit the hand, narrow at a point in the 
middle, and pointed at the other end. 
   "You men don't have weapons. While we waited for 
you to arrive, we've made some." He waggled his 
fingers, requesting Tom to come forward. "The men 
of the Order won't recognize these as weapons, at 
first, anyway. If questioned, you should tell them 
that they're used to make holes in the ground to 
plant crops." 
   With his left hand, Richard seized Tom's shirt 
at his shoulder, to hold him, and demonstrated the 
weapon's use by slowly showing how it would be 
thrust upward, toward a man's middle just under his 
ribs, to stab him. Some faces among the men twisted 
with revulsion. 
   "This can most easily be driven up into a man's 
soft part, up in under his ribs," Richard told 
them. "Once you thrust it in, give it a quick 
sideways twist to break it off at the narrow point. 
That way, the man won't be able to pull it out. 
With such a thing lodged in his insides, if he can 
even stand, he won't want to be running after you 
or trying to wrestle you. You'll be better able to 
get away." 
   One of the men lifted a hand. "But a piece of 
wood like that will be wet and wouldn't break. Many 
of the wood fibers will just bend over, leaving the 
handle end attached." 

   Richard tossed the weapon to the man. After he 
caught it, he said, "Look at the middle, where it's 
cut to a narrow neck. You'll see that it's been 
held over a fire and dried for that very reason. 
Notice the pointed end, too. You'll see that it's 
been cut and split into four sections, with the 
points bent open, like a flower bud, so that as 
it's thrust into an enemy it has a good chance to 
break open, the four sides going in different 
directions to do more damage. With that one thrust, 
it will be like stabbing him four times. 
   "When you snap it off in him, he won't be able 
to fight you because every move he makes will 
wrench those long oak splinters through his 
vulnerable insides. If it doesn't hit something 
vital and kill him immediately, he's certainly 
likely to die within the day. While he's dying, 
he'll be screaming in agony and fear. I want such 
evil men to know that the pain and death they 
inflict on others will be coming for them. That 
fear will cause them to begin to think of running. 
It will make them lose sleep, wear them down, so 
that when we do get to them they'll be easier to 
kill." 
   Richard picked up another item. "This is a small 
crossbow." He held 
it high for the men to see as he pointed outi ts 
features."As you can see, the bowstring is locked 
back on this nut. A stout bolt is laid in this 
groove, here. Pulling this lever rotates the nut, 
releasing the string and firing the bolt. It isn't 
fancy, and you men aren't experienced at using such 
weapons, but at close, range you don't have to be 
all that good a shot. "I've started a number of 
crossbows and have a whole pile of stocks and parts 
made. With the items that you men brought back, we 
can 
finish making them. They're rather 0rude, and, as I 
said, they won't be good at much of a distance, but 
they are small and you can hide them 

under a cloak. No matter how big and strong the 
enemy is, the smallest of you can kill him. Not 
even his chain-mail armor will protect against 
such a weapon fired at close range. I cah promise 
you that they will be very deadly." 
   Richard showed the men hardwood clubs they would 
stud with nails. Such weapons could also be 
concealed. He showed them a simple cord with a 
small wooden handle at each end trjat was used to 
strangle a man from behind when stealth was 
paramount. 
   "As we take these men, we'll be able to get 
other weapons—knives, axes, maces, swords." 
   "But, Lord Rahl," Owen said, looking beside 
himself with worry, "even if we were to agree to 
join you in this, we are not fighters. These men of 
the Order are brutes who are experienced at such 
things. We would stand no chance against them." 
   The others voiced their worried agreement. 
Richard shook his head as he held up his hands for 
them to be quiet. 
   "Look at those fingers you hold. Ask yourselves 
what chance those little girls had against such 
men. Ask yourselves what chance your mothers, your 
sisters, your wives, your daughters have. You are 
the only hope for these people. You are the only 
hope for yourselves. 
   "Most likely, you men would not stand a chance 
against such men, either. But I have no intention 
of fighting them as you're thinking. That's a good 
way to get killed." Richard pointed at one of the 
younger men. "What is it we want? The reason you 
came to get me?" 
The man looked confused. "To get rid of the men of 
the Order?" 
   "Yes," Richard said. "That's right. You want to 
be rid of murderers. The last thing you want is to 
fight them." 
   The man gestured at the weapons Richard had 
shown them. "But these things ..." 

   "These men are murderers. Our task is to execute 
them. We want to avoid fights. If we fight them, we 
risk being hurt or killed. I am not saying that we 
won't have to fight them, but that isn't our goal. 
There will be times when there may be limited 
numbers of them and we can be sure that with 
surprise we can take them out before a fight has a 
chance to erupt. Keep in mind that these men have 
been conditioned to none of your people putting up 
any resistance. We hope to kill them before it 
occurs to them to draw a weapon. 
   "But if we don't have to face them, all the 
better. Our goal is to kill them. To kill every one 
of them we can. Kill them when they sleep, when 
they are looking the other way, when they are 
eating, when they are talking, when they are 
drinking, when they are out for a stroll. 
"They are evil. We must kill them, not fight them." 
   Owen threw up his hands. "But, Lord Rahl, if we 
were to start killing them, they would take revenge 
on all the people they have." 
   Richard watched the men, waiting until he was 
sure everyone was paying attention. 
   "You have just recognized the reality that they 
are evil. You're right; they will probably start 
killing captives as a way to convince you to 
surrender. But they are killing them now. Over 
time, if left to do as they will, the killing they 
do will be on a vast scale. The faster we kill 
them, the sooner it's over and the sooner the 
murder will stop. Some people will lose their lives 
because of what we do, but in doing it, we will 
free all the rest. If we do nothing, then we 
condemn those innocent people to the mercy of evil 
and evil grants no mercy. As I've said before, you 
can't negotiate with evil. You must destroy it."  
   A man cleared his throat. "Lord Rahl, some of 
our people have sided with the men of the Order—
believed their words. They will not want us to harm 
the men of the Order." 

   Richard let out a heavy breath. He turned away 
for a moment, gazing off into the gloom, before 
turning his attention once more to the men. "I've 
had to kill people I knew my whole life because 
they sided with the Order, much the same as you are 
saying. They came to believe the men of the 
Imperial Order, and because I was opposed to the 
Order, they tried to kill me. It's a terrible thing 
to have to kill someone like that, someone you 
know. I believe the alternative is worse." 
"The alternative?" the man asked. 
   "Yes, letting them murder me. That's the 
alternative: losing your life and losing the cause 
for which you fight—the lives of your loved ones." 
Richard's expression had turned grave. "If some of 
your people have joined with the Order, or work to 
protect them, then it may be that you could end up 
facing them. It will be their life, or yours. It 
could even mean the lives of the rest of us. If 
they side with evil, then we must not allow them to 
stop us from eliminating evil. 
   "This is part of what you must weigh in your 
decision to join us or not. If you take up this 
struggle, you must accept that you may have to kill 
people you know. You must weigh this in the choice 
you will make." 
   The men no longer seemed shocked by his words. 
They looked solemn as they listened. 
   Kahlan saw small birds flitting past, looking to 
roost for the night. The sky, the icy fog, was 
getting darker. She scanned the sky, ever watchful 
for black-tipped races. With the weather in the 
pass so dreadful, she doubted they would be around. 
The fog, at least, was comforting for that reason. 
   Richard looked exhausted. She knew how hard it 
was for her to breathe in the high, thin air, so it 
had to be far worse for him; she feared how, 
because of the poison, the thin air robbed Richard 
of his strength. They needed to be down out of the 
high pass. 

   "I have told you the truth and all I can for 
now," Richard told the men. "Your future is now up 
to each of you." 
He quietly asked Cara, Jennsen, and Tom to collect 
their things. He put a gentle hand on Kahlan's back 
as he turned to the men and gestured down the hill. 
   "We're going back down to our camp in those 
woods. You men decide what you will do. If you are 
with us, then come down there in the protection of 
the trees, where the races won't be able to spot us 
when the weather lifts. We will need to finish 
making the weapons you will carry. 
   "If any of you choose not to join us, then 
you're on your own. I plan not to be here, at this 
camp, for long. If the Order captures you they will 
likely torture you and I don't want to be anywhere 
nearby when you scream your lungs out as you reveal 
where our camp was." 
The forlorn men stood huddled in a group. 
"Lord Rahl," Owen asked, "you mean we must choose 
now?" 
   "I've told you all I can. How much longer can 
those being tortured, raped, and murdered wait for 
you? If you wish to join us and be part of life, 
then come down to our camp. If you choose not to be 
on our side, then I wish you luck. But please don't 
try to follow us or I'll have to kill you. I was 
once a woods guide; I will know if any of you 
follow us." 
   One of the men, the one who had been the first 
to show Richard two pebbles to say that he would 
reveal the location of the antidote, stepped 
forward, away from the rest of the men. 
   "Lord Rahl, my name is Anson." Tears filled his 
blue eyes. "I wanted you to know that, to know who 
I am. I am Anson." 
Richard nodded. "All right, Anson." 
   "Thank you for opening my eyes. I've always had 
some of the thoughts that you explained. Now I 
understand why, and I understand the darkness kept 

over my eyes. I don't want to live like that 
anymore. I don't want to live by words that don't 
mean anything and I don't want the men of the Order 
to control my life. 
   "My parents were murdered. I saw my father's 
body hanging from a pole. He never hurt anyone. He 
did nothing to deserve such a murder. My sister was 
taken. I know what those men are doing to her. I 
can't sleep at night thinking about it, thinking 
about her terror. 
   "I want to fight back. I want to kill these evil 
men. They've earned death. I want to grind them 
into dust, as you have said. 
   "I choose to join with you and fight to gain my 
freedom. I want to live free. I want those I love 
to live free." 
   Kahlan was stunned to hear one of them say such 
things, especially without first consulting with 
the rest of the men. She had watched the eyes of 
the other men as Anson spoke. They all listened 
keenly to everything Anson said. 
   Richard smiled as he placed a hand on the young 
man's shoulder. "Welcome to D'Hara, Anson. Welcome 
home. We can use your help." He pointed off at Cara 
and Tom picking up the weapons they'd brought to 
show the men. "Why don't you help them take those 
things back down to our camp." 
   Anson grinned his agreement. The soft-spoken 
young man had broad shoulders and a thickly muscled 
neck. He was genial, but looked determined. If she 
were in the Imperial Order, Kahlan would not want 
to see such a powerfully built man coming after 
her. 
   Anson eagerly tried to take the load from Cara's 
arms. She wouldn't relinquish it, so he picked up 
the rest of the things and followed Tom down the 
hill. Jennsen went along, too, pulling Betty behind 
by her rope, tugging for the first few steps 
because Betty wanted them to stay with Richard and 
Kahlan. 

   The other men watched as Anson started down the 
hill with Cara, Tom, and Jennsen. They then moved 
off to the side, away from the statue, while they 
whispered among themselves, deciding what they 
would do. 
   Richard glanced at the figure of Kaja-Rang 
before starting down the hill. Something seemed to 
catch his eye. 
"What's the matter?" Kahlan asked. 
   Richard pointed. "That writing. On the face of 
the pedestal, below his feet." 
   Kahlan knew there had been no writing in that 
spot before, and she was still too far away to 
really tell if she could see writing in the flecked 
granite. She glanced back to see the others making 
their way down the hill, but instead followed 
Richard when he started toward the statue. The men 
were still off to the side, busily engaged in their 
discussion. 
   She could see the spot on the face of the 
pedestal where the warning beacon had shattered. 
The sand from inside the statue representing  
   Richard was still splattered across the face of 
the pedestal. 
   As they got closer, she could hardly believe 
what she was beginning to see. It looked as if the 
sand had eroded the stone to reveal lettering. The 
words had not been there before; that much she was 
sure of. 
   Kahlan knew a number of languages, but she 
didn't know this one. She recognized it, though. It 
was High D'Haran. 
   She hugged her arms to herself in the chill wind 
that had come up. The somber clouds stirred 
restlessly. She peered around at the imposing 
mountains, many hidden by a dark shroud of fog. 
Swirling curtains of snow obscured other slopes in 
the distance. Through a small, brief opening in the 
wretched weather, the valley she could see off 
through the pass offered the promise of green and 

warmth. 
And the Imperial Order. 
   Kahlan, close beside Richard, wished he would 
put a warm arm around her. She watched as he stared 
at the faint letters in the stone. He was being far 
too quiet for her peace of mind. 
"Richard," she whispered, leaning close to him, 
"what does it say?" 
   Transfixed, he ran his fingers slowly, lightly 
over the letters, his lips soundlessly pronouncing 
the High D'Haran words. 
   "Wizard's Eighth Rule," Richard whispered in 
translation. "Taiga Vassternich." 
 
        
 
 
 
          CHAPTER 46 
 
 
 
 
     Following behind the messenger, Verna stepped 
aside as a tight pack of horses raced by. Their 
bellies were caked with mud, their nostrils flared 
with excitement. The eyes of the cavalry soldiers 
bent over their withers showed grim determination. 
With the constant level of activity of recent 
weeks, she had to maintain a careful vigil whenever 
she stepped out of a tent lest she be run down by 
one thing or another. If it wasn't horses charging 
through camp, it was men at a run. 
"Just up ahead," the messenger said over his 
shoulder. 
   Verna nodded to his young face as he glanced 
back. He was a polite young man. His curly blond 
hair and his mannerly behavior combined to remind 
her of Warren. She was defenseless against the wave 
of pain that cut through her with the memory of 

Warren being gone, at the emptiness of each day. 
   She couldn't remember this messenger's name. 
There were so many young men; it was hard to recall 
all their names. Though she tried her best, she 
couldn't keep track of them. At least for a while 
now they hadn't been dying at a terrifying rate. As 
harsh as the winters were up in D'Hara, such 
weather had at least been a respite from the 
battles of the previous summer, from the constant 
fighting and dying. With summer again upon them, 
she didn't think that the relative quiet was going 
to last much longer.For now the passes held against 
the Imperial Order. In such narrow and confined 
places, the enemy's weight of numbers didn't mean 
so much. If only one man would fit through a narrow 
hole in a stone wall, it meant little that there 
were a hundred waiting behind him to go through, or 
a thousand. Defending against one man, as it were, 
was not the impossible task that it was trying to 
fight the onslaught of Jagang's entire force. 
   When she heard the distant thunder, felt it 
rolling through the ground, she glanced up at the 
sky. The sun had not made an appearance in two 
days. She didn't like the looks of the clouds 
building against the slopes of the mountains. It 
looked like they could be in for a nasty storm. 
   The sound might not have been thunder. It was 
possible that it was magic the enemy hammered 
against the shields across the passes. Such 
battering would do them no good, but it made for 
uneasy sleeping, so, if for no other reason, they 
kept at it. 
   Some of the men and the officers passing in the 
other direction gave her a nod in greeting, or a 
smile, or a small wave. Verna didn't see any 
Sisters of the Light. Many would be at the passes, 
tending shields, making sure none of the Imperial 
Order soldiers could get through. Zedd had taught 
them to consider every possibility, no matter how 
outlandish, and guard against it. Day and night 

Verna ran every one of those places through her 
mind, trying to think if there was anything they 
had overlooked, anything they had missed, that 
might allow the enemy forces to flood in upon them. 
   If that happened, if they broke through, then 
there was nothing to stop their advance into D'Hara 
except the defending army, and the defending army 
was no match for the numbers on the other side of 
those mountains. She couldn't think of any chink in 
their armor, but she worried constantly that there 
might be one. 
   It seemed that the final battle might be on them 
at any moment. And where was Richard? 
   Prophecy said that he was vital in the battle to 
decide the future course of mankind. With it 
appearing that they very well could be one battle 
from the end of it all, of freedom's final spark, 
the Lord Rahl ran the very real risk of missing the 
moment of his greatest need. She could hardly 
believe that for centuries Prophecy foretold of the 
one who would lead them, and when the time finally 
arrives, he's off somewhere else. Lot of good 
Prophecy was doing them. 
   Verna knew Richard's heart. She knew Kahlan's 
heart. It wasn't right to doubt either of them, but 
Verna was the one staring into the eyes of Jagang's 
horde and Richard was nowhere to be found. 
   From what little information Verna had gleaned 
from Ann's messages in the journey book, there was 
trouble afoot. Verna could detect in Ann's writings 
that the woman was greatly troubled by something. 
Whatever the cause, Ann and Nathan were racing 
south, back down through the Old World. Ann avoided 
explaining, possibly not wanting to burden them 
with anything else, so Verna didn't press. She had 
enough trouble conceiving of why Ann would have 
joined with the prophet rather than collaring him. 
Ann said only that a journey book was not a good 
place to explain such things. 
   Despite the good work the man sometimes did, 

Verna considered Nathan dangerous in the extreme. A 
thunderstorm brought life-giving rain, but if you 
were the one struck by its lightning, it didn't do 
you much good. For Ann and Nathan to join forces, 
as it were, must be indicative of the trouble they 
were all in. 
   Verna had to remind herself that not everything 
was going against them, not everything was hopeless 
and dismal. Jagang's army had, after all, suffered 
a stunning blow at the hands of Zedd and Adie, 
losing staggering numbers of soldiers in an instant 
and suffering vast numbers of casualties. As a 
result the Imperial Order had turned away from 
Aydindril, leaving the Wizard's Keep untouched. 
Despite the dream walker's covetous hands, the Keep 
remained out of his reach. 
   Zedd and Adie had the defense of the Keep well 
in hand, so it was not all trouble and strife; 
there were valuable assets on the side of the 
D'Haran Empire. The Keep might yet prove decisive 
in helping to stop the Imperial Order. Verna missed 
that old wizard, his advice, his wisdom, though she 
would never admit it aloud. In that old man she 
could see where Richard got many of his best 
qualities. 
   Verna halted when she saw Rikka striding across 
in front of her. Verna snatched the Mord-Sith's 
arm. 
"What is it, Prelate?" Rikka asked. 
"Have you heard what this is about?" 
Rikka gave her a blank look. "What what's about?" 
   The messenger stopped on the other side of the 
intersection of informal roads. Horses trotted past 
in both directions, one pulling a cart of water 
barrels. Fully armed men crossed on the side road. 
The encampment, one of several, surrounded by a 
defensive berm, had evolved into a city of sorts, 
with byways through its midst for men, horses, and 
wagons. 
"Something is going on," Verna said. 

"Sorry, I haven't heard anything." 
"Are you busy?" 
"Nothing urgent." 
   Verna took a good grip on Rikka's arm and 
started her walking. "General Meiffert sent for me. 
Maybe you'd best come along. That way if he wants 
you, too, we won't have to send someone looking for 
you." 
   Rikka shrugged. "Fine by me." The Mord-Sith's 
expression turned suspicious. "Do you have any idea 
what's wrong?" 
   As Verna kept an eye on the messenger ahead of 
her weaving his way among men, tents, wagons, 
horses, and repair stations, she glanced over at 
Rikka. "Nothing that I know of." Verna's expression 
contorted a bit as she tried to put her queazy mood 
into words. "Did you ever wake up and just feel 
like there was something wrong, but you couldn't 
explain why it seemed like it was going to be a bad 
day?" 
   "If it's to be a bad day, I see to that it's 
someone else's, and I'm the cause of it." 
   Verna smiled to herself. "Too bad you're not 
gifted. You would make a good Sister of the Light." 
"I would rather be Mord-Sith and be able to protect 
Lord Rahl." 
   The messenger stopped at the side of the camp 
road. "Back there, Prelate. General Meiffert said 
to bring you to that tent by the trees." 
   Verna thanked the young man and made her way 
across the soft ground, Rikka at her side. The tent 
was away from the main activity of the camp, in a 
quieter area where officers often met with scouts 
just back from patrols. Verna's mind raced, trying 
to imagine what news scouts could have brought 
back. There was no alarm, so the passes still held. 
If there was trouble, there would be a flurry of 
activity in the camp, but it seemed about the same 
as any other day. 
   Guards saw Verna coming and ducked into the tent 

to announce her arrival. Almost immediately, the 
general stepped out of the tent and rushed to meet 
her. His blue eyes reflected iron determination. 
The man's face, though, was ashen. 
   "I saw Rikka," Verna explained as General 
Meiffert dipped his head in a hurried greeting. "I 
thought I ought to bring her just in case you 
needed her, too." 
   The tall, blond-headed D'Haran glanced briefly 
at Rikka. "Yes, that's fine. Come in, please, both 
of you." 
   Verna snatched his sleeve. "What's this about? 
What's going on? Is something wrong?" 
   The general's eyes moved to Rikka and back to 
Verna. "We've had a message from Jagang." 
   Rikka leaned in, her voice taking on an edge. 
"How did a messenger from Jagang get through 
without someone killing them?" 
   It was standard practice that no one came 
through for any reason. They didn't want so much as 
a mouse making it through. There was no telling if 
it might be some kind of trick. 
   "It was a small wagon, pulled by a single 
horse." He tilted his head toward Verna. "The men 
thought the wagon was empty. Remembering your 
instructions, they let it through." 
   Verna was somewhat surprised that Ann's warning 
to let an empty wagon through had been so correct. 
"A wagon came of its own accord? An empty wagon 
drove itself in?" 
   "Not exactly. The men who saw it thought it was 
empty. The horse appears to be a workhorse that is 
used to walking roads, so it plodded along the road 
as it had been trained." General Meiffert pressed 
his lips together at the confusion on Verna's face 
and then turned away from the tent. "Come on, and 
I'll show you." 
   He led them to the third tent down the line and 
held the flap aside. Verna ducked in, followed by 
Rikka and the general. On a bench inside sat a 

young novice, Holly, with her arm around a very 
frightened-looking girl no more than ten years old. 
   "I asked Holly to stay with her," General 
Meiffert whispered. "I thought it might make her 
less nervous than a soldier standing over her." 
   "Of course," Verna said. "Very wise of you. 
She's the one who brought the message, then?" 
   The young general nodded. "She was sitting in 
the back of the wagon, so the men seeing it coming 
at first thought it was empty." 
   Verna now understood why such a messenger got 
through. Soldiers weren't nearly so likely to kill 
a child, and the Sisters could test her to insure 
she was no threat. Verna wondered if Zedd would 
have something to say about that; threat often came 
in surprising packages. Verna approached the pair 
on the bench, smiling as she bent down. 
   "I'm Verna. Are you all right, young lady?" The 
girl nodded. "Would you like something to eat?" 
   Trembling slightly as her big brown eyes took in 
the people looking at her, she nodded again. 
"Prelate," Holly said, "Valery already went to get 
her something." 
   "I see," Verna said, holding the smile in place. 
She knelt down and gently patted the girl's hands 
in her lap to reassure her. "Do you live around 
here?" 
   The girl's big brown eyes blinked, trying to 
judge the danger of the adult before her. She 
calmed just a little at Verna's smile and kind 
touch. "A bit of travel to the north, ma'am." 
"And someone sent you to see us?" 
   The big brown eyes filled with tears, but she 
didn't cry. "My parents are back there, down over 
the pass. The soldiers there have them. As guests, 
they said. Men came and took us to their army. 
We've had to stay there for the last few weeks. 
Today they told me to take a letter over the pass 
to the people here. They said that if I did as I 
was told, they would let my mother and father and 

me go home." 
   Verna again patted the girl's small hands. "I 
see. Well, that's good of you to help your 
parents." 
"I just want to go home." 
   "And you shall, child." Verna straightened. 
"We'll get you some food, dear, so you have a full 
tummy before you go back to your parents." 
   The girl stood and curtsied. "Thank you for your 
kindness. May I go back after I eat, then?" 
"Certainly," Verna said. "I'll just go read the 
letter you brought while you have a nice meal, and 
then you can return to your parents." 
   As she sat back up on the bench, squirming her 
bottom back beside Holly, she couldn't help keeping 
a wary eye on the Mord-Sith. 
   Trying not to show any apprehension, Verna 
smiled her good-bye to the girl before leading the 
others out of the tent. She couldn't even imagine 
what Jagang was up to. 
   "What's in the letter?" Verna asked as they 
hurried to the command tent. 
   General Meiffert paused outside the tent, his 
thumb burnishing a brass button on his coat as he 
met Verna's gaze. "I'd just as soon you read it for 
yourself, Prelate. Some of it is plain enough. Some 
of it, well, some of it I'm hoping you can explain 
to me." 
   Stepping into the tent, Verna saw Captain Zimmer 
waiting off to the side. The square-jawed man was 
absent his usual infectious smile. The captain was 
in charge of the D'Haran special forces, a group of 
men whose job it was to go out and spend their days 
and nights sneaking around in enemy territory 
killing as many of the enemy as possible. There 
seemed to be an endless supply. The captain seemed 
determined to use up the supply. 
   The men in Captain Zimmer's corps were very good 
at what they did. They collected strings of ears 
they took from the enemies they killed. Kahlan used 

to always ask to see their collection whenever they 
returned. The captain and his men dearly missed 
her. 
   They all glanced up at a flash of lightning. The 
storm was getting closer. After a moment's pause, 
the ground shook with the rolling rumble of 
thunder. 
   General Meiffert retrieved a small folded paper 
from the table and handed it to Verna. 
"This is what the girl brought." 
   Looking briefly to the two men's grim 
expressions, Verna unfolded the paper and read the 
neat script. 
   I have Wizard Zorander and a sorceress named 
Adie. I now hold the Wizard's Keep in Aydindril and 
all it contains. My Slide will soon present me with 
Lord Rahl and the Mother Confessor. 
   Your cause is lost. If you surrender now and 
open the passes, I will spare your men. If you do 
not, I will put every one of them to death. 
   Signed, Jagang the Just. 
The arm holding the paper in her trembling fingers 
lowered. 
"Dear Creator," Verna whispered. She felt dizzy. 
   Rikka snatched the paper from her hand and stood 
facing away as she read it. She cursed under her 
breath. 
   "We have to go get him," Rikka said. "We have to 
get Zedd and Adie away from Jagang." 
   Captain Zimmer shook his head. "There is no way 
we could accomplish such a thing." 
   Rikka's face went red with rage. "He's saved my 
life before! Yours, too! We have to get him out of 
there!" 
   In contrast to Rikka's anger, Verna spoke 
softly. "We all feel the same about him. Zedd has 
probably saved all of our lives more than once. 
Unfortunately, Jagang will do all the worse to him 
for it." 
   Rikka shook the message before their faces. "So 

we are just going to let him die there? Let Jagang 
kill him? We sneak in, or something!" 
   Captain Zimmer rested the heel of his hand on a 
long knife at his belt. "Mistress Rikka, if I told 
you that I had a man hidden somewhere in this camp, 
in one of the hundreds of thousands of tents, and 
no one would bother you or ask you any questions, 
but would allow you to freely go about a search, 
how long do you think it would take you to find 
such a hidden man?" 
   "But they won't be in just any tent," Rikka 
said. "Look at us, here. This message came. Did it 
go to just any random tent in the whole camp? No, 
it went to a place where such things are handled." 
   "I've been to the Imperial Order encampment too 
many times to count," Captain Zimmer said as he 
cast his arm out toward the enemy over the 
mountains to the west. "You can't even imagine how 
big their camp is. They have millions of men there. 
   "Their encampment is a quagmire of cutthroats. 
It's a place of chaos. That disorder allows us to 
slip in, kill some of them, and get out fast. You 
don't want to be there very long. They recognize 
outsiders, especially blond outsiders. 
   "Moreover, there are layers of different kinds 
of men. Most of the soldiers are little more than a 
mob of thugs that Jagang turns loose from time to 
time. None of them are allowed beyond a certain 
point within their own camp. The men guarding the 
areas with higher security are not nearly so stupid 
and lazy as the common soldiers. 
   "The men in those protected areas aren't as 
numerous as the common soldiers, but they are 
trained professionals. They are alert, vigilant, 
and deadly. If you could somehow manage to get 
through the sea of misfits to reach the island at 
the core where the torture and command tents are, 
those professional soldiers would have you on the 
end of a pike in no time. 
   "Even they are not all the same. The outer ring 

of this core, besides having these professionals 
guarding it, is where the Sisters are. They both 
live there and use magic to watch for intruders. 
Beyond them are further rings, starting with the 
elite guards, and then, finally, the emperor's 
personal guards. These are men who have been 
fighting with Jagang for years. They kill anyone, 
even the elite guard officers, if they become at 
all suspicious of them. If they even hear word of 
someone saying disparaging things about the 
emperor, they hunt them down and have them 
tortured. After being tortured, if they live 
through it, they are then put to death. 
   "I'm not saying that my men and I would be 
unwilling to risk our lives trying to get Zedd out 
of there; I'm saying that we would be giving our 
lives up for nothing." 
The mood in the tent could not have been more 
hopeless. 
   The general gestured with the paper when Rikka 
handed it back. "Any idea what a Slide is, 
Prelate?" 
Verna met his blue-eyed gaze. "A soul stealer." 
The general frowned. "A what?" 
   "In the great war—three thousand years ago—the 
wizards of that time created weapons out of people. 
Dream walkers, like Jagang, were one such weapon. 
The best way I can explain it to you is that a 
Slide is in some ways like a dream walker. A dream 
walker can enter a person's mind and seize control 
of them. A Slide, I believe, is something like 
that, only he seizes your spirit, your soul." 
Rikka made a face. "Why?" 
   Verna lifted her hands in frustration. "I don't 
really know. To control their victim, perhaps. 
   Altering gifted people was an ancient practice. 
They sometimes changed gifted people with magic to 
suit a specific purpose. With Sub-tractive Magic 
they took away traits they didn't want, and then 
they used Additive Magic to add to or enhance a 

trait they did want. What they created were 
monsters. 
   "I'm not really well versed in the subject. When 
I became Prelate I had access to books I had never 
seen before. That's where I saw the reference to 
Slides. They were used to slip into another 
person's being and steal the essence of who they 
where—their spirit, their soul. 
   "Altering people in such a way as to create 
these Slides is a long-dead art. I'm afraid that I 
don't know a great deal about the subject. I do 
remember reading that the ones called Slides were 
exceedingly dangerous." 
   "Long-dead art," the general muttered. He looked 
like he was making a great effort to restrain 
himself. "Those wizards of that time made such 
weapons as Slides, but how could Jagang? He's no 
wizard. Could it be that he's lying?" 
   Verna thought about the question a moment. "He 
has gifted people under his direct control. Some 
are able to use underworld magic. As I said, I 
don't know a great deal about it, but I suppose 
it's possible that he was able to do it." 
   "How?" the general demanded. "How could Jagang 
do such things? He's not even a wizard." 
   Verna clasped her hands before herself. "He has 
Sisters of the Light and the Dark. In theory, I 
suppose he has what he needs. He is a man who 
studies history. I know from personal experience 
that he puts great value in books. He has an 
extensive and quite valuable collection. Nathan, 
the prophet, was very concerned about this very 
thing, and destroyed a number of important volumes 
before they could fall into Jagang's possession. 
   "Still, the emperor possesses a great many 
others—in fact, he has a huge collection. Now that 
he has captured the Keep, he has access to 
important libraries. Those books are dangerous, or 
they wouldn't have been sealed away in the Wizard's 
Keep in the first place." 

"And now Jagang has control of them." General 
Meiffert ran his fingers back through his hair. He 
gripped the back of the chair set before the small 
table and leaned his weight on his arms. "Do you 
think he really has Zedd and Adie?" 
   The question was a plea for some thread of hope. 
Verna swallowed as she carefully considered the 
question. She answered in an honest voice, not 
wanting to be the founder of a false faith. Since 
she'd read the message from Jagang, she, herself, 
had been searching for that same thread of hope. 
   "I don't think he's a man who would find any 
satisfaction in bragging about something he hadn't 
actually accomplished. I think he must be telling 
us the truth and wants to gloat over his 
accomplishment." 
   The general released his grip on the chair and 
turned as he considered Verna's words. Finally, he 
asked a question worse yet. 
   "Do you think he's telling the truth that this 
Slide has Lord Rahl and the Mother Confessor? Do 
you think this terrible creation, this Slide, will 
soon deliver the two of them to Jagang?" 
   Verna wondered if this was the reason for Ann 
and Nathan's headlong rush down through the Old 
World. Verna knew that Richard and Kahlan were down 
there, somewhere. There could be no more urgent 
reason for Ann and Nathan to race south. Was it 
possible that this Slide had already captured them, 
or captured their souls? Verna's heart sank. She 
wondered if Ann already knew that the Slide had 
Richard, and that was why she wasn't saying much 
about her mission. 
"I don't know," Verna finally answered. 
"I think Jagang just made a mistake," Captain 
Zimmer said. 
Verna lifted an eyebrow. "Such as?" 
   "He has just betrayed to us how much trouble 
he's having with the passes. He's just told us how 
well our defenses are working and how desperate he 

is. If he doesn't get through this season, his 
whole army will have to sit out another winter. He 
wants us to let him through. 
   "D'Haran winters are hard, especially on men 
such as his, men not used to the conditions. I saw 
with my own eyes good indications of how many men 
he lost last winter. Hundreds of thousands of men 
died from disease." 
"He has plenty of men," General Meiffert said. "He 
can afford the losses. He has a steady supply of 
new troops to replace the ones who died from the 
fevers and sickness last winter." 
"So, you think the captain is wrong?" Verna asked. 
   "No, I agree that Jagang would like very much to 
get it over with; I just don't think he cares how 
many of his men die. I think he's eager to rule the 
world. Patient as he generally is, he sees the end 
at hand, the goal within his grasp. We're the only 
thing standing in his way, keeping his prize from 
falling to him. His men, too, are impatient for the 
plunder. 
   "His choice to split the New World first by 
driving up to Aydindril has left him close to his 
goal, but in some ways, even more distant from it. 
If he can't make it through the passes, he may 
decide to pick up his army and make a long march 
back south again, to the Kern River valley, to 
where he can then come over and up into D'Hara. 
Once his army takes to the open ground down south, 
there's no way for us to stop them. 
   "If he can't break through the passes now, it 
means a long march and a long delay, but he will 
still have us in the end. He would rather have us 
now and is willing to offer the lives of our men to 
close a deal." 
Verna stared off. "It's a grave mistake to try to 
appease evil." 
   "I agree," General Meiffert said. "Once we 
opened the passes, he would slaughter every last 
man." 

The mood in the tent was as gloomy as the sky 
outside. 
   "I think we should send him back a letter," 
Rikka said. "I think we should tell him that we 
don't believe him that he has Zedd and Adie. If he 
expects us to believe him, he should prove it; he 
should send us their heads." 
Captain Zimmer smiled at the suggestion. 
   The general tapped a finger on the table as he 
thought it over. "If it's as you say, Prelate, and 
Jagang really does have them, then there's nothing 
we can do about it. He will kill them. After what 
Zedd did to Jagang's force back in Aydindril, to 
say nothing of all the havoc he caused the Imperial 
Order last summer when the Mother Confessor was 
with us, I know it won't be an easy death, but he 
will kill them in the end." 
   "Then you agree that nothing else can be done," 
Verna said. 
   General Meiffert wiped a hand across his face. 
"I hate admitting it, but I'm afraid they're lost. 
I don't think we should give Jagang the 
satisfaction of knowing how we truly feel about 
it." 
   Verna's head spun at the thought of Zedd and 
Adie being put to torture, of them being in the 
hands of Jagang and his Sisters of the Dark. She 
quailed at the thought of the D'Haran forces losing 
Zedd. There simply was no one with his experience 
and knowledge. There was no one who could replace 
him. 
   "We write Jagang a letter, then," Verna said, 
"and tell Jagang we don't believe he has Zedd and 
Adie." 
   "The only thing we can do," Rikka said, "is to 
deny Jagang what he wants most. What he wants is 
for us to give up." 
   General Meiffert pulled out the chair at the 
table, inviting Verna to sit and write the letter. 
"If Jagang is angered by such a letter, he just 

might send us their heads. If he did, that would 
spare them terrible suffering. That's the only 
thing we can do for them—the best we could do for 
them." 
   Verna took stock of the grim faces and saw only 
resolve at what had to be done. She sat in the 
chair the general held for her, wiggled the stopper 
out of the ink bottle, and then took a piece of 
paper from a small stack in a box to the side. 
   She dipped the pen and stared at the paper for a 
moment, trying to decide how to phrase the letter. 
She tried to imagine what Kahlan would write. As it 
came to her, she bent over the table and began 
writing. 
   I don't believe you are competent enough to 
capture Wizard Zoran-der. If you were, you would 
send us his head to prove it. Don't bother me 
anymore with your whining for us to open the passes 
for you because you are too inept to do it 
yourself. 
Reading over Verna's shoulder, Rikka said, "I like 
it." 
Verna looked up at the others. "How should I sign 
it?" 
   "What would make Jagang the most angry—or 
worried?" Captain Zimmer asked. 
   Verna tapped the back of the pen against her 
chin as she thought. Then it came to her. She put 
pen to paper. 
Signed, the Mother Confessor. 
 
 
 
 
 
          CHAPTER 47 
 
 
 
 

 
Richard scanned the site off in the broad, green 
valley, watching for any sign of troops. He looked 
over at Owen. 
"That's Witherton?" 
   Hands pressed against the rich forest floor at 
the crown of a low ridge, Owen pulled himself 
closer to the edge. He stretched his neck to see 
over the rise and finally nodded before pulling 
back. 
Richard had thought it would be bigger. "I don't 
see any soldiers." 
   Owen crawled back away from the edge. In the 
shadowed cover among ferns and low scrub, he stood 
and brushed the moist crumbles of leaves from his 
shirt and trousers. 
   "The men of the Order mostly stay inside the 
town. They have no interest in helping to do the 
work. They eat our food and gamble with the things 
they have taken from our people. When they do these 
things they are interested in little else." His 
face heated to red. "At night, they used to collect 
some of our women." Since the reason was obvious 
enough, Owen didn't put words to it. "In the 
daytime they sometimes come out to check on our 
people who work in the fields, or watch to see that 
they come back in at night." 
   If the soldiers had once camped outside the city 
walls, they no longer did. Apparently, they 
preferred the more comfortable accommodations 
within the town. They had learned that these people 
would offer no resistance; they could be cowed and 
controlled by words alone. The men of the Imperial 
Order were safe sleeping among them. 
   The wall around Witherton blocked much of 
Richard's view of the place. Other than through the 
open gates, there wasn't much to see. The wall was 
constructed of upright posts not a great deal 
taller than the height of a man. The posts, a 
variety of sizes no bigger around than a hand-

width, were bound tightly together, top and bottom, 
with rope. The wavy wall snaked around the town, 
leaned in or out in places. There was no bulwark, 
or even a trench before the wall. Other than 
keeping out grazing deer or maybe a roaming bear, 
the walls certainly didn't look strong enough to 
withstand an attack from the Imperial Order 
soldiers. 
   The soldiers had no doubt made a point of using 
the gate into the town for reasons other than the 
strength of the wall. Opening the gates for 
soldiers of the Imperial Order had been a symbolic 
sign of submission. 
   Broad swaths of the valley were clear of trees, 
leaving fields of grain to grow alongside row crops 
in communal gardens. Tree limbs knitted into 
fencing kept in cows. There, the wild grasses were 
chewed low. Chickens roamed freely near coops. A 
few sheep grazed on the coarse grass. 
   The smells of rich soil, wildflowers, and 
grasses carried on a light breeze into the woods 
where Richard watched. It was a great relief to 
have finally descended from the pass. It had been 
getting difficult to breathe in the thin air up on 
the high slopes. It was considerably warmer, too, 
down out of the lofty mountain pass, although he 
still felt cold. 
   Richard checked the sweep of open valley one 
last time and then he and Owen made their way back 
into the dense tangle of woods toward where the 
others waited. The trees were mostly hardwoods, 
maple and oak, along with patches of birch, but 
there were also stands of towering evergreens. 
Birds chirped from the dense foliage. A squirrel up 
on the limb of a pine chattered at them as they 
passed. The deep shade below the thick forest crown 
was interrupted only occasionally by mottled 
sunlight. 
Some of the men, swatting at bugs, stood in a rush 
when Richard led Owen into the secluded forest 

opening. Richard was glad to stand in the warmth of 
sunlight slanting in at a low angle. 
   It appeared that the open area in the dense 
woods had been created when a huge old maple had 
been hit by lightning. The maple split and fell in 
two directions, taking other trees down with it. 
Kahlan hopped down off her seat on the trunk of the 
fallen monarch. Betty, her tail wagging in a blur, 
greeted Richard, eagerly looking for attention, or 
a treat. Richard scratched behind her ears, the 
goat's favorite form of attention. 
   More of the men came into the open from behind 
upturned roots that had been turned silver by years 
of exposure to the elements. A crop of spruce, none 
more than chest high, had sprung up in the sunny 
spot created when the old maple had died such a 
sudden and violent death. Spread among Kahlan, 
Cara, Jennsen, and Tom were the rest of the men—his 
army. 
   Back up in the pass, Ansons saying that he 
wanted to help rid his people of the Imperial Order 
soldiers seemed to have galvanized the rest of the 
men, and the balance had finally tipped. Once it 
had, a lifetime of darkness and doubt gave way to a 
hunger to live in the light of truth. The men all 
declared, in a breathtaking moment of 
determination, that they wanted to join with 
Richard to be part of the D'Haran Empire and fight 
the soldiers of the Imperial Order to gain their 
freedom. 
   They had all decided that the men of the Order 
were evil and deserved death, even if they 
themselves had to do the killing. 
   When Tom glanced down to see Betty going back to 
browsing on weeds, Richard noticed that the man's 
brow was beaded with sweat. Cara fanned herself 
with a handful of big leaves from a mountain maple. 
Richard was about to ask them how they could be 
sweating when it was such a cool day when he 
realized that it was the poison making him cold. 

With icy dread, he recalled how the last time he 
had gotten cold, the poison had nearly killed him 
that awful night. 
   Anson and another man, John, took off their 
packs. They were the ones planning to slip in among 
the field-workers returning to town at nightfall. 
Once they sneaked into town, the two men planned to 
recover the antidote.  
   "I think I'd better go with you," Richard said 
to Anson. "John, why don't you wait here with the 
others." 
   John looked surprised. "If you wish, Lord Rahl, 
but there is no need for you to go." 
   It wasn't supposed to be a foray that would 
result in any violence, only the recovery of the 
antidote. The attack on the Imperial Order soldiers 
was to be after the antidote had been safely 
recovered and they had assessed the situation, the 
number of men, and the layout. 
"John is right," Cara said. "They can do it." 
   Richard was having difficulty breathing. He had 
to make an effort not to cough. 
"I know. I just think I had better have a look 
myself." 
Cara and Kahlan cast sidelong glances at each 
other. 
   "But if you go in there with Anson," Jennsen 
said, "you can't take your sword." 
   "I'm not going to start a war. I just want to 
get a good look around at the place." 
   Kahlan stepped closer. "The two of them can 
scout the town and give you a report. You can rest—
they will only be gone a few hours." 
"I know, but I don't think I want to wait that 
long." 
   By the way she appraised his eyes, he thought 
she must be able to see how much pain he was in. 
She didn't argue the point further but instead 
nodded her agreement. 
   Richard pulled the baldric and sword belt off 

over his head. He slipped it all over Kahlan's 
head, laying the baldric across her shoulder. 
"Here. I pronounce you Seeker of Truth." 
   She accepted the sword and the honor by planting 
her fists on her hips. "Now don't you go starting 
anything while you're in there. That's not the 
plan. You and Anson will be alone. You wait until 
we're all together." 
   "I know. I just need to get the antidote and 
then we'll be back in no time." 
   Beside getting the antidote, Richard wanted to 
see the enemy forces, how they were placed, and the 
layout of the town. Having the men draw a map in 
the dirt was one thing, seeing it for himself was 
another; these men didn't know how to evaluate 
threat points. 
   One of the men took off his light coat, 
something a number of the men wore, and held it out 
to Richard. "Here, Lord Rahl, wear this. It will 
make you look more like one of us." 
   With a nod of thanks, Richard drew the coat on. 
He had changed out of his war wizard's outfit into 
traveling clothes, so he didn't think he would look 
out of place with the way the men from the town of 
Witherton looked. The man was nearly Richard's 
size, so the coat fit well enough. It also hid his 
belt knife. 
   Jennsen shook her head. "I don't know, Richard. 
You just don't look like one of them. You still 
look like Lord Rahl." 
   "What are you talking about?" Richard held out 
his arms, looking down at himself. "What's wrong 
with the way I look?" 
"Don't stand up so straight," she said. 
"Hunch your shoulders and hang your head a little," 
Kahlan offered. 
   Richard took their advice seriously; he hadn't 
thought about it, but the men did tend to hunch a 
lot. He didn't want to stand out. He had to blend 
in if he didn't want to raise the suspicions of the 

soldiers. He bent over a little. 
"How's that?" 
Jennsen screwed up her mouth. "Not much different." 
"But I'm bending down." 
   "Lord Rahl," Cara said in a soft voice as she 
gave him a meaningful look, "you remember how it 
was to walk behind Denna, when she held the chain 
to the collar around your neck. Make yourself like 
that." 
   Richard blinked at her. The mental image of his 
time as a captive of a Mord-Sith hit him like a 
slap. He pressed his lips tight, not saying 
anything, and conceded with a single nod. The 
memory of that forsaken time was depressing enough 
that he would have no trouble using it to fall into 
the role. 
   "We had better be on our way," Anson said. "Now 
that the sun is falling behind the mountains, 
darkness comes quickly." He hesitated, then spoke 
again. "Lord Rahl, the men of the Order will not 
know you—I mean they probably will not realize you 
aren't from our town. But our people do not carry 
weapons; if they see that knife, they will know you 
are not from our town, and they will send up an 
alarm." 
Richard lifted open the coat, looking at the knife. 
"You're right." He loosened his belt and removed 
the sheath holding the knife. He handed it to Cara 
for safekeeping. 
   Richard cupped a hand quickly to the side of 
Kahlan's face as a way of saying his good-bye. She 
seized the hand in both of hers and pressed a quick 
kiss to the backs of his fingers. Her hands looked 
so small and delicate holding his. He sometimes 
kidded her that he didn't see how she could 
possibly get anything done with such small hands. 
Her answer was that her hands were a normal size 
and perfectly adequate, and his were simply 
outsized. 
   The men all noticed Kahlan's gesture of 

affection. Richard was not embarrassed that they 
did. He wanted them to know that other people were 
the same as they in important, human ways. This was 
what they were fighting for—the chance to be human, 
to love and cherish loved ones, to live their lives 
as they wanted. 
   The light faded quickly as Richard and Anson 
made their way through the woods running beside 
fields of wild grasses. Richard wanted to work 
around to where the forest came in closer to the 
men out weeding in the gardens and tending to 
animals. With the nearby mountains to the west 
being so high, the sun vanished behind them earlier 
than what would normally be sunset, leaving the sky 
a swath of deep bluish green and the valley in an 
odd golden gloom. 
   By the time he and Anson had reached the place 
where they would leave the woods, it was still a 
little too light, so they waited a short while 
until Richard felt the murky light in the fields 
was dim enough to hide them. The town was some 
distance away and since Richard couldn't make out 
any men outside the gates, he reasoned that if 
soldiers were watching, then they couldn't see him, 
either. 
   As they moved quickly through the field of wild 
grass, staying low and out of sight, Anson pointed. 
"There, those men going back to town, we should 
follow them." 
   Richard spoke quietly back over his shoulder. 
"All right, but don't forget, we don't want to 
catch up with them or they might recognize you and 
make a fuss. Let them stay a good distance ahead of 
us." 
   When they reached the town walls, Richard saw 
that the gates were no more than two sections of 
the picket walls. A couple of posts no bigger than 
Richard's wrist had been tied sideways to stiffen 
two sections of wall and make them into gates. The 
ropes that tied the posts together served as the 

hinges. The sections were simply lifted and swung 
around to open or close them. It was far from a 
secure fortification. 
   In the murky light of twilight, the two guards 
milling around just inside the gates and watching 
workers return couldn't really see much of Richard 
and Anson. To the guards, they would appear to be 
two more workers. The Order understood the value of 
workers; they needed slaves to do the work so that 
the soldiers might eat. 
   Richard hunched his shoulders and hung his head 
as he walked. He remembered those terrible times as 
a captive when, wearing a collar, he walked behind 
Denna, devoid of all hope of ever again being free. 
Thinking of that inhuman time, he shuffled through 
the open gates. The guards didn't pay him any 
attention. 
   Just as they were nearly past the guards, the 
closest one reached out and snatched Anson's 
sleeve, spinning him back around. 
   "I want some eggs," the young soldier said. 
"Give me some of the eggs you collected." 
   Anson stood wide-eyed, not knowing what to do. 
It seemed ludicrous that these two young men were 
allowed to serve their cause by being bullies. 
Richard stepped up beside Anson and spoke quickly, 
remembering to bow his head so that he wouldn't 
loom over the man. 
   "We have no eggs, sir. We were weeding the bean 
fields. I'm sorry. We will bring you eggs tomorrow, 
if it pleases you." 
   Richard glanced up just as the guard backhanded 
him, knocking him flat on his back. He instantly 
took a firm grip on his anger. Wiping blood from 
his mouth, he decided to stay where he was. 
   "He's right," Anson said, drawing the guard's 
attention. "We were weeding beans. If you wish it, 
we will bring you some eggs tomorrow—as many as you 
want." 
   The guard grunted a curse at them and swaggered 

off, taking his companion with him. They headed for 
a nearby long, low structure with a torch lashed to 
a pole outside a low door. In the flickering light 
of that torch, Richard couldn't make out what the 
place was, but it appeared to be a building dug 
partway into the ground so that the eaves were at 
eye level. After the two soldiers were a safe 
distance away, Anson offered Richard a hand to help 
him up. Richard didn't think he'd been hit that 
hard, but his head was spinning. 
   As they started out, faces back in doorways and 
around dark corners peeked out to watch them. When 
Richard looked their way, the people ducked back 
in. 
"They know you are not from here," Anson whispered. 
   Richard didn't trust that one of those people 
wouldn't call the guards. "Let's hurry up and get 
what we came here for." 
   Anson nodded and hurriedly led Richard down a 
narrow street with what looked like little more 
than huts huddled together to each side. The single 
torch burning outside the long building where the 
soldiers had gone provided little light down the 
street. The town, at least what Richard could see 
of it in the dark, was a pretty shabby-looking 
place. In fact, he wouldn't call it a town so much 
as a village. Many of the structures appeared to be 
housing for livestock, not people. Only rarely were 
there any lights coming from any of the squat 
buildings and the light he did see looked like it 
came from candles, not lamps. 
   At the end of the street, Richard followed Anson 
through a small side door into a larger building. 
The cows inside mooed at the intrusion. Sheep 
rustled in their pens. A few goats in other pens 
bleated. Richard and Anson paused to let the 
animals settle down before making their way through 
the barn to a ladder at the side. Richard followed 
Anson as he climbed quickly to a small hayloft. 
   At the end of the loft, Anson reached up over a 

low rafter to where it tied into the wall behind a 
cross brace. "Here it is," he said as he grimaced, 
stretching his arm up into the hiding place. 
   He came out with a small, square-sided bottle 
and handed it to Richard. "This is the antidote. 
Hurry and drink it, and then let's get out of 
here." 
   The large door banged open. Even though it was 
dark outside, the torch down the street provided 
just enough light to silhouette the broad shape of 
a man standing in the doorway. By his demeanor, he 
had to be a soldier. 
   Richard pulled the stopper from the bottle. The 
antidote had the slight aroma of cinnamon. He 
quickly downed it, hardly noticing its sweet, spicy 
taste. He never took his eyes off the man in the 
doorway. 
   "Who's in here?" the man bellowed. 
   "Sir," Richard called down, "I'm just getting 
some hay for the livestock." 
"In the dark? What are you up to? Get down here 
right now." 
   Richard put a hand against Anson's chest and 
pushed him back into the darkness. "Yes, sir. I'm 
coming," Richard called to the soldier as he 
hurried down the ladder. 
   At the bottom of the ladder, he turned and saw 
the man coming toward him. Richard reached for his 
knife under the coat he was wearing, only 
remembering then that he didn't have his knife. The 
soldier was still silhouetted against the open barn 
door. Richard was in the darkness and the man 
probably wouldn't be able to see him. He silently 
moved away from the ladder. 
   As the soldier passed near him, Richard stepped 
in behind him and reached to his side, seizing the 
knife sheathed behind the axe hanging on his belt. 
Richard gingerly drew the knife just as the man 
stopped and looked up the ladder to the hayloft. 
   As he was looking up, Richard snatched a fistful 

of hair with one hand and reached around with the 
other, slicing deep through the soldier's throat 
before he realized what was happening. Richard held 
the man tight as he struggled, a wet gurgling the 
only sound coming from him. He reached back, 
frantically grabbing at Richard for a moment before 
his movements lost their energy and he went limp. 
   "Anson," Richard whispered up the ladder as he 
let the man slip to the ground, "come on. Let's 
go." 
   Anson hurried down the ladder, coming to a halt 
as he reached the bottom and turned around to see 
the dark shape of the dead man sprawled on the 
ground. 
"What happened?" 
   Richard looked up from his work at undoing the 
weapon belt around the dead weight of the soldier. 
"I killed him." 
"Oh." 
   Richard handed the knife, in its sheath, to 
Anson. "Here you go. Now you have a real weapon—a 
long knife." 
   Richard rolled the dead soldier over to pull the 
belt the rest of the way out from under the man. As 
he tugged it free, he heard a noise and turned just 
in time to see another soldier running in toward 
them. 
   Anson slammed the long knife hilt-deep into the 
man's chest. The man staggered back. Richard shot 
to his feet, bringing the weapon belt with him. The 
soldier gasped for breath as he clutched at the 
knife handle. He dropped heavily to his knees. One 
hand clawed at the air above him as he swayed. 
Pulling a final gasp, he toppled to his side. 
   Anson stood staring at the man lying in a heap, 
the knife jutting from his chest. He bent, then, 
and pulled his new knife free. 
"Are you all right?" Richard whispered when Anson 
stood. 
   Anson nodded. "I recognize this man. We called 

him the weasel. He deserved to die." 
   Richard gently clapped Anson on the back of the 
shoulder. "You did well. Now, let's get out of 
here." 
   As they made their way back up the street, 
Richard asked Anson to wait while he checked down 
alleyways and between low buildings, searching for 
soldiers. As a guide, Richard often scouted at 
night. In the darkness, he was in his element. 
   The town was a lot smaller than he had expected. 
It was also much less organized than he thought it 
would be, with no apparent order to where the 
simple structures had been built. The streets 
through the haphazard town, if they could be called 
streets, were in most cases little more than 
footpaths between clusters of small, single-room 
buildings. He saw a few handcarts, but nothing more 
elaborate. There was only one road through the 
town, leading back to the barn where they had 
recovered the antidote and run into the two 
soldiers, that was wide enough to accommodate a 
wagon. His search didn't turn up any patrolling 
soldiers. 
   "Do you know if all the men of the Order stay 
together?" Richard asked when he returned to Anson, 
waiting in the shadows. 
   "At night they go inside. They sleep in our 
place, by where we came in." 
"You mean that low building where the first two 
soldiers went?" 
   "That's right. That's where most people used to 
gather at night, but now the men of the Order use 
it for themselves." 
Richard frowned at the man. "You mean you all slept 
together?" 
Anson sounded mildly surprised by the question. 
"Yes. We were together whenever possible. Many 
people had a house where they could work, eat, and 
keep belongings, but they rarely slept in them. We 
usually all slept in the sleeping houses where we 

gathered to talk about the day. Everyone wanted to 
be together. Sometimes people would sleep in 
another place, but mostly we sleep there together 
so we can all feel safe—much like we all slept 
together at night as we made our way down out of 
the pass with the statue." 
"And everyone just... lay down together?" 
   Anson diverted his eyes. "Couples often slept 
apart from others by being with one another under a 
single blanket, but they were still together with 
our people. In the dark, though, no one could see 
them . .. together under a blanket." 
   Richard had trouble imagining such a way of 
life. "The whole town fit in that sleeping 
building? There was enough room?" 
   "No, there were too many of us to all sleep in 
one sleeping house. There are two." Anson pointed. 
"There is another on the far side of the one you 
saw." 
"Let's go have a look, then." 
   They moved quickly back toward the town gates, 
such as they were, and toward the sleeping houses. 
The dark street was empty. Richard didn't see 
anyone on the paths between buildings. What people 
were left in the town had apparently gone to sleep 
or were afraid to come out in the darkness. 
   A door in one of the small homes opened a crack, 
as if someone inside were peering out. The door 
opened wider and a thin figure dashed out toward 
them. 
"Anson!" came the whispered voice. 
   It was a boy, in his early teens. He fell to his 
knees and clutched Anson's arm, kissing his hand in 
joy to see him. 
   "Anson, I am so happy that you are home! We've 
missed you so much. We feared for you—feared that 
you were murdered." 
   Anson grabbed the boy by his shirt and hauled 
him to his feet. "Bernie, I'm well and I'm happy to 
see you well, but you must go back in now. The men 

will see you. If they catch you outside ..." 
   "Oh, please, Anson, come sleep at our house. 
We're so alone and afraid." 
   "Who?" 
"Just me and my grandfather, now. Please come in 
and be with us." 
"I can't right now. Maybe another time." 
   The boy peered up at Richard, then, and when he 
saw that he didn't recognize him shrank back. 
   "This is a friend of mine, Bernie—from another 
town." Anson squatted down beside the boy. "Please, 
Bernie, I will return, but you must go back inside 
and stay there tonight. Don't come out. We fear 
there might be trouble. Stay inside. Tell your 
grandfather my words, will you now?" 
   Bernie finally agreed and ran back into the dark 
doorway. Richard was eager to get out of the town 
before anyone else came out to pay their respects. 
If he and Anson weren't careful, they would end up 
attracting the attention of the soldiers. 
   They moved quickly the rest of the way up the 
street, using buildings for cover. Pressing up 
against the side of one at the head of the street, 
Richard peered around the corner at the squat daub-
and-wattle sleeping house where the guards had 
gone. The door was open, letting soft light spill 
out across the ground. 
"In there?" Richard whispered. "You all slept in 
there?" 
   "Yes. That is one of the sleeping houses, and 
beyond it the other one." 
Richard thought about it for a moment. "What did 
you sleep on?" 
   "Hay. We put blankets over it, usually. We 
changed the hay often to keep it fresh, but these 
men do not bother. They sleep like animals in dusty 
old hay." 
   Richard looked out through the open gates at the 
fields. He looked back at the sleeping house. 
"And now the soldiers all sleep in there?" 

   "Yes. They took the place from us. They said it 
was to be their barracks. Now our people—the ones 
still alive—must sleep wherever they can." 
   Richard made Anson stay put while he slipped 
through the shadows, out of the light of the torch, 
to survey the area beyond the first building. The 
second long structure also had soldiers inside 
laughing and talking. There were more men than were 
needed to guard such a small place, but Witherton 
was the gateway into Bandakar—and the gateway out. 
   "Come on," Richard said as he came up beside 
Anson, "let's get back to the others. I have an 
idea." 
   As they made their way to the gate, Richard 
looked up, as he often did, to check the starry sky 
for any sign of black-tipped races. He saw instead 
that the pole to each side of the gate held a body 
hanging by the ankles. When Anson saw them, he 
paused, held frozen by the horror of the sight. 
   Richard laid a hand on the man's shoulder and 
leaned close. "Are you all right?" 
   Anson shook his head. "No. But I will be better 
when the men who come to us and do such things are 
dead." 
 
 
 
 
          CHAPTER 48 
 
 
 
 
   Richard didn't know if the antidote was supposed 
to make him feel better, but if it was, it hadn't 
yet done its work. As they crept through the pitch-
black fields, his chest hurt with every breath he 
took. He paused and closed his eyes briefly against 
the pain of the headache caused by his gift. He 
wanted nothing more than to lie down, but there was 

no time for that. Everyone started out once more 
when he did, quietly making their way through the 
fields outside of Witherton. 
   It felt good, at least, to have his sword back, 
even if he dreaded the thought of having to draw it 
for fear of finding its magic was no longer there 
for him. Once they recovered the other two bottles 
of the antidote and he was rid of the poison, then 
maybe they could make it back to Nicci so that she 
could help him deal with his gift. 
   He tried not to worry if a sorceress could help 
a wizard once his gift had gone out of control, as 
his had. Nicci had vast experience. As soon as he 
reached her, she could help him. Even if she 
couldn't help him, he felt confident that she would 
at least know what he had to do in order to get the 
help he needed. After all, she was once a Sister of 
the Light; the purpose of the Sisters of the Light 
had been to help those with the gift to learn to 
control it. 
"I think I see the outer wall," Kahlan said in a 
quiet voice. 
"Yes, that's the place." Richard pointed. "There's 
the gate. See it?" 
"I think so," she whispered back. 
   It was a dark night, with no moon. While the 
others were having difficulty seeing much of 
anything as they made their way through the dark, 
Richard was glad for the conditions. The starlight 
was enough for him to see by, but he didn't think 
it was enough to give the soldiers any help in 
seeing them. 
   As they crept closer, the sleeping house came 
into view through the open gate. The torch still 
burned outside the door to the building where the 
soldiers slept. Richard signaled everyone to gather 
around close. They all crouched low. He grabbed the 
shoulder of Anson's shirt and pulled him up closer 
yet, then did the same with Owen. 
   Both now carried battle-axes. Anson also carried 

the knife he'd earned. The rest of the men carried 
the weapons they had helped finish making. 
   When Richard and Anson had returned to the 
forest clearing, Anson had told the waiting men 
everything that had happened. When he said that he 
killed the man called the weasel, Richard held his 
breath, not sure exactly how the men would react to 
hearing that one of their own had actually killed a 
man. There was a brief moment of astonished 
silence, and then spontaneous joy at the 
accomplishment. 
   Every man wanted to shake Anson's hand to 
congratulate him, to tell him how proud they were. 
At that moment, any lingering doubts Richard 
harbored had vanished. He had allowed the men to 
celebrate briefly while he waited for the night to 
darken, and then they had started making their way 
through the fields. 
This was the night that Witherton gained its 
freedom. 
   Richard looked around at all the dark shapes. 
"All right, now, remember all the things we've told 
you. You must stay quiet and hold the gates steady 
while Anson and Owen cut the rope where they hinge. 
Be careful not to let the gates fall once the ropes 
are cut." 
   In the dim starlight Richard could just make out 
the men nodding to his instructions. Richard 
carefully checked the sky, looking for any sign of 
black-tipped races. He didn't see any. It had been 
a long time since they'd seen any races. 
   It seemed that the trick of taking to the 
forests just before they changed their expected 
route and being careful to stay out of sight from 
the sky had worked. It was possible that they had 
succeeded in slipping out from under Nicholas the 
Slide's surveillance. If they really had escaped 
his observation, then he wouldn't know where to 
begin looking for them. 
   Richard briefly squeezed Kahlan's hand and then 

started for the opening in the town wall. Cara 
crouched close at his other side. Tom was bringing 
up the rear, along with Jennsen, making sure there 
were no surprises from behind. 
   They had left Betty not only tied up, but 
confined to a makeshift pen to be sure she didn't 
follow after them and give them away at the wrong 
moment. The goat had been unusually distraught to 
be left behind, but with lives at stake they 
couldn't risk Jennsen's goat causing trouble. She 
would be happy enough after they returned. 
   When they reached the fields close to the town 
gates, Richard motioned for everyone to get down 
and stay where they were. Along with Tom, Richard 
moved up to the gates, taking cover in the shadow 
of the wall. There was a soldier just inside the 
gate, pacing slowly in his lonely nighttime sentry 
duty. He wasn't being very careful, or he would not 
be doing such duty in the light of the torch. 
   As the soldier turned to walk away from them, 
Tom slipped up behind the man and swiftly silenced 
him. As Tom dragged the dead man through the gates 
to hide him in the darkness outside the wall, 
Richard moved in through the gates, staying in the 
shadows and away from the torch burning outside the 
sleeping house. The door to the sleeping house 
stood open, but no light or sound came from inside. 
This late, the men were bound to be asleep. 
   He moved past the first long building to the 
second, and there came upon another guard. Quickly, 
silently, Richard seized the man and cut his 
throat, holding him tight as he struggled. When he 
finally went limp, Richard laid him in the darkness 
at the head of the second sleeping house, around 
the corner from the torchlight. 
   In the distance, the men had already swarmed 
over the gates, holding them up while Anson and 
Owen worked quickly at cutting the ropes that acted 
as hinges. In moments, both sections of gate were 
freed. Richard could hear the soft grunts of effort 

as the heavy gates were manhandled around by the 
two gangs of men. 
   Jennsen handed Richard his bow, the string 
already strung. She handed him one of the special 
arrows, holding the rest at the ready for him. 
Kahlan slipped up to the torch on the pole outside 
the first building and lit several small torches, 
handing each of them off to the men. She kept one 
for herself. 
   Richard nocked the arrow and then glanced around 
at the faces seeming to float before him in the 
wavering torchlight. In answer to the unspoken 
question, they all nodded that they were ready. He 
checked the men balancing the two gates and saw 
their nod. The bow in one hand, with his fist 
holding the arrow in place, Richard gave hand 
signals to the men, starting them moving. 
   What had been a slow, careful approach from the 
woods into the town suddenly transformed into a 
headlong rush. 
   Richard held the head of the arrow nocked in his 
bow in the flame of the torch Kahlan held out for 
him. As soon as it caught, he ran to the open door 
of the sleeping house, leaned into the darkness, 
and fired the arrow toward the back. 
   As the blazing arrow flew the length of the 
building, it illuminated row upon row of men 
sleeping on the bed of straw. The arrow landed at 
the far end, spilling flame across the straw. A few 
heads lifted at the confusing sight. Jennsen handed 
Richard another. He immediately drew string to 
cheek and the arrow shot toward the middle of the 
interior. 
   As Richard pulled back from the doorway, two men 
with torches, dripping flaming drops of pitch, 
heaved them just inside. They hissed as they flew 
through the air, landing amid the sleeping men, 
bouncing and tumbling through the straw, igniting a 
wall of flame. 
   In a matter of only a few heartbeats since the 

attack started, the first sleeping house was set 
afire from one end to the other. The largest blaze, 
by design, was the fire spread by the pitch-laden 
torches, at the end of the building nearest the 
door. Confused cries came from inside, muted by the 
thick walls. The sleeping soldiers scrambled to 
their feet. 
   Richard checked that the men with the heavy 
gates were coming; then he ran around the sleeping 
house to the second building. Jennsen, following 
close behind, handed him an arrow, the flames 
around its head wrapped in oil-soaked cloth making 
a whooshing sound as she ran. 
One of his men pulled the torch from the stand 
outside the building where the guard Richard killed 
had been patrolling. Richard leaned in the doorway 
only to see a big man charging at him out of the 
dark interior. Richard pressed his back against the 
doorjamb and kicked the man squarely in the chest, 
driving him back. 
   Richard drew the bowstring back and shot the 
flaming arrow off into the interior. As it lit the 
interior in its flight through the building, he 
could see that some of the men had been awakened 
and were getting up. Turning to take the second 
flaming arrow from Jennsen, he saw smoke pouring up 
from the first building. As soon as he drew string 
to cheek and loosed the second arrow, he leaned 
away and men heaved the torches in. 
   One torch fell back out of the doorway. It had 
bounced off the chest of a man rushing for the 
doorway to see what was happening. The pitch from 
the torch caught his greasy beard afire. He let out 
a bloodcurdling scream. Richard kicked him back 
inside. In an instant, men by the dozens were 
racing for the door, not only to escape the burning 
building, but to meet the attack. Richard saw the 
flash of weapons being drawn. 
   He sprang back from the doorway as the men 
carrying the heavy section of gate rushed in. They 

turned the gate sideways and rammed it in under the 
eaves, but before they could bring the bottom down 
to wedge it against the ground, the weight of 
bellowing men inside crashed into the section of 
gate and drove it back. The men carrying it fell 
back, the weight knocking them from their feet, the 
gate landing atop them. 
   Suddenly, men were pouring from the doorway. 
Richard's men were ready and fell on them, driving 
the wooden weapons into their soft underbellies and 
snapping the handles off as man after man spilled 
out of the doorway. Standing to the side of the 
door, others used their maces to bash in the skulls 
of soldiers who emerged. When one soldier came out 
with his sword raised, the man to the side clubbed 
his arm as another rushed in and drove a wooden 
stake in up under his ribs. The more men who fell 
at the doorway, the more those trying to get out 
were slowed and could be dispatched. 
   The soldiers were so stunned to see these people 
fighting that in some cases they fought back only 
ineffectually. As a soldier leaped over the bodies 
in the doorway and lifted a sword, a man jumped on 
his back and seized his arm while another stabbed 
him. Another, crying orders, charged Jennsen, only 
to have the bolt of a crossbow fired into his face. 
A few soldiers escaped the burning building and 
managed to slip past Richard's men only to meet 
Cara's Agiel. Their screams, worse than the cries 
of men on fire, briefly brought the gaze of every 
man, from both sides of the battle. 
   Fallen knives and swords were scooped up by the 
men of the town and turned on the men from the 
Imperial Order. Richard fired an arrow into the 
center of the chest of a man emerging from the 
smoke that rolled out of the doorway. As he was 
falling, a second arrow felled the man behind him. 
As more men rushed out, they fell over those piled 
around the doorway and were hacked to death with 
commandeered axes or stabbed with confiscated 

swords. Since they could emerge only one at a time, 
the soldiers couldn't mount a coordinated attack, 
but those waiting could. 
   As Richard's men fought back those struggling to 
get out of the doorway of the burning building, 
other men rushed to help lift the gate so those 
under it could get up and get control of it. Once 
the gate was lifted, the men swung it around and, 
with a cry of joint effort, ran with it toward the 
building. They drove the top up under the eaves, 
first, but when they brought the bottom edge down, 
the bodies piled in the doorway prevented them from 
getting the bottom down so they could wedge it in 
place. 
   Richard called out orders. Some of his men 
rushed in and seized an arm or a leg of a dead man 
and dragged the body aside so the others could 
finally bring the bottom of the gate down against 
the building to close off the opening. 
   One man from inside squeezed through just before 
they had the gate in place. The weight of the door 
pinned him against the building. Owen leaned in and 
with a sword he'd picked up decisively stabbed the 
man through the throat. 
   As men inside pounded at the gate covering the 
doorway and threw their weight against it, men on 
the outside piled around to push it down and hold 
it in place. Other men fell to their knees and 
drove stakes into the ground to lock the gate 
section in place, trapping the soldiers 
inside.Behind, streamers of flame leaked out from 
under the eaves of the first building and leaped up 
into the night sky. The roof of the building 
ignited all at once, explosively engulfing the 
entire sleeping house in sparks and flames. Screams 
of men being burned alive ripped the night. 
   The waves of heat coming off the massive fire as 
the first building was consumed by the flames began 
to carry the heavy aroma of cooking meat. It 
reminded Richard that, for the killing he did, his 

gift demanded the balance of not eating meat. After 
all the killing of this night, since his gift was 
already spinning out of control, he would have to 
be even more careful to avoid eating any meat. 
   His head was already hurting so much that he was 
having trouble focusing his vision; he couldn't 
afford to do anything that would further unbalance 
his gift. If he was not careful, the poison 
wouldn't get the chance to be the first to kill 
him. 
   Heavy black smoke billowed out from around the 
edges of the gate covering the doorway of the 
second sleeping house. Screams and pleas came from 
inside. The men of the town moved back, watching, 
as smoke began rolling up from under its eaves. The 
battle seemed to have ended as quickly as it had 
started. 
   No one spoke as they stood in the harsh glare 
from the roaring fires. Flames ate through the 
second building. With a loud whoosh it was engulfed 
in fire. 
   The heat drove everyone back away from the two 
sleeping houses. As they moved back from the 
burning buildings, they encountered the rest of the 
people of the town, all gathered in the shadows, 
watching in stunned silence. 
   One of the older men took a step forward. 
"Speaker Owen, what is this? You have committed 
violence?" 
   Owen stepped away from the men he was with to 
stand before the people of his town. He held an arm 
back, pointing toward Richard. 
   "This is Lord Rahl, of the D'Haran Empire. I 
went in search of him to help us be free. We have 
much to tell you, but for now you must know that 
tonight, for the first time in many seasons, our 
town is free. 
   "Yes, we have helped Lord Rahl to kill the evil 
men who have terrorized us. We have avenged the 
deaths of our loved ones. We will no longer be 

victims. We will be free!" 
   Standing silently, the people seemed able only 
to stare at him. Many looked confused. Some looked 
quietly jubilant, but most just looked stunned. 
   The boy, Bernie, ran up to Anson, peering up in 
astonishment. "An-son, you and our other people 
have freed us? Truly?" 
"Yes." He laid a hand on Bernie's shoulder. "Our 
town is now free." 
   "Thank you." He broke into a grin as he turned 
back to the town's people. "We are free of the 
murderers!" 
   A sudden, spontaneous cheer rose into the night, 
drowning out the sound of the crackling flames. The 
people rushed in around men they had not seen for 
months, touching them, hugging them, all asking 
questions of the men. 
   Richard took Kahlan's hand as he stepped back 
out of the way, joining Cara, Jennsen, and Tom. 
These people who were so against violence, who 
lived their whole life avoiding the truth of what 
their beliefs caused, were now basking in the 
tearful joy of what it really meant to be freed 
from terror and violence. 
   People slowly left their men to come and look at 
Richard and those standing with him. He and Kahlan 
smiled at their obvious joy. They gathered in close 
before him, smiling, staring, as if Richard and 
those with him were some strange creatures from 
afar. 
   Bernie had attached himself to Anson's arm. 
Others had the rest of the men firmly embraced. One 
by one, though, the men started pulling away so 
that they could stand behind Richard and Kahlan. 
   "We are so happy that you are home, now," people 
were telling the men. "We have you back, at last." 
"Now we are all together again," Bernie said. 
"We can't stay," Anson told him. 
Everyone in the crowd fell silent. 
Bernie, like many of the others, looked 

heartbroken. "What?" 
   Buzzing, worried whispers spread through the 
crowd. Everyone was shaken by the news that the men 
were not home to stay. 
   Owen lifted a hand so they would listen. When 
they went silent, he explained. 
"The people of Bandakar are still under the cruel 
power of the men from the Order. Just as you have 
become free tonight, so must the rest of the people 
of Bandakar be free. 
   "Lord Rahl and his wife, the Mother Confessor, 
as well as his friend and protector Cara, his 
sister Jennsen, and Tom, another friend and 
protector, have all agreed to help us. They cannot 
do it alone. We must be part of it, for this is our 
land, but more importantly, our people, our loved 
ones." 
   "Owen, you must not engage in violence," an 
older man said. In view of their sudden freedom, it 
was not an emphatic statement. It seemed to be an 
objection more out of obligation than anything 
else. "You have begun a cycle of violence. Such a 
thing is wrong." 
   "We will speak with you before we go, so that 
you might come to understand, as we have, why we 
must do this to be truly free of violence and 
brutality. Lord Rahl has shown us that a cycle of 
violence is not the result of fighting back for 
your own life, but is the result of a shrinking 
back from doing what is necessary to crush those 
who would kill you. If you do as you must in duty 
to yourself and your loved ones, then you will 
eradicate the enemy so completely that they can no 
longer do you any harm. Then, there is no cycle of 
violence, but an end to violence. Then, and only 
then, will true peace and freedom take root." 
   "Such actions can never accomplish anything but 
to start violence," an old man objected. 
   "Look around," Anson said. "The violence has not 
begun tonight, but ended. Violence has been 

crushed, as it should be, by crushing evil men who 
bring it upon us." 
   People nodded to one another, the heady relief 
of being suddenly freed from the grip of the terror 
brought by the soldiers of the Imperial Order 
plainly overcoming their objections. Joy had taken 
over from fear. The reality of having their lives 
returned had opened their eyes. 
   "But you must understand, as we have come to 
understand," Owen said, "that nothing can ever 
again be the way it once was. Those ways are in the 
past." 
   Richard noticed that the men weren't slouching 
anymore. They stood with their heads held high. 
   "We have chosen to live," Owen told his people. 
"In so doing, we have found true freedom." 
"I think we all have," the old man in the crowd 
said. 
 
 
 
 
 
         CHAPTER 49 
 
 
 
 
       Zedd frowned with the effort of 
concentrating on what it was Sister Tahirah had 
placed on the table before him. He looked up at 
her, at the way her scowl pinched in around her 
humped nose. 
"Well?" she demanded. 
   Zedd looked down, squinting at the thing before 
him. It looked like a leather-covered ball painted 
with faded blue and pink zigzagged lines all around 
it. 
What was it about it that seemed so familiar, yet 
so distant? 

   He blinked, trying to better focus his eyes. His 
neck ached something fierce. A father, hearing his 
young son in the next tent screaming in appalling 
agony, had grabbed Zedd by the hair and yanked him 
away from other parents who, pulling and pawing at 
him, made desperate demands of their own. Because 
of the torn muscles in his neck, it was painful to 
hold up his head. Compared to the torture he'd 
heard, though, it was nothing. 
   The dim interior of the tent, lit by several 
lamps hanging from poles, felt as if it were 
detached from the ground and swirling around him. 
The foul place stank. The heat and humidity only 
made the smell, and the spinning, worse. Zedd felt 
as if he might pass out. 
   It had been so long since he'd slept that he 
couldn't even remember the last time he had 
actually lain down. The only sleep he got was when 
he fell asleep in the chair while Sister Tahirah 
was seeing to another object being unloaded from 
the wagons, or when she went to bed and the next 
Sister hadn't yet arrived to take the next stint in 
their laborious cataloging of the items brought 
from the Keep. The catnaps he got were rarely 
longer than a few precious minutes at a time. The 
guards had orders not to allow him or Adie to lie 
down. 
   At least the screams of the children had ended. 
At least, as long as he cooperated, those cries of 
pain had stopped. At least, as long as he went 
along, the parents had hope. 
   A violent crack of pain suddenly hammered the 
side of his head, knocking him back. The chair 
toppled over, spilling him to the ground. With his 
arms bound behind his back, he couldn't do anything 
to break the fall and he hit hard. Zedd's ears 
rang, not only from the fall, but with the 
aftermath of the blow of the Sister's power 
delivered through the collar around his neck. 
   He hated that wicked instrument of control. The 

Sisters were not shy about exercising that control. 
Because the collar locked him away from the use of 
his own gift, he could not use his ability to 
defend himself. Instead, they used his power 
against him. 
   It took little or no provocation to send one of 
the Sisters into a fit of violence. Many of these 
women had once been kindly people devoting their 
lives to helping others. Jagang had enslaved them 
to a different cause. Now they did his bidding. 
Though they might have once been gentle, they were 
now, he knew, trying to keep one step ahead of the 
discipline Jagang meted out to them. That 
discipline could be excruciating beyond endurance. 
The Sisters were expected to get results; Jagang 
would not be interested in the excuse that Zedd was 
being difficult. 
   Zedd saw that Adie, too, had been knocked to the 
ground. Any punishment he received, she, too, 
endured. He felt more agony for her than for 
himself. 
   Soldiers standing to the side moved in to right 
the chair and lift Zedd into it. With his arms 
bound behind his back, he couldn't get up by 
himself. They sat him down hard enough to drive a 
grunt from his lungs. 
"Well?" Sister Tahirah demanded. "What is it?" 
Zedd once again leaned in, staring down at the 
round object sitting by itself in the center of the 
table. The faint blue and pink lines zigzagging all 
around it stirred deep feelings. He thought he 
should know this thing. 
"It's . . . it's . . ." 
   "It's what!" Sister Tahirah slammed the book 
against the edge of the table, causing the round 
object to bounce up and roll a few inches before it 
came to a stop closer to Zedd. She tucked the book 
under one arm as she leaned with the other on the 
table. She bent down toward him. 
"What is it? What does it do?" 

"I... I can't remember." 
   "Would you like me to bring in some children," 
the Sister said in the soft, sweet tone of a very 
bitter threat, "and show you their little faces 
before they are taken to the tent next to us to be 
tortured?" 
"I'm so tired," he said. "I'm trying to remember, 
but I'm so tired." 
   "Maybe while the children are screaming you 
would like to explain to their parents that you are 
tired and just can't quite seem to remember." 
Children. Parents. 
   Zedd suddenly remembered what the object was. 
Painful memories welled up. He felt a tear run down 
his cheek. 
"Dear spirits," he whispered. "Where did you find 
this?" 
"What is it?" 
"Where did you find it?" Zedd repeated. 
   Huffing impatiently, the Sister straightened. 
She opened the book and made a noisy show of 
turning heatedly through the pages. Finally, she 
stopped and tapped a finger in the open book. 
   "It says here that it was found hidden in an 
open recess in the back of a black six-drawer chest 
in a corridor. There was a tapestry of three 
prancing white horses hanging above the chest." 
She lowered the book. "Now, what is it?" 
Zedd swallowed. "A ball." 
   The Sister glared. "I know it's a ball, you old 
fool. What is it for? What does it do? What is its 
purpose?" 
Staring at the ball no bigger than his fist, Zedd 
remembered. "It's a ball for children to play with. 
Its purpose is to bring them pleasure." 
   He remembered this ball, brightly colored back 
then, frequently bouncing down the halls of the 
Wizard's Keep, his daughter giggling and chasing 
after it. He had given it to her for doing well in 
her studies. Sometimes she would roll it down the 

halls, urging it along with a switch, as if she 
were walking a pet. Her favorite thing to do was to 
bounce it on the floor so that it would come up 
against a wall, after which it would bounce to 
another wall at an intersection of stone hallways. 
In that way she made it bounce around a corner. She 
would watch which hall it went down, left or right, 
then chase after it. 
   One day she came to him in tears. He asked her 
to tell him her troubles. She crawled up in his lap 
and told him that her ball had gone somewhere and 
gotten itself lost. She wanted him to get it 
unlost. Zedd told her that if she looked, she would 
likely find it. She spent days despondently 
wandering the halls of the Keep, searching for it. 
She couldn't find it. 
   Finally, starting out one morning at sunrise, 
Zedd made the long walk down to the city of 
Aydindril, to the market on Stentor Street. That 
was where he had first come across a stand where 
they sold such toys and found the ball with the 
zigzagged lines. There he bought her another one—
not just like it, but instead one with pink and 
green stars. He deliberately chose a ball unlike 
the one she'd lost because he didn't want her to 
think that wishes could be miraculously fulfilled, 
but he did want her to know that there were 
solutions that could solve problems. 
   He remembered his daughter hugging his legs, 
thanking him for the new ball, telling him that he 
was the best father in all the world and that she 
would be ever so much more careful with the new 
ball and never lose it. He had smiled as he watched 
her put a little hand to her heart and recite a 
little-girl oath she had invented on the spot. 
   She treasured the ball with the pink and green 
stars. Since it was small, it was one of the few 
things she had been able to take with her, after 
she was grown, when she and Zedd ran away to 
Westland, after Darken Rahl had raped her. 

   When Richard had been young, he had played with 
that ball. Zedd remembered the smile on his 
daughter's face as she watched her own child play 
with that precious ball. Zedd could see in her 
beautiful eyes the memories of her own childhood as 
she watched Richard play. She had kept that ball 
her whole life, kept it until she died. 
   This ball before him was the very same one his 
daughter had lost. It must have bounced up behind 
the chest and fallen into a recess in the back, 
where it had been for all those long years. 
   Zedd leaned forward, resting his forehead on the 
dusty ball surrounded with faded blue and pink 
zigzagged lines, the ball which her little fingers 
had once held, and wept. 
   Sister Tahirah seized a fistful of his hair and 
pulled him upright. "I don't believe you're telling 
me the truth. It's an object of magic. I want to 
know what it is and what it does." Holding his head 
back, she glared into his eyes. "You know that I 
will not hesitate to do what is necessary to make 
you cooperate. His Excellency accepts no excuses 
for failure." 
   Zedd stared up at her, blinking away his tears. 
"It's a ball, a toy. That's all it is." 
   With a sneer, she released him. "The great and 
powerful Wizard Zorander." She shook her head. "To 
think that we once feared you. You are a pathetic 
old man, your courage crushed by nothing more than 
the cry of a child." She sighed. "I must say, your 
reputation far exceeds the reality of your mettle." 
   The Sister scooped up the ball, turning it in 
her fingers as she inspected it. She huffed with 
disgust and tossed it aside, as if it were 
worthless. Zedd watched the ball bounce and roll 
across the ground, coming to rest at the side of 
the tent, against the bench where Adie sat. He 
looked up into her completely white eyes to see her 
watching him. Zedd turned away, waiting while the 
Sister made notes in her book. 

   "All right," she finally said, "let's go have a 
look at what they've unloaded in the next tent." 
   The soldiers lifted him from the chair before he 
had a chance to try to do it himself. His shoulders 
ached from his wrists being bound behind his back 
and from being lifted by his arms. Adie, too, was 
lifted to her feet. The book snapped closed. Sister 
Tahirah's wiry gray hair whipped around as she 
turned and led them out of the tent. 
Because the Sisters knew how dangerous items of 
magic from the Wizard's Keep could be, especially 
if the wrong combination of magic were to 
accidentally be allowed to combine or touch, they 
were cautious enough to bring the items, one at a 
time, out of each individual, protected, shielded 
crate in the wagons. Zedd knew that there were 
things in the Keep that, by themselves, were not 
dangerous, but became so in the presence of other 
things that, by themselves, were also not 
dangerous. Sometimes it was only the combination of 
specific items that created a desired outcome. 
   The Sisters had vast experience in the most 
esoteric things of magic and so they at least 
understood the principles involved. They treated 
the cargo with the care due such potentially 
hazardous goods. Once each object was uncrated, 
they placed it, by itself, in a tent to await 
examination. They took Zedd and Adie from tent to 
tent so that Zedd could identify each treasure, 
tell them what it was, explain how it worked. 
   They had been at it for days—how many, Zedd 
couldn't remember. Despite his best efforts, the 
endless days and nights had all begun to melt 
together in his mind. 
   Zedd did all he could to stall, but there was 
only so much he could do. These women knew magic. 
They would not easily be fooled by any invented 
explanation. They had made very clear the 
consequences of any such deception. 
   And, Zedd didn't know how much they knew. At 

times they feigned ignorance of something which 
they actually understood quite well, just to see if 
he was telling the truth. 
   Fortunately, as of yet, they had uncovered 
nothing that was extravagantly dangerous. Most of 
the items from the crates were simple-looking 
objects, but were actually for a narrowly focused 
purpose—a pole that could remotely judge the depth 
of water in a well, an iron decoration shaped like 
a fan of leaves that prevented words from carrying 
beyond an open door where it was placed, a large 
looking glass that revealed when a person entered 
another room. While possibly useful to Emperor 
Jagang, such items were not all that valuable or 
dangerous; they were not going to help him to 
conquer and rule the world. 
   What dangerous things the Sisters had uncrated 
and shown him were not really anything that a 
Sister couldn't easily produce with a spell of her 
own. The most dangerous item had been a constructed 
spell held within an ornate vase that, under 
specific conditions, such as when the vase was 
filled with water, created a temperature inversion 
that produced a blast of flame. Zedd was not 
betraying his cause or putting innocent lives at 
risk by revealing how the spell worked; any Sister 
worth her salt could reproduce the same effect. The 
purpose of the spell was protective; had it touched 
other stolen items, which, because they were 
stolen, was a reversal of intended ownership that 
such a spell recognized, it would have ignited and 
destroyed those items, keeping them from covetous 
hands. 
   None of the things so far discovered would do 
Jagang any real good. There were things in the 
Keep, though, that could cause him harm. There were 
spells there, such as the constructed spell in the 
vase, that recognized the nature of the person 
invoking their magic. Opened by the right person, 
such as Zedd, those things would do nothing, but, 

opened by a thief, they would create calamity. 
   The Keep had thousands of rooms. The looting of 
it had netted the Imperial Order a caravan of cargo 
wagons, but even that much hardly scratched the 
surface of the contents of the Keep. 
So far, Zedd had not seen any plums. 
   He didn't know if he would live to see any. The 
ride in the box after his capture had been brutal. 
He was still not recovered from the injuries 
inflicted after meeting Jagang. Guards let the 
parents do what they would to convince Zedd and 
Adie to give in, but they wouldn't allow the 
parents to get so carried away that they killed 
such prize prisoners. The parents had known that 
they weren't to kill them, but in the heat of such 
raw passion, Zedd knew that such orders were easy 
to forget. Zedd yearned for them to kill him and 
end it. The emperor, though, needed them alive, so 
the guards stood careful watch. 
   After the first few horrifying hours of 
listening to children being subjected to crippling 
torture, of being among their parents, who 
understandably demanded, quite forcefully, that he 
cooperate and tell the emperor what he wanted to 
know, Zedd had given in—not for the sake of the 
parents so much as to stop those brutal men from 
what they were doing to the children. 
He had figured that he had nothing to lose, really, 
by giving in. It stopped the torture of the 
children for the time being. The Keep was vast; the 
things they brought were only a tiny portion of 
them. Zedd reasoned that the caravan of wagons 
probably didn't hold anything of any real value to 
Jagang. It would take quite a while to catalog 
everything—it could be weeks more before they 
reached the last item. There was no purpose in 
allowing children to endure torture when there 
might not be anything useful for Zedd to betray to 
Jagang. 
   Once, when they were alone while the Sister had 

gone to check on the preparations in the next tent, 
Adie had asked what he would do if they presented 
him with something that would materially help 
Jagang win. Zedd hadn't had a chance to answer; the 
soldiers had come in then and taken the two of them 
to the Sister in the next tent. 
   He was hoping to drag out the process for as 
long as possible. He hadn't counted on how they 
would keep at it day and night. 
   It sometimes took quite a while for the Sisters 
to get out the next treasure and have it ready. 
They were understandably cautious and took no 
chances. Those strange men without any trace of the 
gift who helped them might not be harmed if any 
errant item of magic were to accidentally be set in 
motion, but everyone else certainly was vulnerable. 
Careful as they were, there were enough people 
working at the preparations that Zedd and Adie were 
not allowed to sleep for long before they were 
taken off to unravel the next puzzle for them. 
   As he and Adie were dragged through the dark 
camp to the next tent, Zedd's legs would hardly 
hold him. Seeing his daughter's long-lost ball had 
sapped much of his remaining strength. He had never 
felt so old, so feeble. He feared that his will to 
go on was flagging. 
He didn't know how much longer he could keep his 
sanity. 
   He wasn't at all sure that he actually still 
possessed it. The world seemed to have turned into 
a crazy place. At times the whole thing seemed 
dreamlike. What he knew and what he didn't know 
sometimes seemed to have all twisted together into 
a knot of confusion. 
   As he was marched through the dark camp, through 
the humid heat, he began to imagine that he saw 
things—mostly people—from his past. He began to 
doubt that he really had seen that ball. He 
wondered if, like some of the other things he was 
seeing, he had imagined it as well. Could it maybe 

have been a simple ball, and he only thought that 
it was the one his daughter had lost? Had he 
imagined the zigzagged colors around it? He was 
beginning to question himself over every little 
thing. 
   Looking up at all the people in the crowded 
encampment, he thought he saw his long-dead wife, 
Erilyn, in the faces of the women held nearby under 
guard. They were mothers, their worst nightmares 
ready to come to life if Zedd didn't cooperate. His 
gaze passed over children clutching their mother's 
skirts, or their father's legs. They looked at him. 
his wavy white hair in disarray, probably thinking 
he was some crazy man. Maybe he was. 
   The torches lit the sprawling camp with a kind 
of flickering light that made everything seem 
imaginary. The campfires, spread as far as he could 
see, looked like a star field lying across the 
ground, as if the world had turned upside down. 
"Wait," the Sister said to the guards. 
   Zedd was jerked to a halt as the Sister ducked 
inside the tent. Adie cried out as the man holding 
her wrenched her arm in the act of stopping her. 
   Zedd swayed on his feet, wondering if he might 
pass out. The whole nighttime camp wavered in his 
vision. 
   As he looked at one of the girls held captive 
across the way, he stared, astonished, thinking he 
recognized her. Zedd looked up at the emperor's 
elite guard in the distance holding the child. Zedd 
blinked his blurred vision. The guard, in leather 
and mail armor, with a belt full of weapons, looked 
like a man Zedd used to know. Zedd turned away at 
the memory, only to see a Sister, making her way 
among the tents not far away, who also looked like 
someone else he knew. He looked around at soldiers 
going about their business. Elite soldiers guarding 
the emperor's compound looked like men he thought 
he remembered. 
   Zedd truly was terrified, then. He was sure that 

he was losing his mind. He couldn't possibly be 
seeing the people he thought he saw. 
   His mind was all he had. He didn't want to be 
some babbling old man sitting by the side of a road 
begging. 
   He knew that people sometimes became irrational—
lost their mind— when they got old or were pressed 
past their endurance. He had known people who had 
snapped, who had gone insane, and saw things that 
weren't really there. That's what he was doing. He 
was having visions of people from his past who 
weren't really there. That was a sure sign of 
insanity—seeing your past come to life, thinking 
you were back with long-lost loved ones. 
His mind was the most important thing he had. 
Now he was losing that, too. 
He was losing his sanity. 
 
 
 
 
 
           CHAPTER 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
Nicholas heard an annoying noise back in another 
place. 
A disturbance of some sort, back where his body 
waited. 
   He ignored it, watching the streets, watching 
the buildings go by. The sun had just set. People, 
wary people, moved past. Color. Sound. Activity. 
   It was a dingy place, with buildings crowded 
close. Watch, watch. Alleyways were dark and 
narrow. Strangers stared. The street smelled. None 
of the buildings were more than two stories; he was 
sure of it. Most were not even that. 

   Again, he heard the noise back where his body 
waited. It was forceful, calling his attention. 
   He ignored the thump, thump, thump back 
somewhere else as he watched, trying to see where 
they were going. What's this? Watch, watch, watch. 
He thought he knew, but he wasn't positive. Look, 
look. He wanted to be sure. He wanted to watch. 
He so enjoyed watching. 
More noise. Obnoxious, demanding, thumping noise. 
   Nicholas felt his body around him as he slammed 
back to where it waited, sitting cross-legged on 
the wooden floor. He opened his eyes, blinking, 
trying to see in the dim room. Slivers of dusk 
leaking in around the edges of the closed shutters 
lent only somber light to the room. 
   He stood, wavering on his feet for a moment, not 
yet used to the strange feeling of being back in 
his own body. He started walking across the room, 
looking down, watching as he lifted each foot out 
ahead, shifted his weight with every step. He had 
been gone so much lately, day and night, that he 
was not used to having to do such things on his 
own. He had been so often in another place, another 
body, that he had difficulty adjusting to his own. 
   Someone was banging on the door, yelling for him 
to open it. Nicholas was furious at the uninvited 
caller, at such a rude intrusion. 
   With wobbly gait, he made his way to the door. 
It felt so confining being back in his own body. It 
moved in such an odd manner. He rolled his 
shoulders, resisting the urge to bend forward. He 
pulled and stretched his neck one way, then the 
other. 
   It was bothersome to have to move himself about, 
to use his own muscles, to feel himself breathe, to 
see, hear, smell, feel with his own senses. 
   The door was barred by a heavy bolt to prevent 
unwelcome callers from entering while he was off to 
other places. It wouldn't do to have someone 
messing with his body while he wasn't there using 

it himself. Wouldn't do at all. 
   Someone pounding on the other side of the door 
bellowed his name and demanded to be let in. 
Nicholas lifted the heavy bolt and heaved it over. 
He threw open the thick door. 
   A young soldier stood just outside in the hall. 
A common, grubby soldier. A nobody. 
   Nicholas stared in stunned fury at the lowly man 
who would just walk up the stairs to the room 
everyone knew was off-limits and pound on the 
forbidden door. Where was Najari's flat, crooked 
nose when he needed it? Why wasn't someone guarding 
the door? 
   A broken bone jutted from the back of the bloody 
fist the man had been hammering against the door. 
   Nicholas craned his neck, peering past the 
soldier out into the dimly lit hall, and saw the 
bodies of guards sprawled in pools of blood. 
Nicholas ran his fingernails back through his hair, 
shivering with delight at the silken smooth feel of 
oils gliding against his palm. He rolled his 
shoulders with the pleasure of the sensation. 
   Opening his eyes, he fixed his gaze on the wide-
eyed, common soldier whom he was about to kill. The 
man was dressed like many of the Imperial Order 
soldiers, at least the better-outfitted soldiers, 
with leather chest armor, a sleeve of protective 
mail on his right arm, and a number of leather 
straps and belts holding a variety of weapons from 
a short sword to a mace with a spiked metal head to 
knives. Despite how deadly all his gear appeared, 
the expression on his face was one of startled 
terror. 
   Nicholas puzzled for a moment at what such a 
meaningless man could possibly have to say that 
would be worth his life. 
"What is it, you insipid fool?" 
   The man lifted an arm, then the hand, then a 
single finger in a manner that reminded Nicholas of 
nothing so much as a puppet having its strings 

pulled. The finger tipped to one side, then the 
other, then back again, the way someone might 
waggle a finger in admonition. 
   "Ah, ah, ah." The finger twitched side to side 
again. "Be polite. Be awfully polite." 
   The soldier, his eyes wide, seemed surprised by 
his own haughty words. The voice sounded too deep—
too mature—to belong to this young man. 
The voice, in fact, sounded dangerous in the 
extreme. 
"What is this?" Nicholas frowned at the soldier. 
"What's this about?" 
   The man started into the room, his legs moving 
in a most peculiar, stilted manner. In some ways it 
reminded Nicholas of how it must look when he used 
his own legs after not being in his body for a long 
spell. He stepped aside as the man walked woodenly 
into the center of the dim room and turned. Blood 
dripped from the hand that had been pounding 
against the door, but the man, his eyes still wide 
with fear, seemed not to notice what had to be 
painful injuries. 
   His voice, though, came out anything but afraid. 
"Where are they, Nicholas?" 
Nicholas approached the man and cocked his head. 
"They?" 
   "You promised them to me, Nicholas. I don't like 
it when people don't keep their word. Where are 
they?" 
   Nicholas drew his brow down even farther, leaned 
in even more. "Who?" 
   "Richard Rahl and the Mother Confessor!" the 
soldier bellowed in unrestrained rage. 
   Nicholas backed away a few paces. He understood, 
now. He had heard the stories, heard that the man 
could do such things. Now he was seeing it for 
himself. 
This was Emperor Jagang, the dream walker himself. 
   "Remarkable," Nicholas drawled. He approached 
the soldier who was not a soldier and tapped a 

finger against the side of the man's head. "That 
you in there, Your Excellency?" He tapped the man's 
temple again. "That's you, isn't it, Excellency." 
   "Where are they, Nicholas?" It was as dangerous-
sounding a question as Nicholas had ever heard. 
"I told you that you would have them, and you 
shall." 
   "I think you're lying to me, Nicholas," the 
voice growled. "I don't think you have them, as you 
promised you would." 
   Nicholas flipped a hand dismissively as he 
strolled off a few paces. "Oh, foo. I have them by 
a string." 
   "I think otherwise. I have reason to believe 
that they aren't down here at all. I have reason to 
believe that the Mother Confessor herself is far to 
the north . .. with her army." 
   Nicholas frowned as he approached the man, 
leaning in close, peering into the eyes. "Do you 
completely lose your senses when you go cavorting 
into another man's mind like that?" 
"Are you saying it isn't so?" 
   Nicholas was losing patience. "I was just 
watching them when you barged in here to pester me. 
They were both there—Lord Rahl and the Mother 
Confessor." 
   "Are you sure?" came the deep gravelly voice out 
of the young soldier's mouth. 
   Nicholas planted his fists on his hips. "Are you 
questioning me? How dare you! I am Nicholas the 
Slide. I will not be questioned by anyone!" 
The soldier took an aggressive step forward. 
   Nicholas held his ground and lifted a finger in 
warning. "If you want them, then you had better be 
awfully careful." 
   The soldier watched with wide eyes, but Nicholas 
could see more in those eyes: menace. 
"Talk, then, before I lose my patience." 
   Nicholas screwed his mouth up in annoyance. 
"Whoever told you that they were to the north, that 

the Mother Confessor is with their army, either 
doesn't know what they're talking about or is lying 
to you. I've kept a careful eye on them." 
"But have you seen them lately?" 
   The room was growing dark. Nicholas cast a hand 
toward the table, sending a small spark of his gift 
into three candles there, setting their wicks to 
flame. 
   "I told you, I was just watching them. They are 
in a city not far from here. Soon, they will be 
coming here, to me, and then I will have them. You 
don't have long to wait." 
"What makes you think they're coming to you?" 
   "I know everything they do." Nicholas held his 
arms aloft, his black robes slipping up to his 
elbows, gesturing expansively as he walked around 
the man, speaking of what he alone knew. "I watch 
them. I have seen them lying together at night, the 
Mother Confessor tenderly holding her husband in 
her arms, holding his head to her shoulder, 
comforting his terrible pain. It's quite touching, 
actually." 
"His pain?" 
   "Yes, his pain. They are in Northwick right now, 
a city not far to the north of here. When they are 
finished there, if they live through their visit, 
then they will be coming here, to me." 
   Jagang in the soldier looked around, taking in 
the freshly dead bodies lying against the wall. His 
attention returned to Nicholas. 
"I asked, what makes you think so?" 
   Nicholas looked over his shoulder and lifted an 
eyebrow at the emperor. "Well, you see, these fool 
people here—the pillars of Creation who so 
fascinate you—have poisoned the poor Lord Rahl. 
They did it to try to insure his help in getting 
rid of us." 
"Poisoned him? Are you sure?" 
   Nicholas smiled at the note of interest he 
detected in the emperor's voice. "Oh, yes, quite 

sure. The poor man is in a great deal of pain. He 
needs an antidote." 
   "Then he will do what he must to get such an 
antidote. Richard Rahl is a surprisingly 
resourceful man." 
   Nicholas leaned his backside against the table 
and folded his arms. "He may be resourceful, but 
he's now in a great deal of trouble. You see, he 
needs two more doses of the antidote. One of them 
is in North-wick. That's why he went there." 
   "You would be surprised at what that man can 
accomplish." It would have been impossible to miss 
the bristling anger in the emperor's voice. "You 
would be a fool to underestimate him, Nicholas." 
   "Oh, but I never underestimate anyone, 
Excellency." Nicholas smiled meaningfully at the 
emperor watching him through another man's eyes. 
"You see, I'm reasonably sure that Richard Rahl 
will retrieve the antidote in Northwick. In fact, I 
am counting on it. We shall see. I was watching him 
as you came in, watching what would happen. You 
spoiled it. 
   "But even if he obtains the antidote in 
Northwick, he will still need to get the last dose. 
The antidote in Northwick alone will not spare his 
life." 
"Where's this other dose of his antidote?" 
   Nicholas reached in a pocket and showed the 
emperor the square-sided bottle, along with a 
satisfied smile. 
"I have it." 
   The man with an emperor inside him smiled. "He 
may come to take it from you, Nicholas. But, more 
likely, he will have someone else make him more of 
the antidote so that he won't even have to bother 
coming here." 
   "Oh, I don't think so. You see, Excellency, I am 
quite thorough in my work. This poison that Lord 
Rahl took is complex, but not nearly as complex as 
the antidote. I know, because I had the only man 

who can make it tortured until he told me what it 
was, told me all about it, told me its secrets. It 
contains a whole list of things I couldn't even 
begin to recall. 
   "I had the man killed, of course. Then I had the 
man who tortured the confession out of him, 
tortured the antidote's list of ingredients out of 
him, killed as well. It wouldn't do to have the 
resourceful Richard Rahl find either man and 
somehow discover from them what was in the cure. 
   "So, you see, Excellency, there is no one to 
make Lord Rahl any more of the antidote." He held 
the bottle by the neck and wagged it before the 
man. "This is the last dose. Lord Rahl's last 
chance at life." 
   Through the eyes of a young soldier, Jagang 
watched the bottle Nicholas dangled before him. Any 
trace of humor had vanished. 
"Then Richard Rahl will come here and get it." 
   Nicholas pulled the cork. He took a whiff. The 
liquid inside carried the slight aroma of cinnamon. 
"You think so, Excellency?" 
   Making a great show of it, Nicholas poured the 
liquid out onto the floor. 
   As Emperor Jagang watched, Nicholas shook the 
bottle, making sure that the very last drop fell 
out. 
   "So, you see, Excellency, I have everything well 
in hand. Richard Rahl will not be a problem. He 
will shortly die from the poison—if my men don't 
manage to get him before then. Either way, Richard 
Rahl is a dead man—just as you requested." 
   Nicholas bowed, as if at the conclusion of a 
grand performance before an appreciative audience. 
The man smiled again, a smile of strained 
forbearance. 
"And what of the Mother Confessor?" the emperor 
asked. 
   Nicholas noted the clear undertone of restrained 
wrath. He was displeased not to be roundly admired 

for his great accomplishment. After all. this 
Emperor Jagang had not managed to capture the prize 
he so keenly sought. Nicholas smiled indulgently. 
   "Well, the way I see it, Excellency, now that 
I've told you Lord Rahl is soon to join the ranks 
of the Keeper's flock in the underworld, I have no 
assurance that you will keep your part of the 
bargain. I would like a commitment, on your part, 
before I give you the Mother Confessor." 
"What makes you think you can capture her?" 
   "Oh, I have that well in hand. Her own nature 
will deliver her into my hands." 
"Her own nature?" 
"You let me worry about that, Excellency. All you 
need know is that I will deliver the Mother 
Confessor to you, alive, as promised. You might say 
that Lord Rahl was free—a gift on my part—but you 
will have to pay the price if you are to have the 
prize you covet: the Mother Confessor." 
"And what would be your price?" 
   Nicholas strolled around the man in the center 
of the room. He gestured with the empty antidote 
bottle at the surroundings. "Not my idea of the 
proper way to live, if one has to live." 
   "So, you would have riches as a reward for doing 
your duty to the Creator, to the Imperial Order, 
and to your emperor." 
   The way Nicholas saw it, he had done more than 
his duty that night in the woods with the Sisters. 
Instead of saying so, he shrugged. 
   "Well, I will let you have the rest of the world 
you have fought so hard to gain. I only want 
D'Hara. An empire of worth for my own." 
"You wish to rule the land of D'Hara?" 
   Nicholas performed an exaggerated bow. "Under 
you, of course, Excellency." He straightened. "I 
will rule as do you, through fear and terror, all 
in the name of sacrificing for the betterment of 
mankind." 
   The dream walker watched through the eyes of the 

frightened soldier. The glint in those eyes was 
looking dangerous again. 
   "You play a risky game, Slide, making such 
demands. Your life must mean little to you." 
   Nicholas showed the emperor a smile that said he 
was tiring of trifling. "Hate to live, live to 
hate." 
Finally, the emperor's smile returned to the man's 
lips. 
   "D'Hara is your wish? It is done. Lord Rahl 
dead, and the Mother Confessor delivered to me, 
alive, and you will then have D'Hara to do with as 
you wish... as long as you pay homage to the rule 
of the Imperial Order." 
   Nicholas indulged Jagang with a more polite 
smile as he bowed his head. "But of course." 
   "Then, when Richard Rahl is dead and I have the 
Mother Confessor, you shall be named Emperor 
Nicholas of the land of D'Hara." 
"You are a wise emperor." 
This was the man who had prescribed Nicholas's 
fate. This was the man who had sent those Sisters 
to practice their vile craft, to sunder him with 
the terrible agony of destroying who he had been, 
to mother him in an agonizing second Creation. 
   They had decreed that he sacrifice himself to 
their cause. Nicholas had had no say in it. Now, at 
least, for the small task of dealing with the petty 
enemies of the Order, he would have his reward. He 
would have riches and power that he could never 
have dared imagine before he had been reborn. 
   They had destroyed him, but they had created him 
again more powerful than he had ever been. 
Now he was but one step away from being Emperor 
Nicholas. 
It had been a bitter road. 
   Driven by angry need, by hatred, Nicholas thrust 
out his hand as he thrust his own mind, like a hot 
dagger, into the mind of this man before him, into 
the spaces between his thoughts, into the marrow of 

his soul. 
   He hungered to feel the slick heat of this other 
spirit slide into his own, the hot rush of taking 
him while Jagang was still within the man's mind. 
But there was nothing there. 
In that spark of time, Jagang has already slipped 
away. 
The man crashed to the floor, dead. 
   Nicholas—Emperor Nicholas—smiled at the game 
only just begun. He was beginning to wonder if he 
had set the price too low. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
         CHAPTER 51 
 
 
 
 
       As they made their way up the street, Kahlan 
glanced to the small windows in the surrounding 
buildings. In the gathering darkness, she doubted 
that the faces she saw peering out of the windows 
could tell much about the people they saw out in 
the street, but she pulled the hood of her cloak 
forward anyway. 
   From the stories the men had told, it was not 
safe to be a woman in Bandakar, so Kahlan, Jennsen, 
and Cara covered their identity to draw as little 
attention as possible. Kahlan knew that people in 
fear for their own lives sometimes tried to shift 
attention away from themselves by offering another 
to the wolves. Worse, she also knew that there were 
bitter people devoted to the morbid ideal of the 
perpetual cannibalism of appeasement that they 
defined as peace. 
   Richard slowed and checked the alley as they 

passed. One hand gripped the front of his simple 
black cloak so that, if need be, he could lift it 
open and draw his sword. 
   Their men were spread out so as not to appear to 
be a mob moving through Northwick. Any gathering of 
crowds of men, except in markets, would no doubt be 
reported and swiftly draw the attention of the 
Imperial Order soldiers. They had timed their entry 
into the city to be just as night fell so as to 
better obscure them, yet not so late that their 
presence on the streets would be suspicious. 
"There," Owen said as they reached the corner, 
tilting his head to the right. "Down that way." 
   Richard looked back over his shoulder to make 
sure that everyone was still with him, then turned 
down the narrow street. The buildings in the city 
were mostly single-story, but they were entering a 
district where a number had a second story, usually 
hanging several feet out over the street. Kahlan 
saw nothing taller than the squat two-story 
buildings. 
   The area they had turned in to reeked with the 
stench of sewage in a shallow ditch to the side. 
The dusty streets of Northwick kept making her 
cough. She imagined that when it rained the place 
turned into a quagmire that stank even worse. She 
saw that Richard made a great effort not to cough. 
It wasn't always possible. At least, when he did, 
he wasn't coughing up blood. 
   As they kept to the shadows in under the 
overhangs and eaves, Kahlan moved up closer to him. 
Jennsen followed right behind. Anson, out ahead, 
scouted their route, looking for all the world as 
though he were by himself. 
   Richard scanned the sky again. It was empty. 
They hadn't seen any black-tipped races since 
before they started up the pass into Bandakar. 
Kahlan and Cara were glad not to see the huge black 
birds. Richard, though, seemed as troubled by not 
seeing them as he once was when he did. 

   Cara hung back a bit, along with a half-dozen 
men. Tom and some others were moving up a parallel 
street. Yet other men, who knew where they were 
headed, made their way through the city by a 
different route. Even though there were less than 
fifty in their force, such numbers together could 
bring attention and trouble. 
For now, they didn't need trouble. They needed the 
antidote. 
   "Where is the city center?" Kahlan asked Owen 
when she got close enough to be able to speak in a 
low voice. 
   Owen swept his arm around, indicating the street 
they were on. "This is the place. These shops are 
where the major commerce is, where people come. In 
the open squares the people sometimes set up 
markets." 
   Kahlan saw a leather shop, a bakery, a place 
that sold cloth, but nothing more elaborate. "This 
is the center of your great city? These post-and-
beam buildings with living quarters over the shops? 
This is your major business center?" 
"Yes," Owen said, sounding half puzzled and half 
proud. 
Kahlan let out a sigh, but didn't comment. Richard 
did. 
   "This is the result of your advanced culture?" 
He gestured around at the shabby daub-and-wattle 
buildings. "In close to three thousand years this 
is what your great culture has accomplished? This 
is what you have managed to build?" 
Owen smiled. "Yes. It is magnificent, is it not?" 
   Instead of answering the question, Richard said, 
"I thought you were in Altur'Rang." 
"I was." 
   "Well, even that dingy place was far more 
advanced than this city of Northwick." 
   "It was? I am sorry, Lord Rahl, but I did not 
see much of Altur'Rang. I was afraid to go far into 
such a place, and I did not stay for long." Owen 

looked back at Kahlan. "Do you mean to say that the 
city where you are from is more magnificent than 
this one?" 
   Kahlan blinked at the man. How could she 
possibly explain Aydin-dril, the Wizard's Keep, the 
Confessors' Palace, the palaces on Kings Row, the 
People's Palace, the marble and granite work, the 
soaring columns, the noble works of art, or any of 
a hundred other places and sights to a man who 
thought straw-and-dung buildings were an example of 
advanced culture? In the end, she decided that this 
was not the time to try. 
   "Owen, I hope that when we are all free of the 
oppression of the Imperial Order, Richard and I can 
show you and your people some other places in the 
world outside of Bandakar—show you some other 
centers of major commerce and art, some of what 
mankind elsewhere has accomplished." 
   Owen smiled. "I would like that, Mother 
Confessor. I would like it very much." He stopped 
abruptly. "Oh, here is the place. It is down here." 
   A head-high wooden gate weathered to a brownish 
gray barred the alleyway beyond from sight. Richard 
checked both ways up the street, looking to see if 
anyone was watching. The street was empty of 
everyone but their men. As he kept an eye to the 
street, he pushed the gate open enough to allow 
Owen to slip through. 
Owen poked his head back out. "Come, it is clear." 
   Richard gave a hand signal to the men up at the 
corner. He put his arm around Kahlan's waist, 
holding her close as he squeezed with her through 
the gate into the alley. 
   The walls of the buildings on either side that 
came to the edge of the narrow, dusty alleyway had 
no windows. Some of the tightly packed structures 
that weren't set so far back had room for small 
backyards. As they moved cautiously up the alley, 
more of their men poured in through the gate at the 
far end. Chickens penned in one of the yards 

flapped their wings in fright at the people moving 
close by. 
   Jennsen pulled Betty along by her rope, keeping 
the goat close so she couldn't cause any trouble. 
Betty remained quiet, seeming nervous in the 
strange surroundings of a city. She wasn't even 
wagging her tail as she peered up at Richard, 
Kahlan, and Jennsen for reassurance as they moved 
deeper into the heart of the jumble of buildings. 
   Tom appeared at the other end of the alleyway, 
bringing another group of men. Richard signaled for 
them to spread out and wait at that end of the 
alleyway. 
   Cara came up from behind, the hood of her cloak 
pulled up like Kahlan's and Jennsen's. "I don't 
like it." 
"Good," Richard whispered in answer. 
   "Good?" Cara asked. "You think it's good that I 
don't like this place?" 
   "Yes," Richard said. "If you were ever happy and 
unconcerned, then I'd be worried." 
Cara twisted her mouth with a reply she decided to 
keep to herself. 
"Here," Owen said, grabbing Richard's arm to stop 
him. 
   Richard looked where Owen had pointed and then 
stared down at the man. "This is a palace." 
   Owen nodded. "One of them. We have several 
palaces. I told you, we are an advanced culture." 
Richard gave Kahlan a sidelong glance, but said 
nothing. 
   From what Kahlan could see in the dim light, the 
backyard was dry dirt with clumps of grass growing 
here and there. A wooden stairway at the back of 
the building led up to a small balcony with a door 
onto the second floor. As they passed through a 
short gate into the yard, Kahlan saw that under the 
stairs there was a stairwell going down. 
   Owen looked around, then leaned close. "They are 
downstairs. This is where they are hiding the Wise 

One." 
   Richard scanned the alley and the surrounding 
buildings. He rubbed his fingertips across his 
brow. 
"And the antidote is in there?" 
Owen nodded. "Do you wish to wait while I go get 
it?" 
Richard shook his head. "We'll go with you." 
   Kahlan held his arm, wishing she could do more 
to comfort his pain. The best thing, though, was to 
get the antidote. The sooner they rid him of the 
poison, the sooner he could deal with solving the 
problem of the headaches caused by the gift. 
   Some of their men waited nearby. She saw in 
their eyes their fear of being back in a city where 
the Imperial Order soldiers had control. She didn't 
know what she and Richard could do to help them 
free their people of those troops, but she intended 
to come up with something. Were it not for her 
desperate act, no matter how unwitting, these 
people would not be suffering and dying at the 
hands of the Order. 
   The last gray glow of twilight made Richard's 
eyes look as if they were made of steel. He pulled 
Jennsen close. 
   "Why don't you and Tom stay out here, with 
Betty, and stand watch. Stay under the concealment 
of the stairs and balcony. If you see any soldiers, 
come let us know." 
   Jennsen nodded. "I'll let Betty graze on the 
grass. It would look more natural if any patrols 
pass by." 
   "Just keep out of sight," he said. "If soldiers 
see a young woman like you they won't hesitate to 
snatch you." 
   "I'll keep her out of sight," Tom said as he 
came up into the yard. He aimed a thumb over his 
shoulder. "I have the men spread out so they won't 
be so noticeable." 
   Kahlan and Cara followed Richard and Owen toward 

the back of the building. At the stairwell down, 
Owen paused when Richard instead went to the door 
into the building. 
"This way, Lord Rahl." 
"I know. Wait while I check the hallway inside, 
make sure it's clear." 
"It is just empty rooms where people sometimes 
meet." 
"I want to check it anyway. Cara, wait here with 
Kahlan." 
   Kahlan followed Richard to the door under the 
balcony. "I'm going with you." 
   Cara was right on Kahlan's heels. "If you want 
to check the hall," she told Richard, "then you may 
come with us." 
   After a quick glance at Kahlan's eyes, he didn't 
argue with her. Looking at Cara, he said, 
"Sometimes ..." 
   Cara flashed him a defiant smile. "You wouldn't 
know what to do without me." 
   Kahlan saw that as he turned to the door, he 
couldn't help but smile. Her heart lifted at seeing 
Richard's smile, and then she felt a sudden pang of 
sorrow for Cara, knowing how she must miss General 
Meiffert with their army far to the north in 
D'Hara. It wasn't often that a Mord-Sith could come 
to care about someone the way Kahlan knew Cara 
cared about Benjamin. Cara wouldn't come out and 
admit it, though, and had put first her wish to 
protect Richard and Kahlan. 
   When she and Cara had been back with that army, 
Kahlan had promoted the then captain to general 
after a battle in which they had lost a number of 
officers. Captain Meiffert had risen to the 
occasion. Since then, he had held their army 
together. While she had complete faith in him, she 
also feared for his well-being, as Cara certainly 
must. Kahlan wondered if they would ever again see 
the young general. 
   Richard opened the door a crack and peered into 

the dark hallway beyond. It was empty. Cara, Agiel 
in hand, pushed through and entered ahead of them, 
wanting to be sure that it was safe. Kahlan 
followed Richard in. There were two doors to each 
side. At the far end of the hall stood a door with 
a small window. 
   "What's out there?" Kahlan whispered as Richard 
looked through the window. 
"The street. I see some of our men." 
   On the way back, Richard checked rooms on one 
side while Cara checked the rooms on the other. 
They were all empty, just as Owen had said. 
'This might be a good place to hide our men," Cara 
said. 
Richard nodded. "That's what I was thinking. We 
could make strikes from here, from their midst, 
rather than risk being spotted corning in from the 
countryside to attack." 
   Before they reached the back door, Richard 
suddenly stumbled, banging a shoulder against the 
wall before going to one knee. Kahlan and Cara 
grabbed for him, keeping him from falling on his 
face. 
"What's wrong?" Cara whispered. 
   He paused a moment, apparently waiting for a 
bout of pain to lift. His fingers squeezing 
Kahlan's arm hurt so much that her eyes were 
watering, but she made herself remain silent. 
   "I just.. . just got dizzy for a minute." He 
panted, trying to recover his breath. "The dark 
hall, I guess." His fingers released their viselike 
grip on Kahlan's arm. 
   "The second state. That's what Owen called it. 
He said that the second state of the poison was 
dizziness." 
   Richard looked up at her in the dark. "I'm all 
right. Let's go get the antidote." 
   Owen, waiting in the shadows in the stairwell, 
started down when they reached him. At the bottom 
of the stairs he pushed the door open and looked 

in. 
   "They are still here," he said with relief. "The 
speakers are still here—I recognize some of their 
voices. The Wise One must still be here with them. 
They have not moved to another hiding place as I 
feared they might." 
   Owen was hoping the great speakers would agree 
to help rid their people of the Imperial Order. 
After they had refused in the past, Kahlan didn't 
think they would agree this time, but then, Owen 
and his men had not at first agreed to fight. Owen 
believed that with the commitment of the men they 
had, and with what had happened in his town, the 
assembly of speakers would see that there was a 
chance of being free again and would be more open 
to hearing what had to be done. Many of the men 
shared Owen's confidence that help was at hand. 
   More important than talking to the speakers, as 
far as Kahlan was concerned, was that this was 
where the second bottle of antidote was hidden. 
That came above all else. They had to secure the 
antidote. 
   Whenever she thought about the possibility of 
Richard dying, it made her knees tremble. 
Just inside the small vestibule, Owen rapped gently 
on the door. 
   Soft candlelight came from inside when the door 
pulled in a crack. A man peered out for a moment; 
then his eyes went wide. 
"Owen?" 
   Kahlan didn't think the man intended to open the 
door. Before he had a chance to think it over, 
Richard pushed the door open and moved into the 
room. The man hastily backed out of Richard's way. 
   Richard pulled Cara close. "Guard the door. None 
of these people comes out unless I say so." 
Cara nodded and took up a position outside the 
door. 
   "What is the meaning of this?" the man inside 
demanded of Owen as he gaped in fear at Richard and 

Kahlan. 
"Great speaker, it is vital that we speak with all 
of you." 
   The place was aglow with candles. A dozen and a 
half men sitting around on rugs sipping tea or 
leaning against pillows lining the walls abruptly 
fell silent. 
   The stone walls were the outer foundation of the 
building. Stone piers marched in two lines down the 
center of the large room, supporting fat beams far 
above Richard's head. There was no decoration. It 
looked like little more than a basement made 
comfortable with rugs and pillows where the men 
congregated at one end of the extensive room. 
Simple wooden tables against the walls at one end 
held candles. 
Some of the men rose to their feet. 
   "Owen," one of them said in grave reprimand, 
"you have been banished. What are you doing here?" 
   "Honored speaker, we are well past petty issues 
of banishment." Owen held out an introductory hand. 
"These are friends of mine, from outside our land." 
   Kahlan grabbed Owen's shirt at the shoulder and 
pulled his ear close as she gritted her teeth. 
"Antidote." 
   Owen nodded apologetically. The men, all older, 
watched indignantly as Owen went to the corner at 
the far right. He grasped a stone near chest 
height, and twisted it side to side. Richard 
reached in and helped Owen wiggle the stone loose. 
When he finally pulled the heavy block out far 
enough to turn it to the side, Owen reached in 
behind and came out with the bottle. He wasted no 
time in handing it to Richard. 
   When Richard pulled the cork, Kahlan detected 
the slight aroma of cinnamon. Richard downed the 
contents. 
   "You must leave," one of the men growled. "You 
are not welcome here." 
Owen didn't back down. "We must see the Wise One." 

"What!" 
   "The men of the Order have invaded our land. 
They are torturing and murdering our people. Others 
they have taken away." 
   "Nothing can be done about this," the red-faced 
speaker said. "We do as we must so that our people 
can go on with their lives. We do as we must to 
avoid violence." 
   "We have ended violence," Owen told the man. "At 
least, in our town. We killed all the men of the 
Order who held us in the grip of fear, who raped 
and tortured and murdered our people. Our people 
there are now free of these men of the Order. We 
must fight back and free the rest of our people. It 
is your duty as speakers to do right by our people 
and not accommodate their enslavement." 
The great speakers were apoplectic. 
"We will hear none of this!" 
"We will speak of it with the Wise One and see what 
he has to say." 
   "No! The Wise One will not see you! Never! You 
are all denied! 
You must all leave!"  
 
          
 
 
 
 
         CHAPTER 52 
 
 
   
   One of the men came forward and angrily seized a 
fistful of Richard's shirt, trying to push him out. 
"You are the cause of this! You are an outsider! A 
savage! One of the unenlightened! You have brought 
profane ideas among our people!" He did his best to 
shake Richard. "You have seduced our people to 
violence!" 

   Richard snatched the speaker's wrist and 
wrenched his arm around, talcing him to his knees. 
The man cried out in pain. Without letting up, 
Richard leaned down toward him. 
   "We have risked our lives helping your people. 
Your people are not enlightened, but people the 
same as anyone else. You are going to listen to us. 
This night, the future of you and your people will 
be shaped." 
   Richard released the man with a shove, then went 
to the door and stuck his head out. "Cara, go ask 
Tom to help you get all the rest of the men to come 
down here. I think they had better all be part of 
this." 
   As Cara ran to spread the word that Richard 
wanted all the men to gather into the basement of 
the "palace," he ordered the speakers back against 
the wall. 
"You have no right to do this," one protested. 
   "You are the representatives of the people of 
Bandakar. You are their leaders," Richard told 
them. "The time has come for you to lead." 
Behind, men started filing into the candlelit room. 
It wasn't long before they were all quietly 
assembled. The basement was large enough that 
Owen's men took up only part of the available 
space. Kahlan saw other, unfamiliar people straggle 
in as well. Knowing the nature of these people, and 
since Cara was letting them in, Kahlan didn't think 
that they presented a threat. 
   Richard gestured toward the quiet gathering 
watching the speakers. "These men from the town of 
Witherton have faced the truth of what is happening 
to their people. They will no longer tolerate such 
brutality. They will no longer be victims. They 
wish to be free." 
   One of the speakers, a man with a narrow, 
pointed chin, huffed dismissively. "Freedom can 
never work. It only gives people license to be 
self-centered. A thoughtful person, dedicated to 

the welfare of an enlightened mankind, must reject 
the immoral concept of 'freedom' for what it is—
selfish." 
   "That's right," another agreed. "Such simplistic 
beliefs can only provoke a cycle of violence. This 
silly notion of 'freedom' leads to viewing things 
as black or white. Such uninspired morals are 
obsolete. Individuals have no right to judge 
others—especially in such authoritarian terms. What 
is needed is compromise among all sides if there is 
to be peace." 
   "Compromise?" Richard asked. "A cycle of 
violence can only exist if you grant all people, 
including those who are evil, moral equivalence—if 
you say that everyone, including those who decide 
to harm others, has an equal right to exist. That 
is what you do when you refuse to crush evil—you 
give moral standing and power to those who murder. 
   "Devotion to compromise in such arenas is a sick 
idea that says you must cut off a finger, and then 
a leg, and then an arm to feed the monster living 
among you. Evil feeds on the good. If you kill the 
monster, the violence ends. 
   "You have two choices before you. Choose to live 
in cringing fear, on your knees, apologizing 
endlessly for wishing to be allowed to live as you 
struggle to appease an ever-expanding evil, or 
eliminate those who would harm you and free 
yourselves to live your own lives— which means you 
must remain vigilant, ever ready to protect 
yourself." 
One of the speakers, his eyes going wide, lifted an 
arm to point at Richard. "I know you, now. You are 
the one who was named in Prophecy. You are the one 
that Prophecy says will destroy us!" 
Whispers carried the accusation back through the 
crowd. 
   Richard gazed back at his gathered men, then 
directed a withering glare at the speakers. "I am 
Richard Rahl. You're right; I am the one named in 

the Prophecy given to your people so long ago. 
'Your destroyer will come and he will redeem you.' 
   "You're right; this Prophecy is about me. But if 
I had not come along, it would eventually have been 
another who would have fulfilled those words, 
whether in another year, or another thousand years, 
because these words are really about man's 
honorable commitment to life. 
   "Your people were banished because they refused 
to see the truth of the world around them. They 
chose to close their minds to reality. I have ended 
that blindness." 
   Richard pointed back at the men with him. "When 
the truth was put before these men, they chose at 
last to open their eyes and see it. Now, the rest 
of your people must meet the same challenge and 
make a choice as to how they will live their 
future. 
   " 'Your destroyer will come and he will redeem 
you' are words of the potential for a better 
future. They mean that your way of life, of 
impeding people from being their best, of 
restricting them from being all that they can be, 
of your blind destructive ways that crush the 
spirit of each individual and over time have caused 
so many of the best of your people to abandon you 
and go into the unknown beyond the boundary... is 
ended. 
   "The men of the Order may have invaded your 
land, but, spiritually, they change nothing for 
you. Their violence is merely more apparent than 
your slow suffocation of human potential. They 
offer the same unseeing lives you already live, 
simply with a more manifest form of brutality. 
   "I have brought the light of truth to some of 
your people, and in so doing I have destroyed their 
dark existence. The rest of your people must now 
decide if they will continue to cower in darkness 
or come into the light I have brought among you. 
"In bringing that light to your people, I have 

redeemed them. 
   "I have shown them that they can soar on their 
own wings, aspire to reach for what they want for 
themselves. I have helped them take back their own 
lives. 
   "Yes, I have destroyed the pretext that is the 
chains of their repression, but in so doing I have 
freed the nobility of their spirits. 
   "That is the meaning of the Prophecy. It is up 
to each of you to rise to the occasion and seek to 
triumph, or to hide in your self-imposed darkness 
without trying. There is no guarantee that if you 
try you will succeed. But without trying, you will 
assure failure and lives of dread for yourselves 
and your children. The only difference will be that 
if you choose to live the same as you do now, if 
you continue to appease evil, you will now know 
that it's at the price of your soul." 
   Richard turned away from the speakers. Before he 
closed his eyes to rub them with his fingertips, 
Kahlan saw the terrible agony in those eyes. She 
wanted nothing more than to get to the last 
antidote and then to do what they must to rid him 
of the pain caused by his gift. She knew she was 
slowly losing him. It seemed to her as if Richard 
were somewhere all alone, dangling from the edge of 
a cliff, holding on by his fingertips, and his 
fingers were slowly slipping. 
   Owen stepped forward. "Honored speakers, the 
time has come to hear from the Wise One. If you do 
not think this crisis for our people warrants it, 
then nothing does. This is our future, our lives, 
that are at stake. 
   "Bring out the Wise One. We will hear his words, 
if he truly is wise and worthy of our loyalty." 
   After noting the murmurs of agreement throughout 
the room, the speakers put their heads together, 
whispering among themselves to find a consensus 
that would tell them what to do. Finally, about 
half of them went off into a back room. 

   One of the remaining speakers bowed his bald 
head. "We will see what the Wise One has to say." 
Kahlan had seen such contemptuous smiles often 
enough. Lifting his pointed chin, he serenely 
clasped his hands before himself. "Before all these 
people, we will put your blasphemous words to the 
Wise One and hear his wisdom so that this matter 
may be put to rest." 
Men emerged from the back room carrying posts 
draped with red cloth, notched boards, and planks. 
Before the door into a back room, they began 
assembling a simple platform with posts at each 
corner and the heavy red drapes designed to enclose 
it. When the structure was finally completed, they 
placed a large pillow on the platform and then drew 
the drapes together. Other men carried over two 
tables, holding a number of candles, and placed one 
on each side of the draped ceremonial seat of 
wisdom. In short order, the speakers had created a 
simple but reverent setting. 
   Kahlan knew a number of peoples in the Midlands 
who had magic and functioned in the capacity she 
imagined that this Wise One did. They also usually 
had attendants, such as these speakers. She also 
knew better than to underestimate such simple 
shamans and their link to the spirit world. There 
were those who had very real connections and very 
real power over their people. 
   What she couldn't imagine was how a people 
without any magic whatsoever could have such an 
agent of the spirits. If it was true that they did, 
and such a person went against them, then all their 
work would have been for nothing. 
   The speakers lined up to either side and then 
drew the curtains in the front just enough to see 
into the dim interior. 
   There, sitting cross-legged on the pillow, was 
what appeared to be a boy in white robes, his hands 
resting prayerfully in his lap. He didn't look very 
old, maybe eight or ten at most. A black scarf was 

tied around his head to cover his eyes. 
"He's just a boy," Richard said. 
   At the interruption, one of the speakers shot 
Richard a murderous glare. "Only a child is 
innocent enough of the contamination of life to be 
free to touch true wisdom. As we grow older we 
layer our experiences over our once perfect 
insight, but we remember those once unadulterated 
connections and so we realize how only in a child 
can wisdom itself be so pure." 
Heads throughout the room bobbed knowingly. 
Richard cast a sidelong glance at Kahlan. 
One of the speakers knelt before the platform and 
bowed his bald "Wise One, we must ask your knowing 
guidance. Some of our wish to begin a war." 
"War solves nothing," the Wise One said in a pious 
voice. 
"Perhaps you would like to hear his reasons." 
   "There are no valid reasons for fighting. War is 
never a solution. War is an admission of failure." 
   The people in the room shrank back, looking ill 
at ease to have brought such crude inquiries before 
the Wise One, inquiries he had no trouble 
untangling with simple wisdom that laid bare 
obvious immorality. 
   "Very wise. You have shown us wisdom in its 
true, simple perfection. All men would do well to 
heed such truth." The man bowed his head again. "We 
have tried to tell—" 
   "Why are you wearing a blindfold?" Richard 
asked, cutting off the speaker kneeling before the 
platform. 
   "I hear anger in your voice," the Wise One said. 
"Nothing can be accomplished until you shed your 
hate. If you search with your heart, you can find 
the good in everyone." 
   Richard put a hand on Owen's back, urging him 
ahead. He reached back into the crowd of men and 
grabbed a pinch of Anson's shirt, pulling him 
forward as well. The three men moved up to the Wise 

One's platform. Only Richard stood tall. With his 
foot, he forced the kneeling speaker aside. 
"I asked why you're wearing a blindfold," Richard 
said. 
   "Knowledge must be denied so as to make room for 
faith. It is only through faith that real truth can 
be reached," the Wise One said. "You must believe 
before you can see." 
   "If you believe, without seeing the truth of 
what is," Richard said, "then you're simply being 
willfully blind, not wise. You must see, first, in 
order to learn and understand." 
   The men around Kahlan looked uncomfortable that 
Richard was speaking in this way to their Wise One. 
"Stop the hate, or you reap only hate." 
"We were talking about knowledge. I haven't asked 
you about hate." 
   The Wise One put his hands together prayerfully 
before himself, bowing his head slightly. "Wisdom 
is all around us, but our eyes blind us, our 
hearing deafens us, our minds think and so make us 
ignorant. Our senses only trick us; the world can 
tell us nothing of the nature of reality. To be at 
one with the greater essence of the true meaning of 
life, you must first stare blindly inward to 
discover truth." 
   Richard folded his arms over his chest. "I have 
eyes, so I can't see. I have ears, so I can't hear. 
I have a mind, so I can't know anything." 
   "The first step to wisdom is to accept that we 
are inadequate to know the nature of reality, and 
so nothing we think we know can be real." 
   "We must eat to live. How is one to track a deer 
in the woods so you can eat? Blindfold yourself? 
Stuff wax in your ears? Do it while you're asleep 
so your mind won't contribute any thinking to the 
task at hand?" 
   "We do not eat meat. It is wrong to harm animals 
just so that we might eat. We have no more right to 
live than an animal." 

"So you eat only plants, eggs, cheese—things like 
that." 
"Of course." 
"How do you make cheese?" 
In the awkward silence, someone in the back of the 
room coughed. 
   "I am the Wise One. I have not been called upon 
to do this work. Others make cheese for us to eat." 
   "I see; you don't know how to make cheese for 
your dinner because no one has ever taught you. 
That's perfect. Here you are, then, blindfolded and 
with a clear mind not all clogged up with 
troublesome knowledge on the subject. So, how do 
you make cheese? Is it coming to you? Is the method 
of making cheese being sent to you through your 
blindfolded divine introspection?" 
"Reality cannot be tested—" 
   "Tell me how, if you were to wear a blindfold so 
you couldn't see, put wax in your ears so you 
couldn't hear, and put on heavy mittens so you 
couldn't feel anything, how you would even do 
something as simple as picking a radish to eat. 
Tell you what, you can leave the wax out of your 
ears, and not bother with the mittens. Just leave 
that blindfold on and show me how you can pick a 
radish so you have something to eat. I'll even help 
you find the door, first; then you're on your own. 
Come on, then. Off you go." 
The Wise One licked his lips. "Well, I..." 
   "If you deny yourself sight, hearing, touch . . 
. how will you plant food to sustain your life, or 
how can you even hunt for berries and nuts? If 
nothing is real, then how long until you starve to 
death while you wait for some inner voice of 
'truth' to feed you?" 
   One of the speakers rushed forward, trying to 
push Richard back. Richard shoved the man so hard 
that it sat him on the ground. The speakers cowered 
back a few paces. Richard put one boot up on the 
platform, laid his arm across his knee, and leaned 

close to the Wise One. 
   "Answer my questions, 'Wise One.' Tell me what 
staring blindly inwardly has so far revealed to you 
about making cheese. Come on; let's hear it." 
"But... it's not a fair question." 
   "Oh? A question regarding the pursuit of a value 
is not fair? Life requires all living things to 
successfully pursue values if they are to continue 
to live. A bird dies if it can't succeed at 
catching a worm. It's basic. People are no 
different." 
"Stop the hate." 
   "You already have on a blindfold. Why don't you 
plug your ears and hum a tune to yourself so you 
won't be thinking about anything"— Richard leaned 
in and lowered his voice dangerously—"and in your 
state of infinite wisdom, Wise One, just try to 
guess what I'm about to do to you." 
The boy squealed in fright and scooted back. 
   Kahlan pushed her way between Richard and Anson 
and sat back on the platform. She put an arm around 
the terrified boy and pulled him close to comfort 
him. He pressed himself into her sheltering 
protection. 
   "Richard, you're scaring the poor boy. Look at 
him. He's shaking like a leaf." 
   Richard pulled the blindfold off the boy's head. 
In confused dismay, he peered fearfully up at 
Richard. 
"Why did you go to her?" Richard asked in a gentle 
tone. 
"Because, you were about to hurt me." 
"You mean, then, that you were hoping she would 
protect you?" 
"Of course—you're bigger than me." 
   Richard smiled. "Do you see what you're saying? 
You were frightened and you hoped to be protected 
from danger. That wasn't wrong of you. was it? To 
want to be safe? To fear aggression? To seek help 
from someone you thought might be big enough to 

stop the threat?" 
The boy looked confused. "No, I guess not." 
   "And what if I held a knife to you? Wouldn't you 
want to have someone prevent me from cutting you? 
Wouldn't you want to live?" 
The boy nodded. "Yes." 
"That's the value we're talking about, here." 
He frowned. "What do you mean?" 
   "Life," Richard said. "You want to live. That is 
noble. You don't want someone else to take your 
life. That is just. 
   "All creatures want to live. A rabbit will run 
if threatened; that's why he has strong legs. He 
doesn't need the strong legs or big ears to find 
and eat tender shoots. He has the big ears to 
listen for threats, and the strong legs to escape. 
   "A buck will snort in warning if threatened. A 
snake may shake a rattle to ward off threats. A 
wolf growls a warning. But if the danger keeps 
coming and they can't escape, a buck may trample 
it, the snake may strike, and the wolf may attack. 
None of them will go looking for a fight, but they 
will protect themselves. 
   "Man is the only creature who willingly submits 
to the fangs of a predator. Only man, through 
continual indoctrination such as you've been given, 
will reject the values that sustain life. Yet, you 
instinctively did the right thing in going to my 
wife." 
"I did?" 
   "Yes. Your ways couldn't protect you, so you 
acted on the chance that she might. If I really 
were someone intent on harming you, she would have 
fought to stop me." 
He looked up into Kahlan's smile. "You would?" 
"Yes, I would. I, too, believe in the nobility of 
life." 
He stared in wonder. 
   Kahlan slowly shook her head. "But your 
instinctive act of seeking protection would have 

done you no good had you instead sought the 
protection of people who live by the misguided 
teachings you repeat. Those teachings condemn self-
preservation as a form of hate. Your people are 
being slaughtered with the aid of their own 
beliefs." 
He looked stricken. "But, I don't want that." 
Kahlan smiled. "Neither do we. That's why we came, 
and why Richard had to show you that you can know 
the truth of reality and doing so will help you 
survive." 
"Thank you," he said to Richard. 
   Richard smiled and gently smoothed down the 
boy's blond hair. "Sorry I had to frighten you to 
show you that what you were saying didn't really 
make any sense. I needed to show you that the words 
you've been taught can't serve you well—you can't 
live by them because they are devoid of reality and 
reason. You look to me like a boy who cares about 
living. I was like that when I was your age, and I 
still am. Life is wonderful; take delight in it, 
look around with the eyes you have, and see it in 
all its glory." 
   "No one has ever talked to me about life in this 
way. I don't get to see much. I have to stay inside 
all the time." 
   "Tell you what, maybe, before I go, I can take 
you for a walk in the woods and show you some of 
the wonders of the world around you— the trees and 
plants, birds, maybe we'll even see a fox—and we'll 
talk some more about the wonders and joy of life. 
Would you like that?" 
   The boy's face lit up with a grin. "Really? You 
would do that for me?" 
   Richard smiled one of those smiles that so 
melted Kahlan's heart. He playfully pinched the 
boy's nose. "Sure." 
   Owen came forward and ran his fingers 
affectionately through the boy's hair. "I was once 
like you—a Wise One—until I got a little older than 

you." 
The boy frowned up at him. "Really?" 
   Owen nodded. "I used to think that I had been 
chosen because I was special and somehow only I was 
able to commune with some glorious otherworldly 
dominion. I believed that I was gushing great 
wisdom. Looking back, I am ashamed to see how 
foolish it all was. I was made to listen to 
lessons. I was never allowed to be a boy. The great 
speakers praised me for repeating back the things I 
had heard, and when I spoke then with great scorn 
to people, they told me how wise I was." 
"Me, too," the boy said. 
   Richard turned back to the men. "This is what 
your people have been reduced to as a source of 
wisdom—listening to children repeating meaningless 
expressions. You have minds in order to think and 
understand the world around you. This self-imposed 
blindness is a dark treason to yourselves." 
   The men in front, that Kahlan could see from 
where she sat holding the boy, all hung their heads 
in shame. 
   "Lord Rahl is right," Anson said, turning back 
to the men. "Until today, I never actually 
questioned it or thought about how foolish it 
really is." 
One of the speakers shook his fist. "It is not 
foolish!" 
   Another, the one with the pointed chin, leaned 
in and snatched An-son's knife from the sheath at 
his belt. 
   Kahlan could hardly believe what she had just 
seen. It felt as if she were watching a nightmare 
suddenly unfold, a nightmare she wasn't able to 
stop or even slow. It seemed she knew what was 
going to happen before she saw it. 
   With an enraged cry, the speaker suddenly struck 
out, stabbing Anson before he could react. Kahlan 
heard the blade hit bone. Driven by blind rage, the 
speaker swiftly drew back the fist holding the now 

bloody knife to stab Anson again. Anson's face 
twisted in shock as he began going down. 
   Points of candlelight reflecting off the 
polished length of razor-sharp steel blurred into 
streaks as Richard's sword flashed past Kahlan. 
Even as the sword swept around, the unique ring of 
steel as it had been drawn accompanied its 
terrifying arc toward the threat. Driven by 
Richard's formidable strength, the tip of the sword 
whistled through the air. As the speaker's arm 
reached the apex of its swing, as it once more 
began a deadly journey down, Richard's blade 
slammed into the side of the speaker's neck and 
without seeming to slow in the least ripped through 
flesh and bone, cleaving off the man's head and one 
shoulder along with the arm holding high the knife. 
The lightning slash threw long strings of blood 
against the stone wall of the foundation of the 
palace of the Bandakar Empire. 
   As the speaker's head and the one shoulder with 
the arm attached tumbled through the air in an odd, 
wobbling spiral, his body collapsed in a heap. The 
head smacked the floor with a sickening thud and 
bounced across the carpets, leaving a trail of 
blood as it tumbled. 
   Richard swept the crimson blade around, 
directing it toward the potential threat of the 
other speakers. Kahlan pressed the boy's face to 
her shoulder, covering his eyes. 
   Some of the men fell in around Anson. Kahlan 
didn't know how badly he was hurt—or if he was even 
still alive. 
   Not far away, the gory head and arm of the dead 
speaker lay before a table set with candles. The 
fist still held the knife in a death grip. The 
sudden carnage lying there before them all, the 
blood spreading across the floor, was horrifying. 
Everyone stared in stunned silence. 
   "The first blood drawn by you great speakers," 
Richard said in a quiet voice to the cluster of 

cringing speakers, "is not against those who come 
to murder your people, but against a man who 
committed no violence against you—one of your own 
who simply stood up and told you that he wanted to 
be free of the oppression of terror, free to think 
for himself." 
   Kahlan stood, and saw then that there were far 
more people in the room than there had been before. 
Most were not their men. When Cara made her way 
through the silent throng to Kahlan's side, Kahlan 
took her by the arm and leaned close. 
"Who are all those people?" 
   "The people from the city. Runners brought them 
the news that the town of Witherton had been freed. 
They heard about our men being here to see the Wise 
One and wanted to witness what would happen. The 
stairs and halls upstairs are full of them. The 
words that have been spoken down here have spread 
up through the whole crowd." 
   Cara was obviously concerned about being close 
enough to protect Richard and Kahlan. Kahlan knew 
that many of the people had been swayed by what 
Richard had been saying, but now she didn't know 
what they would do. 
   The speakers seemed to have lost their 
conviction. They didn't want to be associated with 
the one among them who had done such a thing. One 
of them finally left his fellow speakers and made 
the lone walk over to the boy standing beside the 
curtain-draped platform, and under Kahlan's 
protective arm. 
   "I am sorry," he said in a sincere voice to the 
boy. He turned to the people watching. "I am sorry. 
I don't want to be a speaker any longer.  
   Prophecy has been fulfilled; our redemption is 
at hand. I think we would do best to listen to what 
these men have to say. I think I would like to live 
without the fear that the men of the Order are 
going to murder us all." 
   There were no cheers, no wild ovation, but, 

rather, silent agreement as all the people Kahlan 
could see nodded with what looked like expectant 
hope that their secret wish to be free of the 
brutality of the Imperial Order was not a sinful, 
secret thought after all, but was really the right 
thing. 
   Richard knelt beside Owen as other men worked at 
tying a strip of cloth around Anson's upper arm. He 
was sitting up. His whole arm was soaked in blood, 
but it looked like the bandage was slowing the 
bleeding. Kahlan sighed in relief at seeing that 
Anson was alive and not seriously hurt. 
"It looks like it will need to be stitched," 
Richard said. 
   Some of the men agreed. An older man pushed his 
way through the crowd and stepped forward. 
"I do such things. I also have herbs with which to 
make a poultice." 
   "Thank you," Anson said as his friends helped 
him stand. He looked light-headed and the men had 
to steady him. Once sure of his feet, he turned to 
Richard. 
   "Thank you, Lord Rahl, for answering the call in 
the words of the devotion I spoke: 'Master Rahl, 
protect us.' 
   "I never thought I would be the first to bleed 
for what we have set out to do, or that the blood 
would be drawn by one of our own people." 
   Richard gently clapped Anson on the back of his 
good shoulder, showing his appreciation for Anson's 
words. 
   Owen looked around at the crowd. "I think we 
have all decided to be free again." When the crowd 
nodded their agreement, Owen turned to Richard. 
"How will we get rid of the soldiers in Northwick?" 
   Richard wiped his sword clean on the cloth of 
the dead speaker's trouser leg. His gaze turned up 
to the crowd. "Any idea how many soldiers there are 
here in Northwick?" 
   There was no anger in his voice. Kahlan had 

seen, since the moment he had drawn his sword, that 
his eyes had been absent of the Sword of Truth's 
attendant magic. There was no spark of the sword's 
rage in the Seeker's eyes, no magic dangerously 
dancing there, no fury in his demeanor. He had 
simply done what was necessary to stop the threat. 
While it was a relief that he had swiftly 
succeeded, it was gravely worrisome that the 
sword's magic had not come out along with the sword 
itself. 
   What had always been there to help him before 
had apparently finally failed him. That absence of 
his sword's magic left Kahlan feeling icy 
apprehension. 
   People in the crowd looked around at others and 
then spoke of hundreds of men of the Order they had 
seen. Another man said there were several thousand. 
   An older woman lifted her hand. "Not that many, 
but approaching it." 
Owen turned to Richard. "That's a lot of men for us 
to take on." 
   Having never been in a real battle, he didn't 
know the half of it. Richard didn't seem to hear 
Owen. He slid his sword back into the scabbard 
hidden under his black cloak. 
"How do you know?" he asked the woman. 
"I am one of the people who help prepare their 
meals." 
"You mean you people cook for the soldiers?" 
   "Yes," the old woman said. "They do not wish to 
do it for themselves." 
"When do you next have to cook?" 
   "We have large kettles we are just starting to 
get ready for tomorrow's meal. It takes us all 
night to prepare the stew so that we can cook it 
tomorrow for their evening meal. Besides that, we 
also have to work all night making biscuits, eggs, 
and porridge for their morning meal." 
   Kahlan imagined that the soldiers were probably 
pleased to have such a ready supply of pliant 

slaves. Richard paced in a short track between her 
and Owen. He pinched his lower lip as he considered 
the problem. With such a small force of their own, 
nearly two thousand armed men was a lot to take on, 
especially considering how inexperienced the men 
were. Kahlan recognized that Richard was scheming 
something. 
He took the arm of the older man tightening the 
bandage around Anson's wound. "You said you had 
herbs. Do you know about such things?" 
   The man shrugged. "Not a great deal, just enough 
to make simple remedies." 
   Kahlan's mood sank. She had thought that maybe 
this man might know something about making more of 
the antidote. 
   "Do you have access to lily of the valley, 
oleander, yew, monkshood, hemlock?" 
   The man blinked in surprise. "Common enough, I 
guess, especially just to the north in the wooded 
areas." 
   Richard turned to his men standing at the fore 
of the crowd. "We must eliminate the men of the 
Order. The less fighting we have to do, the better. 
   "While it's still dark, we need to slip out of 
the city and go collect the things we need." He 
lifted a hand to the woman who had spoken about 
cooking for the soldiers. "You show us where you're 
going to do all the cooking of tomorrow's evening 
meal. We'll bring you some extra ingredients. 
   "With what we put in the stew, the soldiers will 
be getting violently sick within hours. We will put 
different things in different kettles, so the 
symptoms will be different, to help create 
confusion and panic. If we can get enough of the 
poisons into the stew, most of them will die within 
hours, suffering everything from weakness and 
paralysis to convulsions. 
   "Late in the night, we'll go in and finish any 
who aren't yet dead, or who may not have eaten. If 
we prepare carefully, Northwick will be free of the 

Imperial Order without having to fight them. It 
will be swiftly ended without any of us being 
hurt." 
   The room was silent for a moment; then Kahlan 
saw smiles breaking out among the people. A ray of 
light had come into their lives. 
   With the heady thought of imminent freedom, some 
began to weep as they suddenly felt the need to 
come forward and tell brief accounts of those they 
loved who had been raped, tortured, taken away, or 
murdered. 
Now that these people had been given a chance to 
live, none wanted to turn back. They saw salvation, 
and were willing to do what had to be done to gain 
it. 
   "This will destroy our way of life," someone 
said, not in bitterness, but in wonder. 
"Redemption is at hand," one of the other people in 
the crowd added. 
 
  
 
 
 
          CHAPTER 53 
 
 
 
 
          Standing in dusty streamers of late-day 
sunlight, Zedd wavered on his feet as he waited not 
far from the tent where Sister Tahirah had just 
taken a small crate. While she was inside carefully 
unpacking and preparing the item of magic for 
inspection, the guards stood not far off, talking 
among themselves about their chances of having ale 
that night. They were hardly worried about a skinny 
old man with a Rada'Han around his neck and his 
arms shackled behind his back causing them any 
trouble or running off. 

   Zedd used the opportunity to lean against the 
cargo wagon's rear wheel. He wanted only to be 
allowed to lie down and go to sleep. Without being 
obvious, he looked over his shoulder at Adie. She 
gave him a brief, brave smile. 
   The wagon he leaned against was full of items 
looted from the Keep that had yet to be identified. 
For all Zedd knew, he could be leaning against a 
wagon full of simple magic meant to entertain and 
teach children, or something so powerful that it 
would hand Jagang victory in one blinding instant. 
   Some of the items brought from the Keep were 
unknown to Zedd. They had been locked behind 
shields that he had never been able to breach. Even 
in his childhood the old wizards at the Keep had 
not been able to get at what was behind many of the 
shields. But the men who had assaulted and taken 
the Wizard's Keep were untouched by magic and 
apparently had no trouble getting through shields 
that had been in place for thousands of years. 
Everything Zedd knew had been turned upside down. 
In some ways, it seemed like this was not only the 
end of the Wizard's Keep as it had been intended 
and envisioned, but the end of a way of life as 
well, and the death of an era. 
   The items brought from the Keep that Zedd had so 
far identified were of no great value to Jagang in 
winning the war. There were a few things, now back 
in protective crates, that were a mystery to Zedd; 
for all he knew, they could be profoundly 
dangerous. He wished that they could all be 
destroyed before one of the Sisters of the Dark 
discovered how to use them to create havoc. 
   Zedd looked up when he saw one of the elite 
soldiers in leather and mail pause not far away, 
his attention keenly focused on something. His 
right ear had a big V-shaped notch taken out of the 
upper portion, the way some farmers marked their 
swine. Although he wore the same kind of outfit as 
the rest of the elite soldiers, his boots weren't 

the same. Zedd saw, when the man looked around, 
that his left eye didn't open as wide as his right, 
but then he moved off into the bands of patrolling 
soldiers. 
   As Zedd watched the constantly churning press of 
soldiers, Sisters, and others moving past, he kept 
having the disconcerting visions of people from his 
past, and others he knew. It was disheartening to 
be having such will-o'-the-wisps—illusions spawned 
by a mind that from lack of sleep, and perhaps the 
constant tension, was failing him. The faces of 
some of the elite guards looked hauntingly 
familiar. He guessed he had been seeing the men for 
days and they were beginning to look familiar. 
   In the distance he saw a Sister walking past who 
looked like someone he knew. He had probably met 
her recently, was all. He'd met a number of Sisters 
recently, and it was never congenial. Zedd 
admonished himself that he had to keep a grasp on 
his wits. 
   One of the little girls not far away, being held 
prisoner by a big guard standing over her, was 
watching Zedd and when he glanced up at her, she 
smiled. He thought it the oddest thing a frightened 
child—mid such chaos of soldiers, prisoners, and 
military activity—could do. He supposed that such a 
child could not possibly understand that she was 
there to be tortured, if necessary, to make sure 
Zedd told all he knew. He looked away from her long 
blond hair cascading down around her shoulders, her 
beautiful, oddly familiar face. This was madness— 
in more ways than one. 
   The hump-nosed Sister emerged from the tent. 
"Bring them in," she snapped. 
   The four guards jumped into action, two seizing 
Adie, the other two taking Zedd. The men were big 
enough that Zedd's weight was trivial to them. The 
way they held him up by his arms prevented half his 
steps from touching the ground. They horsed him 
into the tent, advanced him around the table, spun 

him around, and dropped him into the chair with 
such force that it drove the wind from his lungs in 
a grunt. 
   Zedd closed his eyes as he grimaced in pain. He 
wished they would just kill him so that he wouldn't 
ever have to open his eyes again. But when they 
killed him, they would send his head to Richard. 
Zedd hated to think of the anguish that would cause 
Richard. 
"Well?" Sister Tahirah asked. 
   Zedd opened his eyes and peered at the object 
sitting before him in the center of the table. 
His breath caught. 
He blinked at what he saw, too astonished to let 
out the breath. 
It was constructed magic called a sunset spell. 
   Zedd swallowed. Surely, none of the Sisters had 
opened it. No, they wouldn't have opened it. He 
wouldn't be sitting there if they had. 
   Before him on the table sat a small box, the 
size of half his palm. The box was shaped like the 
upper half of a stylized sun—a half disc with six 
pointed rays coming out from it, meant to represent 
the sun setting at the horizon. The box was 
lacquered a bright yellow. The rays were also 
yellow, but with lines of orange, green, and blue 
along their edges. 
"Well?" Sister Tahirah repeated. 
"Ahh..." 
   She was looking in her book, not at the small 
yellow box. "What is it?" 
   "I'm ... not sure I remember," he said, 
stalling. 
The Sister wasn't in a patient mood. "Do you want 
me to—" 
   "Oh, yes," he said, trying to sound nonchalant, 
"I recall, now. It's a box with a spell that 
produces a little tune." 
   That much was true. The Sister was still reading 
in her book. Zedd glanced back over his shoulder at 

Adie sitting on the bench. He could see in her eyes 
that she knew by his demeanor that something was 
up. He hoped the Sister couldn't detect the same 
thing. 
   "It's a music box, then," Sister Tahirah 
murmured, more interested in her catalog of magic. 
   "Yes, that's right. A box that contains a spell 
for music. When you remove the lid, it produces a 
melody." Sweat trickled down from his neck, down 
between his shoulder blades. Zedd swallowed and 
tried not to let his trembling carry in his voice. 
"Take the lid off—you'll see." 
   She peered suspiciously over the top of the 
book. "You take the lid off." 
"Well... I can't. My hands are shackled behind my 
back." 
"Use your teeth." 
"My teeth?" 
   The Sister used the back end of her pen to push 
the yellow half-sun box closer to him. "Yes, your 
teeth." 
   He had been counting on her suspicion, but he 
dared not overplay it. He worked his tongue in his 
mouth, desperately trying to work up some saliva. 
Blood would be better, but he knew that if he bit 
the inside of his lip the Sister would get 
suspicious. Blood was too common a catalyst. 
   Before the Sister got leery, Zedd leaned forward 
and tried to stretch his lips around the box. He 
worked to get his bottom teeth at the bottom of the 
sun and his top teeth hooked over a pointed ray. 
The box was a hair too big. With a hand on the back 
of his head, Sister Tahirah pushed him down on it. 
That was all he needed and he captured the lid with 
his teeth. 
   He lifted the lid, but the whole box came up off 
the table. He shook his head and, at last, the top 
came free. He set the lid aside. 
   If not opened by a party to the theft of items 
preserved at the Keep, a sunset spell had to be 

activated by a wizard whom the spell would 
recognize. Quickly, before she saw what he was 
doing, he let some saliva drop into the box in 
order to activate the spell. 
   Zedd felt giddy as the music started. It worked. 
It was still viable. He glanced through the narrow 
slit of the tent flap. The sun would be down soon. 
   He wanted to jump up and dance to the merry 
tune. He wanted to let out a whoop. Even though he 
didn't have long to live, he still felt 
exhilarated. The ordeal was almost over. In a short 
time, all the things of magic that were stolen 
would be destroyed, and he would be dead. They 
would never get anything out of him. He would not 
betray their cause. 
   He felt bad that the captured families who were 
being used to help gain his cooperation would also 
die, but at least they would no longer have to 
suffer. He felt a sudden pang of sadness that Adie, 
too, would die. He hated the thought of that nearly 
as much as the thought of her suffering. 
The Sister reached in and replaced the lid. "Very 
cute." 
   The music stopped. It didn't matter, though. The 
spell had been activated. The music was simply 
confirmation—and a warning to get out of range. No 
chance of that. 
It didn't matter. 
   Sister Tahirah scooped the yellow box off the 
table. "I'm going to put this back." She leaned 
down toward Zedd. "While I'm gone, I'm going to 
have the guards bring in the next child and let you 
have a good look at her, let you think about what 
those men in the next tent are going to do to her—
without hesitation—if you stall and waste our time 
like that again." 
"But I—" 
   His words were cut off as she used the Rada'Han 
around his neck to send a shock of searing pain 
from the base of his skull down to his nips. His 

back arched as he cried out, nearly losing 
consciousness. He slumped back in his chair, his 
head hanging back, unable to lift it for the 
moment. 
   "Come with me," Sister Tahirah said to the 
guards. "I'll need some help. The guard who brings 
in the next child can watch them for a few 
minutes." 
   Panting from the lingering pain, tears filling 
his eyes, Zedd stared at the ceiling of the tent. 
He saw light as the flap was opened. Shadows moved 
across the canvas as the Sister and the four men 
left and she sent in the guard with the child. Zedd 
stared up at the ceiling, not wanting to look at 
the face of another child. 
Finally, recovered from the bout of pain, he sat 
up. 
   One of the big elite guards, dressed in their 
leather, mail, and a broad belt holding an 
assortment of weapons, stood to the side with a 
blond-headed girl held before him. It was the girl 
who had smiled. Zedd closed his eyes a moment in 
the agony of what they would do to this poor child 
who reminded him so much of someone he knew. 
When he opened his eyes, she smiled again. Then she 
winked. 
   Zedd blinked. She lifted up her flower print 
dress just enough so that Zedd could see two knives 
strapped to each of her thighs. He blinked again at 
what he was seeing. He looked up into her smiling 
face. 
"Rachel... ?" he whispered. 
Her smile widened into a beaming grin. 
   Zedd looked up at the face of the big man 
standing guard behind her. 
"Dear spirits ..." Zedd whispered. 
It was the boundary warden. 
"I hear you've gotten yourself into a bit of 
trouble," Chase said. 
   For an instant, Zedd thought that for sure he 

must be seeing things. Then he realized why Rachel 
looked so familiar, yet different; she was more 
than two and a half years older than the last time 
he'd seen her. Her blond hair, once chopped short, 
was now long. She had to be nearly a foot taller. 
   Chase hooked his thumbs behind the broad leather 
belt. "Adie, as levelheaded as you are, I imagine 
it had to be Zedd who got you into this fix." 
   Zedd looked over his shoulder. Adie wore a 
beautiful, tearful smile. He couldn't remember the 
last time he had seen her smile. 
"He be nothing but trouble," she told the boundary 
warden. 
   It had been two and a half years since he'd seen 
Chase. The boundary warden was an old friend. He 
was the one who had taken them to meet Adie back 
then so she could show Richard the way through the 
boundary before Darken Rahl had brought it down. 
Chase was older than Richard, but one of his 
dearest and most trusted friends. 
   "An older boundary warden, Friedrich, came 
looking for me," Chase explained. "He said that 
'Lord Rahl' had sent him to the Keep to warn you 
about some trouble. He said that Richard had told 
him about me, and since you were gone and the Keep 
had been captured, he came to Westland looking for 
me. Boundary wardens can always count on one 
another. 
   "Rachel and I decided to come pull your scrawny 
hide out of the fire." 
   Zedd glanced at the sunlight coming through the 
tent's narrow opening. "You have to get out of 
here. Before the sun sets—or you'll be killed. 
Hurry, get out of here while you can." 
   Chase lifted an eyebrow. "I've come all this way 
and I don't intend to leave without you." 
"But you don't understand—" 
   A knife poked through the side of the tent and 
ran a slit down through the canvas. One of the 
elite guards pushed his way in through the slit. 

Zedd stared in astonishment. The man looked 
familiar, but he didn't look right. 
   "No!" Zedd called to Chase as the big man went 
for the axe hanging at his hip. 
   "Stay where you are," the man who came in 
through the slit in the side of the tent said to 
Chase. "There's a man right outside who will put a 
sword through you if you move." 
Zedd's jaw dropped. "Captain Zimmer?" 
"Of course. I've come to get you out of here." 
"But, but, you have black hair." 
   The captain flashed one of his infectious 
smiles. "Soot. Not a good idea to have blond hair 
in the middle of Jagang's camp. I've come to rescue 
you." 
   Zedd was incredulous. "But you all have to get 
out of here. Hurry, before the sun sets. Get out!" 
"Do you have any more men?" Chase asked the 
captain.  
"A handful. Who are you?" 
"An old friend," Zedd told him. "Now, look here—" 
   At that, cries and shouts came from outside. 
Captain Zimmer rushed to the tent's opening. A man 
poked his head in. 
"It's not us," he said in answer to the captain's 
unspoken question. 
In the distance, Zedd could hear the shouts of 
"Assassin!" 
   Captain Zimmer rushed behind Zedd and worked a 
key in the manacles. They broke open. Zedd's arms 
were suddenly free. The captain hurried to undo 
Adie's as she stood and turned her back to him. 
   "Sounds like our chance," Rachel said. "Let's 
use the commotion to get you out of here." 
"The brains of the group," Chase said with a grin. 
   The first thing Zedd did when his arms were free 
was fall to his knees and hug the girl. He couldn't 
bring forth words, but they weren't needed. To feel 
her spindly arms around his neck was better than 
any words. 

"I've missed you, Zedd," she whispered in his ear. 
   Outside the tent, mayhem had broken out. Orders 
were being shouted, men were running, and in the 
distance the clash of steel rang out. 
   The Sister burst back into the tent. She saw 
Zedd free and immediately released a bolt of power 
through his collar. The shock sent him sprawling. 
   Just then, a second, young, blond Sister in a 
drab brown wool dress charged in behind Sister 
Tahirah. Sister Tahirah spun around. The second 
Sister smacked her so hard it nearly knocked the 
woman from her feet. Without pause, Sister Tahirah 
unleashed a bolt of her power that lit the inside 
of the tent with a blinding flash. Instead of it 
blasting the second Sister back through the tent's 
doorway, as Zedd had expected, Sister Tahirah cried 
out and crumpled to the ground. 
   "Got you!" the second Sister growled as she 
planted a boot on Sister Tahirah's neck, keeping 
her on the ground. 
Zedd blinked in astonishment. "Rikka?" 
   Rikka was already turning, her Agiel in her 
fist. She held it toward Chase. 
   "Rikka?" Captain Zimmer asked from the other 
side of the tent, sounding startled, not just to 
see who it was, but perhaps to see the Mord-Sith 
with her blond hair undone from its single braid 
and flying free. 
"Zimmer?" She frowned at his black hair. "What are 
you doing here?" 
   "What am I doing here? What are you doing here!" 
He gestured to her dress. "What are you wearing?" 
Rikka grinned that wicked grin she had. "The dress 
of a Sister." 
"Sister?" Zedd asked. "What Sister?" 
   Rikka shrugged. "One who didn't want to give up 
her dress. She lost her head over the whole 
affair." With her finger and thumb Rikka pulled her 
lower lip out. "See? I borrowed her ring, too. I 
spread the split and hung it here, so I'd look like 

a real Sister." 
   Rikka pulled Sister Tahirah up by her hair and 
shoved her toward Adie. "Get that thing off her 
neck." 
"I will do no such—" 
   Rikka drove her Agiel up under the Sister's 
chin. Blood gushed out over her lower lip. The 
Sister started choking on it as she gasped in 
agony. 
   "I said, get that thing off Adie's neck. And 
don't you ever question me again." 
   Sister Tahirah scrambled to Adie to do as the 
Mord-Sith had commanded. 
   Chase planted his fists on his hips as he glared 
down at Zedd, still on the ground. "So what are we 
going to do now—draw straws to see who gets to 
rescue you?" 
"Bags! Isn't anyone listening? You people have to 
get out of here!" 
   Rachel shook a finger at Zedd. "Now, Zedd, you 
know you're not supposed to say bad words in front 
of children." 
Sputtering in frustration, Zedd gaped up at Chase. 
   "I know," the boundary warden said with a sigh. 
"She's been a trial for me, too." 
"The sun's about to set!" Zedd roared. 
   "It would be better if we could delay until it 
did," Captain Zimmer said. "It would be easier to 
get out of camp in the dark." 
   A humming noise filled the tent, making the very 
air vibrate, and then there was a sudden metallic 
pop. Adie cried out with relief as the collar fell 
away. 
   "Isn't anyone listening?" Zedd scrambled to his 
feet and shook his fists. "I've ignited a sunset 
spell!" 
"A what?" Chase asked. 
   "A sunset spell. It's a protective device from 
the Keep. It's a shield of sorts. When it 
recognizes that other shields are being violated 

and protected items are being taken, it insinuates 
itself among the stolen goods. When a thief opens 
it to see what it is, it activates the spell. At 
the first sunset the spell ignites and destroys 
everything that has been plundered." 
Sister Tahirah shook her fist at him. "You fool!" 
Rikka seized his arm. "Then let's get going." 
   Chase grabbed Zedd's other arm and pulled him 
back. "Now, hold on." 
   Zedd yanked both arms free and pointed out 
through the slit in the side of the tent at the 
setting sun. "We've got mere moments until this 
place is a fireball." 
"How big a fireball?" Captain Zimmer asked. 
   Zedd threw up his hands. "It will kill 
thousands. It won't destroy the camp by any means, 
but this whole area is going to be leveled." 
   Everyone started talking, but Chase cut them all 
off with an angry command for silence. "Now listen 
to me. If we look like we're escaping, we'll be 
caught. Captain, you and your men come with me. 
We'll pretend like Zedd and Adie are our prisoners. 
Rachel, too—that's how I got in here; I found out 
they were holding children." He flipped a hand 
toward Rikka and Sister Tahirah. "They will look 
like Sisters in charge of prisoners, along with us 
playing as the guards." 
"Do you want that thing off your neck, first?" 
Rikka asked Zedd. 
"No time for that now. Let's go." 
Adie grabbed Zedd's arm. "No." 
"What!" 
   "Listen to me, old man. There be those families 
and children in these tents around us. They will 
die. You go. Get to the Keep. I will get the 
innocent people out of here." 
   Zedd didn't like the idea, but arguing with Adie 
was a fool's task, 
and besides, there was no time. 
   "We split up, then," Captain Zimmer said. "Me 

and my men will play the part of guards and get the 
men, women, and children out of here, back to our 
lines, along with Adie." 
   Rikka nodded. "Tell Verna that I'm going to go 
with Zedd to help take back the Keep. He will need 
a Mord-Sith to keep him out of trouble." 
   Everyone looked around to see if there would be 
any arguments. No one said anything. It suddenly 
seemed settled. 
"Done," Zedd said. 
   He threw his arms around Adie and kissed her 
cheek. "Be careful. Tell Verna I'm going to take 
the Keep back. Help her defend the passes." 
   Adie nodded. "Be careful. Listen to Chase—he be 
a good man to come all this way for you." 
   Zedd smiled and then gasped as Chase grabbed his 
robes and yanked him out of the tent. "The sun is 
setting—let's get out of here. Remember, you're our 
prisoner." 
   "I know the part," Zedd grumbled as he was 
dragged out of the tent like a sack of grain. He 
smiled as Adie, already rushing away, looked over 
her shoulder one last time. She smiled back, and 
then was gone. 
   "Wait!" Zedd called. He quickly reached into one 
of the wagons and retrieved something he didn't 
want to be destroyed. He slipped it into a pocket. 
"All right, let's go." 
   Outside the tent, the camp was in pandemonium. 
Elite guards, in a state of high alert and with 
weapons drawn, raced past on their way toward the 
command tents. Other men ran to the ring of 
barricades. Trumpets blared alarms and coded 
messages that directed men to tasks. Zedd feared 
his small group might be set upon and held for 
questioning. 
   Instead of waiting for that to happen, Chase 
reached out and snatched a soldier running past. 
"What's the matter with you? Get me some protection 
for these prisoners until I can get them to a safe 

place! The emperor will have our heads if we allow 
them to be recaptured!" 
   The soldier quickly collected a dozen men and 
fell in around Rikka, Sister Tahirah, Chase, 
Rachel, and Zedd. Rachel was doing a convincing job 
of bawling in fear. For effect, Chase would 
occasionally give her a shake and yell at her to 
shut up. 
   Zedd glanced back over his shoulder, seeing the 
sun touch the horizon. He growled at Rikka, out 
ahead, for her to pick up her pace. 
   At the barricades, scowling guards looked them 
over carefully as they approached and then opened 
their ranks. They were preventing anyone from 
getting in, and were momentarily confused by such a 
company of their own men with prisoners making 
their way out. One man decided to step out to stop 
and question them. 
   Chase straight-armed him. "Idiot! Out of our 
way! Emperor's orders!" 
   The man frowned as he stared at the procession 
sweeping past. While he considered what to do, they 
were past and gone, swallowed up in the larger 
camp. 
   In moments, they were out of the heart of the 
camp. In short order, regular soldiers, seeing 
Rikka at the lead, moved to block their path. A 
beautiful woman out among the regular soldiers was 
asking for trouble, and with the confusion the men 
saw in the command area, they believed they had an 
opportunity while those in authority were busy. 
Rikka and Chase kept their small group moving at a 
quick pace. The grinning soldiers closed ranks, 
blocking the way. One of the men, missing his two 
front teeth, took a step out in front of his men. 
With one thumb hooked behind his belt, he held up 
the other hand. 
"Hold on there. I think the ladies would like to 
stay for a visit." 
   Without pause, Rachel reached under the hem of 

her dress and pulled a knife. She didn't slow or 
even look back as she flipped the knife up over her 
shoulder. In one fluid motion, without missing a 
step, Chase caught the knife by the tip and heaved 
it at the toothless man. With a thunk, the knife 
slammed hilt-deep into the man's forehead. 
   As he was still toppling back, Rachel flipped a 
second knife up over her shoulder. Chase caught it 
and sent it on its way. As the second man twisted 
toward the ground, dead, the rest of the men backed 
away to let the small group, marching onward, in 
among them. Deadly rights within the Imperial Order 
camp were not a rarity. 
Elite guards or not, the soldiers were confident in 
their numbers and, with a beautiful woman in their 
midst, sure of what they wanted. Men all around 
closed in. 
Zedd snatched a quick glance back. "Now! Hit the 
ground!" 
Rikka, Chase, Rachel, and Zedd dove to the dirt. 
   For an instant, everyone above them froze, 
staring in surprise. The soldiers who were 
accompanying them, weapons already drawn for the 
fight they expected, also stopped and stood in 
confusion. 
   Sister Tahirah saw her opportunity and cried 
out. "Help! These people are—" 
The world ignited with brilliant white light. 
   An instant later a thunderous blast rocked the 
ground. A wall of debris followed, driven before a 
roar of noise. 
   Men were blown into the air. Some were cut down 
by flying wreckage. The elite guards that had 
escorted them tumbled through the air over Zedd. 
   Sister Tahirah had turned toward the flash. A 
wagon wheel shot toward them at incredible speed, 
hitting her chest-high, cutting her in two. The 
bloodied wheel sailed onward without even being 
slowed. The Sister's shredded remains were flung 
across the ground along with the bodies of 

countless men. 
   As the blast from behind still rumbled, the 
screams of terribly wounded men rose into the 
lingering rays of sunset. 
Zedd dearly hoped that Adie had not wasted any time 
in escaping. 
   Chase seized Zedd's robes at one shoulder and 
hauled him to his feet as he swept Rachel up in his 
other arm. Rikka grabbed Zedd's robes at the other 
shoulder and pulled him ahead. Together, Zedd's two 
rescuers rushed with him into the carnage. 
Rachel hid her face in Chase's shoulder. 
   Zedd was about to ask Chase why in the world he 
would teach a young girl such things with knives 
when he recalled that he himself had been the one 
who had once commanded Chase to the task of 
teaching her everything the boundary warden knew. 
   Rachel was a special person. Zedd had wanted her 
to be prepared for what life might have in store. 
   "You should have let me make the Sister take off 
that collar when we had the chance," Rikka said as 
they ran. 
   "If we had taken the time," Zedd answered, "we 
would have been back there and caught up in that 
fireball." 
"I suppose," she said. 
   As they slowed a bit to catch their breath, men 
ran in every direction. In the confusion and 
disorder, no one noticed that the four of them were 
making good their escape. As they hastily made 
their way through the vast Imperial Order 
encampment, Zedd put an arm around Rikka's 
shoulders and pulled her closer. 
"Thank you for coming to save my life." 
   She flashed him a cunning smile. "I wouldn't 
leave you to those pigs—not after all you've done 
for us. Besides, Lord Rahl has Cara protecting him; 
I'm sure he would want a Mord-Sith protecting his 
grandfather as well." 
Zedd had been right. The world was turned upside 

down. 
   "We have horses and supplies hidden," Chase 
said. "On our way out of this place, we'd better 
take a horse for Rikka." 
   Rachel looked back over Chase's shoulder, her 
arms around his neck. She gave Zedd a serious frown 
as she whispered, "Chase is unhappy because he had 
to leave all his weapons behind and be so lightly 
armed." 
   Zedd glanced to the battle-axe at one hip, the 
sword at Chase's other, and two knives at the small 
of his back. "Yes, I can see where being so 
defenseless would make a man grumpy." 
"I don't like this place," Rachel whispered in 
Chase's ear. 
   He patted her back as she laid her head on his 
shoulder. "We'll be back in the woods in no time, 
little one." 
   Amid the screams and death, it was as tender a 
sight as Zedd could imagine. 
 
 
 
 
 
          CHAPTER 54 
 
 
   Verna paused when the sentry rushed up in the 
dark. She moved her hands up on the reins, closer 
to the bit, to keep her horse from spooking. 
   "Prelate—I think it might be an attack of some 
sort," the soldier said in breathless worry. 
She frowned at the man. "What might be an attack? 
What is it?" 
   "There's something coming up the road." He 
pointed back toward Dobbin Pass. "A wagon, I 
think." 
   The enemy was always sending things at them—men 
sneaking through the darkness, horses encased in 

spells designed to blow a breach in their shields 
running wildly toward them, innocent enough wagons 
with archers hiding inside, powerful spell-driven 
winds laced with magic conjuring of every sort. 
   "Since it's dark, the commander thinks it's 
suspicious and we shouldn't take any chances." 
"Sounds wise," Verna said. 
   She had to get back to their camp. She had made 
the rounds herself to get a good look at their 
defenses, to see the men at the outposts, before 
their nightly meeting back at camp to go over the 
day's reports. 
   "The commander wants to destroy the wagon before 
it gets too close. I've checked, Prelate—there are 
no other Sisters at hand. If you don't want to see 
to this, we can have the men up above drop a 
rockslide on the wagon and crush it." 
   Verna had to get back to meet with the officers. 
"You had better tell your commander to take care of 
it in whatever manner he sees fit." 
The soldier saluted with snap of a fist to his 
heart. 
   Verna pulled her horse around and put a foot 
into the stirrup. Why would the Imperial Order 
think they could get a wagon through, especially at 
night? Certainly, they weren't foolish enough to 
think it wouldn't be seen in the dark. She paused 
and looked at the soldier hurrying away. 
   "Wait." He stopped and turned. "I changed my 
mind. I'll go with you." 
   It was foolish to use the rocks they had ready 
overhead; they might need them if a full-scale 
attack suddenly charged up this pass. It was silly 
to waste such a defense. 
   She followed the man up the trail to the lookout 
point where his company waited. The men were all 
watching through the trees. The road out ahead and 
below them looked silver in the light of the rising 
moon. 
   Verna inhaled the fragrance of balsam firs as 

she watched the wagon making its way up the silvery 
road, being pulled by a single, plodding horse. 
Tense archers waited at the ready. They had a 
shielded lantern standing by to light fire arrows 
in order to set the wagon ablaze. 
   Verna didn't see anyone in the wagon. An empty 
wagon seemed pretty suspicious. She recalled the 
strange message from Ann, warning her to let an 
empty wagon through. 
   But they had already done that. Verna recalled 
that the girl with the message from Jagang had come 
in by this route and method. Verna's heart pounded 
in worry at the thought of what new message Jagang 
might be sending, now. 
Perhaps it was Zedd's and Adie's heads. 
   "Hold," she called to the archers. "Let it 
through, but stand at the ready in case it's a 
trick." 
   Verna made her way down the narrow path between 
the trees. She stood behind a screen of spruce, 
watching. When the wagon was close enough, she 
opened a small gap in the weave of the vast shield 
she and the Sisters had spun across the pass. The 
pattern of magic was barbed with every nasty sort 
of magic they could conjure. This pass was small 
enough that the shields alone could hold it, and if 
the enemy did come, it was too small for any 
numbers to come all at once. Even without the 
formidable shield, the pass was relatively easy to 
hold. 
   When the wagon passed through the shield, Verna 
closed the hole. When it rolled close enough, one 
of the men ran out of the trees and look control of 
the horse. As the wagon drew to a halt, dozens of 
archers behind him and on the other side, behind 
Verna, drew their weapons. Verna had spun a web of 
magic and she was prepared to unleash it at the 
slightest provocation. 
   The tarp in the bed of the wagon eased back. A 
little girl sat up. It was the child who had 

brought the message the last time. Her face lit up 
at seeing Verna, someone she recognized. 
   Verna's heart skipped a beat at the thought of 
what the message might be, this time. 
"I brought some friends," the girl said. 
   People lying in the back of the wagon pulled the 
tarp aside and started sitting up. They looked like 
parents with their frightened children. 
   Verna blinked in shock when she saw some of the 
people help Adie up. The sorceress looked to be 
exhausted. Her black and gray hair was no longer 
parted neatly in the middle, but was in as much 
disarray as Zedd's usually was. 
   Verna rushed over, leaning in to help the woman. 
"Adie! Oh, Adie, am I ever glad to see you!" 
   The old sorceress smiled. "I be awfully happy to 
see you, too, Verna." 
   Verna's gaze swept over the people in the wagon, 
her heart still pounding with apprehension. 
"Where's Zedd?" 
"He escaped as well." 
Verna closed her eyes with a silent prayer of 
gratitude. 
Her eyes popped open. "If he escaped, then where is 
he?" 
   "He be on his way back to the Keep, in 
Aydindril," Adie said in her raspy voice. "The 
enemy has captured it." 
"We heard." 
"That old man intends to have his Keep back." 
"Knowing Zedd, I feel sorry for anyone who gets in 
his way." 
"Rikka be with him." 
   "Rikka! What was she doing over there? I ordered 
her not to do that!" Verna realized how that must 
have sounded. "We thought it would be pointless, 
that she wouldn't have a chance and we would just 
lose her for nothing." 
"Rikka be Mord-Sith. She has a mind of her own." 
   Verna shook her head. "Well, even though she 

wasn't supposed to do that, now that I see you 
again and know Zedd has escaped as well, I'm glad 
that that obstinate woman didn't listen to me." 
"Captain Zimmer be on his way back as well." 
"Captain Zimmer!" 
   "Yes, he and some of his men decided to come to 
rescue us as well. They be coming back the way they 
travel, unseen in the night." Adie gestured to the 
surrounding trees. "They be up around us, 
protecting the wagon on our way in. The captain 
feared that some of the enemy might stop the wagon 
and capture us all over again. He wanted to make 
sure we be safe." 
   The captain and his men had special signals that 
allowed them to move through the pass without being 
attacked by their own men, or the Sisters, by 
mistake. The nature of the way Captain Zimmer and 
his men worked was that they were, for the most 
part, outside regular command. Kahlan had set it up 
that way so they could act on their own initiative. 
While it could at times be aggravating, those men 
accomplished more than anyone ever expected. 
   "Zedd wanted me to help these people escape." 
Adie gave Verna a meaningful look. "There be others 
we could not help." 
   Verna glanced over at the people huddling 
together at the back of the wagon. "I can only 
imagine what Jagang has been doing with people like 
that." 
"No," Adie said. "I doubt you can." 
   Verna changed to an even more horrifying 
subject. "Has Jagang been able to find anything 
from the Keep, so far, that he will use against 
us?" 
"Thankfully, no. Zedd set a spell that destroyed 
the things stolen from the Keep. There be a big 
explosion in the middle of their camp." 
"Like the one back in Aydindril that killed so many 
of them?" 
   "No, but it still caused much destruction and 

killed some important people—even some of Jagang's 
Sisters, I believe." 
   Verna never thought she would see the day that 
she would be pleased to hear that Sisters of the 
Light had died. Those women were controlled by the 
dream walker, and even when they had been offered 
freedom, they had been too afraid to believe those 
trying to rescue them. They had chosen to remain 
Jagang's slaves. 
   With a sudden thought, Verna grabbed a fistful 
of Adie's robes. "Could the spell Zedd ignited 
possibly have taken out Jagang?" 
   With her completely white eyes, Adie looked back 
up Dobbin Pass toward the Imperial Order camp. "I 
wish I had better news, Prelate, but Captain 
Zimmer, on the way out, told me that just as we 
were about to be rescued, an assassin managed to 
get deep into the inner camp." 
"An assassin? Who was it? Where was he from?" 
   "None of us knows. He appeared much like others 
from the Old World. The intruder be driven by a 
single-minded determination to get to Jagang and 
kill him. He somehow made it into the inner 
defenses, killed some people, and took the uniform 
of the elite guards so he might get to Jagang. The 
guards somehow recognized he not be one of their 
own. They hacked the man to pieces before he could 
get close to the emperor. 
   "Jagang left the area until his men could check 
over their defenses and make sure there be no more 
assassins about. Many of the Sisters went with him, 
helping with his safeguards. That be when Zedd set 
off the sunset spell. We did not know Jagang had 
left the area, but it would have make no 
difference. Zedd had to use the spell when it be 
put before him. The spell be triggered by the sun 
setting." 
Verna nodded. For a moment, she had been hoping ... 
   "Still, you and Zedd escaped, and that's what 
matters for now. Thank the Creator." 

   "A surprising number of people showed up all at 
once to rescue us." Adie lifted an eyebrow. "I do 
not recall seeing the Creator among them." 
   The warm breeze ruffled Verna's curly hair. "I 
suppose not, but you know what I mean." 
   The crickets in the woods kept up their steady 
chirping. Life seemed to be a little sweeter, their 
situation a little less hopeless. 
   She let out a sigh. "I hope the Creator will at 
least help Zedd and Rikka take back the Keep." 
   "Zedd will not need the Creator's help," Adie 
said. "Another man showed up to help get us out. 
Chase be an old friend of Zedd, me, and Richard. 
Chase will have those holding the Keep praying for 
the protection of the Creator." 
   "Then we can look forward to the day the Keep is 
back in our hands and Jagang is denied help in 
breaking through the passes into D'Hara." 
   Verna waved her arm, signaling, and the four 
couples standing at the back of the wagon shuffled 
forward with their children. 
"Welcome to D'Hara," Verna told them. "You will be 
safe, here." 
   "Thank you for helping get us out," one of the 
men said with a bow of his head to Adie. "I feel 
ashamed, now, of the terrible things I had been 
thinking of you." 
   Adie smiled to herself as she tightened her thin 
fingers on his shoulder. "True. But I could not 
blame you." 
   The girl who had brought the message the last 
time tugged on Verna's dress. "This is my mother 
and father. I told them how nice you were to me, 
before." 
   Verna squatted down and hugged the girl. 
"Welcome back, child. Welcome back." 
 
 
 
 

jeff 
 
          CHAPTER 55 
 
 
 
   Whenever a breath of wind sighed among the 
branches above, silvery streamers of moonlight 
cascading down through the forest canopy glided 
about in the darkness like ghosts on the prowl. 
Kahlan peered around, barely able to make out the 
somber shapes of the looming trees as she tried to 
see if there was anything that did not belong. She 
heard no chirps of bugs, no small animals scurrying 
among the leaf litter, no mockingbirds singing 
throughout the night as there had been. Carefully 
picking her way over the mossy ground, she did her 
best to see in the gloom so as not to step in holes 
and cracks in the rocky places or pools of standing 
water in the low areas. 
   Ahead of her, Richard slipped through the open 
forest like a shadow. At times he seemed to 
disappear, causing her to fear that he might no 
longer be with them. He had ordered everyone 
following behind him not to talk and to walk as 
quietly as possible, but none of them could move 
through the woods as silently as he did. 
   For some reason, Richard was as tense as his 
bowstring. He felt that something was wrong, but he 
didn't know what. While it might seem a beautiful 
moonlit night in the woods, the way Richard was 
acting, on top of the haunting silence, had draped 
a pall of foreboding over everyone. 
Kahlan was at least pleased that the skies had 
cleared. The rains of recent days had made travel 
not just difficult, but miserable. While it hadn't 
really been cold, the wet made it feel so. Taking 
shelter had not been an option. Until they had the 
final dose of the antidote, they had no choice but 
to press on. 

   The antidote from Northwick had improved 
Richard's condition a little, in addition to 
stopping the advance of the symptoms of his 
poisoning, but now the temporary improvement was 
dissipating. Kahlan was so worried for him that she 
had no appetite. 
   They now had well over double the number of men 
with them, and many more than that were making 
their way toward the city of Hawton by different 
routes. Those other groups of men planned to 
eliminate the lesser detachments of Imperial Order 
soldiers stationed in villages along the way. 
Richard, Kahlan, and their smaller group were 
pushing toward Hawton as rapidly as possible, 
deliberately avoiding contact with the enemy so as 
to get there before Nicholas and his soldiers knew 
they were on their way. Stealth would afford them 
the best chance of recovering the final dose of the 
antidote. 
   Once they had the antidote, then they could 
gather with the rest of the men for an attack. 
Kahlan knew that if they could first eliminate 
Nicholas it would make it much easier, and less 
risky, to defeat the remaining Imperial Order 
troops. If she could somehow find a way to get 
close to Nicholas she could touch him with her 
power. She knew better than to suggest such an idea 
to Richard; he would never go along with it. 
   To a certain extent, Kahlan felt responsible for 
what these people had suffered under the Imperial 
Order. After all, if not for her freeing the 
chimes, the boundary protecting Bandakar would 
still be in place. Yet, if these people could rid 
themselves of the Imperial Order, the changes that 
had come about also meant the true freedom they had 
never really enjoyed and, with it, the opportunity 
for better lives. 
   The change in the people in Northwick had been 
heartening to witness. That night, the men Richard 
and Kahlan had brought had stayed up most of the 

night talking to the people there, explaining the 
things Richard and Kahlan had explained to them. 
The morning after the annihilation of the soldiers 
who had taken over their city and held them in the 
grip of fear, the people had celebrated by singing 
and dancing in the streets. Those people had 
learned not only just how precious freedom really 
was, but also that their old ways provided no real 
tools for improving the quality of their lives. 
   After Richard had dissolved the ancient 
illusions of the Wise One's wisdom and the 
meaningless tenets the speakers substituted for 
knowledge, and after the killing of the enemy 
soldiers, the men of Northwick had not been shy 
about volunteering to help rid their land of the 
Imperial Order. Freed from the enforced blindness 
of a repressive mindset, many now hungered aloud 
for a future of their own making. 
   Kahlan unexpectedly came up against Richard's 
outstretched arm. She put a hand to her chest, over 
her galloping heart, then immediately turned and 
passed the signal to stop back to those behind. 
There was still no sound in the dark woods—not so 
much as the buzz of a mosquito. 
   Richard slipped his pack off of his back, set it 
on a low rock, and started quietly searching 
through it. 
Kahlan leaned close to whisper. "What are you 
doing?" 
   "Fire. We need light. Pass the word back for 
some of the men to get out torches." 
   While Richard pulled out a steel and flint, 
Kahlan whispered instructions to Cara, who in turn 
passed them back. In short order, several men 
tiptoed forward with torches. 
   The men gathered in close, squatting down beside 
a low jumble of rock next to Richard. He picked a 
stick up off the ground and dipped it in a small 
container from his pack. He then wiped the stick 
across the top of a high point on the rock. 

   "I'm putting some pine resin on this rock," he 
told the men. "Hold your torches over it so that 
when I strike a spark and the resin flames up, it 
will light the torches." 
   Pine resin, painstakingly collected from rotting 
trees, was valuable for starting fires in the rain. 
A spark would ignite it even when wet. It burned 
hot enough to often be able to catch damp wood on 
fire. 
   Richard had always seemed at home in the dark. 
Kahlan had never seen him need to have light like 
this. She stared intently out into the night, 
wondering what it was he thought might be out there 
that they couldn't see. 
   "Cara," Richard whispered, "pass the word back. 
I want everyone to get out a weapon. Now." 
   Without hesitation, Cara turned to pass on the 
orders. After a seemingly endless span of silence, 
broken only by the soft whisper of steel sliding 
past leather, word came back and she leaned down 
toward Richard. "Done." 
Richard looked up at Kahlan and Jennsen. "Both of 
you, as well." 
   Kahlan drew her sword, Jennsen her silver-
handled dagger with the ornate letter R that stood 
for the House of Rahl. 
   Richard struck the spark. The pine pitch flamed 
up with an angry hiss; the torches caught; light 
ignited in the heart of the dark forest. 
   In the sudden, harsh glare, everyone turned and 
looked about to see what might be hiding in the 
darkness around them. 
Men gasped. 
   In the trees all around them, perched on 
branches everywhere, sat black-tipped races. 
Hundreds of them. Beady black eyes watched the 
people. 
   In that moment of sudden bright light, 
everything but the flickering flame was silent and 
still. 

With a burst of wild cries, the races launched 
their attack. 
   From all around, all at once, the races 
descended on them. The night air suddenly filled 
with a riot of glossy black feathers, the sweep of 
huge wings, hooked beaks, and reaching talons. 
After such a long silence, the sound of piercing 
cries and beating wings was deafening. 
   Everywhere, the people met the attack with 
fierce determination. Some of the men were knocked 
to the ground, or stumbled and fell. Others cried 
out as they tried to protect themselves with one 
arm while driving off the attack with the other. 
Men hacked at the races atop their friends and 
turned to ward off other screeching beasts that 
flew in toward them. 
   Kahlan saw the red-striped breast of a race 
abruptly appear right before her face. She swung 
her sword, lopping off a wing, and spun around, 
bringing the sword up to hit another bird coming in 
from the other side. She stabbed a race on the 
ground at her feet as it reached in with its beak, 
like a vulture, to try to rip flesh from her leg. 
   Richard's sword was a blur of silver slashing 
through the winged attackers. A cloud of black 
feathers surrounded him. The birds were attacking 
everyone, but the assault appeared to be centered 
around Richard. It almost seemed as if the races 
were trying to drive the people back from Richard 
so that more of the birds could get at him. 
   Jennsen frantically stabbed at birds going for 
him. Kahlan swung at others, knocking them to the 
ground, wounded or dead. With measured efficiency, 
Cara snatched them out of the air and swiftly wrung 
their necks. 
   Everywhere, men stabbed, cut, and hacked at the 
onslaught of fierce raptors. Some men used their 
torches as weapons. The night was filled with the 
screams of the birds, with the flapping of wings, 
with the thud of weapons striking home. Birds 

tumbled and fell as they were hit. More dove in to 
take their place. The trees all around poured the 
monstrous birds down on them. Wounded and dying 
birds struggling on the ground made the forest 
floor a writhing sea of black feathers. 
The ferocity of the attack was frightening. 
And then, it was suddenly over. 
   A few of the birds on the ground, wings spread, 
still tried to get up, their feathers making a 
silken rasp as they rubbed against the feathers of 
dead birds beneath them. Here and there men stabbed 
or chopped at a bird still alive on the ground at 
their feet. It wasn't long before all the creatures 
finally went still. No more races came from the 
sky. 
Dead races mounded up against Richard like snow 
drifted in a storm. 
   Men panted as they held torches aloft. They 
peered into the darkness beyond the light, looking 
for any sign of more trouble from above. But for 
the hissing of the torches, the night was silent. 
The branches of the trees all around appeared to be 
empty. 
   Kahlan could see scratches and cuts on Richard's 
arms and hands. She waded through the sea of dead 
birds to get to his pack sitting on a near by rock. 
The forest floor around him was nearly knee-deep 
with dead races. She had to flip a dead bird off 
Richard's pack. Pushing her hand down into his 
pack, she blindly searched until her fingers found 
a folded waxed paper that contained a salve. 
   Cara rushed in close to Richard when she saw him 
unsteady on his feet. She grasped his arm, lending 
him support. 
   "What in the world was that all about?" Jennsen 
asked, panting, still catching her breath as she 
pulled strands of red ringlets off her sweaty face. 
"I guess they finally decided to try to get us," 
Owen said. 
   Jennsen patted Betty's head when the goat 

stepped unhurt through the corpses of races to get 
in closer to her friends. "One thing for sure is 
that they finally found us again." 
   "There was an important difference this time," 
Richard said. "They weren't following us. They were 
here, waiting for us." 
Everyone stared at him. 
   "What do you mean?" Kahlan paused at daubing 
salve on his cuts. "They've followed us before. 
They must have seen us." 
   Betty moved in closer, leaning against Kahlan's 
leg to stand and watch her and Richard talking. 
Kahlan wasn't in the mood to be scratching the 
goat's ears, so she pushed her out of the way. 
   Richard laid a hand on Cara's shoulder to steady 
himself. Kahlan noticed how he swayed on his feet. 
At times he was having difficulty standing. 
   "No. They haven't been following us. The skies 
have been empty." Richard gestured to the dead 
birds all around him. "These races weren't 
following us. They were waiting for us. They knew 
we were coming here. They lay in wait." 
That was a chilling thought—if it was true. 
   Kahlan straightened, holding the waxed paper in 
one hand; a finger of her other hand, loaded with 
salve, waiting. "How could they possibly know where 
we were going?" 
"That's what I'd like to know," Richard said. 
Nicholas glided back into his body, his mouth still 
opened wide in a yawn that was not a yawn. He 
stretched his neck to one side and then the other. 
He smiled with his delight in the game. It had been 
dazzling. It had been delicious. His widening grin 
bared his teeth. 
   Nicholas staggered to his feet, wavering 
unsteadily for a moment. It reminded him of the way 
Richard Rahl swayed on his feet, dizzy with the 
effects of a poison that was inexorably doing its 
deadly work. 
Poor Richard Rahl needed the last dose of the 

antidote. 
   Nicholas opened his mouth again in a yawn that 
was not a yawn, twisting his head, eager to be 
away, eager to learn more. He would return soon 
enough. He would watch them. Watch them as they 
worried, as they struggled in vain to understand 
what was happening, watch them as they approached. 
They would reach him in mere hours. 
The fun was truly about to begin. 
   Nicholas wound his way across the room, stepping 
between the bodies sprawled everywhere. They had 
all died suddenly when the races were killed. Here 
and there the dead were stacked in piles atop one 
another, the way the races in those dark woods had 
been heaped around Richard Rahl. 
   Such violent deaths. Those spirits had been 
horrified as they were slaughtered, but there was 
nothing they could do to stop it. 
   Nicholas had controlled their souls, their fate. 
Now they were beyond his control; they now belonged 
to the Keeper of the dead. 
   Nicholas ran his fingernails back through his 
hair, shivering with delight as he felt the slick 
oils glide through his fingers and against his 
palm. 
   He had to drag three bodies aside before he 
could get at the door. He threw the heavy latch 
over and opened the thick door. 
"Najari!" 
   The man stood not far away, leaning against the 
wall, waiting. His muscular form straightened. 
"What is it?" 
   Nicholas opened his arm back in graceful 
indication, his fingers tipped with black nails 
stretching wide. "There is a mess in here that 
needs to be cleaned up. Get some men and have these 
bodies taken away." 
   Najari stepped to the door and stretched his 
neck to peer into the room. 
"The whole crowd we brought in?" 

   "Yes." Nicholas snapped. "I needed them all, and 
some more I had the soldiers fetch for me. I'm done 
with them all, now. Get rid of them." 
   When the races had attacked, each had been 
driven by the soul of one of these ungifted people, 
and each of those souls had been driven by 
Nicholas. It had been a stupendous achievement—the 
simultaneous command of so many with such precision 
and coordination. When the races had been killed, 
though, so, too, died the bodies back in the room 
with Nicholas. 
   He supposed that one day he really should learn 
how to call back such spirits when their hosts 
died. It would save him from having to get new ones 
each time. But people were plentiful. Besides, if 
he were to find a way to call them back, then he 
would have to mind the people once their spirits 
returned, after they had learned his use of them. 
   Still, it was annoying when Richard Rahl killed 
those Nicholas used to help him watch. 
"How much longer?" Najari asked. 
   Nicholas smiled, knowing what the man was 
curious about. "Soon. Very soon. You must get these 
people out of here before they arrive. Then, keep 
our men out of the way. Let them do as they will." 
Najari flashed a cunning smile. "As you wish, 
Nicholas." 
Nicholas lifted an eyebrow. "Emperor Nicholas." 
   Najari chuckled as he started away to get his 
men. "Emperor Nicholas." 
"You know, Najari, I've been thinking." 
Najari turned back. "About what?" 
   "About Jagang. We've worked so hard. What reason 
is there for me to bow to him? A legion of my 
silent army could swoop in upon him and that would 
be that. I wouldn't even need an army. He could 
mount his horse one day, and I could be there in 
the beast, waiting to throw him and trample him to 
death." 
Najari rubbed his stubble. "True enough." 

   "Of what use is Jagang, really? I could just as 
easily rule the Imperial Order. In fact, I would be 
better suited to it." 
Najari cocked his head. "Then what of the plans 
we've already laid?" 
   Nicholas shrugged. "Why change them? But why 
should I give the Mother Confessor to Jagang? And 
why let him have the world? Perhaps I will keep her 
for my own amusement... and have the world as 
well." 
 
 
 
 
 
           CHAPTER 
56 
  
 
 
    Richard pressed his back up against the 
clapboard wall. He had to pause a moment, waiting 
for the world to stop spinning. He was so cold he 
felt numb. As dark as it was, he was having 
difficulty seeing. 
But it was more than the darkness. 
He knew that his sight was beginning to fail him. 
   At night it was worse. He had always been able 
to see better at night than most other people. Now, 
he was no better able to see at night than Kahlan. 
That wasn't a big difference, but he knew it was 
meaningful. 
The third state of the poison had begun. 
Fortunately, they were close to having the final 
dose. 
"This is the alleyway, here," Owen whispered. 
   Richard looked up and down the street. He didn't 
see anything moving. The city of Hawton was asleep. 
He wished he could be, too. He was so exhausted and 
dizzy he could hardly put one foot in front of the 
other. He had to take shallow breaths to keep from 

coughing. Coughing brought on the worst pain. At 
least he wasn't coughing up blood. 
   Coughing now, though, could be fatal, so he 
swallowed, trying to stifle the urge. If they made 
any noise, it might alert the soldiers. 
   When Owen moved into the alleyway, Richard, 
Kahlan, Cara, Jenn-sen, Tom, Anson, and a handful 
of their men followed in single file. 
There had been no lights burning in the windows 
facing the streets. As the small group moved 
through the alley close to the walls, Richard saw 
no windows. A few of the walls did have doors. 
   At a narrow space between buildings, Owen turned 
in, following the brick path hardly wider than 
Richard's shoulders. 
Richard seized Owen by the arm. "Is this the only 
way in?" 
   "No. See there? The walkway goes through to the 
street in front, and there is another door inside 
that comes up on the other side of the building." 
   Satisfied that they had alternative escape 
routes, Richard gave Owen a nod. They took the dark 
stairwell down to a room at the bottom under the 
building. Tom struck flint to steel a number of 
times until he managed to light a candle. 
   Once the candle was lit, Richard gazed around at 
the small, empty, windowless room. "What is this 
place?" 
"The basement of a palace," Owen said. 
Richard frowned at the man. "What are we doing 
here?" 
Owen hesitated and glanced at Kahlan. 
   Kahlan saw the look. She pushed Richard down 
until he sat and leaned back against the wall. A 
footsore Betty squeezed between them and lay down 
beside Richard, pleased to have a rest. Jennsen 
squatted close, on the other side of Betty. Cara 
closed him in from the other side. 
   Kahlan knelt in front of him and then sat back 
on her heels. "Richard, I asked Owen to bring us 

here—to a place where we would be safe. We can't 
all go into that building to get the antidote." 
   "I suppose not. That's a good idea. Owen and I 
will go; the rest of you can stay here where no one 
will spot you." 
   He started to get up, but Kahlan pushed him back 
down. "Richard, you have to wait here. You can't 
go. You're dizzy. You need to save your strength." 
   Richard gazed into her green eyes, eyes that 
always captivated him, always made everything else 
but her seem unimportant. He wished they could be 
alone somewhere peaceful, like the home he had 
built for her back in the mountains where he had 
taken her to recover after she had been hurt... 
when she had lost their unborn child after being 
beaten nearly to death by those brutes. 
   She was the most precious thing alive. She was 
everything. He wanted so much for her to be safe. 
"I'm strong enough," he said. "I'll be fine." 
   "If you start coughing in that place where the 
soldiers are, then you'll be caught and never get 
out—much less recover the antidote. You and Owen 
would both be caught. There is no telling how many 
soldiers are in there. What will happen to us if 
you're caught? What would happen if. .." Her voice 
trailed off. She hooked a stray strand of hair 
behind an ear. "Look, Richard, Owen went in there 
before; he can go in there again." 
   Richard saw desperation in her eyes. She was 
terrified of losing him. He hated that he was 
making her afraid. 
   "That's right, Lord Rahl," Owen assured him. "I 
will get the antidote and bring it to you." 
   "While we're waiting, you can get some rest," 
Kahlan said. "Some sleep would do you more good 
than anything else until they bring back the 
antidote." 
   Richard couldn't debate how tired he was. He 
still didn't like the idea of not going himself. 
"Tom could go with him," Cara suggested. 

   Richard looked up into Cara's blue eyes. He 
looked up into Kahlan's eyes. He knew he had 
already lost this argument. 
"How far is this place?" Richard asked Owen. 
   "A goodly distance. Here, we are just at the 
fringe of the city. I wanted to take us to a place 
where we would be less likely to encounter 
soldiers. The antidote is at most an hour distant. 
I thought it best if we were not too far into the 
city if we had to get back out, but we are close 
enough so that you will not have long to wait for 
the antidote." 
Richard nodded. "All right. We'll wait here for you 
and Tom." 
Kahlan paced in the small, damp basement as the 
others sat against the wall, waiting in silence. 
She couldn't stand the tension. It felt too much 
like a deathwatch. 
They were so close that it made it seem impossibly 
far. They had waited so long that the small amount 
of time left seemed an eternity that would never 
end. Kahlan told herself to calm down. Shortly, 
Richard would have the antidote. He would be 
better, then. He would be cured of the poison, 
then. 
   But what if it didn't work? What if he had 
already waited so long that he was beyond any cure? 
No, the man who had made the poison and the 
antidote had told Owen that this last dose would 
cure Richard of the poison for good. Because of the 
beliefs of these people, they would be certain that 
the poison was reversible. They would never have 
used it if they believed it would risk a life. 
But what if what they believed was wrong? 
   Kahlan rubbed her shoulders as she paced, and 
admonished herself to stop inventing problems to 
worry about. They had enough real problems without 
letting her imagination get carried away. They 
would get the antidote and then they would address 
the problem with Richard's gift. After that, they 

had to turn their attention to larger issues of 
Jagang and his army. 
   When Kahlan glanced over and saw that Richard 
had fallen sound asleep, she decided to go outside 
and watch for Owen and Tom. Cara, leaning against 
the wall beside Richard, guarding him while he 
slept, nodded when Kahlan whispered to her, telling 
her where she was going. Jennsen, seeing that 
Kahlan was heading for the door, quietly followed 
her out. Betty had fallen asleep beside Richard, so 
Jennsen left her there. 
   The moonlit night had cooled. Kahlan thought she 
should be sleepy, but she was wide awake. She 
followed the brick path out between the buildings 
toward the alley. 
   "Owen will be back soon," Jennsen said. "Try not 
to worry. It will be over, soon." 
   Kahlan glanced over in the dark. "Even after he 
has the antidote, we still have his gift to worry 
about. Zedd is too far. We're going to have to get 
to Nicci right away. She is the only one close 
enough that might know what to do to help him." 
"Do you think the trouble with his gift is getting 
worse?" 
Kahlan was haunted by the pain she so often saw in 
his eyes. But there was more to it. 
   "When he used the sword the last two times I 
could see that even the sword's magic had failed 
him. He's in more trouble with his gift than he 
will admit." 
   Jennsen chewed her lower lip as she watched 
Kahlan pace. "Tonight he will have the antidote," 
she finally said in soft assurance. "Soon, we can 
be on our way to Nicci." 
   Kahlan turned when she thought she heard a noise 
in the distance. It had sounded like the crunch of 
a footstep. Two dark figures appeared off at the 
end of the alleyway. By the way one of them towered 
over the other, Kahlan was pretty sure that it was 
Tom and Owen. She wanted to run to meet them, but 

she knew how deadly tricks could be, so she drew 
Jennsen back with her around the corner of the 
building, into the darkest part of the shadows. 
This was no time to get careless. 
   When the two men reached the narrow walkway and 
started to turn in. Kahlan stepped out in front of 
them, prepared to unleash her power if necessary. 
"Mother Confessor—it's me, Tom, and Owen," Tom 
whispered. 
Jennsen let out a breath. "Are we ever glad to see 
you back." 
   Owen looked both ways down the alley. When he 
turned to check, Kahlan saw moonlight reflect off 
tears running down his face. 
"Mother Confessor, we have trouble," Tom said. 
Owen spread his hands. "Mother Confessor, I, I..." 
   Kahlan grabbed his shirt in both fists. "What's 
wrong? The antidote was there, wasn't it? You have 
it, don't you?" 
   "No." Owen choked back his tears and pulled out 
a folded piece of paper. "Instead of the bottle of 
antidote, I found this in its hiding place." 
   Kahlan snatched it out of his hands. With 
trembling fingers, she unfolded the paper. She 
turned as she held it close so she could read it in 
the light of the moon. 
/ have the antidote. I also hold by a thread the 
lives of the people of Bandakar. I can end all 
their lives as easily as I can end the life of 
Richard Rahl ./ will give over the antidote and the 
lives of all the people in this empire in exchange 
for the Mother Confessor. 
    Bring the Mother Confessor to the bridge over 
the river one mile to the east of where you are. In 
one hour, if I do not have the Mother Confessor, I        
will pour the antidote in the river and then I will 
see to it that all the people of this city die. 
Signed, Emperor Nicholas 
Kahlan, her heart racing out of control, started 
east. 

   Tom grabbed her arm and held her back. "Mother 
Confessor, I know what it says." 
   Kahlan's hands wouldn't stop shaking. "Then you 
know why I have no choice." 
   Jennsen put herself in front of Kahlan to stop 
her from starting out once again. "What does the 
letter say?" 
"Nicholas wants me in exchange for the antidote." 
   Jennsen put her hands against Kahlan's shoulders 
to stop her. "What?" 
   "That's what the letter says. Nicholas wants me 
in exchange for the lives of everyone else in this 
empire and the antidote to save Richard's life." 
   "The lives of everyone else ... but how could he 
carry out such a threat?" 
   "Nicholas is a wizard. There are any number of 
deadly things available to such a man. If nothing 
else, he could use wizard's fire and incinerate the 
entire city." 
   "But his magic won't harm the people here—
they're pristinely un-gifted, the same as me." 
   "If he uses wizard's fire to set a building 
ablaze, like we did to those soldiers sleeping back 
in Owen's town, it won't matter to the people 
inside how the fire started. Once the buildings 
catch fire, then it's just regular fire—fire that 
will kill anyone. If not that, Nicholas has 
soldiers here. He could immediately start executing 
people. He could have thousands beheaded in hardly 
any time at all. I can't even imagine what else he 
could do, but he put this letter where the antidote 
was hidden, so I know he's not bluffing." 
   Kahlan stepped around Jennsen and started out 
again. She couldn't make herself stop trembling. 
She tried to slow her racing heart, but that didn't 
work, either. Richard had to have the antidote. 
That was what mattered. She focused her attention 
ahead as she marched swiftly up the dark street. 
   Tom paced along beside her, opposite Jennsen. 
"Mother Confessor, wait. We have to think this 

out." 
"I already have." 
   "We can take a force of men to the meeting 
place—take the antidote by force." 
   Kahlan kept going. "From a wizard? I don't think 
so. Besides, if Nicholas were to see such a force 
coming he would probably pour the antidote in the 
river. Then what? We have to do as he demands. We 
have to get our hands on the antidote, get it 
safely away from them." 
   "What makes you think that after Nicholas has 
you he won't then pour it in the river?" Tom asked. 
   "We'll have to make the exchange in a way that 
best insures we get the antidote. We aren't going 
to rely on his goodwill and honesty. Owen and 
Jennsen are pristinely ungifted. They won't be 
harmed by his magic. They can help make sure we get 
the antidote in the exchange." 
   Jennsen pulled her hair away from her face as 
she leaned close. "Kahlan, you can't do this. You 
can't. Please, Richard will go crazy— we all will. 
Please, for his sake, don't do this." 
"At least he will be alive to go crazy." 
Tears streamed down Jennsen's face. "But this is 
suicide!" 
   Kahlan watched the buildings, the streets, 
making sure there were no troops to hem them in. 
"Let's hope Nicholas thinks so, too." * 
   "Mother Confessor," Owen pleaded, "you can't do 
this. This is what Lord Rahl has shown us is wrong. 
You can't bargain with a man like Nicholas. You 
can't try to appease evil." 
"I have no intention of appeasing Nicholas." 
Jennsen wiped tears from her cheek. "What do you 
mean?" 
   Kahlan stiffened her resolve. "What is our best 
chance of getting rid of the Imperial Order in this 
city—and all of Bandakar? Eliminating Nicholas. How 
better to get close to him than to make him think 
he has won?" 

   Jennsen blinked in surprise. "You intend to 
touch him with your power. That's what you're 
thinking, isn't it? You think you will have a 
chance to touch him with your Confessor power." 
"If I get him in my sight, he's dead." 
"Richard would never agree to this," Jennsen said. 
"I'm not asking him. This is my decision." 
   Tom stepped in front of her, blocking the way. 
"Mother Confessor, I'm sworn to protect the Lord 
Rahl, and I understand risking your life to protect 
him—but this is different. You may be acting to try 
to save his life, but at what cost? We would lose 
too much. You can't do this." 
   Owen moved around in front of her, too. "I 
agree. Lord Rahl will be more than crazy if you 
exchange yourself for the antidote." 
   Jennsen nodded her agreement. "He will kill us 
all. He will take off our heads for allowing you to 
do this." 
   Kahlan smiled at their tense expressions. She 
put a hand to the side of Jennsen's face. 
   "Remember back just after we'd met you, and I 
told you that there were times when there was no 
choice but to act?" 
Jennsen nodded, her tears returning. 
   "This is one of those times. Richard is getting 
sicker by the day. He's dying. If he doesn't get 
the antidote, he has no chance and will soon be 
dead. That's the truth of the way things are. 
   "How can we let this chance slip away from us? 
There are no more opportunities after this. Our 
chances to save him will forever be lost. It will 
be the end. I don't want to live without him. I 
don't want the rest of our people to live without 
him. 
   "If I do this, then Richard will live. If 
Richard lives, then there will still be a chance 
for me, too. I can touch Nicholas with my power, or 
Richard and the rest of you can think of something 
to do to save me. 

"But if Richard dies, then our chances end." 
   "But, Mother Confessor," Jennsen sobbed, "if you 
do this, then we'll lose you...." 
   Kahlan looked to each face, her anger rising. 
"If any of you have a better idea, then put words 
to it. Otherwise, you are risking me losing the 
only chance left." 
586 
 
NAKED EMPIRE 
   No one had anything to say. Kahlan was the only 
one with a realistic plan of action. The rest of 
them had only wishes. Wishing would not save 
Richard. 
Kahlan started out once again, hurrying her pace to 
get there in time. 
 
 
 
 
 
          CHAPTER 57 
 
 
 
  Kahlan paused in the quiet darkness not far from 
the bridge. She could just make out what appeared 
to be a burly man standing on the other side. He 
was all alone. She couldn't see his face, or tell 
what he looked like. She scanned the far bank of 
the river, along with the trees and buildings she 
could make out in the moonlight, looking for 
soldiers, or anyone else. 
   Jennsen clutched her arm. "Kahlan... please." 
Her voice was choked with tears. 
   Kahlan felt oddly calm. There were no options 
for her to weigh, so she suffered no gnawing 
indecision; there was only one choice. Richard 
lived, or he died. It was as simple as that. The 
choice was clear. 

   Her mind was made up, and with that came clarity 
and determination. She could now focus on what she 
was to do. 
   The river through the city was larger than 
Kahlan had expected. The steep banks to each side, 
in this area, anyway, were a few dozen feet high 
and lined with stone blocks. The bridge itself, 
wide enough for wagons to pass each other, had two 
arches to make the span and side rails with simple 
stone caps. The waters below were dark and swift. 
It was not a river she would want to have to try to 
swim. 
   Kahlan approached as far as the foot of the 
bridge and stopped. The man on the other side 
watched her. 
   "Do you have the antidote?" she called over to 
him. 
   He lifted what looked like a little bottle high 
above his head. He lowered the arm and pointed to 
the bridge. He wanted her to come across. 
"Mother Confessor," Owen pleaded, "won't you 
reconsider?" 
   She gazed into his wet eyes. "Reconsider what? 
If I will have Richard live rather than let him 
succumb to the poison? If I will try to kill 
Nicholas in order to make it possible to defeat 
them and for your people to have a better chance to 
free themselves? How would I ever live with myself 
if Richard died without the antidote and I knew 
there was something I could have done that would 
have saved him and also have given me a chance to 
get close enough to Nicholas to eliminate him? 
"I couldn't live with myself if I failed to do 
this. 
   "We are fighting this war to stop people like 
this, people who bring death upon us, people who 
want us dead because they cannot stand that we live 
our lives as we wish, that we are successful and 
happy. These people hate life; they worship death. 
They demand that we do the same and join them in 

their misery. 
   "As Mother Confessor, I decreed vengeance 
without mercy against the Imperial Order. Changing 
from our course is suicide. I will not reconsider." 
"What would you have us tell Lord Rahl?" Tom asked. 
She smiled. "That I love him, but he knows that." 
   Kahlan unbuckled her sword belt and handed it to 
Jennsen. "Owen, come with me." 
   Kahlan started out, but Jennsen threw her arms 
around her and hugged her fiercely. "Don't worry," 
she whispered. "We'll get the antidote to Richard, 
and then we'll come back for you." 
   Kahlan hugged Jennsen briefly, whispered her 
thanks, and then started onto the bridge. Owen 
walked at her side, saying nothing. 
The man on the far side watched, but stayed where 
he was. 
   In the center of the bridge, Kahlan stopped. 
"Bring the bottle," she called across. 
"Come over here and you can have it." 
   "If you want me, you will come to the center of 
the bridge and give the bottle to this man to take 
back, as Nicholas offered." 
   The man stood for a time, as if considering. He 
looked like a soldier. He didn't match the 
description of Nicholas that Owen had given her. 
Finally, he started onto the arch of the bridge. 
Owen whispered that it looked like the commander he 
had seen with Nicholas. Kahlan waited, watching the 
man walk through the moonlight. He wore a knife at 
one side and a sword at his other hip. 
When he had almost reached her, he came to a halt 
and waited. 
   Kahlan held her hand out. "The note said we were 
to trade. Me for what Nicholas has." 
   The man, his crooked nose flattened to the side, 
smiled. "So we were." 
   "I am the Mother Confessor. Either give me the 
bottle or you die here, now." 
   He pulled the square-sided bottle from his 

pocket and placed it in her hand. Kahlan saw that 
it was full of clear liquid. She pulled the cork 
and smelled it. It had the slight aroma of 
cinnamon, as had the other bottles of the antidote. 
   "He goes back with this," Kahlan said to the 
grim-looking man as she handed Owen the bottle. 
   "And you come with me," the man said as he 
grabbed her wrist. "Or we all die on this bridge. 
He may go, as agreed, but if you try to run you 
will die." 
Kahlan glanced to Owen. "Go," she growled. 
   Owen looked over at the man with black hair, 
then back to her. He looked like he had a lot to 
say, but he nodded and then ran back over the 
bridge to where Tom and Jennsen stood waiting, 
watching. 
   When Owen reached the other two, the man said, 
"Let's go, unless you'd like to die here." 
   Kahlan yanked her arm back. When he turned and 
started out, she followed behind him as they 
crossed the rest of the way over the bridge. She 
scanned the shadows among the trees on the far side 
of the river, the thousand hiding places among 
buildings beyond, the streets in the distance. She 
didn't see anyone, but that didn't really make her 
feel any better. 
   Nicholas was there, somewhere, hiding in the 
darkness, waiting to have her. 
   Suddenly, the night lit up from behind. Kahlan 
spun and saw the bridge enveloped in a boiling ball 
of flame. The fire turned black as it billowed up. 
Stones sailed into the air above the inferno. As 
the luminous cloud rose, she could see the bridge 
beneath the roaring fireball crumpling. The arches 
caved in on themselves and the entire structure 
began the long drop into the river. 
   With icy dread, Kahlan wondered if there were 
any more bridges across the river. How would she 
get back to Richard if she succeeded? How was help 
going to get to her if she didn't? 

   On the far side, Kahlan could see Tom, Jennsen, 
and Owen running back up the road toward where 
Richard slept. They were not about to waste time 
watching a bridge being destroyed. At the thought 
of Richard, Kahlan almost let out a sob. 
The man unexpectedly shoved her. "Move." 
   She glared at him, at his self-satisfied smile, 
at the smug confidence she saw in his eyes. 
   As she walked ahead of this man and he 
occasionally shoved her, Kahlan's temper was on a 
low boil. She had the urge to use her power and 
take out the despicable brute, but she had to 
concentrate on the task at hand: Nicholas. 
   Walking up the street leading away from the 
river, she was just able to make out soldiers 
hanging back in the shadows on the dark side 
streets, blocking every escape route. It didn't 
matter. At the moment, she wasn't interested in 
escape, but in her objective. The man behind her. 
as arrogantly as he was behaving, was also wary and 
treated her with cautious contempt. 
   The farther she walked into the city on the far 
side of the river, the closer the clusters of small 
buildings were packed together. Side streets of 
narrow twisting warrens ran off among the 
ramshackle structures. What trees there were grew 
crowded in close to the street. Their branches hung 
out over her like arms raised to snatch her in 
their claws. Kahlan tried not to think about how 
deep she was getting into enemy territory, and bow 
many men were surrounding her. 
   The last time she had been surrounded and 
trapped by such savage men she had been beaten and 
bad come perilously close to dying. Her unborn 
child had died. Her child. Richard's child. 
   She had also lost a kind of innocence that day, 
a simplistic sense of her invincibility. In its 
place had come the understanding of how frail life 
was, how frail her own life was, and how easily it 
could be lost. She knew how much it had hurt 

Richard to fear he might lose her. She remembered 
the terrible agony in his eyes every time he had 
looked at her. It was completely different from the 
pain she saw in his eyes from his gift. It had been 
a helpless suffering for her. She hated the thought 
of that pain returning to haunt him. 
   From the shadows to the right side, a man 
stepped out from behind a building. He wore black 
robes, covered in layers of what looked like strips 
of cloth, almost as if he were covered in black 
feathers. They lifted in the breeze created by his 
stride, lending him an unsettling, floating 
fluidity as he moved. 
   His hair was slicked back with oils that 
glistened in the moonlight. Close-set, small black 
eyes rimmed in red peered out at her from an 
altogether unwholesome face. He held his wrists to 
his chest, as if he were holding back claws tipped 
with black fingernails. 
   Kahlan needed no introduction to know that this 
was Nicholas the Slide. She had taken confessions 
from men who appeared to be no more than polite 
young men, working fathers, or kindly grandfathers 
but in truth were men who had carried out acts of 
ruthless cruelty. To look at them behind their 
bench where they made shoes, or behind a counter 
where they sold bread, or in a field tending their 
animals it would be difficult to believe them 
capable of their vile crimes. But looking at 
Nicholas, Kahlan saw such utter corruption that it 
tainted everything about the man, right down to the 
indecent squint of his eyes. 
   "The prize of prizes," Nicholas hissed. He 
reached out, making a fist. "And I have her." 
   Kahlan hardly heard him. She was already lost to 
the commitment of wielding her power. This was the 
man who held the lives of innocent people hostage. 
This was the man who brought suffering and death in 
his shadow. This was the man who would kill her and 
Richard, if given the chance. 

She snatched his outstretched wrist capped with his 
fist. 
He appeared no more than a statue before her. 
The night, sprinkled with a vault of stars, seemed 
cold and distant. 
Beneath her grip of him, Kahlan could feel Nicholas 
tense, as if to draw back his arm. But it was too 
late. 
He had no chance. He was hers. 
Time was hers. 
   The men all around, who had begun rushing in, 
were far too distant to matter. They could never 
reach her in time to save Nicholas. Not even the 
man who had brought her from the bridge, who now 
stood not more than a few paces away, was close 
enough to matter. 
Time was hers. 
Nicholas was hers. 
   She gave no thought to what those men would do 
to her. Right then, it didn't matter. Right then, 
nothing but her ability to do what needed doing 
mattered. This man had to be eliminated. 
This was the enemy. 
   This was the man who had invaded a land to 
torture, rape, and murder innocent people in the 
name of the Imperial Order. This was a man who had 
been mutated by magic into a monster designed to 
destroy them. This man was a tool of conquest, a 
being of evil. 
This was the man who held Richard's life in the 
balance. 
The power within raged to be released. 
   All her emotions evaporated before the heat of 
that power. She no longer felt fear, hate, anger, 
horror. The emotions behind her reasons were now 
gone. In the all-consuming race of time suspended 
before the violent rush of her power, she felt only 
a resolute determination. Her power had become an 
instrument of pure reason. 
All her barriers fell before it. 

   In an infinitesimal spark of time as she watched 
the beady eyes staring at her, her power became 
all. 
   As she had done countless times before, Kahlan 
released her restraint on it, and released herself 
into the flux of violence focused to a singular 
purpose. 
   Where she should have felt the exquisite release 
of merciless force, she felt instead a terrifying 
emptiness. Where there should have been the fierce 
twisting of her power through this man's mind, 
there was ... nothing. 
Kahlan's eyes went wide as she gasped. 
As she felt hot pain knife through her. 
   As she felt the thrust of something foreign and 
terrible beyond anything she could have imagined. 
   Hot agony lanced through her consciousness all 
the way into her very soul. 
It felt as if her insides were being ripped apart. 
She tried to scream but couldn't. 
The night went blacker still. 
Kahlan heard laughter echoing through her soul. 
 
 
 
 
 
           CHAPTER 
58 
 
 
 
 
 
    Richard's eyes popped open. He felt suddenly, 
completely, horrifyingly wide awake. 
   The hair at the back of his neck lifted. It felt 
as if all his hair wanted to stand on end. His 
heart raced nearly out of control. 
   He shot to his feet. Cara, right beside him, 
caught his arm, surprised to see him suddenly stand 

up. Looking as if she feared he might fall, she 
frowned in concern. 
"Lord Rahl, what's the matter? Are you all right?" 
The room was silent. Startled faces all around 
stared up at him. 
"Get out!" he yelled. "Get your things! Everyone 
out! Now!" 
   Richard snatched up his pack. He didn't see 
Kahlan, but saw her pack and grabbed it as well. He 
wondered if he might still be dreaming. But he 
never remembered his dreams. He wondered if the 
feeling might be some lingering dread from a dream. 
No. It was real. 
   At first made confused and indecisive by 
Richard's sudden commands, when the men saw him 
urgently picking up his gear, everyone scooped up 
their things and scrambled to their feet. Men 
everywhere were snatching anything they saw lying 
about, no matter whose it was. 
   "Move!" Richard yelled as he pushed hesitant men 
toward the door. "Go. Move, move, move." 
It felt as if something brushed against him, a 
sliding caress of his flesh, something warm and 
wicked. Goose bumps tingled up his arms. 
"Hurry!" 
   Men scrambled wildly up the dark stairs ahead of 
him. Betty, caught up in the mood of panicked 
escape, shot between his legs and ran up the steps. 
Cara was close behind him. 
   The hair at the nape of his neck prickled as if 
lightning was about to strike. Richard scanned the 
dark, empty room. 
"Where's Kahlan and Jennsen?" 
"They went outside before," Cara said. 
"Good. Let's go!" 
   Just as Richard reached the top of the stairs, a 
fiery blast from back in the room knocked him 
sprawling. Cara fell on his legs. The stairwell lit 
in a flash of yellow and orange light as the entire 
basement filled with flames. Gouts of fire rolled 

up the stairwell. 
   Richard seized Cara's arm and dove with her 
through the open doorway. As they burst out into 
the night, the building behind them erupted in a 
thunderous roar of flames. Parts of the building 
broke apart, lifting in the billowing blaze. 
Richard and Cara ducked as flaming boards fell all 
around them, bouncing and flipping across the 
ground lit by the glow. 
   Finally away from the burning building, Richard 
made a quick appraisal of the alley, looking to see 
if there were any soldiers about to set upon them. 
Not seeing anyone he didn't recognize, he started 
the men moving down the alley to put some distance 
between them and the burning building. 
   "We have to get away from here," Richard told 
Anson. "Nicholas knew we were here. The fire will 
draw attention and troops. We haven't much time." 
   Looking around, he still didn't see Kahlan 
anywhere. His concern rising, he spotted Jennsen, 
Tom, and Owen running up the alley toward him. By 
the looks on their faces, he immediately knew that 
something was wrong. 
Richard seized Jennsen's arm as she ran up close. 
"Where's Kahlan?" 
Jennsen gulped air. "Richard—she, she—" 
   Jennsen burst into tears. Owen waved a square-
sided bottle and a piece of paper, as he, too, wept 
uncontrollably. 
   Richard looked at Tom, expecting an answer, and 
fast. "What's going on?" 
   "Nicholas found the antidote. He offered it in 
trade... for the Mother Confessor. We tried to stop 
her, Lord Rahl—I swear we did. She wouldn't listen 
to any of us. She insisted that she was going to 
get the antidote and then stop Nicholas. After you 
have the antidote, if she fails to stop Nicholas 
and return, she wants you to come for her." 
The leaping flames lit the grim faces around him. 
   "Once her mind is made up," Tom added, "there's 

no talking her out of it. She has a way of making 
you do as she says." 
   Richard knew the truth of that. Amid the roar 
and crackle of the fire, the building groaned and 
popped. The roof began to fall in, sending showers 
of sparks skyward. 
   Owen urgently handed the square-sided bottle to 
Richard. "Lord Rahl, she did it to get the 
antidote. She wanted you to have it so you could be 
well. She said that comes first—before it is too 
late." 
   Richard pulled the cork on the bottle. It had 
the slight aroma of cinnamon. He took the first 
swallow, expecting a thick, sweet, spicy taste. It 
didn't taste that way at all. 
He looked at Jennsen's and Owen's faces. "This is 
water." 
Jennsen's eyes went wide. "What?" 
   "Water. Water with a little cinnamon in it." 
Richard poured it on the ground. "It's not the 
antidote. She traded herself to Nicholas for noth-
ing." 
Jennsen, Owen, and Tom stood in mute shock. 
   Richard felt a kind of detached calm. It was 
over. It was the end of everything. He now had a 
limited amount of time to do what had to be done 
... and then everything was at an end for him. 
"Let me see this note," he said to Owen. 
   Owen handed it over. Richard had no trouble 
reading by the light coming from the fire. As Cara, 
Tom, Jennsen, and Owen watched, he read it over 
three times. 
   Finally, his arm lowered. Cara snatched the note 
away and read it for herself. 
   Richard gazed up the alleyway at the burning 
building, trying to figure it out. "How did 
Nicholas know that someone was coming for the 
antidote? He said we had an hour. How did he know 
we were here, this close, and coming for it, in 
order to write in the note that he gave us an 

hour?" 
   "Maybe he didn't," Cara said. "Maybe he wrote 
the note days ago. Maybe he just wrote that to make 
us rush without thinking." 
   "Maybe." Richard gestured behind him. "But how 
did he know we were here?" 
"Magic?" Jennsen offered. 
   Richard didn't like the idea that Nicholas 
apparently knew so much and was always one step 
ahead of them. 
   "How did you know that Nicholas was about to set 
this place ablaze?" Cara asked him. 
   "I woke suddenly," Richard said. "My headache 
was gone and I just knew we had to get out at 
once." 
"So your gift worked?" 
"I guess so. It does that—it works sometimes to 
warn me." 
   He wished he could somehow make it more 
dependable. At least this time it had been, or they 
would all be dead. 
   Tom peered out into the night. "So, you think 
Nicholas is close? That he knew where we were and 
set the place afire?" 
   "No. I think he wants us to believe he's close. 
He's a wizard. He could have sent wizard's fire 
from a great distance. I'm no expert on magic; he 
might have used some other means to set the fire 
from a distance." 
   Richard turned to Owen. "Take me to this 
building where you hid the antidote, where Nicholas 
was when you first saw him." 
   Without hesitation, Owen started out. The rest 
of the small group followed after him. 
"Do you think she will be there?" Jennsen asked. 
"There's only one way to find out." 
   By the time they reached the river they were out 
of breath. Richard was furious to find the bridge 
gone, with stone blocks from it scattered on the 
banks far below; the rest of it had apparently 

vanished beneath the dark water. Owen and some of 
the other men said that there was another bridge 
farther to the north, so they took off in that 
direction, following the road that twisted along 
beside the river. 
   Before they reached the bridge, a knot of 
soldiers rushed out from a side street with weapons 
raised, yelling battle cries. 
   The night rang with the distinctive sound of 
Richard's sword being drawn. While the blade was 
free, its magic was not. With the heart-pounding 
threat, it didn't matter. Richard had anger to 
spare and met the enemy with a cry of his own. 
   The first man lunged. Richard's strike was so 
violent it cleaved the burly man down through the 
leather armor over his shoulder to his opposite 
hip. As Richard spun without pause to a soldier 
coming at him from behind, he brought the sword 
around with such speed that the man was beheaded 
before he had cocked his sword arm. Richard drew 
his elbow back, smashing the face of a man rushing 
in to stab him from behind. A quick thrust took 
down another man before Richard could turn to 
finish the man behind, who had dropped to his 
knees, his hands covering his bleeding face. A 
moonlit flash of Richard's sword brought measured 
death. 
   Tom slashed through the men at the same time as 
Cara's Agiel took others down. Cries of surprised 
pain shattered the quiet of the night. All the 
while, Richard swept through the enemy like a wind-
borne shadow. 
   In mere moments, the night was again silent. 
Richard, Tom, and Cara had eliminated the enemy 
squad before any of their men could react to the 
threat that had come out of the darkness. Scarcely 
had they caught their breath when Richard was 
already charging onward to the bridge. 
   When they reached it, two slouching Imperial 
Order soldiers stood guard, pikes standing upright. 

The guards seemed to be surprised that people would 
be running toward them at night. Probably because 
the people of Bandakar had never before dared to 
cause them any trouble, the two guards stood 
watching Richard come until he pulled his sword 
from behind and took them down with a rapid thrust 
to the first man and a powerful sweeping slice that 
cut the second in two along with the pike standing 
at his side. 
   The small company raced unopposed across the 
bridge and into the darkness among the crowded 
buildings. Owen directed Richard at every turn as 
they rushed onward toward the place where Owen had 
hidden the antidote and where he had recovered, 
instead of the antidote, the note demanding Kahlan 
in exchange for Richard's life, in exchange for the 
lives of an empire naked to the dark talents of 
Nicholas the Slide. 
   In the somber heart of the city made up of 
small, squat, mostly single-story buildings, Owen 
pulled Richard to a stop. "Lord Rahl, down here, at 
the corner, we turn to the right. A short distance 
beyond is a square where people often gather. At 
the far end of the square will be a building taller 
than those around it. That is the place. Down a 
small street to the side of it, there will be an 
alleyway that runs behind the building. That is the 
way I got in, before." 
Richard nodded. "Let's go." 
   Without waiting to see if the tired men were 
with him, he started out, keeping in close to the 
buildings, to the shadows cast by the moon. Richard 
moved around the building at the corner. Hung over 
a small front window was a carved sign displaying 
loaves of bread. It was still too early for the 
baker to be at work. 
   Richard looked up and froze. There before him 
was the square with trees and benches. The building 
across the open square was in ruin. Only smoldering 
timbers remained. A small crowd had gathered 

around, watching what had hours ago obviously been 
a large fire. 
   "Dear spirits," Jennsen whispered in horror. She 
covered her mouth, fearing to speak aloud the worry 
on everyone's mind. 
   "She wouldn't be in there," Richard said in 
answer to the unspoken fear. "Nicholas wouldn't 
take her back here just to kill her." 
"Then why do this?" Anson asked. "Why burn the 
place down?" 
   Richard watched the wisps of smoke slowly 
curling up into the cool night air, at his hopes 
disappearing. "To send me a message that he has her 
and I'll not find her." 
   "Lord Rahl," Cara said under her breath, "I 
think we had better get out of here." 
   From the darkness around the building that had 
burned down, Richard could just start to make out 
the sight of soldiers by the hundreds, no doubt 
waiting to catch them. 
   "I feared as much," Owen said. "That's why I 
brought us in by such a circuitous route. See that 
road over there, where all the soldiers are? That's 
the road coming from the bridge we crossed." 
   "How do they always know where we are, or where 
we will be?" Jennsen whispered in frustration. "And 
when?" 
   Cara grabbed Richard's shirt and started pulling 
him back. "There are too many. We don't know how 
many more are around us. We need to get out of 
here." 
Richard was loath to admit it, but she was right. 
   "We have men waiting for us," Tom reminded him. 
"And a lot more coming." 
Richard's mind raced. Where was she? 
   Finally he nodded. The instant he did, Cara took 
him by his arm and they dashed off into the 
darkness. 
 
 

 
 
         CHAPTER 59 
 
 
 
   Under the sweep of stars, Richard willed himself 
to stand up straight and tall before all the men 
gathered beneath the spreading branches of the oak 
trees at the forest's edge. A few candles burned 
among the gathering so they could all see. By the 
time they charged into the city of Northwick to 
make their attack, it would just be light. 
   Richard wanted nothing more than to get into the 
city and find Kah-lan, but he had to use everything 
he had at hand to help, or he might waste the 
chance. He had to do this, first. 
   Most of these men had never really fought 
before. Owen and Anson's men from the town of 
Witherton had been there at the first attack on the 
sleeping houses and had taken part in the 
skirmishes there. The rest of the men were from 
Northwick, where Richard had gone to see the Wise 
One. They had been in on the clashes with the 
soldiers who weren't poisoned. There had not been a 
great many enemy soldiers to fight, but the men had 
done what had to be done. If anything, those minor 
but bloody encounters had served only to make the 
men more determined, showing them that they could 
win freedom themselves, that they were in control 
of their own destiny. 
   This, though, was different. This was going to 
be a battle on a scale they had not experienced. 
Worse, it was in a city that had, for the most 
part, willingly joined with the Order's cause. The 
populace was not likely to offer much help. 
   Had he more time, Richard might have come up 
with a better plan that would have chipped away at 
the enemy's numbers, first, but there was no time. 
It had to be now. 

   Richard stood before the men, hoping to give 
them something to help them carry the day. He had 
trouble thinking of anything but finding Kahlan. In 
order to have the best chance to save her, he put 
her from his mind and focused on the task at hand. 
   "I had hoped we wouldn't have to do it this 
way," he said. "I had hoped we could do it in some 
manner like we've done before, with the fire, or 
the poisoning, so that none of you would be hurt. 
We don't have that option. Nicholas knows we're 
here. If we run, his men will come after us. Some 
of us might escape . . . for a while." 
"We are finished running," Anson said. 
   "That's right," Owen agreed. "We have learned 
that running and hiding brings only greater 
suffering." 
   Richard nodded. "I agree. But you must 
understand that some of us are probably going to 
die, today. Maybe most of us. Maybe all of us. If 
any of you choose not to fight, then we must know 
now. Once we go in, we'll all be depending on each 
other." 
   He clasped his hands behind his back as he paced 
slowly before them. It was hard to make out their 
faces in the dim light. Richard knew, too, that his 
time was running out. His sight would only get 
worse. His dizziness would only get worse. 
He knew he was never going to get better. 
   If he was to have a chance to get Kahlan away 
from the men of the Order, it had to be at once, 
with these men or without them. 
   When none said that they wanted to quit, Richard 
went on. "We need to get to their commanders for 
two reasons: to find out where the Mother Confessor 
is being held, and to eliminate them so that they 
can't direct their soldiers against us. 
   "You all have weapons, now, and in the limited 
time we've had, we've done our best to teach you 
how to use them. There's one other thing you must 
know. You will be afraid. So will I. 

   "To overcome this fear, you must use your 
anger." 
   "Anger?" one of the men asked. "How can we bring 
forth anger when we're afraid?" 
   "These men have raped your wives, your sisters, 
your mothers, daughters, aunts, cousins, and 
neighbors," Richard said as he paced. "Think about 
that, when you look into the enemy's eyes as they 
come at you. They have taken most of the women 
away. You all know why. They have tortured children 
to make you give up. Think about the terror of your 
children as they screamed in fear and pain, dying 
bloody and alone after being mutilated by these 
men." 
   The heat of Richard's anger seeped into his 
words. "Think about that when you see their 
confident grins as they come at you. These men have 
tortured people you loved, people who never did 
anything against them. Think about that as these 
men come at you with their bloodstained hands. 
   "These men have sent many of your people away to 
be used as slaves. Many more of your people have 
been murdered by these men. Think about that, when 
they come to murder you, too. 
   "This is not about a difference of opinion, or a 
disagreement. There can be no debate or uncertainty 
about this among moral men. This is about rape, 
torture, murder." 
   Richard turned and faced the men. "Think about 
that, when you face these beasts." He tapped a fist 
to his chest as he ground his teeth. "And when you 
face these men, men who have done all these things 
to you and your loved ones, face them with hate in 
your hearts. Fight them with hate in your hearts. 
Kill them with hate in your hearts. They deserve no 
better." 
   The woods were silent as the men considered his 
chilling words. Richard knew that he had rage 
enough, and hate enough, to be eager to get at the 
men of the Imperial Order. 

   He didn't know where Kahlan was, but he intended 
to find out and to have her back. She had done as 
she had to in order to get the antidote to save his 
life. He understood what she had done, and couldn't 
fault her for it—that was the kind of woman she 
was. She loved him just as fiercely as he loved 
her. She had done what she had to do.But he was not 
going to let her down. She was depending on him to 
come for her. 
   The terrible irony was that it had all been for 
nothing. The antidote she had made such a sacrifice 
to obtain was no antidote at all. 
   Richard looked out at all their faces, so intent 
on what he had to tell them on the eve of such a 
momentous battle, and remembered, then, the words 
on the statue at the entrance to this land, the 
words of the Wizard's Eighth Rule: Taiga 
Vassternich. 
   "There is one last thing to tell you," he said. 
"The most important thing of all." 
   Richard faced them as the leader of the D'Haran 
Empire, an empire struggling to survive, to be 
free, and told them those two words in their 
language. 
"Deserve Victory." 
It was just turning light as they charged into the 
city. Only one of them had remained behind: 
Jennsen. Richard had forbidden her from joining the 
fight. Besides being young and not nearly as strong 
as the men they would come up against, she would 
only create a tempting target. Rape was a sacred 
weapon of the wicked, and one this enemy used 
religiously. The men of the Imperial Order would 
rally for such a prize. Cara was different; she was 
a trained warrior and more lethal than any of them 
except Richard. 
   Jennsen hadn't been pleased to be left behind, 
but she had understood Richard's reasons and hadn't 
wanted to give him anything else to worry about. 
She and Betty had remained behind in the woods. 

   A man they had sent out to scout because he knew 
the area well emerged from a side alley. As they 
reached him they all moved up against the wall, 
trying to remain out of sight as best they could. 
   "I found them," the scout said, trying to catch 
his breath. He pointed to the right of their route 
into the city. 
"How many?" Richard asked. 
   "I think it must be their main force within the 
city, Lord Rahl. It's where they sleep. They seem 
to still be there, as you expected, and not yet up. 
The place they've taken over contains buildings for 
city offices and administration. But I bring 
troubling news, as well. They are being protected 
by the people of the city." 
   Richard ran his ringers back through his hair. 
He had to concentrate to keep from coughing. He 
gripped the window frame of the building beside him 
to help himself stand. 
"What do you mean, they are being protected?" 
   "There are crowds of people from the city 
surrounding the place occupied by the soldiers. The 
people are there to protect the soldiers— from us. 
They are there to stop us from attacking." 
   Richard let out an angry breath. "All right." He 
turned back to the worried, expectant faces of all 
the men. "Now, listen to me. We are joined in a 
battle against evil. If anyone sides with evil, if 
they protect evil men, then they are serving to 
perpetuate evil." 
   One of the men looked unsure. "Are you saying 
that if they try to stop us, we might have to use 
force against them?" 
   "What is it these people seek to accomplish? 
What is their goal? They want to prevent us from 
eliminating the Imperial Order. Because they hate 
life, they despise freedom more than slavery." 
   With grim determination, Richard met the men's 
gazes. "I'm saying that anyone who protects the 
enemy and seeks to keep them in power, for whatever 

reason, has sided with them. It's no more 
complicated than that. If they try to protect the 
enemy or hamper us from doing as we must—kill 
them." 
"But they aren't armed," a man said. 
   Richard's anger flared. "They are armed—armed 
with evil ideas that seek to enslave the world. If 
they succeed, you die. 
   "Saving the lives of innocent people and your 
loved ones—and having far less loss of life in the 
end—is best served by crushing the enemy as 
decisively and quickly as possible. Then there will 
be peace. If these people try to prevent that, then 
they are, in effect, siding with those who torture 
and murder—they help them to live another day to 
murder again. Such people must not be treated any 
differently than what they in truth are: servants 
of evil. 
"If they try to stop you, kill them." 
   There was a moment of silence; then Anson put a 
fist to his heart. "With hate in my heart... 
vengeance without mercy." 
   Looks of iron determination spread back through 
the men. They all put fists to their hearts in 
salute and took up the pledge. "Vengeance without 
mercy!" 
Richard clapped Anson on the side of the shoulder. 
"Let's go." 
   They raced out from the long shadows of the 
buildings and poured around the corner. The people 
off at the end of the street all turned when they 
spotted Richard's force coming. More people—men and 
women from the city—surged into the street in front 
of the compound of buildings the soldiers had taken 
up as barracks and a command post. The people 
looked like a scraggly lot. 
   "No war! No war! No war!" the people shouted as 
Richard led the men up the street at a dead run. 
   "Out of the way!" Richard yelled as he closed 
the distance. This was no time for subtlety or 

discussions; the success of their attack depended 
in large part on speed. "Get out of the way! This 
is your only warning! Get out of the way or die!" 
   "Stop the hate! Stop the hate!" the people 
chanted as they locked arms. 
   They had no idea how much hate was raging 
through Richard. He drew the Sword of Truth. The 
wrath of its magic didn't come out with it, but he 
had enough of his own. He slowed to a trot. 
"Move!" Richard called as he bore down on the 
people. 
   A plump, curly-haired woman took a step out from 
the others. Her round face was red with anger as 
she screamed. "Stop the hate! No war! Stop the 
hate! No war!" 
"Move or die!" Richard yelled as he picked up 
speed. 
   The red-faced woman shook her fleshy fist at 
Richard and his men, leading an angry chant. 
"Murderers! Murderers! Murderers!" 
   On his way past her, gritting his teeth as he 
screamed with the fury of the attack begun, Richard 
took a powerful swing, lopping off the woman's head 
and upraised arm. Strings of blood and gore 
splashed across the faces behind her even as some 
still chanted their empty words. The head and loose 
arm tumbled through the crowd. A man made the 
mistake of reaching for Richard's weapon, and took 
the full weight of a charging thrust. 
Men behind Richard hit the line of evil's guardians 
with unrestrained violence. People armed only with 
their hatred for moral clarity fell bloodied, 
terribly injured, and dead. The line of people 
collapsed before the merciless charge. Some of the 
people, screaming their contempt, used their fists 
to attack Richard's men. They were met with swift 
and deadly steel. 
   At the realization that their defense of the 
Imperial Order's brutality would actually result in 
consequences to themselves, the crowd began 

scattering in fright, screaming curses back at 
Richard and his men. 
   Richard's army did not pause as they tore 
through the ring of protectors, now on the run, but 
continued on to the maze of buildings among grassy 
open spaces dotted with trees. The soldiers who 
were outside began to realize that this time they 
would have to protect themselves, that the people 
of the city could no longer do it for them. These 
were men used to slaughtering defenseless, docile 
victims. For more than a year of occupation they 
had not had to fight. 
   Richard was the first on them, taking down men 
on his way into their midst. Cara charged in at his 
right, Tom at his left, the deadly point of a spear 
driving into soldiers only now pulling free their 
weapons. These were men used to overwhelming their 
cowering opponents with sheer numbers, not with 
fighting resolute opposition. They did so now, and 
for their lives. 
   Richard moved through them as if they were 
statues. They thrust a blade at where he had been, 
while he cut where they were going and met them 
there with razor-sharp steel. He came up behind 
others as they looked both ways, losing track of 
him, only to have him reach around and draw his 
sword across their throats. Others he beheaded 
before they realized he was about to strike. 
   He wasted no effort with exaggerated movements 
and wild slashes. He cut with deadly proficiency. 
He didn't try to best men to show them he was 
better; he simply killed them. He didn't give them 
any chance to fight back; he cut them down before 
they could. 
   Now that he was committed to the fight, he was 
committed to the dance with death, which meant one 
thing: cut. It was his duty, his purpose, his 
hunger to cut the enemy down quickly, resolutely, 
and utterly. 
They were not prepared for this level of violence 

unleashed. 
As his men fell on the soldiers, a great cry rose 
up. As men fell, their screams filled the morning. 
   Seeing a man who looked like an officer, Richard 
wheeled around him and laid his blade across the 
man's throat. 
"Where is Nicholas and the Mother Confessor?" 
   The man answered by trying to grab Richard's 
arm. He wasn't nearly quick enough. Richard pulled 
his sword across the man's throat, nearly severing 
his head, as he spun to a man coming at him from 
behind. The man skidded to a stop in an effort to 
avoid Richard's blade, only to be stabbed through 
the heart. 
   The battle raged on, moving back between the 
buildings as they took down those men who met the 
attack. Yet more men, layered in leather, mail, 
hides, and weapon belts, came out of the barracks 
at hearing the clash. They were fierce-looking men 
looking better suited to murder than any men 
Richard had ever seen. 
   As they came onward, Richard seized anyone who 
looked like an officer. None of them were able to 
give him an answer. None of them knew the 
whereabouts of either Nicholas or Kahlan. 
   Richard had to fight off the dizziness as well 
as the soldiers. By focusing on the dance with 
death and the precepts the sword had taught him in 
the past, he was able to surmount the effects of 
the poison. He knew that such efforts couldn't long 
replace the required strength of endurance, but for 
the moment he was able to do as he had to. 
   It was somewhat surprising to see how well his 
men were doing. They helped one another as they 
moved deeper into the enemy lines. By fighting in 
that way, using one another's strengths, they were 
often able to survive together where one alone 
would not have. 
   Some of his men had not survived; Richard saw 
several lying dead. But the surprised enemy was 

being slaughtered. The Imperial Order soldiers were 
not charged with righteous, resolute determination. 
Richard's men were. The Order soldiers were little 
more than a gang of thugs allowed to run loose. 
They now faced men calling them to ac-count. The 
men of the Order fought a disorderly attempt to 
spare their own individual lives, without thought 
to a coordinated defense, while Richard's men 
fought to a singular purpose of exterminating the 
enemy's entire force. 
   Richard heard Cara calling urgently for him from 
the narrow space between two buildings. At first, 
he thought she was in trouble, but when he rounded 
the corner he saw then that she had a husky man on 
his knees. She held his head up by a fistful of his 
greasy black hair. One ear displayed a row of 
silver rings. Cara had her Agiel at his throat. 
Blood ran down his chin. 
"Tell him!" she yelled at the man when Richard ran 
up. 
"I don't know where they are!" 
   In a fit of fury, Cara slammed the tip of her 
Agiel to the base of the man's skull. He flinched, 
his arms shaking with the shattering shock of pain 
that brought a gasp rather than a scream. His eyes 
rolled back in his head. Holding him by his tangled 
hair, Cara bent him back over her knee to hold him 
upright. 
"Tell him," she growled. 
   "They left," he mumbled. "Nicholas left last 
night. They carried a woman away with them, but I 
don't know who she was." 
   Richard went to a knee and grabbed the man's 
shirt. "What did she look like?" 
The man's eyes were still rolling. "Long hair." 
"Where did they go?" 
"Don't know. Gone. In a hurry." 
"What did Nicholas tell you before he left?" 
   The man's eyes slowly came into focus. "Nicholas 
knew you were going to attack at dawn. He told me 

the route you would take into the city." 
   Richard could hardly believe what he was 
hearing. "How could he possibly know that?" 
He hesitated. The sight of Cara's Agiel made him 
talk. 
   "I don't know. Before he left, Nicolas told me 
how many men you had, told me when you would 
attack, and by which route. He told me to get 
people from the city to shield us from your attack. 
We gathered our most fanatical supporters and told 
them that you were coming to murder us, that you 
wanted to make war." 
"When did Nicholas leave? Where did he take this 
woman?" 
   Blood dripped from the man's chin. "I don't 
know. They just left in a hurry last night. That's 
all I know." 
   "If you knew we were coming, why didn't you make 
a better defense?" 
   "Oh, but we did. Nicholas told me to take care 
of the city. I assured him that such a small force 
as yours cannot possibly defeat us." 
Something was terribly wrong. "Why not?" 
   For the first time, the man smiled. "Because you 
don't know how many men we really have. Once I knew 
where your attack was coming, I was able to call in 
all my forces." The man's smile widened. "Do you 
hear that horn in the distance? Here they come." A 
belly laugh rolled up. "You are about to die." 
Richard gritted his teeth. "You first." 
   With a mighty thrust, he ran his sword through 
the officer's heart. The man's eyes widened in 
shock. Richard gave the blade a twist as he 
withdrew it to be sure the job was done. 
   "We'd better get the men out of here," Richard 
said as he took Cara's arm and ran for the corner 
of the buildings. 
   "Looks like we're too late," she said when they 
came out from behind cover and saw the legions of 
men pouring in all around them. 

   How did Nicholas know when and where they were 
going to attack? There had been no one around—no 
races, not so much as a mouse had been there when 
they had made their plans as they moved through the 
countryside. How could he have known? 
   "Dear spirits," Cara said. "I didn't think they 
had this many men in Bandakar." 
   The roar of the soldiers was deafening as they 
charged in. Richard was already spent. Each deep 
breath he pulled was agonizingly painful. He knew 
that there was no choice. 
   He had to find a way to get to Kahlan. He had to 
hold out at least that long. 
   Richard whistled in a signal to gather his men. 
As Anson and Owen ran up. Richard looked around and 
saw most of the others. 
   "We have to try to break out of here. There's 
too many of them. Slay together. We're going to try 
to punch through. If we make it, scatter and try to 
make it back to the forest." 
   With Cara at one side, Tom at the other, Richard 
charged at the head of his men toward the enemy 
lines. Thousands of the Imperial Order soldiers 
poured out from the city around them and into the 
open. It was a frightening sight. There were so 
many that it almost seemed as if the ground itself 
were moving. 
   Before Richard reached the soldiers, the morning 
suddenly lit with blinding blasts of fire. 
Thunderous eruptions of flame tore through the 
enemy lines, killing men by the hundreds. Sod, 
trees, and men were hurled into the air. Men, their 
clothes, hair, and flesh burning, tumbled across 
the ground. 
   Richard heard a howl coming from behind. It 
sounded somehow familiar. He turned just in time to 
see a roiling ball of liquid yellow flame wailing 
through the air toward them. It expanded as it 
came, tumbling with seething, deadly intensity. 
Wizard's fire. 

   The incandescent, white-hot inferno roared by 
just overhead. Once past Richard and his men, it 
descended, crashing down among the enemy soldiers, 
spilling a flood of liquid death out among them. 
Wizard's fire stuck to what it touched, burning 
with ferocious intensity. A single droplet of it 
would burn down through a man's leg to the bone. It 
was horrifyingly deadly. It was said to be so 
excruciatingly painful that those who lived longed 
only for death. 
The question was, who was it coming from? 
   To the other side, men of the Order fell as 
something scythed through their ranks. It almost 
looked as if a single blade cut them down by the 
hundreds, ripping them apart with bloody ferocity. 
But who was doing it? 
   There was no time to stand around and wonder. 
Richard and his men had to turn to meet the 
soldiers who made it through the devastating 
conjuring. Now that their numbers had been so 
thinned, the Imperial Order soldiers were unable to 
mount an effective attack. Their charge fell apart 
on the blades of Richard's men. 
   As they fought, more deadly fire came in to 
catch those trying to run, or those who massed to 
attack. In other places, Order soldiers fell 
without Richard or his men touching them. They 
gasped in great agony, clutching their chests, and 
fell dead. 
   Before long, the morning fell silent but for the 
groans of the wounded. Richard's men rallied around 
him, unsure of what had happened, worried that 
whatever had befallen these men might suddenly turn 
and befall them as well. Richard realized that they 
didn't see the attack of wizard's fire and magic in 
the same way as he did; to them it must seem a 
miracle of salvation. 
   Richard spotted two people beside one of the 
buildings off to the side of the grounds. One was 
taller than the other. He squinted, trying to make 

them out, but he just couldn't see who they were. 
With a hand on Tom's shoulder for support, they 
headed toward the two figures. 
   "Richard, my boy," Nathan said when Richard made 
it over to him. "So good to find you well." 
   Ann, a squat woman in a plain gray dress, smiled 
that knowing smile of hers, so filled with joy, 
satisfaction, and at the same time a kind of 
knowing tolerance. 
   "I doubt you two could imagine how glad I am to 
see you," Richard said, still catching his breath, 
trying not to breathe too deeply. "But what are you 
doing here? How in the world did you find me?" 
Nathan leaned in with a sly smile. "Prophecy, my 
boy." 
   Nathan wore high boots and a ruffled white shirt 
with a vest and an elegant green velvet cape 
attached at his right shoulder. The prophet cut 
quite the figure. 
   Richard saw then that Nathan was wearing an 
exquisite sword in a polished scabbard. It seemed 
to Richard rather odd for a wizard who could 
command wizard's fire to carry a sword. It seemed 
even more odd to see the man abruptly draw the 
weapon. 
   Ann suddenly gasped as someone sprang from 
behind the building and grabbed her. It was one of 
the people from the city who had gathered to 
protect the army—a tall, slender, pinched-faced 
woman with a formidable scowl and a long knife. 
   "You are murderers!" she cried, her straight 
hair whipping side to side. "You are filled with 
hate!" 
   The ground around Ann and the woman erupted, 
chunks of dirt and grass flying up into the air. 
Ann, a sorceress, was apparently trying to fight 
off her attacker. The woman was unaffected. Against 
a pristinely ungifted person, magic wasn't working. 
   Nathan, not far to the side of Ann, stepped in 
and without ado ran the tall woman through with his 

sword. The woman staggered back, his sword through 
her chest, her face a picture of surprise. She 
dropped, sliding off the red blade. 
   Ann, free of her attacker, glanced at the dead 
woman. She fixed Nathan in a scowl. "Dashing 
indeed." 
   Nathan smiled at her private joke. "I told you, 
they aren't touched by magic." 
"Nathan," Richard said, "I still don't understand—" 
"Come here, my dear," Nathan said, signaling off 
behind him. 
   Jennsen ran out from behind the building. She 
threw her arms around Richard. 
   "I'm so glad you're all right," she said. "I 
hope you aren't angry with me. Nathan showed up in 
the woods not long after you and the men left. I 
remembered seeing him before—at the People's Palace 
in D'Hara. I knew he was a Rahl, so I told him the 
trouble we were in. He and Ann wanted to help. We 
came as fast as we could." 
   Jennsen looked expectantly up at Richard. He 
answered her worry with a hug. 
   "You did the right thing," he told her. "You 
used your head for something the orders didn't 
anticipate." 
   Now that the heat of battle had ended, Richard 
was dizzier than ever. He had to lean on Tom for 
support. 
   Nathan put a shoulder under Richard's other arm. 
"I hear you're having trouble with your gift. Maybe 
I can help." 
   "I don't have time. Nicholas the Slide has 
Kahlan. I have to find her or—" 
   "Don't play a fool when you aren't," Nathan 
said. "It won't take long to bring your gift into 
harmony. You need the help of another wizard to get 
it under control—like the last time I helped you—or 
you won't be of any use to anyone. Come on, let's 
get you inside one of these places where it's 
quiet. Then I can take care of that much of your 

troubles." 
   Richard wanted nothing more than to find Kahlan, 
but he didn't know where to look. He felt like 
falling into the man's arms and surrendering his 
destiny to him, to his experience, to his vast 
knowledge. Richard knew Nathan was right. He felt 
like crying with relief that help was finally at 
hand. Who better to help him get his gift back 
under control than a wizard? 
   Richard had never even dared to hope to have 
this opportunity; he had planned on trying to get 
to Nicci because she was the only one he could 
think of who might know what to do. This was 
infinitely better than a sorceress helping him. 
   A wizard was the only one really meant to help 
with this kind of trouble with another wizard's 
gift. 
"Just make it quick," he told Nathan. 
   Nathan smiled that Rahl smile of his. "Come on, 
then. We'll have your gift back to right in no time 
at all." 
   "Thank you, Nathan," Richard mumbled as he let 
the big man help him through a nearby doorway. 
 
 
 
 
 
           CHAPTER 
60 
 
 
   Richard sat cross-legged on the wood floor 
facing Nathan. The barren room had no furniture. 
Nathan said none was needed, that the floor was 
fine with him. Ann, not far away, sat on the floor 
as well. Richard was a little surprised that Nathan 
was allowing her to observe, but didn't question 
it. There was the possibility that he might want to 
have her help for some part of it. 
   Everyone else waited outside. Cara wasn't happy 

about allowing Richard out of her sight, but 
Richard calmed her concern by telling her that he 
would feel more comfortable and able to concentrate 
on correcting the problem with his gift if he knew 
she was outside keeping an eye on everything for 
him. 
   The two windows had been shuttered, allowing in 
only dim light and keeping out most of the noise. 
With his hands on his knees, the prophet pushed his 
back straighter and, drawing a deep breath, seemed 
to pull an aura of authority around himself. Nathan 
was the one who had first taught Richard about his 
gift, telling him how war wizards, like Richard, 
weren't like other wizards. Instead of tapping the 
core of power within themselves, they directed 
their intent through their feelings. 
   It had been a difficult concept to grasp. Nathan 
had told Richard that his power worked through 
anger. 
"Lose yourself in my eyes," Nathan said in a quiet 
voice. 
Richard knew he had to try to put his worry for 
Kahlan aside. 
   Trying to keep his breathing steady so as not to 
cough, he stared into Nathan's hooded, deep, dark, 
azure eyes. Nathan's gaze drew him in. Richard felt 
as if he were falling up into the clear blue sky. 
His breath came in ragged pulls, and not of his own 
doing. He felt Nathan's commanding words more than 
heard them. 
   "Call forth the anger, Richard. Call forth the 
rage. Call forth the hate and fury." 
   Richard's head was swimming. He concentrated on 
calling his anger. He thought about Nicholas having 
Kahlan and he had no trouble summoning rage. 
   He could feel another force within his own, as 
if he were drowning and someone were trying to hold 
his head above water. 
   He drifted, alone, in a dark and still place. 
Time seemed to mean nothing. 

Time. 
He had to get to Kahlan in time. He was her only 
chance. 
Richard opened his eyes. "Nathan, I'm sorry, 
but..." 
   Nathan was drenched in sweat. Ann was sitting 
beside him, holding Richard's left hand, Nathan his 
right. Richard wondered what had happened. 
Richard looked from one face to the other. "What's 
wrong?" 
   They both looked grim. "We tried," Nathan 
whispered. "I'm sorry, but we tried." 
Richard frowned. They had only just begun. 
"What do you mean? Why are you giving up so soon?" 
   Nathan cast a sidelong glance at Ann. "We've 
been at it for two hours. Richard." 
"Two hours?" 
   "I'm afraid there is nothing I can do, my boy." 
By the sound of his voice, he meant it. 
   Richard ran his fingers back through his hair. 
"What are you talking about? You're the one who 
told me the last time, when I had this problem, 
joining with a wizard would set it straight. You 
said it was a simple matter for a wizard to fix 
such a disharmony with the gift." 
   "That's the way it should be. But your gift is 
somehow tangled up into a knot that's strangling 
you." 
   "But you're a prophet, a wizard. Ann, you're a 
sorceress. Together you both probably know more 
about magic than anyone who has lived in thousands 
of years." 
   "Richard, there has not been another born like 
you in the last three thousand years. We don't know 
that much about how your particular gift works." 
Ann paused to push stray strands of gray hair back 
into the bun at the back of her head. "We tried, 
Richard. I swear to you, we both tried our best. 
Your gift is beyond Nathan's help, even with my 
ability enhancing his power. We tried everything we 

know, and even a few things we thought up. None of 
it had any effect. We cannot help you." 
"So, what must I do?" 
   Nathan's azure eyes turned away. "Your gift is 
killing you, Richard. I don't know the cause, but 
I'm afraid that it has spiraled into a phase that 
is out of control and fatal." 
Ann's eyes were wet. "Richard ... I'm so sorry." 
Richard looked from one distraught face to the 
other. 
"I guess it doesn't really matter," Richard said. 
Nathan frowned. "What do you mean it doesn't 
matter?" 
   Richard rose up, groping for the wall to keep 
his balance. "I've been poisoned. The antidote is 
gone.... There is no cure. I'm afraid that I'm 
running out of time. I guess the joke is on my 
gift—something else is going to get me first." 
   Ann stood and gripped his upper arms. "Richard, 
we can't help you right now, but you can at least 
rest while we try to figure out—" 
   "No." Richard waved off her concern. "No. I 
can't waste what little time I have left. I have to 
get to Kahlan." 
   Ann cleared her throat. "Richard, at the Palace 
of the Prophets, Nathan and I waited for your birth 
for a very long time. We worked to clear those 
obstacles that Prophecy showed us lay in your path. 
The prophecies name you as central to the course of 
the future of the world. In fact, they say you are 
the only one with a chance; we need you to lead us 
in this battle. 
"We don't know what is wrong with your gift, but we 
can work on 
You must be here so that if we come up with a 
solution, we can set your power right." 
   "I'll not live for you to cure me. Don't you 
see? The poison is killing me. It has three states. 
I'm already entering the third state: blindness. 
I'm going to die. I must use what time I have left 

to find Kahlan. You aren't going to have me to lead 
you, but if I can get her away from Nicholas, you 
will have her to lead the struggle in my place." 
"You know where she is, then?" Nathan asked. 
   Richard realized that in the state of focused, 
concentrated thought, as he was adrift in that 
quiet place while Nathan was trying to help him, it 
had come to him where Nicholas most likely had 
taken Kahlan. He had to get there while Nicholas 
was still there with her. 
"Yes, I believe I do." 
   Richard pulled open the door. Cara, sitting 
right outside, shot to her feet. Her expectant 
expression quickly withered when he shook his head, 
signaling that it hadn't worked. 
   "We have to get going. Right away. I think I 
know where Nicholas took Kahlan. We have to hurry." 
"You know?" Jennsen asked, holding Betty close by 
the rope. 
"Yes. We need to leave at once." 
"Where is she, then?" Jennsen asked. 
   Richard gestured. "Owen, remember how you told 
us about a fortified encampment the Imperial Order 
built when they first came to Ban-dakar and they 
were worried about their safety?" 
"Back near my town," Owen said. 
   Richard nodded. "That's right. I think Nicholas 
took Kahlan there. It's a secure place they built 
to hold some of the women captive. There would be 
plenty of soldiers to protect him and it's the kind 
of place built specifically to be defensible, so it 
would be much more difficult to approach than his 
place, here, in the city." 
"Then how will we approach it?" Jennsen asked. 
"We'll have to figure that out once we get there 
and see the place." 
   Nathan joined Richard at the door. "Ann and I 
will go with you. We might be able to help rescue 
Kahlan from the Slide. While we travel the two of 
us can work on a solution for untangling your 

gift." 
Richard gripped Nathan's shoulder. "There are no 
horses in this land. If you can run and keep up 
with us, you're welcome, but I can't afford to slow 
for you. I don't have much time, and neither does 
Kahlan. Nicholas will not likely hold her there 
long. After he pauses for rest and supplies and 
then leaves this land, it will be even more 
difficult to find him. We have no time to lose. 
We're going to have to travel as swiftly as 
possible." 
Nathan's eyes turned down in disappointment. 
   Ann drew Richard into a brief hug. "We're far 
too old to keep up the speed afoot that you and 
these young people can. When you get her away from 
the Slide, come back and we'll do our best to help 
you. We'll work on the problem while you're getting 
her out of his clutches. Come back then, and we'll 
have a solution." 
   Richard knew that he would never live that long, 
but there was no point in saying it. "All right. 
What can you tell me about a Slide?" 
   Nathan drew his thumb along his jaw as he 
considered the question. "Slides are soul stealers. 
There is no defense against them. Even I would be 
powerless to stop them." 
   Richard didn't suppose that needed any 
explanation. "Cara, Jennsen, Tom, you can come with 
me." 
"What about us?" Owen asked. 
   Anson stood close by, looking eager to be 
included, and nodded at Owen's suggestion. There 
were others as well, who had stood vigil outside 
the place where Nathan had tried to help Richard. 
They were all men who had fought hard. If he was to 
get Kahlan back, he would likely need some men, at 
least. 
   "Your help would be welcome. I think most of the 
men should stay here with Nathan and Ann. The 
people here in Hawton need to have you men explain 

everything to them—help them to understand all that 
you've learned. They will need to make some changes 
to adjust to interacting with the world out there 
now open to them." 
   As Richard started away, Nathan grabbed ahold of 
his sleeve. "Richard, as far as I know, you have no 
defense against a soul stealer, but there is one 
thing I recall from an old tome in the vaults in 
the Palace of the Prophets." 
"I'm listening." 
"They somehow travel outside their body ... send 
their own spirit out." 
   Richard rubbed his fingertips across his brow as 
he thought about Nathan's words. "That has to be 
how he was watching me, tracking me. I believe he 
watched me through the eyes of huge birds that live 
here, called black-tipped races. If what you're 
saying is right, then maybe he leaves his body in 
order to do this." Richard looked up at Nathan. 
"How does this help me?" 
   Nathan leaned closer, cocking his head to peer 
with one azure eye. "That is when they are 
vulnerable—when they are out of their body." 
   Richard lifted his sword a few inches in the 
scabbard to be sure it was clear. "Any idea how to 
catch him outside of his body?" He let the sword 
drop back. 
Nathan straightened. "Afraid not." 
   Richard nodded his thanks anyway and stepped 
down out of the doorway. "Owen, how far is this 
fortified encampment?" 
"Back close to where the path used to go out 
through the boundary." 
   That was why Richard hadn't seen it; they had 
come on the ancient route used by Kaja-Rang. 
Ordinarily, it would be a journey of well over a 
week. They didn't have nearly that long. 
   He took in all the faces watching him. "Nicholas 
has quite a head start on us and he will be in a 
hurry to escape with his prize. If we travel 

swiftly and don't stop long to rest, there's a good 
chance we can still catch up with him by the time 
he reaches their encampment. We need to be on our 
way at once." 
"We're only waiting for you, Lord Rahl," Cara said. 
So was Kahlan. 
 
 
 
 
           CHAPTER 
61 
 
 
 
 
   Each day of hard travel, Richard's condition 
worsened, but his fear for Kahlan drove him 
relentlessly onward. Most of the time, hour after 
hour, through sunlight, darkness, and occasional 
rain, they ran at a steady lope. Richard used a 
staff he'd cut himself to help keep his balance. 
When he thought he would be unable to go on, 
Richard deliberately picked up the pace to remind 
himself that he could not give up. They stopped at 
night only long enough to get a few hours' sleep. 
   The men had trouble keeping up with him. Cara 
and Jennsen didn't; they were both used to 
strenuous exertion in the course of difficult 
journeys. All of them, though, were so exhausted 
from the unrelenting pace that they talked only 
when necessary. Richard drove himself doggedly, 
trying not to think about his own hopeless 
condition. It didn't matter. He reminded himself 
that with every step they ran, if it was fast 
enough, they were gaining on Nicholas and just that 
much closer to Kahlan. 
   In moments of despair, Richard told himself that 
Kahlan had to be alive, that Nicholas could have 
killed her long ago if that was his intention. He 
wouldn't have run if she were dead. Kahlan would be 

much more valuable to him alive. 
   In a way, he felt an odd kind of relief. He 
could push as hard as he needed. He didn't have to 
worry about his health. There was no antidote to 
the poison. Given the time, it would kill him. 
There was no solution to the problem of his gift 
being out of control; that, too, would kill him. 
There was nothing Richard could do about either. He 
was going to die. 
   The wooded hills were easy enough traveling. 
They were open, with broad, green meadows sprinkled 
with wildflowers and a patchwork of grassland. 
Wildlife was abundant. Were he not dying, in pain, 
and sick with worry for Kahlan, Richard might have 
enjoyed the beauty of the land. Now it was just an 
obstacle. 
   The sun in his eyes was slipping down behind the 
towering mountains. Soon darkness would be upon 
them. A little earlier, Richard had used his bow to 
take a buck when the opportunity presented itself. 
Tom had made quick work of butchering it. The rest 
of them needed to eat, or they would not be able to 
keep up the pace. Richard supposed that they would 
have to stop for a while to cook the meat and get 
some sleep. 
   Owen came up beside Richard as they trotted 
through a sea of grass rolling beneath the breeze. 
Owen pointed ahead. "There, Lord Rahl. That stream 
coming out of the hills is getting close to the 
Order's encampment. Just a little farther, over 
that line of hills and toward the mountains." He 
pointed to the right. "Off that way, not far, is my 
town of Witherton." 
   Richard changed his course a little to the left, 
heading for the woods that started at the foot of a 
gentle rise. They made the trees just as the orange 
disc of the sun slipped behind the snowcapped 
mountains. 
   "All right," Richard said, coming to a 
breathless halt as they entered a small clearing. 

"Let's set up camp here. Jennsen, Tom, why don't 
you two and the men stay here—get some meat cooking 
while I go with Owen and Cara to scout this 
fortification and see if I can figure out how we're 
going to get in." 
   When Richard started out, using his staff to 
help balance, Betty started following him. Jennsen 
snatched Betty's rope. 
   "Oh, no you don't," Jennsen said. "You're 
staying here. Richard doesn't need you tagging 
along to attract attention at the worst possible 
time." 
"What should we make for you to eat, Lord Rahl?" 
Tom asked. 
Richard couldn't stand the thought of eating meat. 
After all the bloody fighting, he needed to balance 
his gift more than ever. His gift was killing him, 
but if he did the wrong thing it might hasten the 
end and then he might not last long enough to get 
Kahlan away from Nicholas. 
   "Whatever we have that isn't meat. You have time 
before we come back, so you can cook some bannock, 
some rice, maybe some beans." 
   Tom agreed to take care of it and Richard 
followed after Owen. Cara, looking more unhappy 
than he could ever remember seeing her, put a hand 
on his shoulder. 
"How are you holding up, Lord Rahl?" 
   He dared not tell her how much pain he was in 
from the gift, or that he had started to cough up 
blood. "I'm all right for now." 
By the time they dragged back into their camp, 
almost two hours later, the meat on the spit was 
finished cooking and some of the men had already 
eaten. They were just curling up in blankets to get 
some sleep. 
   Richard was beyond being tired. He was certain 
that they had been close to Kahlan. It had been 
agonizing to have to return, to leave the place 
where Nicholas held her, but he had to use his 

head. Wild, irrational action would bring only 
failure. It would not get Kahlan out of there. 
   Richard was being driven by needs beyond food or 
sleep, but as he watched Owen sit heavily near the 
fire, he knew that Owen and Cara were exhausted and 
he imagined that they had to be hungry. Rather than 
sit, Cara waited at his side. She would not allow 
him to get far from her watchful protection. Nor 
would she voice any concern for herself or her 
needs. 
   He could never have imagined, back in the 
beginning, ever feeling this close to a Mord-Sith. 
   Jennsen stood and rushed to meet him. "Richard—
here, let me help you. Come and sit." 
   Richard flopped down on the grass near the fire. 
Betty came over and begged a place beside him. He 
let her lie down. 
"Well?" Tom asked. "What do you think of the 
place?" 
"I don't know. It has well-made timber walls with 
trenches dug before them. There are snares and 
traps all around the place. It has a gate—a real 
gate." Richard sighed as he rubbed his eyes. His 
sight was getting blurry. It was getting more 
difficult all the time to see things. "I haven't 
quite figured it out, yet." 
   It was hard to think with the smell of the 
cooking meat. It was making him sick. Richard took 
a piece of bannock and the bowl of rice and beans 
Jennsen handed him. 
   He couldn't eat while watching them eat the meat 
or, worse, smelling it. 
   Richard stood. "I'm going to go for a walk." He 
didn't want to make them feel bad about their 
dinner, or feel guilty for eating meat in front of 
him. "I need some time alone to think it out." 
Richard gestured for Cara to sit back down and stay 
where she was. 
"Get some dinner," he told her. "I need you to stay 
strong." 

   Richard walked off through the trees, listening 
to the chirp of crickets, watching the stars 
through the canopy of leaves. It was a relief to be 
alone, not to have people asking him anything. It 
was tiring to have people always depending on him. 
   Richard found a quiet place where an old oak had 
fallen. He sat and leaned back against the trunk. 
He wished he never had to get up. If not for 
Kahlan, he wouldn't. 
   Betty showed up. She stood before him, looking 
at him intently as if to ask what they were going 
to do next. When Richard said nothing, Betty lay 
down in front of him. It occurred to him that maybe 
Betty just wanted to offer him some comfort. 
   Richard felt a tear run down his cheek. 
Everything was falling to pieces. He couldn't hold 
those pieces together any longer. He could hardly 
breathe past the lump in his throat. 
He lay down and put an arm over Betty. 
   "What am I going to do?" He sniffled. He wiped 
the back of his hand across his nose. 
   "Kahlan, what am I going to do?" he whispered in 
forlorn misery. "I need you so much. What am I 
going to do?" 
He was at the end of all hope. 
He had thought, when he'd seen Nathan unexpectedly 
arrive, that help was at hand. The bright ember of 
that last hope had been extinguished. Not even a 
powerful wizard could help him. 
Powerful wizard. 
Kaja-Rang. 
Richard froze. 
   The words sent to him by Kaja-Rang, those two 
words emblazoned across the granite base of that 
statue, echoed through his mind. 
Those two words were meant for Richard. 
Taiga Vassternich. 
Deserve Victory. 
"Dear spirits ..." Richard whispered. 
He understood. 

 
 
 
 
          CHAPTER 62 
 
 
 
      Nicholas watched as Lord Rahl made his way 
back into the camp among his men after his 
despairing whispered last prayer to the dear 
spirits. So sad. So very sad hat the man was going 
to die. He would soon be with his dear spirits ... 
in the Keeper's realm of the underworld. 
   Nicholas relished the game. The poor Lord Rahl 
was so lost and confused. Nicholas wished the game 
could continue for a good long time, but Lord Rahl 
had little time left. So sad. 
   But it would be much more fun after Lord Rahl 
died, after that last detail was finally finished. 
Jagang thought this pathetic man was resourceful. 
Don't underestimate him, Jagang had warned. Perhaps 
Jagang was no match for the great Richard Rahl, but 
Nicholas the Slide was. 
   His spirit swelled with delight at the expectant 
thought of Lord Rani's death. That was going to be 
something to watch. It would be a grand finale of 
the play of life. Nicholas intended to see it all, 
to see every sad moment of the last act. He 
imagined that Lord Rahl's friends would gather to 
weep and wail as they stood by, helpless, watching 
him slip into the welcoming embrace of death, 
eternity's shepherd, come to help him begin the 
magnificent, never-ending spiritual journey away 
from the bitter interlude that had been life.The 
final curtain was about to draw closed. Nicholas so 
loved sad endings. He could hardly wait to watch it 
played out. 
Hate to live, live to hate. 
   Nicholas wondered, too, as did Lord Rahl, what 

would get him first, the poison or his gift. It 
seemed to tug first toward one, and then toward the 
other. For a time the headaches inflicted by his 
gift nearly put him down; then the poison would 
tighten its pain and make him gasp in agony. It was 
a fascinating question, one that, as in any good 
play, would not be answered until the very end. The 
tension was delicious. 
   Nicholas was rooting for the gift to win the 
fatal contest. Poison was all well and good, but 
what a vastly more intriguing twist of fate it 
would be to see a wizard of Lord Rahl's ability and 
potential, a wizard unlike any to be born since an 
era long buried in the dunghill of mankind's 
history, succumb to his birthright—to his own vast 
but vain power .. . another victim of men reaching 
too high in life. That would be a fascinating and 
fitting end. 
Not long to wait. 
Not long at all. 
   Nicholas watched, not wanting to miss a single 
delectable detail. With the spirit of Richard 
Rahl's lovely bride beside him, as it were, 
Nicholas felt almost a part of the family as he 
attended the approach of such a great man's tragic 
end. 
   Nicholas felt it only fair that the Mother 
Confessor should get to see it all played out, see 
the sad end to her beloved. As she watched along 
with Nicholas, she was suffering seeing the agony 
of it as Richard Rahl walked back into his camp. 
   Nicholas savored her distress. He had not yet 
begun to make her suffer. He would soon have a very 
long time with her to explore her capacity for 
suffering. 
   The people there in the woods around the 
campfire looked up, curious as their master 
returned among them. They all waited, with 
Nicholas, watching, with Nicholas, as their Lord 
Rahl stood over them. His figure wavered in the 

fire, as it did in Nicholas's vision. It was almost 
as if he were already but a spirit, about to drift 
away into the glorious oblivion of the dead. 
   "I've figured it out," Lord Rahl told them. "I 
know how to attack the fortification." 
Nicholas's ears pricked up. What was this? 
   "At first light we go in," Lord Rahl said. "Just 
as the sun breaks over the mountains. Right then, 
on the east side, we'll come in over the wall. The 
guards won't be able to see well because the sun 
will be in their eyes when they look in that 
direction. Men don't look where it's troublesome to 
look." 
"I like it," one of the other men said. 
"So we will sneak in, then, rather than try to 
attack," another said. 
   "Oh, no, there will be an attack," Lord Rahl 
said. "A big attack. An attack that will set their 
heads to spinning." 
   What was this? What was this? Nicholas watched, 
watched, watched. This was most curious. First Lord 
Rahl was going to sneak over the wall, and then he 
would have his men attack? How was he going to set 
their heads to spinning? Nicholas was fascinated. 
He moved in a little closer, fearing to miss a 
precious word. 
   "The attack will involve all the rest of you 
men," Lord Rahl said. "You will all come in toward 
the gate at first light. While you're attacking 
through the gate and drawing their attention, I 
will be slipping over the wall. While you will be 
there to distract them, in part, you will play an 
even more vital role that they will never expect." 
   The game was afoot. Nicholas was in rapture as 
he listened, as he watched. He so liked the game—
especially when he knew all the rules, and could 
bend them to his wishes. It was going to be a 
glorious day, tomorrow. 
   "But, Lord Rahl," the big man, Tom, asked, "how 
are we going to be able to attack through the gate 

if it's as formidable as you say?" 
   Nicholas hadn't thought of that. How curious. A 
key part of Lord Rahl's plan seemed to be faulty. 
   "That's the real trick," Lord Rahl said. "I've 
already figured it out and you'll be amazed to hear 
how you're going to do it." 
   He had already figured it out? How curious. 
Nicholas wanted to hear what possible solution 
could solve such a major hitch in Lord Rahl's plan. 
   Lord Rahl stretched and yawned. "Look," he said, 
"I'm exhausted. I can't stand up anymore. I need to 
get some rest before I lay it all out for you. It's 
complicated, so I'd better wait until just before 
we leave. 
   "Wake me up two hours before dawn, and I'll 
explain the whole thing, then." 
   "Two hours before dawn," Tom repeated in 
confirmation of the orders. 
   Nicholas was furious. He wanted to hear it now. 
He wanted to know the wonderful, fabulous, 
complicated plan. 
   Lord Rahl gestured to his delicious companion, 
the one named Cara, and then to several of the 
young men. "Why don't you come with me and get some 
sleep while the rest finish their meal." 
   As they started away, Lord Rahl turned back. 
"Jennsen, I want you to keep Betty here, with you. 
Make sure she stays here. I need some sleep; I 
don't need the smell of goat to wake me up." 
   "Am I going with you in the morning, Richard?" 
the one called Jennsen asked. 
   "Yes. You play an important part in the plan." 
Lord Rahl yawned again. "I'll explain after I've 
slept. Don't forget, Tom. Two hours before dawn." 
Tom nodded. "I will wake you myself, Lord Rahl." 
   Nicholas would be there as well, to watch, to 
hear the final piece of Lord Rahl's plan. Nicholas 
could hardly stand to wait that long. He would be 
there early. He would hear every word of it. 
   And then, Nicholas would have a surprise waiting 

for Richard Rahl when he and his men came for a 
visit. 
Maybe neither the poison nor his gift would take 
Lord Rahl. 
Maybe Nicholas would do it himself. 
Her spirit a helpless prisoner of the Slide, Kahlan 
could do nothing but watch along with him. She was 
unable to answer Richard's forlorn pleas, unable to 
cry in sorrow for him, unable to do anything. She 
ached to be able to hold him in her arms again, to 
comfort his pain, his heartache. 
He was near the end. She knew that. It broke her 
heart to see his precious life slipping away. 
To see his tears. 
To hear him cry her name in longing. 
To hear him say how much he needed her. 
   She felt so cold and alone. She loathed the 
feeling of being adrift. She desperately wanted to 
be back in her body. It waited somewhere back in a 
lonely room in the fortified encampment. Nicholas's 
body waited there, too. If only she could get back 
there. 
   Most of all, she wished there were some way she 
could warn Richard that Nicholas knew his plan. 
 
 
 
 
           CHAPTER 
63 
 
 
 
     Nicholas lay in wait in the camp, sniffing, 
listening, watching, eager for the game to 
continue. He had come early, fearing to miss 
anything. He was sure it had to be two hours before 
dawn—time for the last act of the play. It was time 
for the man, Tom, to wake Lord Rahl. It was time. 
Watch, watch, watch. Where was he? Somewhere, 
somewhere. Look, look, look. 

   Men off through the trees stood guard over the 
camp. Where was Tom? There he was. Nicholas saw 
that Tom was one of the men standing vigil as 
others slept. Didn't want to be late. Lord Rahl's 
orders. He wasn't sleeping, he was awake, so he 
should know it was time. 
   What was the man waiting for? His master had 
given him a command. Why wasn't he doing as he had 
been told? 
   The woman, Jennsen, woke and rubbed her eyes. 
She looked up and took appraisal of the stars and 
moon. It was time—she knew it was. She threw off 
her blanket. 
   Nicholas followed behind as she rushed past the 
low glow of the smoldering embers, rushed through 
the stand of young trees, rushed to the big man 
leaning against a stump. 
"Tom, isn't it time to wake Richard?" 
Somewhere back in a distant room in the 
fortification, where his body waited, Nicholas 
heard an insistent noise. He was absorbed in the 
task at hand, in the game, so he ignored the sound. 
   Probably Najari. The man was eager to have a 
chance to get at the Mother Confessor, a chance to 
enjoy her more feminine charms. Nicholas had told 
Najari that he would have his chance, but he had to 
wait until Nicholas returned. Nicholas didn't want 
the man tampering with her body while they were 
gone. Najari sometimes didn't know his own 
strength. The Mother Confessor was valuable 
property and Nicholas didn't want that property 
damaged. 
   Najari had proven to be a loyal man and deserved 
a small reward, but not until later. He would not 
disobey Nicholas's orders. He would be sorry if he 
did. 
Maybe it was just— 
   Wait, wait. What was this? Watch, watch, watch. 
The man stood and put a hand reassuringly on the 
young woman's shoulder. How very touching. 

"Yes, I guess it is about time. Let's go wake Lord 
Rahl." 
Again the noise. Stealthy, sharp yet soft. 
Most odd. But it would have to wait. 
   Through the woods. Hurry. Watch, watch, watch. 
Hurry. Couldn't they move faster? Didn't they grasp 
the importance of the occasion? Hurry, hurry, 
hurry. 
"Betty," the Jennsen woman growled, "stop bumping 
my legs." 
Again there was a skulking sound back somewhere 
with his body. 
And then, another, more urgent sound. 
This time, the sound ran a sharp shiver through 
Nicholas's very soul. 
It was as deadly a sound as he had ever heard. 
As the Sword of Truth cleared its scabbard, the 
distinctive ring of steel filled the dimly lit 
room. 
   With the sword came ancient magic, unhindered, 
unrestrained, unleashed. 
   The sword's power instantly inundated Richard 
with its boundless fury, a fury that answered only 
to him. The force of that power flooded into every 
fiber of his being. It had been so long since he 
had truly felt it, truly felt the full magnitude of 
it, that for an instant Richard paused in the 
exaltation of the profound experience of simply 
holding such a singular weapon. 
   His own righteous wrath had already slipped its 
bounds. Joined now with the pure rage of the Sword 
of Truth, both spiraled through him like twin 
storms rampaging unchecked. 
   Richard gloried that they could, and at being 
the ultimate master of both. 
   The Seeker of Truth willed both storms ever 
onward even as the sword began its fearsome 
journey, the merciless lightning of those thun-
derheads about to strike. 
   The tip of the blade whistled though the night 

air, still two hours before dawn. 
Hesitant and uncertain, Nicholas watched as the 
man, Tom, and the Jennsen woman moved through the 
woods to awaken their dying Lord Rahl. 
   Somewhere back in a distant room in the 
fortification, where his body waited, Nicholas 
heard a scream. 
   It was not a scream of fear, but a riotous cry 
of unbridled rage. It sent a shiver through his 
soul. 
   With sudden alarm, knowing that it could not be 
ignored, Nicholas slammed back into his body where 
it sat on the floor, waiting for him. 
   Unsteady from the abrupt return, Nicholas 
blinked as he opened his eyes. 
   Lord Rahl himself stood before him, feet spread, 
both hands gripping his sword. It was a picture of 
sheer muscular force focused by terrifying resolve. 
   Nicholas's eyes went wide at seeing the gleaming 
blade arcing through the still air. 
   Lord Rahl was in the midst of a scream of 
startling power and rage. Every bit of his might 
was committed to the swing of his sword. 
   Nicholas had a sudden and completely unexpected 
realization: he didn't want to die. He very much 
wanted to live. As much as he hated life, he 
realized, now, that he wanted to hold on to it. 
He had to act. 
He summoned his power, rallied his will. He had to 
stop this avenging soul before him. He reached out 
with his power to seize this other's spirit. He 
felt the horrifying shock of a staggering blow 
against the side of his neck. 
Richard was still screaming as his sword, with 
every ounce of power and speed he could put behind 
it, swept around, just clearing the top of 
Nicholas's left shoulder. 
   Richard saw every detail as the blade tore 
through flesh and bone, turning muscle, tendon, 
arteries, and windpipe inside out, following with 

precision the path to which the Seeker had justly 
committed it. Richard had dedicated everything to 
the swift journey of his sword. Now, he watched as 
that journey reached its destination, as the blade 
cleared the neck of Nicholas the Slide, as the 
man's head, its mouth still opened in the beginning 
of shock not fully comprehended, his beady eyes 
still trying to grasp the totality of what they 
were seeing, lifted into the air, beginning to turn 
ever so slowly as the sword below it passed along 
its deadly arc, as curved ropes of the man's blood 
began tracing a long wet line across the wall 
behind him. 
   Richard's scream ended as the sword's swing 
reached its limit. The world came crashing back 
around him. 
The head hit the floor with a loud, bone-cracking 
thunk. 
It was ended. 
   Richard recalled the rage. He had to get it 
under control immediately. He had something yet 
more important to accomplish. 
   In one fluid motion, Richard slid the bloody 
blade home into its scabbard as he turned to the 
second body leaned up against the wall to the 
right. 
   The sight of her almost overcame him. To see her 
there, alive, breathing, seemingly unhurt, brought 
a wild rush of joy. His worst fears, fears he would 
not even allow into his conscious mind, evaporated 
in an instant. 
   But then he realized that she was not all right. 
She could not have slept through such an attack. 
Richard fell to his knees and took her up in his 
arms. She felt so light, so limp. Her face was 
ashen and beaded with sweat. Her eyelids were half 
closed, her eyes rolled back in her head. 
   Richard sank back within himself, seeking 
strength to bring back the one he loved more than 
life itself. He opened his soul to her. All he 

wanted, all he needed, as he held her to him, was 
for her to live, to be whole. 
   Instinctively, in a way he did not fully 
understand, he let his power well up from a place 
deep inside his mind. He released himself into the 
torrent as it rushed onward. He let his love of 
her, his need of her, flood through their 
connection as he hugged her to his breast. 
"Come home to where you belong," he whispered to 
her. 
   He let the core of his power course through her, 
intending it to be like a beacon to light her way. 
It felt as if he were searching through the dark, 
using the light of ability from deep within to help 
him. Even though he couldn't define the precise 
mechanism, he could consciously focus his purpose, 
his need, and what he wanted to accomplish. 
"Come home to me, Kahlan. I'm here." 
   Kahlan gasped. Even though she hung limp, he 
felt the intensity of the life in his arms. She 
gasped again, as if she had nearly drowned and 
needed air. 
   At last, she stirred in his arms, her limbs 
moving,' groping. She opened her eyes, blinking, 
and looked up. Astonished, she sank back into his 
arms. 
   "Richard ... I heard you. I was so alone. Dear 
spirits, I was so alone. I didn't know what to 
do.... I heard Nicholas scream. I was lost and 
alone. I didn't know how to get back. And then I 
felt you." 
She embraced him tightly, as if she never wanted to 
let go. 
"You led me back through the darkness." 
Richard smiled down at her. "I'm a guide, 
remember?" 
   She puzzled at him. "How could you do that?" Her 
beautiful green eyes opened expectantly. "Richard, 
your gift..." 
   "I figured out the problem with my gift. Kaja-

Rang had given me the solution. I'd had the 
solution long before that, but I never realized it. 
My gift is fine, now, and the sword's power works 
again. I was being so blind that I will be ashamed 
to tell it all to you." 
Richard's breath caught, and he coughed, then, 
unable to hold it back any longer. Nor could he 
hold back grimacing at the pain. 
   Kahlan gripped his arms. "The antidote—what 
happened to the antidote! I sent it back with Owen. 
Didn't you get it?" 
   Richard shook his head as he coughed again, the 
pain feeling as though it ripped him deep inside. 
He finally regained his breath. "Well, now, that is 
a problem. It wasn't the antidote. It was just 
water with a bit of cinnamon in it." 
   Kahlan's face went ashen. "But. .." She looked 
over at Nicholas's body, at his head lying upended 
at the end of a bloody trail across the floor. 
"Richard, if Nicholas is dead, how are we going to 
get the antidote?" 
   "There isn't any antidote. Nicholas wanted me 
dead. He would have destroyed the antidote long 
ago. He gave you a fake to be able to capture you." 
Her face had gone from joy to horror. 
"But, without the antidote ..." 
 
 
 
 
           CHAPTER 
64 
 
 
 
 
     There's no time to worry about the poison just 
now," Richard told her as he helped her to her 
feet. 
   No time? She watched his step falter as he made 
his way across the room. He groped for the window 

ledge. 
   At the small window opening in the outer wall of 
the fortification he signaled with the high, clear 
whistle of the common wood pewee— the whistle Cara 
thought was that of the mythical short-tailed pine 
hawk. 
"I used a ladder pole," he explained. "Cara is on 
her way." 
   Kahlan tried to make her way over to him, but 
her body felt alarmingly unfamiliar to her. She 
staggered a couple of steps, her legs moving 
woodenly. She had the urge to get down on her hands 
and feet to walk. She felt like a stranger inside 
her own skin. It seemed foreign to have to breathe 
on her own, to have to look through her own eyes, 
to have to listen through her own ears. It was a 
strange, haunting sensation to feel her clothes 
against her skin. 
   Richard held out his hand to help steady her. 
Kahlan thought that as wobbly as she was, she might 
still be more steady on her feet than Richard. 
   "We're going to have to fight our way out," he 
said, "but we'll have some help. I'll get you the 
first sword I can."  
   " Richard blew out the flame of the single 
candle before a tin reflector on a small shelf. 
   "Richard, I'm not yet used to being . . . back 
inside myself. I don't think I'm ready to go out 
there. I can hardly walk." 
   "We don't have a lot of choice. We have to get 
out. Learn as you go. I'll help you." 
"You can hardly walk yourself." 
   Cara, at the top of a pole ladder Richard had 
cut, leaned forward and wriggled in through the 
small window. 
   Halfway in, Cara gaped in delighted wonder. 
"Mother Confessor— Lord Rahl did it." 
   "You don't need to sound so surprised," Richard 
griped as he helped the Mord-Sith the rest of the 
way in. 

   Cara only briefly took note of the dead man 
sprawled across the floor before Kahlan threw her 
arms around the woman. 
"You can't imagine how glad I am to see you," Cara 
said. 
   "Well, you can't imagine how glad I am to see 
you through my own eyes." 
"If only the trade you made had worked," Cara added 
in a whisper. 
"We'll find another way," Kahlan assured her. 
   Richard slowly drew the door open a crack and 
peeked out. He shut the door and turned back. 
   "It's clear. Doors to the left and around the 
balcony are the rooms with the women in them. 
Stairs to the right are the closest that lead down. 
Some of the rooms at the bottom are for officers; 
others are barracks for soldiers." 
Cara nodded. "I'm ready." 
Kahlan looked from one to the other. "Ready for 
what?" 
Richard took her by the elbow. "I need you to help 
me see." 
"Help you see? Is it progressing that fast?" 
   "Just listen. We're going to move along the 
balcony to the left and open the doors. Do your 
best to keep the women calm. We're going to break 
them out of here." 
   Kahlan was a bit confused by everything—it was 
completely different from the plans she had been 
hearing along with Nicholas. She knew she would 
just have to follow Richard and Cara's lead. 
   Outside, on the simple wooden balcony, there 
were no lamps or torches. The moon was down behind 
the black sprawl of the mountains. Kahlan's sight 
when Nicholas had controlled her had been like 
looking through a greasy pane of wavy glass. The 
sparkling vault of stars overhead had never looked 
so beautiful. In that starlight, Kahlan could see 
simple buildings lined up around the outer wall of 
the fortification. 

   Richard and Cara moved along the balcony, 
opening doors. At each one, Cara quickly ducked 
inside. Some of the women came out in their 
nightshirts; some Kahlan could hear inside rushing 
to get dressed. In some of the rooms, babies cried. 
   While Cara was in one of the rooms, Richard 
opened another door. He leaned close to Kahlan and 
whispered, "Go in and tell the women inside that 
we've come to help them escape. Tell them that 
their men have come to get them out. But they must 
be as quiet as possible, or we'll be caught." 
   Kahlan rushed in, as best she could on unsteady 
legs, and woke the young woman in the bed to the 
right. She sat up, terrified, but silent. Kahlan 
reached around and shook the woman in the other 
bed. 
   "We've come to help you escape. You mustn't make 
any noise. Your men are going to help. You have a 
chance to be free." 
"Free?" the first woman asked. 
   "Yes. It's up to you, but I strongly advise you 
to take the chance, and to hurry." 
The women flew out of their beds and grabbed for 
clothes. 
   Richard, Kahlan, and Cara moved farther down the 
balcony, asking the women who had already come out 
to help rouse the others. In a matter of a few 
minutes, hundreds of women were huddled together 
out on the balcony. There was no problem keeping 
them quiet; they were all too familiar with the 
consequences of causing trouble. They didn't want 
to do anything to get themselves caught trying to 
escape. Before long, they had made it all the way 
around the fortification balcony. 
   Many of the women had very young babies—ones too 
young to be taken away. The babies were mostly 
sound asleep in their mothers' arms, but some of 
them started to cry. The mothers desperately tried 
to rock and cuddle them into silence. Kahlan hoped 
that it was a common enough sound that it wouldn't 

draw the attention of the soldiers. 
   "Wait here," Richard whispered to Kahlan. "Keep 
everyone up here until we get the gate open." 
   With Cara right behind him, Richard slipped 
carefully down the steps and started across the 
open yard. When one of the babies suddenly began 
bawling, soldiers came out of a building to see 
what was going on. They spotted Richard and Kahlan. 
The soldiers yelled, sounding an alarm. 
   Kahlan heard the distinctive ring of steel as 
Richard drew his sword. Men rushed out of some of 
the doors, heading Richard and Cara off. Being used 
to dealing with these people, the men rushing 
toward Richard apparently weren't greatly concerned 
about violence. They were wrong, and fell as soon 
as they got close enough for Richard to strike. 
Some Richard took down as he ran; others Cara 
caught as they tried to come in from the side. 
   The screams of some of the men as they fell woke 
the whole encampment. Men rushed out of barracks 
below, pulling on their trousers and shirts, 
dragging weapon belts behind. 
   In the faint starlight, Kahlan spotted Richard 
by the dropgate. He took a mighty swing. Sparks 
showered across the wall as the sword shattered one 
of the heavy chains holding up the gate. Richard 
ran to the other side, to cut the other chain. Two 
men caught up to him there. In one fluid movement, 
Richard cut them both down. 
   As Cara dropped other men who were rushing in at 
Richard, he swung the sword again. White-hot 
fragments of steel filled the air along with the 
ringing sound of metal shattering. The gate groaned 
and slowly started to fall outward. Richard heaved 
his weight against it and it picked up speed. With 
a resounding crash, it came down, raising clouds of 
dust. 
   A great cry rose up as men outside, wielding 
swords, axes, and battle maces, charged in across 
the broken bridge and into the fortification. The 

soldiers rushed to meet the invasion and there was 
a great clash of weapons and men. 
   Kahlan saw, then, that soldiers were racing up 
the stairway on the opposite side of the balcony. 
   "Come on!" Kahlan yelled to the women. "We have 
to get out now!" 
   Holding the rail to keep her balance, Kahlan 
raced down the steps, all the women pouring down 
behind her, a number carrying screaming babies. 
Richard ran to meet her at the bottom. He tossed 
her a short sword with a leather-wound grip. Kahlan 
caught it by the handle just in time to turn and 
slash a soldier running up from beneath the 
balcony. 
   Owen made his way through the fighting and over 
to the women. "Come on!" he called to them. "Get to 
the gate! Run!" 
   The women, galvanized by his command, started 
running across the compound. As they reached the 
fighting, some of the women, instead of running out 
the gate, took the opportunity to leap on the backs 
of soldiers fighting Owen and his men. The women 
bit the men on the backs, beat at their heads, tore 
at their eyes. The soldiers were not restrained in 
dealing with the women, and several were brutally 
killed. It didn't stop others from joining the 
fight. 
   If they would only run for the gate, they could 
escape, but instead, they were attacking the 
soldiers with their bare hands. They had been held 
in bondage to these men for a very long time. 
Kahlan could only imagine what they had gone 
through and couldn't say she blamed them. She was 
still having difficulty moving, making her body do 
what she wanted it to do, or she would have joined 
them. 
   Kahlan turned at a sound only to see a man 
charging in at her. She recognized his flattened 
nose. Najari—Nicholas's right-hand man. He was one 
of the men who had carried her to the 

fortification. He wore a wicked grin as he came for 
her. 
   She could have used her power on him, but she 
feared to trust it right then. She instead brought 
the short sword out from behind her back and 
slammed it through Najari's gut. He stood stiffly 
right in front of her, his eyes wide. She could 
smell the stink of his breath. Kahlan wrenched the 
handle of the sword to the side. Mouth opened wide, 
he panted, fearing to draw a deep breath, fearing 
to move and cause any more damage. Kahlan gritted 
her teeth and swept the sword's handle around in an 
arc, ripping his insides apart. 
   She stared into his startled eyes as he slid off 
her sword. He grunted in pain as he dropped to his 
knees, holding his wound together as best he could. 
He never got what Kahlan knew he intended, what 
Nicholas had promised him. He fell forward onto his 
face, spilling his insides across the ground at her 
feet. 
   Kahlan turned to the attack. Richard was engaged 
in slashing his way through men trying to surround 
him as he fought to keep the gate clear. Others, 
Richard's men, came at the enemy from behind, 
cutting into them the way Richard had taught them. 
   Kahlan saw Owen not far away. He was standing in 
the open, among the fallen and the fighting, 
staring across the raging battle to a man just 
outside one of the doors under the balcony. 
   The man had a thick black beard, a shaved head, 
and a ring through one ear and one nostril. His 
arms were as big as tree limbs. His shoulders were 
twice as wide as Owen's. 
"Luchan." Owen said to himself. 
   Owen started across the open area of the 
fortification, past men engaged in pitched battle, 
past those crying out and those falling to blades, 
past swords and axes sweeping through the air, as 
if he didn't even see them. His eyes were locked on 
the man watching him come. 

   The face of a young woman appeared in the dark 
doorway behind Luchan He turned and growled at her 
to go back inside, that he was going to take care 
of the little man from her village. 
When Luchan turned back around, Owen was standing 
before him. 
   Luchan laughed and put his fists on his hips. 
"Why don't you scurry back into your hole?" 
   Owen said nothing, gave no warning, made no 
demands. He simply lit into Luchan with a vengeance 
— just as Richard had counseled him to do — 
slamming a knife into the big man's chest over and 
over before Luchan had a chance to react. He had 
underestimated Owen. It had cost him his life. 
   The woman rushed out of the doorway and came to 
a halt over the body of her former master. She 
stared down at him, at his one arm splayed out to 
the side, at the other lying across his bloody 
chest, at the unseeing eyes. She looked up at Owen. 
   Kahlan assumed that this was Marilee, and feared 
that she was going to reject Owen for harming 
another, that she would castigate him for what be 
had done. 
Instead, she rushed to Owen and threw her arms 
around him. 
The woman went to her knees beside the body and 
took the bloody knife from Owen's hand. She turned 
to the fallen Luchan and stabbed him half a dozen 
times with such force that it drove the knife in up 
to the hilt with every thrust. Watching her tearful 
fury, Kahlan didn't have to wonder how she had been 
treated by the man. 
Her anger spent, she stood again and tearfully 
hugged Owen. 
   Kahlan needed to get to Richard. She was 
relieved that her ability to move as she intended 
was returning. She started making her way around 
the edge of the battle, staying close to the walls, 
past men who saw her and thought she would be an 
easy mark. They didn't know that from a young age 

she had been taught to use a sword by her father, 
King Wyborn, and that Richard had later honed her 
skill to deadly proficiency, teaching her how to 
use her lighter weight to give her lethal speed. It 
was the last mistake the men made. 
   Off across the open area, a mob of soldiers, now 
fully awake and fully prepared to engage in battle, 
swarmed out of the barracks. They all charged for 
Richard. Kahlan knew right away that there were too 
many. Richard's men couldn't stop the flood of 
soldiers as they streamed across the encampment. 
All of them crashed in toward Richard. 
   Kahlan heard a deafening crack like lightning as 
the walls of the fortification lit with a flash. 
She had to turn away and shield her eyes. Night 
turned to day, and at the same time, a darkness 
darker than any night was loosed. 
   A blazing white-hot bolt of Additive Magic 
twisted and coiled around and through a crackling 
black void of Subtractive Magic, creating a violent 
rope of twin lightning joined to a terrible 
purpose. 
   It seemed as if the noonday sun crashed down 
among them. The air itself was drawn into the 
fierce heat and light. Try as she might, Kahlan 
couldn't draw a breath against the force of it. 
   Richard's fury gathered it all into a single 
point. In an explosive instant, the thunderous 
ignition of light unleashed a devastating blast of 
staggering destruction radiating outward across the 
entire encampment, annihilating the Imperial Order 
soldiers. 
The night fell dark and silent. 
Men and women stood stunned among the sea of blood 
and viscera, gazing around at the unrecognizable 
remains of the enemy soldiers. 
   The battle was over. The people of Bandakar had 
carried the day. At last, the women fell to wailing 
and crying, ecstatic to be free. They knew many of 
the men who had come to free them, and clung to 

them in gratitude, overwhelmed with joy to be 
reunited. They hugged friends, relatives, and 
strangers alike. The men, too, wept with relief and 
happiness. 
   Kahlan rushed through the maze of rejoicing 
people crowded into the open area of the 
fortification. Men cheered her, thrilled that she, 
too, had been liberated. Many of the men wanted to 
talk to her, but she kept running to get to 
Richard. 
   He stood to the side, leaning against the wall, 
Cara helping to hold him up. He still gripped his 
blood-slicked sword in his fist, the blade's tip 
resting on the ground. 
Owen, too, made his way over to Richard. 
   "Mother Confessor! I'm so relieved and thankful 
to have you back!" He looked over at a smiling 
Richard. "Lord Rahl, I would like you to meet 
Marilee." 
   This woman, who only a short time ago had 
savagely stabbed the corpse of her captor now 
seemed too shy to speak. She dipped her head in 
greeting. 
   Richard straightened and smiled that smile 
Kahlan so loved to see, a smile filled with the 
sheer pleasure of life. "I'm very happy to meet 
you, Marilee. Owen has told us all about you, and 
about how much you mean to him. Through all that 
happened, you were always first in his mind and 
heart. His love for you moved him to act to change 
his entire empire for the better." 
She seemed to be overwhelmed by it all, and by his 
words. 
   "Lord Rahl came to us and did something more 
important than saving us all," Owen told Marilee. 
"Lord Rahl gave me the courage to come and fight 
for you, to fight to save you—for all of us to 
fight for our own lives and the lives of those we 
love." 
   Beaming, Marilee leaned in and kissed Richard on 

the cheek. "Thank you, Lord Rahl. I never knew my 
Owen could do such things." 
   "Believe me," Cara said, "we had our doubts 
about him, too." She clapped Owen on the back of 
the shoulder. "But he did well." 
   "I, too, have come to understand the value of 
what he has done," Marilee said to Richard, "of the 
things you seem to have taught our people." 
   Richard smiled at the two of them, but then he 
could no longer hold back the coughing that so hurt 
him. The mood of joyous liberation suddenly 
changed. People rushed in around them, helping to 
hold him up. Kahlan saw blood running down his 
chin. 
"Richard," she cried. "No ..." 
   They eased him to the ground. He clutched at 
Kahlan's sleeve, wanting to have her close. Kahlan 
saw tears running down Cara's cheek. 
   It seemed that he had spent all the strength he 
had left. He was slipping into the fatal grasp of 
the poison, and there was nothing they could do for 
him. 
   "Owen," Richard said, panting to catch his 
breath when the spell of coughing stopped. "How far 
to your town?" His voice was getting hoarse. 
"Not far—only hours, if we hurry." 
"The man who made the poison and the antidote ... 
he lived there?" 
"Yes. His place is still there." 
"Take me there." 
Owen looked puzzled, but he nodded eagerly. "Of 
course." 
"Hurry," Richard added, trying to get up. He 
couldn't. 
Tom appeared in the crowd. Jennsen was there, too. 
   "Get some poles!" Tom commanded. "And some 
canvas, or blankets. We'll make a litter. Four men 
at a time can carry him. We can run and get him 
there quickly." 
   Men rushed to the buildings, searching for what 

they would need to make a litter. 
 
 
 
 
 
            CHAPTER 
65 
 
 
 
  Kahlan hurriedly pulled the tin off the shelf and 
opened the lid. The tin contained a yellowish 
powder. It was the right color. She leaned down and 
showed it to Richard as he lay in the litter. He 
reached in and took a pinch. 
He smelled it. He put his tongue to it and then 
nodded. 
   "Just a little," he whispered, lifting it out to 
her. Kahlan held out her palm while he dribbled 
some of the crushed powder in her hand. He threw 
the rest on the floor, too weak to bother returning 
it to the tin. Kahlan added the small portion on 
her palm to one of the pots of boiling water. 
   Cloth bags of herbs steeped in other pots of hot 
water. Alkaloids from dried mushrooms were soaking 
in oil. Richard had other people grating stalks of 
plants. 
"Lobelia," Richard said. His eyes were closed. 
Owen bent down. "Lobelia?" 
Richard nodded. "It will be a dried herb." 
   Owen turned to the shelves and started looking. 
There were hundreds of little square cubbyholes in 
the wall of the place where the man who had made 
Richard's poison, and the antidote, used to work. 
It was a small, simple, single-room building with 
little light. It was not nearly as well equipped as 
the herbalist places Kahlan had seen before, but 
the man had an extensive collection of things. More 
than that, he had once made the antidote, 
presumably from what was there. 

   "Here!" Owen said, holding a bag down for 
Richard to see. "It says lobelia on the tag." 
   "Grind a little pile half the size of your 
thumbnail, sift out the fibers and discard them, 
then add what's left to the bowl with the darker 
oil." 
   Richard knew about herbs, but he didn't know 
anywhere near enough about herbs to concoct the 
cure for the poison he had been given. 
His gift seemed to be guiding him. 
   Richard was in a near trance, or nearly 
unconscious; Kahlan wasn't exactly sure which. He 
was having difficulty breathing. She didn't know 
what else to do to help him. If they didn't do 
something, he was going to die, and soon. As long 
as he lay quietly on the litter he was resting more 
comfortably, but that was not going to make him 
recover. 
   It had been a short run to Witherton, but it had 
taken too long as far as Kahlan was concerned. 
"Yarrow," Richard said. 
Kahlan leaned down. "What preparation?" 
"Oil," Richard said. 
   Kahlan fumbled through the shelves of small 
bottles. She found one labeled YARROW OIL. She 
squatted down and held it before Richard. 
"How much?" 
   She lifted one of his hands and put the bottle 
in it, closing his fingers around it so he could 
tell its size. "How much?" 
"Is it full?" 
Kahlan hurriedly wiggled out the whittled wooden 
stopper. "Yes." 
"Half," Richard said. "In with any of the other 
oils." 
   "I found the feverfew," Jennsen said as she 
hopped down from the stool. 
"Make a tincture," Richard told her. 
   Kahlan replaced the stopper in the bottle and 
squatted down beside Richard. "What next?" 

"Make an infusion of mullein." 
"Mullein, mullein," Kahlan mumbled as she turned to 
the task. 
   As Richard gave them instructions, half a dozen 
people worked at boiling, blending, crushing, 
grating, filtering, and steeping. They added some 
of the preparations together as they were 
completed, and kept others separate as they worked 
on them. As they worked, the number of various 
tasks were combined and reduced at specified 
points. 
   Richard gestured for Owen. Owen brushed his 
hands clean on his trouser legs as he bent down to 
await instruction. 
   "Cold," Richard said, his eyes closed. "We need 
something cold. We need a way to cool it." 
Owen thought a moment. "There's a stream not far." 
   Richard pointed to various stations where people 
labored. "Pour those bowls of preparations and 
powders into the boiling water in the kettle, 
there. Then take it to the stream. Hold the kettle 
down in the water to cool it." Richard held up a 
finger in caution. "Don't put it in too deep and 
let the water from the stream run in over the top, 
or it will be ruined." 
Owen shook his head. "I won't." 
   He stood impatiently as Kahlan poured the 
contents of shallow bowls into the boiling pot of 
water. She didn't know if any of this made sense, 
but she knew that Richard had the gift, and he 
certainly had figured out and eliminated the 
problem he had been having with it. If his gift 
could guide him in making the antidote, it might 
save his life. 
Kahlan didn't know anything else that would. 
   She handed the kettle to Owen. He ran out the 
door to put it in the stream to cool it. Cara 
followed him out to make sure that nothing happened 
to what might be the only thing that could save 
Richard's life. 

   Jennsen sat on the floor on the other side of 
him, holding his hand. With the back of her wrist, 
Kahlan pushed her hair off her face. She sat beside 
Richard and took his free hand to wait for Owen and 
Cara to return. 
   Betty stood in the doorway, her ears pricked 
forward, her tail intermittently going into a 
hopeful blur of wagging whenever Jennsen or Kahlan 
looked her way. 
   It seemed like hours until Owen came running 
back with the kettle, although Kahlan knew it 
really hadn't been all that long. 
   "Filter it through a cloth," Richard said, "but 
don't squeeze the cloth at the end; just let the 
liquid run through until you have half a cup of it. 
Once you've done that, then add the oils to the 
liquid you collected in the cup." 
   Everyone stood watching Kahlan work, snatching 
up what she needed, tossing it away when she was 
finished with it. When she had enough liquid from 
the kettle collected in the cup, she poured in the 
oils. 
"Stir it with a stick of cinnamon," Richard said. 
Owen climbed up on the stool. "I remember seeing 
cinnamon." 
   He handed a stick down to Kahlan. She stirred 
the golden liquid, but it didn't seem to be 
working. 
"The oil and water don't want to mix," she told 
Richard. 
   His head was rolled to the side away from her. 
"Keep mixing. A moment will come when they suddenly 
come together." 
   Dubious, Kahlan kept stirring. She could see 
that the oils were sticking together in globs and 
not mixing with the water she had filtered through 
the cloth. The more it cooled, the less and less it 
looked like it was going to work. 
   Kahlan felt a tear of desperation run down her 
cheek and drip off her jaw. 

   The contents of the cup stiffened. She kept 
stirring, not wanting to tell Richard that it 
wasn't working. She swallowed past the growing lump 
in her throat. 
   The contents in the cup began to melt. Kahlan 
gasped. She blinked. Everything in the cup suddenly 
went together into a smooth, syrupy liquid. 
   "Richard!" She wiped the tear from her cheek. 
"It worked. It mixed together. Now what?" 
He held his hand out. "It's ready. Give it to me." 
   Jennsen and Cara helped him to sit up. Kahlan 
held the precious cup in both hands and carefully 
put it to his mouth. She tipped it up to help him 
drink. It took a while to get it down. He had to 
stop from time to time as he sipped, trying not to 
cough. 
   It was a lot more than had been in any of the 
little square-sided bottles, but Kahlan figured 
that maybe he needed more, since he was so late to 
be taking it. 
When he was finished, she reached up and set the 
cup on the counter.She licked a drop of the liquid 
off her finger. The antidote had the slight aroma 
of cinnamon and a sweet, spicy taste. She hoped 
that was right. 
   Richard worked at recovering his breath after 
the effort of drinking. They gently laid him back 
down. His hands were trembling. He looked 
miserable. 
"Just let me rest, now," he murmured. 
   Betty, still standing in the doorway, watching 
intently, bleated her wish to come in. 
   "He will be all right," Jennsen said to her 
friend. "You just stay out there and let him rest." 
   Betty pulled softly and then lay down in the 
doorway to wait along with the rest of them. It was 
going to be a long night. Kahlan didn't think she 
was going to be able to sleep until she knew if 
Richard would be all right. 
Zedd pointed. "There's another one, there, that 

needs to be cleaned up," he said to Chase. 
   Chase wore a chain-mail shirt over a tan leather 
tunic. His heavy black trousers held a black belt 
set with a large silver buckle emblazoned with the 
emblem of the boundary wardens. Beneath his black 
cloak, strapped everywhere—legs, waist, upper arms, 
over the backs of his shoulders—was a small arsenal 
of weapons, everything from small thin spikes held 
in the fist and used to puncture the skull to a 
crescent-shaped battle-axe used to divide a skull 
cleanly with one blow. Chase was deadly with any of 
them. 
   It had been a while now since they needed the 
skills of a boundary warden. Chase seemed to be a 
man without a mission. 
   The big man walked across the rampart and bent 
to pull a knife from beneath the body. 
   He grunted in recognition. "There it is." He 
held the walnut-handled knife up to the light as he 
inspected it. "I was worried I'd lost it." 
   He slipped the knife into an empty sheath 
without having to look. With one hand, he grabbed 
the waistband of the trousers and picked up the 
stiff body. He stepped into an opening in the 
crenellated wall and heaved the body out into the 
air. 
   Zedd looked over the edge. It was a drop of 
several thousand feet before the rock of the 
mountain flared enough for anything falling to make 
contact. It was several thousand more feet down a 
granite cliff before the forest began. 
   The golden sun was getting low in the mountains. 
The clouds had taken on streaks, of gold and 
orange. From this distance, the city below was as 
beautiful as ever, except Zedd knew that it was an 
empty place without the people to bring it life. 
"Chase, Zedd," Rachel called from the doorway, "the 
stew is ready." 
   Zedd threw his skinny arms into the air. "Bags! 
It's about time! A man could starve waiting for 

stew to cook." 
   Rachel planted her fist with the wooden spoon on 
her hip and shook a finger of her other hand at 
him. "If you keep saying bad words, you'll not get 
any dinner." 
   Chase let out a sigh as he glanced over at Zedd. 
"And you think you have troubles. You wouldn't 
think that a girl who doesn't come up to my belt 
buckle could be such a trial." 
   Zedd followed Chase to the doorway through the 
thick stone wall. "Is she always this much 
trouble?" 
Chase mussed Rachel's hair on the way past. 
"Always," he confided. 
"Is the stew good?" Zedd asked. "Worth watching my 
language for?" 
   "My new mother taught me how to make it," Rachel 
said in a tempting singsong. "Rikka had some before 
she went out, and she said it was good." 
   Zedd smoothed back his unruly white hair. "Well, 
Emma can cook better than any woman I ever met." 
   "Then be good," Rachel said, "and I'll give you 
biscuits to go with the stew." 
"Biscuits!" 
"Sure. Stew wouldn't be stew without biscuits." 
Zedd blinked at the child. "Why, that's what I 
always thought, too." 
   "You'd better let me see if she made it right, 
first," Chase said as they passed through the 
tapestry lined halls of the Keep. "I'd hate you to 
go making any firm commitments before we even know 
if the stew is edible." 
   "Friedrich helped me with the heavy parts," 
Rachel said. "He says it's good." 
   "We'll see," Chase said. 
   Rachel turned and shook her wooden spoon at him. 
"You have to wash your hands, first, though. I saw 
you throwing that dead man over the wall. You have 
to wash your hands before you come to the table and 
eat." 

   Chase gave Zedd a look of strained forbearance. 
"Somewhere, there's a boy enjoying himself right 
now, probably carrying around a dead frog, 
oblivious to the sorry fact that he's someday going 
to be married to little-miss-wash-your-hands-
before-you-eat." 
   Zedd smiled. When Chase had taken Rachel in to 
be his daughter, it was just about the best thing 
Zedd could ever have wished for, Rachel thought so, 
too, and it looked like she still did. She was 
fiercely devoted to the man. 
   As they sat at the table, before the cheery fire 
in the hearth, Zedd enjoying his third bowl of 
stew, he couldn't recall the Keep being such a 
wonderful place. It was because there was a child, 
along with friends, once again in the halls of the 
Keep. 
   Friedrich, the man who had come on Richard's 
orders to warn Zedd of the impending attack on the 
Keep, had realized he had not been in time. The man 
used his head and had sought out Chase, the old 
friend he had heard Richard talk about. 
   While Chase had gone to rescue Zedd and Adie, 
Friedrich had returned to the Keep to spy on the 
people who had taken it. By watching carefully and 
staying out of sight of a Sister, Friedrich had 
been able to provide Chase and Zedd invaluable 
information about the number of people occupying 
the Keep, and their routines. He then helped take 
the place back. 
   Zedd liked the man. He was not only frightfully 
handy with a knife, but entertaining at 
conversation. Friedrich, since he had been married 
to a sorceress, was able to converse with Zedd 
without being intimidated as some were of wizards. 
Having lived in D'Hara all his life, Friedrich was 
also able to fill in pieces of information. 
   Rachel held up a carving of a hawk. "Look what 
Friedrich made for me, Zedd. Isn't it the most 
beautiful thing you ever did see?" 

Zedd smiled. "It certainly is." 
"It's nothing," Friedrich scoffed. "If I had some 
gold leaf, then I could gild it for you. That used 
to be what I did for a living." He leaned back and 
smiled to himself. "Until Lord Rahl made me a 
boundary warden." 
   "You know," Zedd drawled offhandedly to both 
men, "the Keep is even more vulnerable, now, to 
those who might come and don't have magic than to 
those who do. I'm just fine protecting against 
those who are affected by magic, but not the other 
kind." 
Chase nodded. "Seems so." 
   "Well, the thing is," he went on, "I was 
thinking that since there's no boundary any longer, 
and what with all the trouble about, perhaps you 
two would like to take on the responsibility of 
helping to protect the Wizard's Keep. I'm not 
nearly so fit for the task as would be someone 
trained in such things." Zedd leaned in, his brow 
lowering. "It's vitally important." 
   Elbows on the table, Chase chewed a bite of 
biscuit as he watched Zedd. Finally, he stirred his 
spoon around in his bowl. 
   "Well, it could be a disaster if Jagang were to 
use those ungifted men to get his hands on the 
place again." He thought about it. "Emma will 
understand." 
Zedd shrugged. "Bring her here." 
Chase frowned. "Bring her here?" 
Zedd gestured around. "The Keep is certainly big 
enough." 
   "But what would we do with our children?" Chase 
leaned back. "You don't want all my children here 
in the Keep, Zedd—they'd be running up and down, 
playing in the halls. It would drive you batty. 
Besides," Chase added, peering with one scowling 
eye at Rachel, "each one's uglier than the next." 
Rachel hid her giggle behind a biscuit. 
   Zedd remembered the sounds of children's 

laughter in the Keep, the sounds of joy and love. 
   "Well, it would be a burden," he agreed, "but 
this is, after all, about the protection of the 
Keep. What sacrifice wouldn't it be worth making to 
protect the Keep?" 
   Rachel looked from Chase to Zedd. "My new 
sister, Lee, could bring Cat back to you, Zedd." 
   "That's right!" Zedd said, throwing his hands 
up. "I haven't seen Cat for ages! Is Lee treating 
Cat well?" 
Rachel nodded earnestly. "Oh, yes. We all take good 
care of Cat." 
   "What do you think, Rachel?" Chase finally 
asked. "Would you want to live here in this dusty 
old place with Zedd?" 
   Rachel ran over and hugged Chase's leg. "Oh, 
yes, can we, please? It would be ever so grand." 
   Chase sighed. "Then I guess it's settled. But 
you'll have to behave and not bother Zedd by being 
too loud." 
   "I promise," Rachel said. She frowned up at 
Zedd. "Will Mother have to crawl into the Keep 
through that little tunnel, like we did?" 
   Zedd chuckled. "No, no, we'll let her come in 
the proper way, like the lady she is." He turned to 
Friedrich. "How about it, boundary warden? Would 
you be willing to continue doing Lord Rahl's 
bidding and stay to help guard the Keep?" 
   Friedrich slowly spun the bird carving by the 
tip of one wing, thinking. 
   "You know," Zedd added, "while you're waiting 
for some fearsome attack, there are any number of 
old gilded things here at the Keep that are in 
terrible need of repair. Perhaps you would consider 
taking on the job of being the Keep's official 
gilder? We have plenty of gold leaf. And, someday, 
when the people return to Aydindril, you would have 
a steady supply of customers." 
   Friedrich stared down at the table. "I don't 
know. This one adventure was all well and good, but 

since my wife, Althea, died, I don't seem to be 
interested in much." 
   Zedd nodded. "I know how it is. I used to have a 
wife. I think it would do you good to get paid to 
do something needed." 
Friedrich smiled. "All right, then. I will take 
your job, wizard." 
   "Good," Chase said. "I'll have someone to help 
me when I need to lock troublesome children in the 
dungeon." 
Rachel giggled as he set her on the ground. 
   Chase pushed his chair back and stood. "Well, 
Friedrich, if we're going to be Keep wardens, then 
I think we ought to make some rounds and satisfy 
ourselves about the security of a few things. As 
big as this place is, Rikka could use the help." 
   "Just mind the shields," Zedd reminded them as 
they headed for the door. 
   After the two men had gone off, Rachel got Zedd 
another biscuit to go with the rest of his stew. 
Her little brow bunched together earnestly. 
"When we live here, we'll try to be real quiet for 
you, Zedd." 
   "Well, you know, Rachel, the Keep is a big 
place. I doubt you would bother me much if you and 
your brothers and sisters wanted to play a little 
bit." 
"Really?" 
   Zedd pulled the leather-covered ball painted 
with faded blue and pink zigzagged lines all around 
it out of his pocket and set it on the table. 
Rachel's eyes lit up in astonishment. 
   "I found this old ball," he said, gesturing with 
his biscuit. "I think a ball has a much better time 
if it has someone to play with it. Do you think you 
and your brothers and sisters might like to play 
with this when you live here? You can bounce it 
down the halls to your heart's content." 
Her mouth fell open. "Really, Zedd?" 
Zedd grinned at the look on her face. "Really." 

   "Maybe I can bounce it in the dark hall that 
makes the funny noises. Then it wouldn't bother you 
any more than now." 
   "This old place is full of funny noises—and a 
bouncing ball isn't liable to cause too much 
trouble." 
   She climbed up in his lap and put her little 
arms around his neck, hugging him tightly. 
   "It's a lot better hugging you now that you 
found those things to get that awful collar off 
your neck." 
   Zedd rubbed her back as she hugged him. "Yes, it 
is, little one; yes, it is." 
   She leaned back and looked at him. "I wish 
Richard and Kahlan could be here to play with the 
ball, too. I miss them something fierce." 
Zedd smiled. "Me, too, little one. Me, too." 
   She frowned at him. "Don't get tears, Zedd. I 
won't make a lot of noise to bother you." 
   Zedd shook a bony finger at her. "I'm afraid you 
have a lot to learn about playing with a ball." 
   "I do?" 
   "Of course. Laughing goes with playing with a 
ball like biscuits go with stew." 
She frowned at him, not sure if he was telling the 
truth. 
   He set her on the floor. "Tell you what. Why 
don't you come with me and I'll show you." 
"Really, Zedd?" 
Zedd stood up and mussed her hair. "Really." 
   He scooped the ball off the table. "Let's see if 
you can show this ball how to have a good time." 
 
 
 
 
 
           CHAPTER 
66 
 
 

 
    Richard rested his back against a rock in the 
shade of a stand of white oaks as he gazed off at 
the line of silver maples shimmering in the breeze. 
The air smelled fresh after the rain of the day 
before. The clouds had moved on and left a clear, 
bright blue sky behind. His head finally felt 
clear, as well. 
   It had taken three days, but he was finally 
recovered from the effects of the poison. His gift 
had not only helped bring Kahlan back from the 
brink, but himself as well. 
   The people of the town of Witherton were just 
beginning to try to put their lives back together. 
With all the people they'd lost, it was going to be 
difficult for them. There were gaping holes where 
there used to be friends or members of families. 
Still, now that they were free there was the 
beginning of a vibrant sense of their future being 
better. 
   But just because they were free, that did not 
mean they would stay that way. 
   Richard gazed up the broad valley beyond the 
town. People were out working with their crops and 
tending to the animals. They were going back to 
their lives. He was impatient to be on his way, and 
back to his own life. This place had kept them from 
important business, from people who had been 
waiting for them. 
He guessed that this place had been important 
business as well. It was hard telling what this all 
had begun, or what the future would hold. 
For sure, the world would never be the same. 
   Richard saw Kahlan coming out through the gate, 
Cara beside her. Betty frolicked along at their 
side, eager to see where they were going. Jennsen 
must have let the goat go for a romp. Betty had 
grown up and spent her entire life on the move. 
She'd never stayed in one place for long. Maybe 
that was why she always wanted to follow Richard 

and Kahlan. She recognized family and wanted to be 
with them. 
   "So, what's she going to do?" Richard asked 
Kahlan as she came close and set her pack down 
beside Richard's. 
   "I don't know." With the flat of her hand to her 
brow, Kahlan shielded her eyes from the sunlight. 
"I think she wants to tell you first." 
   Cara set her pack beside Kahlan's. "I think 
she's torn and doesn't know what to do." 
   "How do you feel?" Kahlan asked as she reached 
down and with her fingertips rubbed the back of his 
shoulder. Her gentle touch was a calming 
connection. 
Richard smiled up at her. "I keep telling you, I'm 
fine." 
   He tore off a strip of dried venison and chewed 
as he watched Jennsen, Tom, Owen, Marilee, Anson, 
and a small group of the men finally emerge through 
the gates and make their way across the waving 
field of waist-high green grass. 
"I'm hungry," Kahlan said. "Can I have some?" 
   "Sure." Richard pulled strips of the meat from 
his pack, stood, and handed a piece to both Kahlan 
and Cara. 
   "Lord Rahl," Anson said, waving, as the group 
joined Richard, Kahlan, and Cara in the shade of 
the oaks, "we wanted to come out to say good-bye 
and see you off. Maybe we will walk with you toward 
the pass?" 
Richard swallowed. "We'd like that." 
   Owen frowned. "Lord Rahl, why are you eating 
meat? You just healed your gift. Won't you harm 
your balance?" 
   Richard smiled. "No. You see, incorrectly trying 
to apply a false notion of balance was what caused 
the problem I was having with my gift." 
Owen looked puzzled. "What do you mean? You said 
that you must not eat meat as the balance to the 
killing you sometimes must do. After the battle at 

the fortification, don't you need to balance your 
gift all the more?" 
   Richard took a deep breath and let it out slowly 
as he gazed out over the mountains. 
   "You see, the thing is," Richard said, "I owe 
you all an apology. You all listened to me, but I 
didn't listen to myself. 
   "Kaja-Rang tried to help me with the words 
revealed on the statue, the words I told you—
Deserve Victory. They were, first of all, meant for 
me." 
"I don't understand," Anson said. 
   "I told you that your life is your own to live 
and that you have every right to defend it. 
   "Yet, I was telling myself that I had to balance 
the killing I did to defend my life and the lives 
of my loved ones by not eating meat—in essence, 
saying my self-defense, my killing of those who 
attack me and other innocent people, was morally 
wrong, and so for the killing I'd done I needed to 
make amends to the magic that helped me by offering 
it the appeasement of balance." 
"But your sword's magic didn't work, either," 
Jennsen said. 
   "No, it didn't, and that should have been the 
thing that made me realize what the problem was, 
because both my gift and the sword's magic are 
different entities, yet they reacted logically to 
the same unreasoned action on my part. The sword's 
magic began to fail because I myself, by not eating 
meat, was saying that I did not completely believe 
that I was justified in using force to stop others 
who initiate violence. 
   "The sword's magic functions through the belief 
structure of the sword's owner; it only works 
against what the Seeker himself perceives as the 
enemy. The sword's magic will not work against a 
friend. That was the key I should have understood. 
   "When I thought that the use of the sword had to 
be balanced, I was, in effect, expressing a belief 

that my actions were in some way unjustified. 
Therefore, because I held that remnant of faith in 
a false concept that had been inculcated in me 
throughout my life, just as all the people of 
Bandakar were taught—that killing was always wrong—
the sword's magic began to fail me. 
   "The Sword of Truth's magic, as my gift, could 
only again be viable when I comprehended—
completely—that the magic needs no balance for the 
killing I've done because the killing I've done is 
not only moral, but the only moral course of action 
I could have taken. 
   "By not eating meat, I was acknowledging that 
some part of my mind believed the same thing that 
the people here in Bandakar believed when we first 
met Owen and his men—that killing is always wrong. 
   "By thinking that I must not eat meat as a 
balance, I was denying the moral necessity of self-
preservation, denying the essential of protecting 
the value of life. The very act of seeking 
'balance' for what I'm right in doing is a conflict 
which is what was causing the headaches and also 
caused the Sword of Truth's power to fail me. I was 
doing it to myself." 
   Richard had violated the Wizard's First Rule by 
believing a lie— that it was always wrong to kill—
because he feared it was true. He had also violated 
the Second Rule, among others, but most grievous of 
all, he had violated the Sixth Rule. In so doing, 
he had ignored reason in favor of blind faith. The 
failure of his gift and the sword's power was a 
direct result of not applying reasoned thought. 
   Fortunately, with the Eighth Rule, he had come 
to reexamine his actions and finally realized the 
flaw in his thinking. Only then was he able to 
correct the situation. 
In the end, he had fulfilled the Eighth Rule. 
   Richard shifted his weight to the other foot as 
he gazed at the faces watching him. "I had to come 
to understand that my actions are moral and need no 

balance, but are in themselves balanced by my 
reasoned actions, that killing is sometimes not 
only justified, but the only right and moral thing 
to do. 
   "I had to come to understand the very thing I 
was asking all of you to understand. I had to 
understand that I must deserve victory." 
   Owen looked over at those with him and then 
scratched his head. "Well, considering everything, 
I guess we can understand how you could make such a 
misjudgment." 
   Jennsen, her red hair standing out against the 
green of the trees and fields, squinted at him in 
the sunlight. "Well," she said with a sigh, "I'm 
glad to be pristinely ungifted. Being a wizard 
sounds awfully hard." 
The men all nodded while voicing their agreement. 
   Richard smiled at Jennsen. "A lot of things in 
life are hard to figure out. Like what you've been 
considering. What have you decided?" 
   Jennsen clasped her hands and glanced over at 
Owen, Anson, and all the rest of the people with 
them. 
   "Well, this is no longer a banished empire. It's 
no longer an empire naked to the aggression of 
tyrants. It's part of the D'Haran Empire, now. 
These people want the same as us. 
   "I think I'd like to stay with them for a while 
and help them come to be part of the wider world, 
just as I've been starting to do. It's kind of 
exciting. I'd like to take your suggestion, 
Richard, and help them in that." 
   Richard smiled at his sister. He ran his hand 
down her beautiful red hair. 
"On a condition," she added. 
Richard let his hand drop back. "Condition?" 
   "Sure. I'm a Rahl, so ... I was kind of thinking 
that I ought to have some proper protection. I 
could be a target, you know. People want to kill 
me. Jagang would love to—" 

   Richard laughed as he drew her into a hug with 
one arm to silence her. 
   "Tom, being as you are a protector to the House 
of RahJ, I'm assigning you to protect my sister, 
Jennsen Rahl. It's an important job and it means a 
great deal to me." 
Tom lifted an eyebrow. "Are you sure, Lord Rahl?" 
   Jennsen swatted him with the back of her hand. 
"Of coursldie's sure. He wouldn't say it unless he 
was sure." 
"You heard the lady," Richard said. "I'm sure." 
   The big blond D'Haran smiled with a boyish grin. 
"All right, then. I swear I will protect her, Lord 
Rahl." 
Jennsen gestured vaguely back at the men and the 
town behind her. 
"Since I've been with them, they have come to see 
that I'm not a witch, and Betty is not a spirit 
guide—although for a time there I was afraid they 
might be right about Betty." 
   Richard peered down at the goat. Betty cocked 
her head. "I guess none of us but Betty knew the 
truth of what Nicholas was up to." At the sound of 
her name, Betty's ears pricked forward and her tail 
went into a fit of expectant wagging. 
   Jennsen patted Betty's round middle. "Now that 
these people understand that I'm not a witch, but I 
do share some of their traits, I suggested I might 
play an important role." She drew the knife at her 
belt and held it up, showing Richard the ornate 
letter "R" engraved on the silver handle. "I 
suggested that I be the official representative of 
the House of Rahl—if you approve." 
Richard grinned. "I think that's an excellent 
idea." 
   "I think that would be wonderful, Jennsen." 
Kahlan pointed to the east with her chin. "But 
don't wait too long before you get back to Hawton 
to see Ann and Nathan. They will be a valuable help 
in insuring that the people here are no longer the 

prey of the Imperial Order. They will help you." 
   Jennsen twisted her fingers together. "But 
aren't they going to want to be going with the both 
of you? Helping you?" 
   "Ann thinks she should direct Richard's life," 
Kahlan said. "I don't think some of her directions 
have been the best thing." She slipped her arm 
through Richard's. "He is the Lord Rahl, now. He 
needs to do things his way, not theirs." 
   "They both feel responsible for us," Richard 
explained. "Nathan Rahl is a prophet. Prophecy, 
because of the way it functions, actually does 
require balance. The balance to Prophecy is free 
will. I am the balance. I know those two don't like 
it, but I think I need to be free of them—for now. 
at least. 
   "But there is more to it. I think it's more 
important that they help the people here, first. We 
already know the uses to which Jagang will put the 
pristinely ungifted. I think it's vital that these 
people here, who are willing to value and protect 
the freedom they've won, are given some guidance in 
how to do that. 
   "Ann and Nathan will be able to set up defenses 
that will help protect the people here. They will 
also be valuable in teaching you the history that 
is important for you to know." 
   After Richard picked up his pack and slipped his 
arms through the straps, Owen gripped Richard's 
hand. "Thank you, Lord Rahl, for showing me that my 
life is worth living." 
   Marilee stepped forward and hugged him. "Thank 
you for teaching Owen to be worthy of me." 
   Richard laughed. Owen laughed. Cara gave Marilee 
an approving clap on the back. And then all the men 
laughed. 
   Betty pushed in and with a flurry of tail 
wagging got the point across that she didn't want 
to be left out. 
   Richard knelt down and scratched Betty's ears. 

"And you, my friend, from now on I don't want you 
letting any Slides using you to spy on people." 
   Betty pushed her head against his chest as he 
scratched her ears, and bleated as if to say she 
was sorry. 
 
 
 
 
        CHAPTER 67 
 
 
   Alone at last beneath the vast blue sky, the 
soaring walls of snowcapped mountains, and in among 
the trees, Richard felt good about being on their 
way. He would miss Jennsen, but it was only for a 
time. It would do her good to be on her own, yet 
among people also discovering how to live their own 
lives as they learned more about the wider world. 
He knew he would not trade away all he had learned 
since he'd left his sheltered life in Hartland. If 
not for that, he wouldn't be with Kahlan. 
   It felt good to walk and stretch his legs. He 
hitched his bow up higher on his shoulder as they 
made their way through the dappled sunlight of the 
hushed forest floor. After being so close to death 
as well as to losing his ability to see, he found 
everything more vibrant. The mosses looked more 
lush, the leaves more shimmery, the towering pines 
more awe-inspiring. 
Kahlan's eyes seemed more green, her hair softer, 
her smile warmer. 
   As much as he at one time had hated the fact 
that he had been born gifted, he was now relieved 
to have his gift back. It was part of him, part of 
who he was, part of what made him the individual he 
was. 
   Kahlan had once asked him if he wished she had 
been born without her Confessor's power. He had 
told her that he would never wish that, because he 

loved her for who she was. There was no way to 
separate out the parts of a person. That was to 
deny their individuality. He was no different. His 
gift was part of who he was. His abilities touched 
everything he did. 
   His problem with his gift was of his own making. 
The magic of the Sword of Truth had helped him 
understand that by failing him. In so doing, it had 
revealed his own failure to recognize the truth. 
   To have it back at his hip, and to know that it 
was once again in harmony with him and ready to 
defend him and those he loved, was a comforting 
feeling—not because he wished to fight, but because 
he wished to live. 
   The day was warm and they made good time 
climbing the rocky trail up into the pass. By the 
time they reached the crown of the notch through 
the formidable mountains, it was colder, but 
without a biting wind it was not unpleasant. 
   At the top of the pass they stopped to gaze up 
at the statue of Kaja-Rang, sitting where it had 
been for thousands of years, all alone, keeping 
vigil over an empire of those who once could not 
see evil. 
   In some ways, the statue's presence was a 
monument to failure. Where Kaja-Rang and his people 
had failed to get these people to see the truth, 
Richard had succeeded—but not without Kaja-Rang's 
help. 
   Richard put his hands on the cold granite, on 
the words—Taiga Vas-sternich—that had helped save 
his life. 
   "Thank you," he whispered up at the face of the 
man staring off toward the Pillars of Creation, 
where Richard had discovered his sister. 
   Cara placed her hands over the words, and 
Richard was surprised to see her look up at the 
statue and say, "Thank you for helping to save Lord 
Rahl." 
   After they started descending the pass, first 

crossing the open ledges and then making it down 
into the dense woods, Richard heard the call of a 
pewee, the signal he had taught Cara that had 
served them so well. 
   "You know," Cara said as she led them down the 
rocky ground beside a small stream, "Anson knows a 
lot about birds." 
Richard stepped carefully among the tangle of cedar 
roots. "Really." 
   "Yes. While you were recovering we spent time 
talking." She put a hand against the fibrous bark 
of the reddish trunk of a cedar to keep her 
balance. She pulled her long blond braid forward 
over her shoulder as she started out again, running 
her hand down the length of the braid. 
"He complimented me on my bird whistle," Cara said. 
   Richard glanced to Kahlan. She shrugged to let 
him know that she didn't have any idea what Cara 
was getting at. 
"I told you that you learned it well," Richard 
said. 
   "I told him that you taught it to me, that it 
was the call of the short-tailed pine hawk. Anson 
said that there wasn't any such bird as a short-
tailed pine hawk. He said the call I used as a 
signal—the call you taught me—wa»a common wood 
pewee. Me, a Mord-Sith, using the call of a bird 
named a pewee. Imagine that." 
They walked in silence for a moment. 
"Am I in trouble?" Richard finally asked. 
"Oh, yes," Cara answered. 
   Richard couldn't help smiling but he made sure 
the Mord-Sith didn't see it, nor. did Cara see 
Kahlan look back over her shoulder with the special 
smile she gave no other but him. 
Kahlan lifted an arm, pointing. "Look." 
   Through the gaps in the crowns of the cedars, 
against the bright blue sky, they saw a black-
tipped race circling high above them, riding the 
mountain air currents. The races were no longer 

hunting them. This one was simply looking for its 
dinner. 
   "What's that old saying?" Cara asked. "Something 
about a bird of prey circling over you at the 
beginning of a journey being a warning sign." 
   "Yes, that's right," Richard said. "But I'm not 
going to let that old tale bother me; we'll let you 
come with us anyway." 
   Kahlan laughed and received a scolding scowl. 
Kahlan laughed all the more when Richard started 
laughing, too. Cara couldn't hold out, and as she 
turned back to the trail, Richard saw the smile 
spread across her face. 
 
 
The End Of Naked Empire.  

