   F&SF readers have hitherto known Robert F. Young only as the author of
sensitive short stories; but like any talented writer (and Mr. Young seems to
me one of the most talented newcomers of the past several years), he has more
than one string to his bow. Here is a longer and more vigorous Young story—a
powerful and moving tale of the sport (or the art) of mountain-climbing in the
interstellar future, of a man whose explorations imperiled not only his life
but his soul, and of a mysteriously landscaped Virgin which is as compellingly
visual a concept as you're apt to have read in a long time. 
   
  Goddess in Granite
   by ROBERT F. YOUNG
   
When he reached the upper ridge of the forearm, Marten stopped to rest. The
climb had not winded him but the chin was still miles away, and he wanted to
conserve as much of his strength as possible for the final ascent to the face.
   He looked back the way he had come—down the slope of the tapered forearm
ridge to the mile-wide slab of the hand; down to the granite giantess-fingers
protruding like sculptured promontories into the water. He saw his rented
inboard bobbing in the blue bay between forefinger and thumb, and, beyond the
bay, the shimmering waste of the southern sea.
   He shrugged his pack into a more comfortable position and checked the
climbing equipment attached to his web belt—his piton pistol in its
self-locking holster, his extra clips of piton cartridges, the airtight packet
that contained his oxygen tablets, his canteen. Satisfied, he drank sparingly
from the canteen and replaced it in its refrigerated case. Then he lit a
cigarette and blew smoke at the morning sky.
   The sky was a deep, cloudless blue, and Alpha Virginis beat brightly down
from the blueness, shedding its warmth and brilliance on the gynecomorphous
mountain range known as the Virgin.
   She lay upon her back, her blue lakes of eyes gazing eternally upward. From
his vantage point on her forearm, Marten had a good view of the mountains of
her breasts. He looked at them contemplatively. They towered perhaps 8,000
feet above the chest-plateau, but since the plateau itself was a good 10,000
feet above sea level, their true height exceeded 18,000 feet. However, Marten
wasn’t discouraged. It wasn’t the mountains that he wanted.
   Presently he dropped his eyes from their snow-capped crests and resumed his
trek. The granite ridge rose for a while, then slanted downward, widening
gradually into the rounded reaches of the upper arm. He had an excellent view
of the Virgin’s head now, though he wasn’t high enough to see her profile. The
11,000-foot cliff of her cheek was awesome at this range, and her hair was
revealed for what it really was—a vast forest spilling riotously down to the
lowlands, spreading out around her massive shoulders almost to the sea. It was
green now. In autumn it would be brown, then gold; in winter, black.
   Centuries of rainfall and wind had not perturbed the graceful contours of
the upper arm. It was like walking along a lofty promenade. Marten made good
time. Still, it was nearly noon before he reached the shoulder-slope, and he
realized that he had badly underestimated the Virgin’s vastness.
   The elements had been less kind to the shoulder-slope, and he had to go
slower, picking his way between shallow gullies, avoiding cracks and crevices.
In places the granite gave way to other varieties of igneous rock, but the
overall color of the Virgin’s body remained the same—a grayish-white,
permeated with pink, startlingly suggestive of a certain hue of human skin.
   Marten found himself thinking of her sculptors, and for the thousandth time
he speculated as to why they had sculptured her. In many ways, the problem
resembled such Earth enigmas as the Egyptian pyramids, the Sacsahuaman
Fortress, and the Baalbek Temple of the Sun. For one thing, it was just as
irresolvable, and probably always would be, for the ancient race that had once
inhabited Alpha Virginis IX had either died out centuries ago, or had migrated
to the stars. In either case, they had left no written records behind them.
   Basically, however, the two enigmas were different. When you contemplated

the pyramids, the Fortress, and the Temple of the Sun, you did not wonder why
they had been built—you wondered how they had been built. With the Virgin, the
opposite held true. She had begun as a natural phenomenon—an enormous
geological upheaval—and actually all her sculptors had done, herculean though
their labor had undoubtedly been, was to add the finishing touches and install
the automatic subterranean pumping system that, for centuries, had supplied
her artificial lakes of eyes with water from the sea.
   And perhaps therein lay the answer, Marten thought. Perhaps their only
motivation had been a desire to improve upon nature. There certainly wasn’t
any factual basis for the theosophical, sociological, and psychological
motivations postulated by half a hundred Earth anthropologists (none of whom
had ever really seen her) in half a hundred technical volumes. Perhaps the
answer was as simple as that. . . .
   The southern reaches of the shoulder-slope were less eroded than the
central and northern reaches, and Marten edged closer and closer to the south
rim. He had a splendid view of the Virgin’s left side, and he stared,
fascinated, at the magnificent purple-shadowed escarpment stretching away to
the horizon. Five miles from its juncture with the shoulder-slope it dwindled
abruptly to form her waist; three miles farther on it burgeoned out to form
her left hip; then, just before it faded into the lavender distances, it
blended into the gigantic curve of her thigh.
   The shoulder was not particularly steep, yet his chest was tight, his lips
dry, when he reached the summit. He decided to rest for a while, and he
removed his pack and sat down and propped his back against it. He raised his
canteen to his lips and took a long cool draught. He lit another cigarette.
   From his new eminence he had a much better view of the Virgin’s head, and
he gazed at it spellbound. The mesa of her face was still hidden from him, of
course—except for the lofty tip of her granite nose; but the details of her
cheek and chin stood out clearly. Her cheekbone was represented by a rounded
spur, and the spur blended almost imperceptibly with the chamfered rim of her
cheek. Her proud chin was a cliff in its own right, falling sheerly—much too
sheerly, Marten thought—to the graceful ridge of her neck.
   Yet, despite her sculptors’ meticulous attention to details, the Virgin,
viewed from so close a range, fell far short of the beauty and perfection they
had intended. That was because you could see only part of her at a time: her
cheek, her hair, her breasts, the distant contour of her thigh. But when you
viewed her from the right altitude, the effect was altogether different. Even
from a height of ten miles, her beauty was perceptible; at 75,000 feet, it was
undeniable. But you had to go higher yet—had to find the exact level, in
fact—before you could see her as her sculptors had meant her to be seen.
   To Marten’s knowledge, he was the only Earthman who had ever found that
level, who had ever seen the Virgin as she really was; seen her emerge into a
reality uniquely her own—an unforgettable reality, the equal of which he had
never before encountered.
   Perhaps being the only one had had something to do with her effect on him;
that, plus the fact that he had been only twenty at the time—twenty, he
thought wonderingly. He was thirty-two now. Yet the intervening years were no
more than a thin curtain, a curtain he had parted a thousand times.
   He parted it again.
   
   After his mother’s third marriage he had made up his mind to become a
spaceman, and he had quit college and obtained a berth as cabin boy on the
starship Ulysses. The Ulysses’ destination was Alpha Virginis IX; the purpose
of its voyage was to chart potential ore deposits.
   Marten had heard about the Virgin, of course. She was one of the seven
hundred wonders of the galaxy. But he had never given her a second
thought—till he saw her in the main viewport of the orbiting Ulysses.
Afterward, he gave her considerable thought and, several days after
planetfall, he “borrowed” one of the ship’s life-rafts and went exploring. The
exploit had netted him a week in the brig upon his return, but he hadn’t

minded. The Virgin had been worth it.
   The altimeter of the life-raft had registered 55,000 feet when he first
sighted her, and he approached her at that level. Presently he saw the
splendid ridges of her calves and thighs creep by beneath him, the white
desert of her stomach, the delicate cwm of her navel. He was above the twin
mountains of her breasts, within sight of the mesa of her face, before it
occurred to him that, by lifting the raft, he might gain a much better
perspective.
   He canceled his horizontal momentum and depressed the altitude button. The
raft climbed swiftly—60,000 feet . . . 65,000 . . . 70,000. It was like
focusing a telescreen—80,000 . . . His heart was pounding now—90,000 . . . The
oxygen dial indicated normal pressure, but he could hardly breathe.
   100,000, 101,000 . . . Not quite high enough. 102,300 . . .Thou art
beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, Comely as Jerusalem, Terrible as an army with
banners . . . 103,211 . . .The joints of thy thighs are like jewels, the work
of the hands of a cunning workman . . . 103,288 . . .
   He jammed the altitude button hard, locking the focus. He could not breathe
at all now—at least not for the first, ecstatic moment. He had never seen
anyone quite like her. It was early spring, and her hair was black; her eyes
were a springtime blue. And it seemed to him that the mesa of her face
abounded in compassion, that the red rimrock of her mouth was curved in a
gentle smile.
   She lay there immobile by the sea, a Brobdingnagian beauty come out of the
water to bask forever in the sun. The barren lowlands were a summer beach; the
glittering ruins of a nearby city were an earring dropped from her ear; and
the sea was a summer lake, the life-raft a metallic gull hovering high above
the littoral.
   And in the transparent belly of the gull sat an infinitesimal man who would
never be the same again. . . .
   
   Marten closed the curtain, but it was some time before the after-image of
the memory faded away. When it finally did so, he found that he was staring
with a rather frightening fixity toward the distant cliff of the Virgin’s
chin.
   Roughly, he estimated its height. Its point, or summit, was on an
approximate level with the crest of the cheek. That gave him 11,000 feet. To
obtain the distance he had to climb to reach the face-mesa, all he had to do
was to deduct the height of the neck-ridge. He figured the neck-ridge at about
8,000 feet; 8,000 from 11,000 gave him 3,000—3,000 feet!
   It was impossible. Even with the piton pistol, it was impossible. The pitch
was vertical all the way, and from where he sat he couldn’t discern the
faintest indication of a crack or a ledge on the granite surface.
   He could never do it, he told himself. Never. It would be absurd for him
even to try. It might cost him his life. And even if he could do it, even if
he could climb that polished precipice all the way to the face-mesa, could he
get back down again? True, his piton pistol would make the descent relatively
easy, but would he have enough strength left? The atmosphere on Alpha Virginis
IX thinned rapidly after 10,000 feet, and while oxygen tablets helped, they
could keep you going only for a limited period of time. After that—
   But the arguments were old ones. He had used them on himself a hundred, a
thousand times. . . . He stood up resignedly. He shrugged his pack into place.
He took a final look down the nine-mile slope of the arm to the
giantess-fingers jutting into the sea, then he turned and started across the
tableland of the upper chest toward the beginning of the neck-ridge.
   
   II
   
   The sun had long since passed its meridian when he came opposite the gentle
col between the mountains. A cold wind breathed down the slopes, drifting
across the tableland. The wind was sweet, and he knew there must be flowers on

the mountains—crocuses, perhaps, or their equivalent, growing high on the
snow-soft peaks.
   He wondered why he did not want to climb the mountains, why it had to be
the mesa. The mountains presented the greater difficulties and therefore the
greater challenge. Why, then, did he neglect them for the mesa?
   He thought he knew. The beauty of the mountains was shallow, lacked the
deeper meaning of the beauty of the mesa. They could never give him what he
wanted if he climbed them a thousand times. It was the mesa—with its blue and
lovely lakes—or nothing.
   He turned his eyes away from the mountains and concentrated on the long
slope that led to the neck-ridge. The pitch was gentle but treacherous. He
moved slowly. A slip could send him rolling, and there was nothing he could
grasp to stop himself. He noticed the shortness of his breath and wondered at
it, till he remembered the altitude. But he did not break into his oxygen
tablets yet; he would have a much more poignant need for them later.
   By the time he reached the ridge, the sun had half completed its afternoon
journey. But he wasn’t dismayed. He had already given up the idea of
assaulting the chin-cliff today. He had been presumptuous in the first place
to have imagined himself capable of conquering the Virgin in a single day.
   It was going to take at least two.
   The ridge was over a mile wide, its curvature barely perceptible. Marten
made good time. All the while he advanced he was conscious of the chin-cliff
looming higher and higher above him, but he did not look at it; he was afraid
to look at it till it loomed so close that it occulted half the sky, and then
he had to look at it, had to raise his eyes from the granite swell of the
throat and focus them on the appalling wall that now constituted his future.
   His future was bleak. It contained no hand- or footholds; no ledges, no
cracks, no projections. In a way he was relieved, for if no means existed for
him to climb the chin-cliff, then he couldn’t climb it. But in another way he
was overwhelmingly disappointed. Gaining the face-mesa was more than a mere
ambition; it was an obsession, and the physical effort that the task involved,
the danger, the obstacles—all were an integral part of the obsession.
   He could return the way he had come, down the arm to his inboard and back
to the isolated colony; and he could rent a flier from the hard-bitten,
taciturn natives just as easily as he had rented the inboard. In less than an
hour after takeoff, he could land on the face-mesa.
   But he would be cheating, and he knew it. Not cheating the Virgin, but
cheating himself.
   There was one other way, but he rejected it now for the same reason he had
rejected it before. The top of the Virgin’s head was an unknown quantity, and,
while the trees of her hair might make climbing easier, the distance to be
climbed was still over three times the height of the chin-cliff, and the pitch
was probably just as precipitous.
   No, it was the chin-cliff or nothing. The way things looked now, it was
nothing. But he consoled himself with the fact that he had examined only a
relatively small section of the cliff. Perhaps the outlying sections would be
less forbidding. Perhaps—
   He shook his head. Wishful thinking would get him nowhere. It would be time
to hope after he found a means of ascent, not before. He started along the
base of the cliff, then paused. While he had stood there, staring at the
stupendous wall, Alpha Virginis had descended unobtrusively into the molten
sea. The first star was already visible in the east, and the hue of the
Virgin’s breasts had transmuted from gold to purple.
   Reluctantly, Marten decided to postpone his investigation till tomorrow.
The decision proved to be a sensible one. Darkness was upon him before he had
his sleeping bag spread out, and with it came the penetrating cold for which
the planet was notorious throughout the galaxy.
   He set the thermostat on the sleeping bag, then he undressed and crawled
into the warm interior. He munched a supper biscuit and allotted himself two
swallows of water from his canteen. Suddenly he remembered that he had missed

his midday meal—and had not even known the difference.
   There was a parallel there somewhere, an element of déjà vu. But the
connection was so tenuous that he could not pin the other moment down. It
would occur to him later, he knew, but such was the nature of the human mind
that it would occur seemingly as the result of another chain of associations,
and he would not remember the original connection at all.
   He lay there, staring at the stars. The dark mass of the Virgin’s chin rose
up beside him, hiding half the sky. He should have felt forlorn, frightened
even. But he did not. He felt safe, secure. For the first time in many years
he knew contentment.
   There was an unusual constellation almost directly overhead. More than
anything else, it made him think of a man astride a horse. The man carried an
elongated object on his shoulder, and the object could have been any one of a
number of things, depending on the way you looked at the stars that comprised
it—a rifle, perhaps, or a staff; maybe even a fishing pole.
   To Marten, it looked like a scythe. . . .
   He turned on his side, luxuriating in his tiny oasis of warmth. The
Virgin’s chin was soft with starlight now, and the night slept in soft and
silent splendor. . . . That was one of his own lines, he thought drowsily—a
part of that fantastic hodgepodge of words and phrases he had put together
eleven years ago under the title of Rise Up, My Love! A part of the book that
had brought him fame and fortune—and Lelia.
   Lelia . . . She seemed so long ago, and in a way she was. And yet, in
another way, a strange, poignant way, she was yesterday—
   
   The first time he saw her she was standing in one of those little antique
bars so popular then in Old York. Standing there all alone, tall, dark-haired,
Junoesque, sipping her mid-afternoon drink as though women like herself were
the most common phenomena in the galaxy.
   He had been positive, even before she turned her head, that her eyes were
blue, and blue they proved to be; blue with the blueness of mountain lakes in
spring, blue with the beauty of a woman waiting to be loved. Boldly, he walked
over and stood beside her, knowing it was now or never, and asked if he might
buy her a drink.
   To his astonishment, she accepted. She did not tell him till later that she
had recognized him. He was so naïve at the time that he did not even know that
he was a celebrity in Old York, though he should have known. His book
certainly had been successful enough.
   He had knocked it off the preceding summer—the summer the Ulysses returned
from Alpha Virginis IX; the summer he quit his berth as cabin boy, forever
cured of his ambition to be a spaceman. During the interim consumed by the
voyage, his mother had remarried again; and when he found out, he rented a
summer cottage in Connecticut as far away from her as he could get. Then,
driven by forces beyond his ken, he sat down and began to write.
   Rise Up, My Love! had dealt with the stellar odyssey of a young adventurer
in search of a substitute for God and with his ultimate discovery of that
substitute in a woman. The reviewers shouted “Epic!” and the Freudian
psychologists who, after four centuries of adversity, still hadn’t given up
psychoanalyzing writers shouted “Death-wish!” The diverse appraisals combined
happily to stir up interest in the limited literary world and to pave the way
for a second printing and then a third. Overnight, Marten had become that most
incomprehensible of all literary phenomena—a famous first-novelist.
   But he hadn’t realized, till now, that his fame involved physical
recognition. “I read your book, Mr. Marten,” the dark-haired girl standing
beside him said. “I didn’t like it.”
   “What’s your name?” he asked. Then: “Why?”
   “Lelia Vaughn . . . Because your heroine is impossible.”
   “I don’t think she’s impossible,” Marten said.
   “You’ll be telling me next that she has a prototype.”
   “Maybe I will.” The bartender served them, and Marten picked up his glass

and sipped the cool blueness of his Martian julep. “Why is she impossible?”
   “Because she’s not a woman,” Lelia said. “She’s a symbol.”
   “A symbol of what?”
   “I—I don’t know. Anyway, she’s not human. She’s too beautiful, too perfect.
She’s a criterion, really.”
   “You look just like her,” Marten said.
   She dropped her eyes then, and for a while she was silent. Presently:
“There’s an ancient cliché that bears mentioning at this point,” she said:
“ ‘I’ll bet you tell that to all the girls—’ But somehow I don’t think you
do.”
   “You’re right,” Marten said. “I don’t.” Then: “It’s so close in here, can’t
we go walking somewhere?”
   “All right.”
   Old York was an anachronism kept alive by a handful of literati who doted
on the prestige lent by old buildings, old streets and old ways of life. It
was a grim, canyonesque grotesquerie compared to its pretty new cousin on
Mars; but during the years, parts of it had taken on some of the coloring and
some of the atmosphere once associated with the Left Bank of Paris, and if the
season was spring and you were falling in love, Old York was a lovely place in
which to be.
   They walked through the dreaming desuetude of ancient avenues, in the cool
shadows of buildings mellowed by the passage of time. They lingered in the
wilderness of Central Park, and the sky was blue with spring, the trees
adorned with the pale greenness of nascent leaves. . . . It had been the
loveliest of afternoons and, afterward, the loveliest of evenings. The stars
had never shone so brightly, nor had the moon ever been so full, the hours so
swift, the minutes so sweet. Marten’s head had been light, seeing Lelia home,
his footsteps unsteady; but it wasn’t till later, sitting on his apartment
steps, that he had realized how hungry he was, and simultaneously realized
that he hadn’t eaten a morsel of food since morning. . . .
   
   Deep in the alien night, Marten stirred, awakened. The strange star
patterns shocked him for a moment, and then he remembered where he was and
what he was going to do. Sleep tiptoed back around him and he turned dreamily
in the warmth of his electronic cocoon. Freeing one arm, he reached out till
his fingers touched the reassuring surface of the star-kissed cliff. He
sighed.
   
   III
   
   Dawn wore a pink dress and crept across the land like a timid girl. Her
sister Morning followed, dressed in blue, the sun a dazzling locket on her
breast.
   There was a tightness in Marten, a tightness compounded of anticipation and
dread. He did not permit himself to think. Methodically he ate his
concentrated breakfast, packed his sleeping bag. Then he began a systematic
examination of the Virgin’s chin.
   In the morning light, the cliff did not seem nearly so awesome as it had
the night before. But its pitch had not varied, nor had its sheer, smooth
surface. Marten was both relieved and chagrined.
   Then, near the western edge of the neck-ridge, he found the chimney.
   It was a shallow fissure, perhaps twice the breadth of his body, created
probably by a recent seismic disturbance. He remembered, suddenly, the other
signs of recent seismic activity he had noticed in the colony but had not
bothered to inquire about. A dozen or so ruptured dwellings were of little
consequence when you were on the verge of resolving a complex that had plagued
you for twelve years.
   The chimney zigzagged upward as far as he could see, presenting, at least
for the first thousand feet, a comparatively easy means of ascent. There were
innumerable hand- and footholds, and occasional ledges. The trouble was, he

had no way of knowing whether the holds and the ledges—or even the chimney
itself—continued all the way to the summit.
   He cursed himself for having neglected to bring binoculars. Then he noticed
that his hands were trembling, that his heart was tight against his ribs; and
he knew, all at once, that he was going to climb the chimney regardless, that
nothing could stop him, not even himself—not even the knowledge, had it been
available, that the chimney was a dead end.
   He drew his piton pistol and inserted one of the dozen clips he carried in
his belt. He aimed carefully, squeezed the trigger. The long hours he had
spent practicing, while awaiting transportation from the spaceport to the
colony, paid off, and the peg, trailing its almost invisible nylon line,
imbedded itself in the lofty ledge he had selected for his first belay. The
sound of the second charge caromed down and joined the fading sound of the
first, and he knew that the steel roots of the peg had been forced deep into
the granite, guaranteeing his safety for the initial 500 feet.
   He replaced the pistol in its self-locking holster. From now till he
reached the ledge, the line would take in its own slack, automatically
rewinding itself in the chamber in pace with his ascent.
   He began to climb.
   His hands were steady now, and his heart had resumed its normal beat. There
was a song in him, throbbing soundlessly through his whole being, imbuing him
with a strength he had never known before, might never know again. The first
500 feet were almost ridiculously easy. Hand- and footholds were so numerous
most of the way that it was like climbing a stone ladder, and in the few
places where the projections petered out, the walls were ideally spaced for
opposite pressure. When he reached the ledge, he wasn’t even breathing hard.
   He decided not to rest. Sooner or later the thinness of the atmosphere was
going to catch up with him, and the higher he got, while he was still fresh,
the better. He stood up boldly and drew and aimed the piton pistol. The new
peg soared forth, trailing the new line and dislodging the old, arrowing into
the base of another ledge some 200 feet above the one on which he stood. The
range of the pistol was 1,000 feet, but the narrowness of the chimney and the
awkwardness of his position posed severe limitations.
   He resumed his ascent, his confidence increasing with each foot he gained.
But he was careful not to look down. The chimney was so far out on the western
edge of the neck-ridge that looking down entailed not only the distance he had
already climbed, but the 8,000-foot drop from the ridge to the lowlands. He
did not think his new confidence quite capable of assimilating the shock of so
appalling a height.
   The climb to the second ledge was as uneventful as the climb to the first.
Again he decided not to rest, and, sinking another peg into a third ledge
approximately 250 feet above the second, he resumed climbing. Halfway to the
third ledge the first pangs of oxygen starvation manifested themselves in a
heaviness in his arms and legs and a shortness of his breath. He slipped an
oxygen tablet into his mouth and went on climbing.
   The dissolving tablet revived him, and when he reached the third ledge he
still did not feel like resting. But he forced himself to sit down on the
narrow granite shelf and he laid his head back against the chimney wall and
tried to relax. Sunlight smote his eyes, and with a shock he realized that the
speed of his ascent had been subjective; actually, hours had passed since he
had left the neck-ridge, and Alpha Virginis was already at meridian.
   Then he couldn’t rest; there was no time. He had to reach the face-mesa
before nightfall, else he might never reach it at all. In an instant he was on
his feet, piton pistol drawn and aimed.
   
   For a while the climb took on a different character. His confidence never
diminished and the soundless song throbbed through him in ever-increasing
cadence; but the heaviness of his limbs and the shortness of his breath
recurred at more and more frequent periods, lending a dreamlike quality to the
adventure, and this quality, in turn, was interspersed by the brief but lucid

intervals that began immediately whenever he took an oxygen tablet.
   The character of the chimney, however, varied only slightly. It grew wider
for a while, but he found that by bracing his back against one wall and his
feet against the other, he could inch his way upward with a minimum of effort.
Then the chimney narrowed again and he returned to his original mode of
ascent.
   Inevitably he became bolder. Up to now he had been using three-point
suspension, never moving one appendage till he was certain the other three
were firmly placed. But as his boldness increased, his caution diminished. He
neglected three-point suspension more and more often, finally neglected it
altogether. After all, he reassured himself, what difference did it make if he
did slip? The piton line would stop him before he fell two feet.
   And it would have too—if the particular cartridge he had just discharged
had not been defective. In his haste he did not notice that the nylon line was
not rewinding itself, and when the chockstone, on which he’d just put his
entire weight, gave way beneath his foot, his instinctive terror was tempered
by the thought that his fall would be brief.
   It was not. It was slow at first, unreal. He knew instantly that something
had gone wrong. Nearby, someone was screaming. For a moment he did not
recognize his own voice. And then the fall was swift; the chimney walls
blurred past his clawing hands, and dislodged rubble rained about his
anguished face.
   
   Twenty feet down he struck a projection on one side of the chimney. The
impact threw him against the other side, then the ledge that he had left a
short while before came up beneath his feet and he sprawled forward on his
stomach, the wind knocked from him, blood running into his eyes from a cut on
his forehead.
   When his breath returned he moved each of his limbs carefully, testing them
for broken bones. Then he inhaled deeply. Afterward he lay there on his
stomach for a long time, content with the knowledge that he was alive and not
seriously hurt.
   Presently he realized that his eyes were closed. Without thinking, he
opened them and wiped the blood away. He found himself staring straight down
at the forest of the hair, 10,000 feet below. He sucked in his breath, tried
to sink his fingers into the ungiving granite of the ledge. For a while he was
sick, but gradually his sickness left him and his terror faded away.
   The forest spread out almost to the sea, flanked by the precipices of the
neck and shoulder, the nine-mile ridge of the arm. The sea was gold and
glittering in the mid-afternoon sunlight, and the lowlands were a green-gold
beach.
   There was an analogy somewhere. Marten frowned, trying to remember. Hadn’t
he, a long time ago, crouched on another ledge—or was it a bluff?—looking down
upon another beach, a real beach? Looking down at—
   Abruptly he remembered, and the memory set his face on fire. He tried to
force the unwanted moment back into his subconscious but it slipped through
his mental fingers and came out and stood nakedly in the sun, and he had to
confront it whether he wanted to or not, had to live it over again.
   
   After their marriage, he and Lelia had rented the same cottage in
Connecticut where Rise Up, My Love! was born, and he had settled down to write
his second book.
   The cottage was a charming affair, perched on a bluff overlooking the sea.
Below it, accessible by a flight of winding stairs, was a narrow strip of
white sand, protected from the prying eyes of civilization by the wooded arms
of a small cove. It was here that Lelia spent her afternoons sunbathing in the
nude, while Marten spent those same afternoons feeding empty words and
uninspired phrases into the manuscript machine on his study desk.
   The new book was going very badly. The spontaneity that had characterized
the creation of Rise Up, My Love! was no longer with him. Ideas would not

come, or, if they did come, he was incapable of coping with them. A part of
his mood, he knew, could be ascribed to his marriage. Lelia was everything a
bride should be, but there was something she was not, an intangible something
that taunted him by night and haunted him by day. . . .
   The August afternoon had been hot and humid. There was a breeze coming in
over the sea, but while it was strong enough to ruffle the curtains of his
study window, it wasn’t quite strong enough to struggle through the
intervening expanse of stagnant air to the doldrums of the study proper where
he sat miserably at his desk.
   As he sat there, fingering words and phrases, grappling with ideas, he
became aware of the soft sound of the surf on the beach below, and an image of
Lelia, lying dark and golden in the sun, intruded repeatedly on his thoughts.
   Presently, he found himself speculating on the positions she might be lying
in. On her side, perhaps . . . or perhaps on her back, the golden sunlight
raining down on her thighs, her stomach, her breasts.
   There was a faint throbbing in his temples, a new nervousness in the
fingers that toyed with the correction pencil on the desktop before him. Lelia
lying immobile by the sea, her dark hair spread out around her head and
shoulders, her blue eyes staring up into the sky . . .
   How would she look from above? Say from the height of the bluff? Would she
resemble another woman lying by another sea—a woman who had affected him in
some mysterious way and lent him his literary wings?
   He wondered, and as he wondered his nervousness grew and the throbbing in
his temples thickened and slowed till it matched the rhythmic beat of the
surf.
   He looked at the clock on the study wall: 2:45. There was very little time.
In another half hour she would be coming up to shower. Numbly, he stood up. He
walked slowly across the study, stepped into the living room; he walked across
the living room and out upon the latticed porch that fronted the green lawn
and the brow of the bluff and the sparkling summer sea.
   The grass was soft beneath his feet and there was a dreaminess about the
afternoon sunlight and the sound of the surf. When he neared the bluff he got
down on his hands and knees, feeling like a fool, and crept cautiously
forward. Several feet from the brow, he lowered himself to his elbows and
thighs and crawled the rest of the way. He parted the long grass carefully and
looked down to the white strip of beach below.
   She was lying directly beneath him—on her back. Her arm was flung out to
the sea and her fingers dangled in the water. Her right knee was drawn upward,
a graceful hillock of sun-gold flesh . . . and the smooth expanse of stomach
was golden too, as were the gentle mountains of her breasts. Her neck was a
magnificent golden ridge leading to the proud precipice of her chin and the
vast golden mesa of her face. The blue lakes of her eyes were closed in
peaceful sleep.
   Illusion and reality intermingled. Time retreated and ceased to be. At the
crucial moment, the blue eyes opened.
   She saw him instantly. There was amazement on her face at first, then
understanding (though she hadn’t understood at all). Finally her lips curved
in a beckoning smile and she held out her arms to him. “Come down, darling,”
she called. “Come down and see me!”
   The throbbing in his temples drowned out the sound of the surf as he
descended the winding stairs to the beach. She was waiting there by the sea,
waiting as she had always waited, waiting for him; and suddenly he was a giant
striding over the lowlands, his shoulders brushing the sky, the ground
shuddering beneath his Brobdingnagian footsteps.
   Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, Comely as Jerusalem, Terrible as
an army with banners . . .
   
   A breeze, born in the purple shadows between the mountains, wafted up to
his eyrie, cooling his flushed face and reviving his battered body. Slowly he
got to his feet. He looked up at the enigmatic walls of the chimney, wondering

if they continued for the thousand-odd feet that still separated him from the
summit.
   He drew his piton pistol and ejected the defective cartridge; then he took
careful aim and squeezed the trigger. When he replaced the pistol he
experienced a wave of giddiness and he reached instinctively for the oxygen
packet on his belt. Then he fumbled for the packet, frantically feeling every
inch of the web surface, and finally he found the tiny rivets that had
remained after the packet had been torn away during his fall.
   For a while he did not move. He had but one logical course of action and he
knew it: Climb back down to the neck-ridge, spend the night there and return
to the colony in the morning; then arrange for transportation to the
spaceport, take the first ship back to Earth and forget about the Virgin.
   He nearly laughed aloud. Logic was a fine word and an equally fine concept,
but there were many things in heaven and earth that it did not encompass, and
the Virgin was one of them.
   He started to climb.
     
   IV
   
   In the neighborhood of 2,200 feet, the chimney began to change.
   Marten did not notice the change at first. Oxygen starvation had decimated
his awareness and he moved in a slow, continuous lethargy, raising one heavy
limb and then another, inching his ponderous body from one precarious position
to another equally precarious—but slightly closer to his goal. When he finally
did notice, he was too weary to be frightened, too numb to be discouraged.
   He had just crawled upon the sanctuary of a narrow ledge and had raised his
eyes to seek out another ledge at which to point his pistol. The chimney was
palely lit by the last rays of the setting sun and for a moment he thought
that the diminishing light was distorting his vision.
   For there were no more ledges.
   There was no more chimney either, for that matter. It had been growing
wider and wider for some time; now it flared abruptly into a concave slope
that stretched all the way to the summit. Strictly speaking, there had never
been a chimney in the first Place. In toto, the fissure was far more
suggestive of the cross section of a gigantic funnel: The part he had already
climbed represented the tube, and the part he had yet to climb represented the
mouth.
   The mouth, he saw at a glance, was going to be bad. The slope was far too
smooth. From where he sat he could not see a single projection, and while that
didn’t necessarily rule out the possible existence of projections, it did
cancel out the likelihood of there being any large enough to enable him to use
his piton pistol. He couldn’t very well drive a piton if there was nothing for
him to drive it into.
   He looked down at his hands. They were trembling again. He started to reach
for a cigarette, realized suddenly that he hadn’t eaten since morning, and got
a supper biscuit out of his pack instead. He ate it slowly, forced it down
with a mouthful of water. His canteen was nearly empty. He smiled wanly to
himself. At last he had a logical reason for climbing to the mesa—to replenish
his water supply in the blue lakes.
   He reached for a cigarette again and this time he pulled one out and lit
it. He blew smoke at the darkening sky. He drew his feet up on the ledge and
hugged his knees with his arms and rocked himself gently back and forth. He
hummed softly to himself. It was an old, old tune, dating back to his early
childhood. Abruptly he remembered where he had heard it and who had sung it to
him, and he stood up angrily and flicked his cigarette into the deepening
shadows and turned toward the slope.
   He resumed his upward journey.
   It was a memorable journey. The slope was just as bad as it had looked. It
was impossible to ascend it vertically, and he had to traverse, zigzagging
back and forth with nothing but finger-thick irregularities to support his

weight. But his brief rest and his condensed meal had replenished his strength
and at first he experienced no difficulties.
   Gradually, however, the increasing thinness of the atmosphere caught up
with him again. He moved slower and slower. Sometimes he wondered if he was
making any progress at all. He did not dare lean his head back far enough to
look upward, for his hand- and footholds were so tenuous that the slightest
imbalance could dislodge them. And presently there was the increasing darkness
to contend with, too.
   He regretted not having left his pack on the last ledge. It was an awkward
burden and it seemed to grow heavier with each foot he gained. He would have
loosened the straps and slipped it from his shoulders—if he had had hands to
spare.
   Repeatedly, sweat ran down into his eyes. Once he tried to wipe his wet
forehead on the granite slope, but he only succeeded in reopening his cut, and
the blood joined forces with the sweat and for a while he could not see at
all. He began to wonder if the cliff was forever. Finally he managed to wipe
his eyes on his sleeve, but still he could not see, for the darkness was
complete.
   Time blurred, ceased to be. He kept wondering if the stars were out, and
when he found a set of hand- and footholds less tenuous than the preceding
ones, he leaned his head back carefully and looked upward. But the blood and
the sweat ran down into his eyes again and he saw nothing.
   He was astonished when his bleeding fingers discovered the ledge. His
reconnaissance had been cursory, but even so he had been certain that there
were no ledges. But there was this one. Trembling, he inched his weary body
higher till at last he found purchase for his elbows, then he swung his right
leg onto the granite surface and pulled himself to safety.
   It was a wide ledge. He could sense its wideness when he rolled over on his
back and let his arms drop to his sides. He lay there quietly, too tired to
move. Presently he raised one arm and wiped the blood and sweat from his eyes.
The stars were out. The sky was patterned with the pulsing beauty of a hundred
constellations. Directly above him was the one he had noticed the night
before—the rider-with-the-scythe.
   Marten sighed. He wanted to lie there on the ledge forever, the starlight
soft on his face, the Virgin reassuringly close; lie there in blissful peace,
eternally suspended between the past and the future, bereft of time and
motion. But the past would not have it so. Despite his efforts to stop her,
Xylla parted its dark curtain and stepped upon the stage. And then the curtain
dissolved behind her and the impossible play began.
   
   After the failure of his third novel (the second had sold on the strength
of the first and had enjoyed an ephemeral success), Lelia had gone to work for
a perfume concern so that he could continue writing. Later on, to free him
from the burden of household chores, she had hired a maid.
   Xylla was an ET—a native of Mizar X. The natives of Mizar X were remarkable
for two things: their gigantic bodies and their diminutive minds. Xylla was no
exception. She stood over seven feet tall and she had an I.Q. of less than
forty.
   But for all her height she was well proportioned, even graceful. In fact,
if her face had possessed any appeal at all, she could have passed for an
attractive woman. But her face was flat, with big, bovine eyes and wide
cheekbones. Her mouth was much too full, and its fullness was accentuated by a
pendulous lower lip. Her hair, which, by contributing the right dash of color,
might have rescued her from drabness, was a listless brown.
   Marten took one look at her when Lelia introduced them, said, “How do you
do?” and then dismissed her from his mind. If Lelia thought a giantess could
do the housework better than he could, it was all right with him.
   That winter Lelia was transferred to the West Coast, and rather than suffer
the upkeep of two houses they gave up the Connecticut cottage and moved to
California. California was as sparsely populated as Old York. The promised

land had long since absconded starward, lay scattered throughout a thousand as
yet unexploited systems. But there was one good thing about the average man’s
eternal hankering for green pastures: The pastures he left behind grew lush in
his absence; there was plenty of space for the stay-at- homes and the
stubborn; and Earth, after four centuries of opportunism, had finally settled
down in its new role as the cultural center of the galaxy.
   Lavish twenty-third-century villas were scattered all along the California
coast. Almost all of them were charming and almost all of them were empty.
Lelia chose a pink one, convenient to her work, and settled down into a
routine identical, except for a change from the morning to the afternoon
shift, to the routine she had left behind; and Marten settled down to write
his fourth book.
   Or tried to.
   He had not been naïve enough to think that a change in scene would snap him
out of his literary lethargy. He had known all along that whatever words and
combinations thereof that he fed into his manuscript machine had to come from
within himself. But he had hoped that two failures in a row (the second book
was really a failure, despite its short-lived financial success) would goad
him to a point where he would not permit a third.
   In this he had been wrong. His lethargy not only persisted; it grew worse.
He found himself going out less and less often, retiring earlier and earlier
to his study and his books. But not to his manuscript machine. He read the
great novelists. He read Tolstoy and Flaubert. He read Dostoevsky and
Stendhal. He read Proust and Cervantes. He read Balzac. And the more he read
Balzac, the more his wonder grew, that this small, fat, red-faced man could
have been so prolific, while he himself remained as sterile as the white sands
on the beach below his study windows.
   Around ten o’clock each evening Xylla brought him his brandy in the big
snifter glass Lelia had given him on his last birthday, and he would lie back
in his lazy-chair before the fireplace (Xylla had built a fire of pine knots
earlier in the evening) and sip and dream. Sometimes he would drowse for a
moment, and then wake with a start. Finally he would get up, cross the hall to
his room and go to bed. (Lelia had begun working overtime shortly after their
arrival and seldom got home before one o’clock.)
   Xylla’s effect upon him was cumulative. At first he was not even conscious
of it. One night he would notice the way she walked—lightly, for so ponderous
a creature, rhythmically, almost; and the next night, the virginal swell of
her huge breasts; and the night after that, the graceful surge of her
Amazonian thighs beneath her coarse skirt. The night finally came when, on an
impulse, or so he thought at the time, he asked her to sit down and talk for a
while.
   “If you weesh, sar,” she said, and sat down on the hassock at his feet.
   He hadn’t expected that, and at first he was embarrassed. Gradually,
however, as the brandy began its swift infiltration of his bloodstream, he
warmed to the moment. He noticed the play of the firelight on her hair, and
suddenly he was surprised to find that it was something more than a dull brown
after all; there was a hint of redness in it, a quiet, unassuming redness that
offset the heaviness of her face.
   They talked of various things—the weather mostly, sometimes the sea; a book
Xylla had read when she was a little girl (the only book she had ever read);
Mizar X. When she spoke of Mizar X, something happened to her voice. It grew
soft and childlike, and her eyes, which he had thought dull and uninteresting,
became bright and round, and he even detected a trace of blueness in them. The
merest trace, of course, but it was a beginning.
   He began asking her to stay every night after that, and she was always
willing, always took her place dutifully on the hassock at his feet. Even
sitting, she loomed above him, but he did not find her size disquieting
anymore, at least not disquieting in the sense that it had been before. Now
her vast presence had a lulling effect upon him, lent him a peace of sorts. He
began looking forward more and more to her nightly visits.

   Lelia continued to work overtime. Sometimes she did not come in till nearly
two. He had been concerned about her at first; he had even reprimanded her for
working so hard. Somewhere along the line, though, he had stopped being
concerned.
   Abruptly he remembered the night Lelia had come home early—the night he had
touched Xylla’s hand.
   He had been wanting to touch it for a long time. Night after night he had
seen it lying motionless on her knee and he had marveled again and again at
its symmetry and grace, wondered how much bigger than his hand it was, whether
it was soft or coarse, warm or cold. Finally the time came when he couldn’t
control himself any longer, and he bent forward and reached out—and suddenly
her giantess fingers were intertwined with his pygmy ones and he felt the
warmth of her and knew her nearness. Her lips were very close, her
giantess-face, and her eyes were a vivid blue now, a blue-lake blue. And then
the coppices of her eyebrows brushed his forehead and the red rimrock of her
mouth smothered his and melted into softness and her giantess-arms enfolded
him against the twin mountains of her breasts—
   Then Lelia, who had paused shocked in the doorway, said, “I’ll get my
things . . .”
   The night was cold, and particles of hoarfrost hovered in the air, catching
the light of the stars. Marten shivered, sat up. He looked down into the pale
depths below, then he lifted his eyes to the breathless beauty of the twin
mountains. Presently he stood up and turned toward the slope, instinctively
raising his hands in search of new projections.
   His hands brushed air. He stared. There were no projections. There was no
slope. There had never been a ledge, for that matter. Before him lay the mesa
of the Virgin’s face, pale and poignant in the starlight.
     
   V
   
   Marten moved across the mesa slowly. All around him the starlight fell like
glistening rain. When he came to the rimrock of the mouth, he pressed his lips
to the cold, ungiving stone. “Rise up, my love!” he whispered.
   But the Virgin remained immobile beneath his feet, as he had known she
would, and he went on, past the proud tor of her nose, straining his eyes for
the first glimpse of the blue lakes.
   He walked numbly, his arms hanging limply at his sides. He hardly knew he
walked at all. The lure of the lakes, now that they were so close, was
overwhelming. The lovely lakes with their blue beckoning deeps and their
promise of eternal delight. No wonder Lelia, and later Xylla, had palled on
him. No wonder none of the other mortal women he had slept with had ever been
able to give him what he wanted. No wonder he had come back, after twelve
futile years, to his true love.
   The Virgin was matchless. There were none like her. None.
   He was almost to the cheekbone now, but still no starlit sweep of blue rose
up to break the monotony of the mesa. His eyes ached from strain and
expectation. His hands trembled uncontrollably.
   And then, suddenly, he found himself standing on the lip of a huge,
waterless basin. He stared, dumfounded. Then he raised his eyes and saw the
distant coppice of an eyebrow outlined against the sky. He followed the line
of the eyebrow to where it curved inward and became the barren ridge that once
had been the gentle isthmus separating the blue lakes—
   Before the water had drained away. Before the subterranean pumping system
had ceased to function, probably as a result of the same seismic disturbance
that had created the chimney.
   He had been too impetuous, too eager to possess his true love. It had never
occurred to him that she could have changed, that—
   No, he would not believe it! Believing meant that the whole nightmarish
ascent of the chin-cliff had been for nothing. Believing meant that his whole
life was without purpose.

   He lowered his eyes, half expecting, half hoping to see the blue water
welling back into the empty socket. But all he saw was the bleak lake
bottom—and its residue—
   And such a strange residue. Scatterings of gray, sticklike objects,
curiously shaped, sometimes joined together. Almost like—like—
   Marten shrank back. He wiped his mouth furiously. He turned and began to
run.
   But he did not run far, not merely because his breath gave out, but
because, before he ran any farther, he had to know what he was going to do.
Instinctively he had headed for the chin-cliff. But would becoming a heap of
broken bones on the neck-ridge be any different, basically, from drowning in
one of the lakes?
   He paused in the starlight, sank to his knees. Revulsion shook him. How
could he have been so naïve, even when he was twenty, as to believe that he
was the only one? Certainly he was the only Earthman—but the Virgin was an
old, old woman, and in her youth she had had many suitors, conquering her by
whatever various means they could devise, and symbolically dying in the blue
deeps of her eyes.
   Their very bones attested to her popularity.
   What did you do when you learned that your goddess had feet of clay? What
did you do when you discovered that your true love was a whore?
   Marten wiped his mouth again. There was one thing that you did not do—
   You did not sleep with her.
   Dawn was a pale promise in the east. The stars had begun to fade. Marten
stood on the edge of the chin-cliff, waiting for the day.
   He remembered a man who had climbed a mountain centuries ago and buried a
chocolate bar on the summit. A ritual of some kind, meaningless to the
uninitiated. Standing there on the mesa, Marten buried several items of his
own. He buried his boyhood and he buried Rise Up, My Love! He buried the villa
in California and he buried the cottage in Connecticut. Last of all—with
regret, but with finality—he buried his mother.
   He waited till the false morning had passed, till the first golden fingers
of the sun reached out and touched his tired face. Then he started down.
   
   
   
   

