OF CATS, UH, FURZELS AND KINGS
 
OF CATS, UH, FURZELS AND KINGS...
From the Log of Dr. Eden Fynn,
Chief Medical Officer
Alliance Huntership Vaxxar
 
 
 
 
     “Finally! A delightfully, blessedly uneventful shift.” Dr. 
Eden Fynn raised the cup of tea the captain had brought her in 
salute. The sweet, fruity smell of the beverage wafted past her 
nose. With a satisfied sigh, Eden leaned back in her office 
chair and took her first sip.
     Sass, across from her, had a similarly relaxed expression 
on her face. Though the dark liquid in her mug was coffee: 
Mahrian Blend, black. The captain was nothing if not consistent.
     “No alarms, no enigmas, no unfriendlies,” Sass agreed, 
propping her boots on the edge of Eden’s desk. “Maybe the 
universe has finally realized that the combined forces of the 
United Coalition and the Triad are best left alone.”
     It had been, what, almost three months since the combined 
forces had combined? It hadn’t been an easy transition though 
Eden knew that Sass, as captain, had had the more difficult job. 
It wasn’t just getting Tridian officers to accept U-Cee officers 
file:///E|/mIRC/download/Linnea%20Sinclair%20-%20Of%20Cats,%20Uh,%20Furzels%20&%20Kings.htm (1 of 11)10-9-2007 20:10:40

OF CATS, UH, FURZELS AND KINGS
and personnel on board a Triad huntership. It was getting one 
particular, unbending, unflinching Triad essence-of-perfection 
bio-cybe admiral to tolerate probably the most unorthodox, far-
from-perfect captain in the U-Cee Fleet on his ship.
     Eden grinned. Actually, Sass’s presence wasn’t the only 
problem.
     “What? What?” Sass’s mouth twisted wryly. “What’s going on 
in that devious mind of yours, Healer?”
     “I was just thinking—”
     “Dangerous, that!”
     “—about Kel-Paten’s first meeting with Reilly.”
     Sass’s eyes widened for a moment, then the older woman 
huffed out a short laugh. “Oh, that was rich.”
     Yes, indeed...
 
     ...It was the final trip to transfer the last of their 
possessions to their new assignment on the Triad huntership, now 
part of the newly formed Alliance Fleet. 
     Eden had glanced with no small regret around the now bare 
cabin, her home on the Regalia for almost four years. It had 
been small, but comfortable. She’d made it cozy, a safe haven 
from the pressures a chief medical officer often faced, 
especially during wartime.
     But the war was over. The enemy was now a friend.
file:///E|/mIRC/download/Linnea%20Sinclair%20-%20Of%20Cats,%20Uh,%20Furzels%20&%20Kings.htm (2 of 11)10-9-2007 20:10:40

OF CATS, UH, FURZELS AND KINGS
     Oh, what a difference a day makes!
     Something large, warm and furry brushed against her shin. 
Okay, perhaps not brushed. Thumped was a more accurate 
description.
     “Time to go,” she told Reilly, scooping the black and white 
furzel into her arms. “Our captain awaits.”
     And a new ship, a new home and the gods only knew what new 
set of problems.
     Sass was already in the transporter room and playfully 
poked a finger into Reilly’s ample belly when Eden stopped 
before her. “Guess he won’t starve on the trip over.”
     The trip, by transbeam, would take all of ten seconds. Or 
less. Though it would be a very long ten seconds. Eden hated 
transbeam transports. “I know, I know.” Eden grinned ruefully. 
“I have to cut back on his treats.”
     “Especially as there’s no way we can let him run about in 
the Vax’s corridors for exercise,” Sass reminded her. “Not 
without risking Kel-Paten’s finding out we have a furzel on 
board.”
     That was the main reasons they were making this last 
transport now, in spite of Eden’s well known aversion to the 
method. The bio-cybe admiral had back-to-back meetings scheduled 
with some brass from Prime One, neither of which would bring him 
anywhere near the transporter deck, or the officers’ residential 
file:///E|/mIRC/download/Linnea%20Sinclair%20-%20Of%20Cats,%20Uh,%20Furzels%20&%20Kings.htm (3 of 11)10-9-2007 20:10:40

OF CATS, UH, FURZELS AND KINGS
deck, but would likely have him escorting said same brass back 
to their shuttle. All Eden, Sass and Reilly had to do was 
traverse the fifteen or so feet from the transporter room to the 
lifts, then from the lifts to Eden’s new cabin.
     Piece o’ cake, Sass had quipped after she’d outlined the 
plan.
     “Ready?” The captain had asked, stepping onto the transbeam 
platform.
     “As we’ll ever be.”
     The world in front of Eden’s eyes glistened, hazed, 
glistened and focused.
     And she was aware of two things, simultaneously. First, 
they were safely in the Vaxxar’s transporter room. That was the 
Good News. The second was that a scowling Admiral Branden Kel-
Paten was standing just in front of the transbeam controls. That 
was definitely not Good News.
Oh, shit, thought Eden.
     “Oh, shit,” whispered Sass, next to her.
     “What,” Admiral Kel-Paten asked, his voice a near growl, 
“is that?”
     Eyes wide in alarm, Sass half-swiveled, peering behind her, 
then behind Eden. “What? Where?”
     Eden choked back a laugh at the captain’s comical display. 
Kel-Paten wasn’t as easily amused, nor diverted.
file:///E|/mIRC/download/Linnea%20Sinclair%20-%20Of%20Cats,%20Uh,%20Furzels%20&%20Kings.htm (4 of 11)10-9-2007 20:10:40

OF CATS, UH, FURZELS AND KINGS
     “That.” His black gloved hand pointed to Reilly’s over-
flowing bulk in Eden’s arms.
     “Oh, that.” Sass shrugged. “It’s a furzel. Male, I believe. 
Name’s Reilly.”
     “A furzel. On a Triad huntership.” It clearly wasn’t a 
question.
     “Oh, more than just a furzel, Admiral,” Eden put in 
smoothly. Reilly, bless his little heart, had fallen asleep and 
so was wasn’t privy to the insulting looks now directed his way 
by his new commanding officer. “He’s, ah... He’s actually my non-
humanoid pet therapist and counselor.”
     Eden stepped off the transbeam platform towards Kel-Paten. 
Sass mirrored her movement. Behind the admiral, a young female 
Triadian officer manning the transbeam station was having a 
difficult time suppressing a fit of the giggles.
     “A pet therapist. And counselor.” Kel-Paten still glared.
     “Yes,” Eden replied. “There’s considerable scientific 
documentation showing that furzels can reduce an individual’s 
blood pressure and relieve many forms of emotional anxiety. I 
have found, umm, Counselor Reilly to be extremely helpful in 
post-trauma cases, and with combat stress-related syndromes.”
     “Counselor. Reilly.” Disbelief laced Kel-Paten’s tone. His 
ice-blue gaze shot from Eden to the furzel to Sass and back to 
Eden again. “This is highly unusual, Dr. Fynn.”
file:///E|/mIRC/download/Linnea%20Sinclair%20-%20Of%20Cats,%20Uh,%20Furzels%20&%20Kings.htm (5 of 11)10-9-2007 20:10:40

OF CATS, UH, FURZELS AND KINGS
     “I try to be progressive and innovative in my methods, 
Admiral.” On a whim, she thrust the sleeping animal towards Kel-
Paten. “Would you like to hold him? You appear to be a bit 
stressed at the moment.”
     Kel-Paten stepped back quickly. “I am not stressed. I do 
not experience stress. I am simply questioning the functionality 
of such a creature on this ship.”
     It was at this point the conversation that Reilly decided 
to wake up. With a yawn and then a wiggle, he jumped down from 
Eden’s arms and land squarely at the admiral’s feet. 
Frantically, Eden tried to recall if the furzel had made a visit 
to the litter box recently and silently prayed that he not 
choose this moment to bless his new surroundings. Or the 
admiral’s boots, which he sniffed with considerable interest.
     “Looks like you have a new friend,” Sass intoned.
     Kel-Paten stared at the large furzel. Reilly, sensing the 
scrutiny, sat on his haunches and glared up at what many 
considered to be the most powerful being in civilized space, a 
look of total and complete disdain on his furry face, as if to 
say: “You don’t impress me one whit.”
file:///E|/mIRC/download/Linnea%20Sinclair%20-%20Of%20Cats,%20Uh,%20Furzels%20&%20Kings.htm (6 of 11)10-9-2007 20:10:40

OF CATS, UH, FURZELS AND KINGS
     “Doctor.” Kel-Paten glanced up, a warning tone in his voice.
     But before Eden could respond, Reilly yawned 
disinterestedly and, with a haughty flick of his tail, sashayed 
across the transporter room as if he, and not Kel-Paten, were 
now in charge of the ship.
     He stopped at the door and glanced back at his mistress 
file:///E|/mIRC/download/Linnea%20Sinclair%20-%20Of%20Cats,%20Uh,%20Furzels%20&%20Kings.htm (7 of 11)10-9-2007 20:10:40

OF CATS, UH, FURZELS AND KINGS
with his large yellow eyes as if to say, “Coming?”.
     The door, sensing the furzel’s presence, opened and, 
without further ado, he trotted confidently into the corridor.
     “I, uh, Counselor Reilly and I will be in Sickbay later 
should you have any further need of us,” Eden announced, then 
swept passed both Kel-Paten and Sass towards the door.
     “Sebastian!” 
     The tone in the admiral’s voice made Eden rethink her hasty 
exit. She paused in the open doorway, not willing to leave her 
friend to face an angry Kel-Paten alone. Reilly was Eden’s 
responsibility, not Sass’s.
     She needn’t have worried.
     The petite woman, arms folded, was almost toe to toe with 
the imposing Kel-Paten. “You’ve changed your mind, then? Want to 
book a session with Counselor Reilly? Excellent idea, admiral. I 
know you’ll find it very beneficial.” She thrust her chin in 
Eden’s direction and Eden caught a slight twitch of a smile on 
Sass’s lips. “When’s the first opening in the counselor’s 
calendar? Second shift tomorrow?”
     “I do not—” Kel-Paten began.
     “Want to wait that long?” Sass interrupted. 
     “We might be able to get you in earlier,” Eden added, 
falling easily into the game. It was far from the first time 
they’d double-teamed someone.
file:///E|/mIRC/download/Linnea%20Sinclair%20-%20Of%20Cats,%20Uh,%20Furzels%20&%20Kings.htm (8 of 11)10-9-2007 20:10:40

OF CATS, UH, FURZELS AND KINGS
     “No. Session.”
     Eden couldn’t tell if Kel-Paten’s teeth were clenched, but 
it definitely sounded as if they were.
     “Of course. I understand.” Sass’s smile could have melted 
the polar caps on Grelchfren-5. “You’re more concerned that your 
crew has first access to Counselor Reilly’s therapeutic 
sessions. That’s very kind of you. Sir. Don’t you agree, Doctor 
Fynn?”
     “I do indeed, Captain Sebastian.”
     A strident yowl echoed from the corridor.
Litter-pan time. 
     “Uhhh,” said Eden.
     Sass edged towards the door. “The counselor’s anxious to, 
um, dig in to his new case load. If you’ll excuse, us?”
     A strange combination of exasperation, defeat and—could it 
really be? Eden wondered—amusement flickered across Kel-Paten’s 
face. Then it was gone, his usual unreadable mask back in place.
     “Dismissed,” he said flatly. 
     “By your command,” Sass responded, grabbing Eden’s elbow. 
Three long strides and Eden scooped up Reilly. A few minutes 
later and they were all safely behind the closing doors of 
Eden’s new cabin.
     “What now?” Eden asked over the scratching sounds coming 
from the covered litter pan.
file:///E|/mIRC/download/Linnea%20Sinclair%20-%20Of%20Cats,%20Uh,%20Furzels%20&%20Kings.htm (9 of 11)10-9-2007 20:10:40

OF CATS, UH, FURZELS AND KINGS
     “Depends,” Sass replied, drumming her fingers on the back 
of Eden’s couch.
     “Depends?”
     “On whether you’re willing to share your new Sickbay with 
Counselor Reilly, or I have to get him an office and med-lab all 
his own...”
 
     The doors to Sickbay phwooshed open. Sass leaned carefully 
back in her chair, coffee cup poised near her mouth. She lowered 
the cup. “Damn,” she said, softly.
     Eden knew what that damn meant. Kel-Paten.
     “Maybe he’s finally ready to have a therapy session with 
Reilly?”
     “We should be so lucky.” Sass lowered her feet to the floor 
as the admiral strode through the open doorway of Eden’s office.
     “Doctor.” Kel-Paten nodded absently at Eden, then switched 
his gaze to Sebastian, still seated. “Sebastian.”
     Pause. There was that pause. Eden had begun to notice it. 
So, she knew, had Sass.
     “Admiral.”
     “I realize you’re off duty. However, I require your 
presence on a matter.”
     “An alarm, an enigma or an unfriendly?” Sass asked, rising.
     A slight tilt of his head, and a slight frown, was Kel-
file:///E|/mIRC/download/Linnea%20Sinclair%20-%20Of%20Cats,%20Uh,%20Furzels%20&%20Kings.htm (10 of 11)10-9-2007 20:10:40

OF CATS, UH, FURZELS AND KINGS
Paten’s only response, other than to step back and, with a sweep 
of a black gloved hand, usher Sass towards the doorway.
     His only outer response. But there was something else 
there, something her empathic senses could discern.
     An enigma, Eden thought, sipping her tea as she watched 
them leave. Definitely, definitely, an enigma…
 
 
  Click HERE to visit the Intergalactic Bar & Grille and play 
bar games!
 
© copyright 2004 Linnea Sinclair Bernadino
 
      
 
                 
 
file:///E|/mIRC/download/Linnea%20Sinclair%20-%20Of%20Cats,%20Uh,%20Furzels%20&%20Kings.htm (11 of 11)10-9-2007 20:10:40

